URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/CLRC/1995/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:33:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Review of Australian Copyright Collecting Societies (www.dcita.gov.au) [1995] CLRC 12
1. INTRODUCTION TO THE REPORT
2. INTRODUCTION TO COLLECTING SOCIETIES
3. HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
4. LEGAL STRUCTURE AND GOVERNANCE
5. MEMBERSHIP
6. RIGHTS AND LICENCES ADMINISTERED BY THE COLLECTING SOCIETIES
7. LEGAL BASIS OF ADMINISTRATION
8. GEOGRAPHICAL JURISDICTION
9. RELATIONSHIP TO ALL OWNERS OF RELEVANT RIGHTS
10. SERVICES OR BENEFITS TO RIGHTS USERS
11. IDENTIFICATION OF COPYRIGHT OWNERS
12. LICENSING ACTIVITY
13. SETTING OF RATES FOR COPYRIGHT USAGES
14. PROCESSES/TECHNIQUES USED TO QUANTIFY ROYALTIES
15. APRA & CAL SAMPLING SCHEMES
16. COLLECTION OF REVENUE
17. ENFORCEMENT
18. DISTRIBUTIONS TO COPYRIGHT OWNERS
19. FOREIGN DISTRIBUTIONS, INCOME AND SOCIETIES
20. DISTRIBUTIONS TO NON-MEMBERS
21. UNDISTRIBUTABLE MONIES
22. ACCOUNTS
23. TAXATION
24. ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENDITURE
25. LONG TERM FINANCIAL INVESTMENTS AND ARRANGEMENTS
26. THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY BY AUSTRALIAN COLLECTION SOCIETIES
27. MERGER OF SOCIETIES - ARE THERE TOO MANY?
28. ROLE OF SOCIETIES IN PROMOTING LAW REFORM AND FORMULATION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY
29. EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES
30. FUNDING OF CULTURAL OR BENEVOLENT PURPOSES
31. REVIEW OF THE COPYRIGHT ACT
AS IT AFFECTS COLLECTING SOCIETY
EFFICIENCY OR EQUITY
32. JURISDICTION AND ROLE OF THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
33. TRADE PRACTICES ISSUES AND COLLECTING SOCIETIES
34. A COPYRIGHT COLLECTING SOCIETY FOR THE VISUAL ARTS
35. NEW TECHNOLOGIES
APPENDIX ONE: STRUCTURE OF INQUIRY MADE OF EACH SOCIETY
APPENDIX TWO: CONTACTS AND SUBMISSIONS
APPENDIX THREE: ADDITIONAL COLLECTING SOCIETIES
APPENDIX FOUR: GLOSSARY
REVIEW OF AUSTRALIAN COPYRIGHT COLLECTING SOCIETIES
A REPORT TO
THE MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS AND THE ARTS
THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE
BY SHANE SIMPSON
56 Kellett Street
Potts Point
Ph: (02) 358 2464
Fax: (02) 357 3112
NOTE: THIS EDITION July 1995
This document provides an electronic version of the report by Shane Simpson
to the Hon Michael Lee MP, Minister for Communications
and the Arts, and the Hon
Duncan Kerr MP, Minister for Justice, that was published in June 1995. Mr
Simpson's findings and recommendations
in the Report are currently being
considered by the Government.
Printed copies of the Report (ISBN 0 642 22909 0) are held by major
Australian academic and community libraries, and by the various
The text of this document is copyright to the Commonwealth of Australia. It
is being released in an electronic edition to assist community
awareness of the
role and operation of the Australian copyright collecting societies.
Queries about the Report may be addressed to the
Department of Communications and the Arts
Canberra ACT 2601
ph: 06 279 1000
fax: 06 279 1901
in the first instance.
and rewarded. For this reason, copyright is important
for all Australians.
Creative Nation
, the Government's cultural policy statement, we
made a commitment to develop an effective copyright regime which achieves a
rewarding creative Australians;
increasing investment by the copyright industries; and
maintaining access to materials for all Australians.
As part of this commitment, the Government recognised the important role of
the collecting societies who administer copyrights for
the vast range of
individual creators and other copyright owners in this country, and undertook to
provide legislative and other
support for these administrations where
appropriate. The Government also commissioned Mr Shane Simpson to provide a
report on the
structure and operations of Australia's collecting societies.
Mr Simpson's comprehensive Review of Australian Copyright Collecting
Societies is a milestone. It is the first report to address the
activities of
Australian collecting societies in such detail, and will be a useful
contribution to the Government's policy development
in this area. The report
makes over 100 recommendations about the activities of Government and the
various collecting societies.
It is sure to be an important reference tool for
academics, lawyers, copyright owners and users of copyright material who need to
learn more about the collecting societies.
The report's recommendations will be considered by a working-group made up of
representatives from the Department of Communications
and the Arts, the
Attorney-General's Department, the Department of Industry, Science and
Technology, and the Treasury. The working-group
will provide advice to the
Government on appropriate responses to the recommendations. Collecting societies
will also be actively
considering the recommendations are particularly relevant
to their operations.
On behalf of the Government, we are pleased to release this report and would
welcome any comments on its content and recommendations.
MICHAEL LEE
Minister for Communications and the Arts
DUNCAN KERR
Minister for Justice
Pages numbers after chapter headings refer to the printed edition of the
Simpson Report
and do not apply to the web edition.
1. INTRODUCTION TO THE
1.1. PURPOSE
1.2. METHODOLOGY
1.3. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
1.4. SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS TO
1.1. PURPOSE
This Review is in fulfilment of the commitment made in the Government's
cultural statement
Distinctly Australian
The terms of the brief were extensive; they may be summarised as follows:
• to describe how the major societies operate
• to examine their efficiency
• to examine their equity of operation
• to obtain information as to their impact on the cultural economy
• to make recommendations as to how relevant legislation may be amended
to promote the efficiency of the societies and the public
• to make recommendations as to the establishment of new societies
1.2. METHODOLOGY
Because the issues that had to be examined for this Report were so various in
nature, a team of consultants were retained to provide
their specialist
knowledge. The issues of quality of management and accounting were examined by
Ms Ann Moffatt of Technological Solutions
Pty Limited; Associate Professor Dr
Simon Sheather of the Australian Graduate School of Management examined the
sampling techniques
of APRA and CAL, and Mr Chris Doney, Manager of Computing
Systems for the Australian Graduate School of Management examined the computing
capabilities and efficiencies of the societies. (Acknowledgment is also due to
Ms Julie Robb for her extensive assistance with the
VISCOPY material.)
Examination of the societies was based in the first instance upon their
responses to an extensive questionnaire. Thereafter, each
member of the
consultancy team met with senior management of the societies (sometimes on
several occasions) and elicited further
information. Each society was most
commissioners
of the Report at the outset, there was no formal submission
process and no public hearings by which the views of the public were
An extensive range of industry bodies were contacted and asked if they wished to
make a submission. Many did; several chose
not to. Further, as a result of
newspaper coverage of the Inquiry, some individuals and organisations made
directly contacted. All of these views were taken into
account. In preparing the Report, extensive and detailed adjectival material
provided about the societies. This was seen as important because one of the
rationales for the Inquiry was the absence of any
readily available source of
detailed information on the societies.
Whilst the terms of the consultancy
contract are such that the Report is confidential to the IDC and the societies,
it is recommended
that the Report, or rather a version of it, be made
publicly available.
Many of the concerns that the public has about
collecting societies are based on no information or misinformation. To a great
this is the fault of the societies themselves but it is to be hoped that
the information provided herein will promote better informed
comment and
discussion.
1.3. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
The procedures by which collecting societies operate are necessarily very
complex. This is largely because of the complexity inherent
in administering a
wide range of rights on behalf of thousands of owners, for a wide range of uses
and users. Achieving a satisfactory
degree of accuracy in collecting, allocating
and delivering the appropriate income to the appropriate rights owners, is an
extraordinarily
difficult task.
Given this complexity, all societies (throughout the world) must try to
strike a balance between the administrative cost of achieving
a perfectly
accurate capture and delivery system and the maximisation of returns to rights
owners. Generally, the societies make
a determined effort to achieve this
balance and the introduction of new Information Technology is assisting them to
this end. The
workings of each of the Societies was examined in detail and the
procedures by which the data is captured, income is collected, allocations
made and distributions are performed, is generally both efficient and equitable.
That is not to say that there are not alternative
approaches possible as to each
of these matters and it is clear that each of the societies is continually
trying to improve their
mechanisms. The degree of commitment of the senior staff
to such improvement is also evident. The widespread belief that collecting
societies are awash with unjustifiable undistributed funds was found to be
without basis. The amounts vary according to the nature
of the collecting scheme
of each society and the stage of development of each society. Certainly, all are
striving to minimise such
sums and maximise the return to their members. One
important qualification to this is the method by which such sums are
redistributed
and whether those methods are truly appropriate. As the Committee
will see, the Report recommends that a greater proportion of the
undistributables be allocated to the cultural purposes of the wider industry
sector rather than merely redistributed as a windfall
to future royalty
recipients. The Report recommends important changes to the Copyright Act and the
extension of the role of the Copyright
Tribunal to cover all copyright licensing
schemes. It also recommends the establishment of the position of Ombudsman for
societies - a role that must be independent of, not a creature of,
the societies. Also recommended, is the establishment of a collecting
for the visual arts - one that is fully representative of the relevant rights
owners. It is important that this organisation
be established on a firm footing
and to achieve this it has been recommended that it receive limited Government
funding in its establishment
phase, together with the repeal or amendment of
1.4. SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS TO
[Chapter 1: Introduction To The Report]
(1) That this report, or rather a version of it, be made publicly
[Chapter 2: Introduction To Collecting Societies]
(2) That collective administration should be the preferred mid-way house
between the exercise of individual exclusive rights and a
compulsory statutory
licence where mass usage requires that the community be given access to the
rights on reasonable terms.
(3) That there be a multiplicity of societies so that individual societies
can represent the disparate interests of the separate groups
[Chapter 13: Setting of Rates for Copyright Users]
(4) That the 1% limit (imposed in Section 152(8)) on fees payable by a
broadcaster for the broadcasting of published sound recordings
be repealed
(5) That the half of one cent limitation (imposed in Section 152(8)) on fees
payable by the ABC for the broadcasting of published
sound recordings be
repealed forthwith
(6) That the anomaly that negates the public performance right in sound
recordings applying to the use of broadcasts (contained in
sound recordings) in
public venuew (imposed by Section 199(2)) be repealed forthwith.
[Chapter 19: Foreign Distributions, Income And Societies]
(7) That there be a further review of the rules of collecting societies as
they relate to relationships with foreign societies and
conversely, the rules of
foreign collecting societies as they relate to relationships with Australian
[Chapter 21: Undistributable Monies]
(8) That the Attorney General reconsider the Guideline for Declared Societies
which obliges them to pay undistributable sums into
the general distribution
pool after a certain period.
[Chapter 23: Taxation]
(9) That discussions be held with the Australian Taxation Office to
rationalise taxation arrangements for the collecting societies.
(10) That tax exempt status be formally accorded collecting societies that
are appropriately structured and administered.
[Chapter 30: Funding Of Cultural Or Benevolent Purposes]
(11) That all societies be encouraged to allocate a specific proportion of
gross distributions and undistributable funds, to cultural
(12) That Declared Societies be required to allocate a specific proportion of
gross distributions and undistributable funds, to cultural
[Chapter 31: Review Of The Copyright Act As It
Affects Collecting Society Efficiency Or Equity]
(13) That Government should not consider the imposition of statutory licences
where commercial voluntary licences, collectively administered,
(14) That section 135 ZM be amended or repealed so as to permit CAL to
collect income in respect of artistic works at the same time
as they are
surveying educational institutions in respect of their use of literary
(15) That educational institutions be provided with a statutory right to
reproduce artistic works (other than those already covered
by "fair dealing")
subject to the payment of equitable remuneration to the copyright owner.
(16) That there be no statutory licence introduced to grant access to
(17) That further inquiry be made as to the matters raised by the Societies
as to how the Copyright Act might be amended to improve
their effectiveness and
efficiency.
(18) That the jurisdiction of the Copyright Tribunal be expanded.
[Chapter 32: Jurisdiction And Role Of The Copyright Tribunal]
(19) That there be established the position of Ombudsman Of Copyright
Collecting Societies.
(20) That the definition of "licence" in section 136(1) be amended.
(21) That the Tribunal have as wide a jurisdiction as possible in respect of
licences and licence tariffs including the variation,
approval and
interpretation of all licensing schemes whether the relevant rights are
administered under voluntary or statutory licence.
(22) That the Tribunal have the right to review determinations of the
(23) That the procedures of the Tribunal be examined to see how matters might
be dealt with, faster and more cheaply.
Chapter 33: Trade Practices Issues And Collecting Societies
(24) That guidelines be drawn up and an approval mechanism instituted, by
which those collecting societies which can demonstrate that
their structures,
procedures, functions and conduct is within those guidelines, are accorded the
status of "Qualified Societies".
(25) That such guidelines be drawn up in consultation with the Trade
Practices Commission and the societies.
(26) That Qualified Societies retain the protection of Section 51 (3) of the
Trade Practices Act.
(27) That a society's input agreement should not be in breach of section 45
if the society is Qualified and the output agreement should
not be in breach of
section 45 if it is either (a) statutory or (b) approved by the Copyright
(28) That where there is a purported abuse of a Qualified Society's monopoly
power, the prior certificate of the Attorney General
be a pre-condition to
raising section 46 (1) in legal proceedings.
Chapter 34: A Copyright Collecting Society For The Visual Arts
(29) That VISCOPY be included in the National Cultural Strategy
(30) That s.135ZM of the Copyright Act be immediately repealed.
(31) Amendment to Part VB of the Copyright Act to provide a statutory licence
for the reprography by educational institutions of artistic
works which
accompany text
(32) That Government provide seed funding for the establishment of a
collecting society for the visual arts.
(33) That the Government commit to fully accountable seed funding for VISCOPY
for a minimum of seven hundred thousand dollars over
two years and a maximum
$1.1 million over five years, depending on the speed with which s. 135ZM is
repealed and the statutory educational
copying right is introduced.
(34) That Government not treat its contribution to establishment costs as
some species of loan but rather require that at break-even
point, the Society be
required to pay an amount equivalent to fifty percent of the Government's grant
into the Society's Cultural
and Benevolent Fund and to spend the remaining fifty
percent on informing the relevant rights owners about the Society and its
(35) That VISCOPY be declared as the copyright collecting society to
administer the rights granted under the new statutory licence
subject only to
review of its Articles and Memorandum to ensure equity of membership, control
and accountability and its compliance
with the criteria set out in this Report
for Qualified Societies.
(36) That no organisation have the ongoing right to appoint members to the
board of the company. All members must have the right to
board membership and no
one organisation should have an automatic right to membership or control.
Chapter 35: New Technologies
(37) That, as a matter of urgency, further study be made of the impact of new
technologies on copyright collecting societies and potential
new methods of
collection.
2. INTRODUCTION TO
COLLECTING SOCIETIES
2.1. COPYRIGHT, CULTURE AND THE ECONOMY
2.2. TOWARDS A DEFINITION OF COLLECTING SOCIETIES
2.3. COLLECTIVE ADMINISTRATION
2.4. BENEFITS OF COLLECTIVE ADMINISTRATION
2.5. THE ROLE OF STATUTORY LICENCES, COLLECTIVE ADMINISTRATION IN A SYSTEM
OF EXCLUSIVE RIGHTS
2.6. MULTIPLE SOCIETIES
2.7. NEW TECHNOLOGIES
2.8. THE DIFFICULTY OF BALANCE
2.9. RECOMMENDATIONS
2.1. COPYRIGHT, CULTURE AND THE
It is little wonder that there is much ignorance and misunderstanding about
the purpose and operation of copyright collecting societies.
Not only do they
operate in an area of law that is little understood even by lawyers, they deal
in rights, not things, and as such
they challenge people's self-presumed right
to what they want to do. This Report is founded upon the belief that copyright
an essential role in any developed sophisticated society. If society is to
recognise creativity, innovation and imagination, then
principal tool by which we accord that recognition. This is economically
expressed by the award of a range of exclusive
rights which grant the owner, the
power of control and the right of commercial exploitation. At the end of the
day, the rights of
for innovation, creativity and
risk taking. It is a recognition that both the culture and the economy of our
community is dependant
on encouraging and fostering these characteristics. So,
fundamental to the existence of bodies established to grant and administer
licences of copyrights, must be the belief:
(i) that copyright is valuable, not merely in the sense of being worth money,
but valuable in the sense that our community has chosen
to confer on copyright a
range of cultural, economic and personal values, and
(ii) that the collective administration of some of those values is likely to
contribute to the community's benefit.
2.2. TOWARDS A DEFINITION OF COLLECTING
There is no single satisfactory definition of a collecting society except one
that vaguely describes an organisation that 'administers
neighbouring rights on behalf of a group of owners and collects and distributes
income in relation to the use of such
It is sometimes said that collecting societies are better described as being
"licensing societies". This is not really accurate as
some societies do not
grant licences but, rather, administer rights that are granted compulsorily by
statute. Indeed, when one looks
at a range of collecting societies around the
world, it is quickly evident that very few so-called collecting societies, can
be accurately
compared. Their differences are often subtle but important. "Oils
ain't oils" and "Collecting societies ain't Collecting Societies".
Even though
the name of the society in one country might suggest that it is comparable with
its Australian version, one quickly finds
that it is likely to:
• administer a widely differing group of rights
• have different membership criteria
• undertake the task in a multitude of ways
• have varying purposes
• be government based, non-profit or completely commercial
• have came into existence by the initiative of different interest
• administer systems that are voluntary, whereas others are
• administer rights on an individual basis whereas others operate
"blanket" licences
• have different techniques for identifying users
• have different techniques for identifying owners
• have different techniques for quantifying the amount of the
• have different legal structures
• have different reporting and audit requirements
• have different levels of commitment to local culture
For example, although it may be tempting to compare AMCOS with many of its
European sister organisations, such comparisons are generally
flawed: Most of
them collect
of the mechanical income derived from records and
distribute it to the copyright owners. In Australia, the Major music publishers
insist on direct payment from the Major record companies of mechanical royalties
payable in respect of the manufacture/sale of records.
This simple initiative
thus removes from AMCOS the opportunity to collect, and thus amortise its
overhead against, a greater gross
income. It means that, for the Major
publishers, the organisation is collecting only on the secondary sources of
mechanical income
(essentially, those which the Majors find uneconomic to
collect for themselves or which the independent publishing companies would
uneconomic to collect at all).
In spite of the differences between societies, both within Australia and
internationally, collecting societies do have three common
features. All
(i) have machinery for the collection and distribution of income earned from
the exploitation of copyrights;
(ii) aim to advance the economic and creative interests of the owners that
they represent; and
(iii) fulfil their functions by means of collective administration.
2.3. COLLECTIVE ADMINISTRATION
A working definition of "collective administration" is a system of copyright
administration whereby "... owners of rights authorise
collective administration
organisations to administer their rights, that is, to monitor the use of the
works concerned, negotiate
with prospective users, give them licences against
appropriate fees and, under appropriate conditions, collect such fees and
them among the owners of rights." ["Collective Administration;
differences
between collective administration schemes was most usefully summarised in the
above WIPO report [para 217] which considers
the differences from various
viewpoints:
The level of collectivisation
The organisation may feature:
(a) Collective representation, individualised authorisation, direct
distribution;
(b) Full collective administration, blanket licensing, distribution among
right owners with certain "corrections"; or
(c) Collective enforcement of rights, blanket licensing, no distribution
among individual right owners.
The right owners' freedom of choice between individual and collective
ways of administration:
(a) Right owners can choose freely (at least there is no legal obligation to
choose collective administration, even if they may, in
practice, have no other
(b) The law subjects the exercise of rights to the condition of collective
administration (for example, in the case of "home taping");
(c) The law also determines the only organisation through which the rights
can be administered in a collective way.
The scope of rights and right owners covered by collective
administration:
(a) The collective administration organisation may only administer its
members' rights.
(b) In the field determined by the law, the organisation administers the
rights of non-members, too ("extended collective administration"),
but they may
renounce such administration, under certain conditions.
(c) Extended collective administration without the possibility of renouncing
The freedom of the collective administration organisation to set
tariffs and other conditions of licenses
(a) Free negotiations but in the case of dispute, a court decides;
(b) There are negotiations between the organisation and the users but any
agreement can only be applied if a supervisory administrative
body (for example,
the Ministry of Culture) approves it;
(c) The tariffs and other conditions are fixed by legal provisions.
The WIPO report then goes on to comment:
"218. With the examples referred to in the preceding paragraph, the
"typology" of collective administration is far from being exhausted.
however, sufficient to illustrate that, when a reference is made to collective
administration, it may mean ways and forms
of such administration which differ
in many important aspects. If, e.g., from the various types of administration
mentioned above,
a (I)(a)-(2)(a)-(3)(a)(4)(a) variant is taken, it is fairly
obvious that what emerges is really an appropriate way of administering
exclusive rights. At the same time, a (I)(c)-(2)(c)-(3)(c)-(4)(c) variant is
only a very small step away from a non-voluntary license
system. Actually, there
is a need for a fairly great amount of benevolence for speaking even about that
small step. Such schemes
can be accepted, without serious doubts, only in cases
where the minimum rules of the Berne Convention, the Rome Convention and
laws do not provide for unrestricted exclusive rights and, thus, such a
restrictive form of exercising rights may be considered to
be allowed."
2.4. BENEFITS OF COLLECTIVE
ADMINISTRATION
It is an inherent feature of the system of copyright that it is based on the
principle of granting exclusive rights to individual
creators. For individual
owners, it is often difficult to maximise the economic value of their rights and
to protect those rights.
The cost of doing so is often greater than the
potential gain. Similarly, third parties who wish to use those rights must incur
trouble and expense of finding the appropriate rights owners, negotiating
individual deals and administering and accounting to a
plethora of such rights
owners. As this study shows, the collective administration of copyright is often
the most effective method
of managing the rights, both for the owners of the
rights and those who need access to them. Quite simply, collective
administration
is in the pubic interest.
For example, it is inconceivable to expect a university to obtain individual
permissions from every author whose work is photocopied
in that institution and
it is unthinkable that the authors of those works should not be rewarded
equitably for the reuse of their
work. If music is to be publicly performed, it
is reasonable to expect that the author of that music be rewarded for that use
his or her work, but it is unreasonable to expect each person who wishes to
play music in public to identify, find and negotiate
licences with each of those
rights owners. The position is similar for schools who wish to record broadcasts
for use in their teaching
It is clear from this study that the collective administration of the
individual rights of copyright, generally benefits both the
owners of the
primary property and those who would make secondary use of that property.
It is also clear from the study that the principal issue is not whether
collective administration is in itself a good thing, but rather,
whether it is
being carried out in a way that is economically effective and equitable to all
parties - the owners, the users and
the community in general.
2.5. THE ROLE OF STATUTORY LICENCES, COLLECTIVE
ADMINISTRATION IN A SYSTEM OF EXCLUSIVE RIGHTS
The international system of copyright, as reflected in the Berne and
Universal Conventions, is based upon the granting of exclusive
rights of control
to copyright owners. It is generally a system in which the owner of each right
has the right to control that right,
territory by territory, term by term and
use by use. It is ruggedly individualistic: The rights of copyright grant
individual owners
the right to determine whether these rights are to exploited
and, if so, the terms of exploitation. Collective administration is,
be, an exception rather than the rule.
Philosophies aside, not all rights of copyright benefit from collective
administration. Many exercises of the rights are best dealt
with on a one-by-one
The most simple indicator of this is that no group of Australian copyright
owners has transferred all of their rights of copyright
to a society for
collective administration. This simple conclusion is in itself significant:
to what rights they are capable of
administering personally, and which of their rights are best administered on a
collective basis.
For example, composers, who choose to assign their public performance of the
Small Rights to APRA, retain their individual control
over licensing for the
public performance of Grand Rights and for use in radio and television
commercials. The reason is simple enough:
the negotiation, collection and
enforcement of public performance income in relation to Small Rights is most
efficiently handled
on a collective basis, whereas the other rights mentioned
are quite easily administered on an individual basis. Similarly, the writer
novel has no need of a collecting society to negotiate or monitor his or her
relationship with a publisher but has an obvious
need to such a resource if he
or she is to obtain income from photocopying in schools. Such distinctions are
easily drawn for every
group of rights owners.
Further, where the rights owner chooses to maintain individual control of a
right, it is usually where the would-be user has all the
time necessary to
locate the rights owner and negotiate the deal. It is not dealing in the
exploitation of a mass of different copyright
materials. Rather, it is dealing
with the exploitation of a very limited number of copyright works (and owners),
even though it may
reproduce each of those works an enormous number of times.
Because the number of rights owners is limited, the administration of
is simple enough.
In short, where the collecting society is administering a voluntarily
transferred right, such transfer will only be made if the owner
believes that it
is in his or her best creative and economic interests to do so. This is one
occasion when market forces is a useful
indicator of value - at least to the
owner. For those copyrights which commercially need to be the subject of mass
use by a large
number of would-be non-exclusive licensees, obtaining and
administering the necessary rights on an individual basis is difficult,
impossible. When the impracticability of granting individual licences becomes
apparent, it is sometimes suggested that the
simplest response is to create a
statutory or compulsory licence
, in effect denying the control that any
individual rights owner may have otherwise had. (Examples of this include the
statutory licence
permitting "cover recordings" which underlies the primary
function of AMCOS and the statutory licences granted to educational institutions
and which are administered by CAL and AVCS. For a description of the extent to
which Australian societies administer statutory licences,
see Chapter 6 of this
Report.) The general attitude of WIPO to statutory licences is that they should
be avoided wherever
collective administration
is feasible. In brief, it
is considered that collective administration recognises that the individual
right to control usage - even though, for ease
of administration, that individual may chose to license or assign that right to
representative organisation. When that right to control is taken away, all
that one is left with is a "right to remuneration", which
is a quite different
concept to the full rights of copyright. Rather than knocking down the long
established structure of individual
rights which comprises copyright (by the
implementation of a series of compulsory licences), it is preferable to maintain
the existing
regime but promote the ease and efficiency of access to copyright
material by promoting and facilitating the collective administration
Collective administration should be the preferred mid-way house
between the exercise of individual exclusive rights and a compulsory
licence where mass usage requires that the community be given access to the
rights on reasonable terms.
By way of example, the difficulties necessarily
raised by the new world of Multi-Media, have inevitably again raised the
that copyright has become an outdated concept. In other words, it is
so hard to control the use of copyright work in this digitised,
computerised
environment, a cyber-world without borders and few police, that old concepts
such as the personal ownership and control
of copyright material should be
discarded as a remnant of an increasingly irrelevant age. It is very doubtful
that this response
is in the interest of the general community, although it is
certainly in the commercial interest of certain commercial would-be,
rights-user
groups. Factors to be taken into account when determining whether collective
administration is appropriate include the
• Is there a public benefit in permitting non-owners easy access to the
use of copyright material?
• How hard is it likely to be, to identify a rights owner in a timely
• Is the cost of negotiating and executing an individual licence,
likely to be uneconomic?
• Is the cost of administering and accounting for an individual
licence, likely to be uneconomic?
• Is the negotiating power of the copyright owner so much less than the
to better ensure
equality of bargaining power?
The existing collecting societies fall within these guidelines. As such,
potentially benefits:
(i) those whose business depends upon access to rights individually owned but
collectively controlled;
(ii) the owners of the rights; and
(iii) the educational, cultural and economic interests of the community at
Whether the existing Australian collecting societies in fact do provide those
benefits, depends upon the efficiency and equity with
which they operate. That
is part of the subject of this Report. At the moment, anyone can establish
themselves as a collecting society
on the basis of voluntary licensing. There is
no need for the approval of government. In principle, this is a good thing. It
is inappropriate
for the government to interfere with the right of copyright
owners to form collectives for the administration of their rights on
a voluntary
basis. This does not mean however, that government should not be involved in
that process: For example, audio-visual
impossible task in setting up a copyright society without government
intervention. In the view
of AVCS and this Inquiry, without statutory authority,
access to a substantially comprehensive repertoire would not have been achieved.
Moreover, the role of the Copyright Tribunal is central in achieving a system in
which equity can be achieved between owner and user.
As is also recommended in
the Report, the role of an independent ombudsman for collecting societies is
another way in which Government
can be usefully involved in the supervision of
the societies.
2.6. MULTIPLE SOCIETIES
One of the concerns that was expressed to the Inquiry was that collecting
societies hold positions of great power within their industry
sector. Generally,
each is in a monopoly position. As is discussed later in the Report, (see "Trade
Practices") this is not necessarily
a bad thing; it depends upon how that
position is exercised. Given the frequently expressed concern about the power of
it is perhaps surprising that there is also a frequently expressed
opinion that there are too many societies and that they would
achieve greater
efficiency by amalgamating and sharing administrative expenses. The views are in
direct conflict. As is stated later
in the Report, there is probably little cost
advantage in the amalgamation of the existing societies. Rather,
recommended
that there be a multiplicity of societies so that individual
societies can represent the disparate interests of the separate groups
This is more likely to ensure the equitable representation of
members' rights and promote a competitive environment.
2.7. NEW TECHNOLOGIES
The system of exclusive rights developed its philosophy in a pre-reprographic
era, a time in which public education, information and
entertainment was not so
dependant upon reproductive technology.
With the development of new technologies has developed the need for more
efficient ways of locating, negotiating, contracting and
administering licences
for the use of these rights. This has not just led to collective administration;
it has led to the emergence
and dominance of blanket licensing. The effective
control of intellectual property rights in the digital age is one of the great
conundrums facing the collecting societies.
The new technologies have led not only to greater ease and need of access to
cultural materials, they have created new uses of such
material and indeed, have
themselves created new forms of such material. Not only has the invention been
the mother of copyright,
it may well provide the answer to the perfect
collective, voluntary licensing system. To quote Professor Gunnar W.G. Karnell
of Stockholm
School of Economics:
"I have for many years nursed a dream about
a world-wide collective society computer-net related to a data base containing
conditions in detail for various uses of work reported to the system.
It would contain different tariffs for uses in various countries
local conditions, kinds of performances, reproductions etc. It would recognise
sound sequences to identify works and registered
right owners. It would contain
modalities regarding payment, currency regulations etc. so that as soon as
anything was identified
the system would be able to produce a financial
statement about costs for the handling of the right and about royalties
("Collecting Societies In The Music Business",
Reports presented at the meeting of the
International Association of Entertainment Lawyers,
Midem 1989, Cannes, Maklu Publishers, Antwerp, 1989, at p.21)
For the moment, most of the thought going into developing new forms of
technologies to assist collecting societies is focussed on
the capture of uses
of intellectual property. This technology is not yet available except in
unsatisfactory, prototype forms. Nevertheless,
with the rapid growth in
computing power, the other elements of Professor Karnell's dream are already
almost realisable. There is
every reason to believe that Information Technology
will provide the solution to many of the problems that reproduction technology
has created. Already, Information Technology has been widely implemented to
undertake the complicated and detailed administration
and calculation processes
that are so central to the operation of every collecting society. What used to
take hundreds of square
metres of space for data storage now takes a few feet;
what took weeks by hand now takes days by computer. The efficiencies permitted
by IT are now evident in the societies - and they can be expected to increase.
Professor Karnell's dream is in fact the almost irresistible
2.8. THE DIFFICULTY OF BALANCE
As already noted, the public interest demands that there be easy access to
cultural material. As it is a feature of this era that
access to processes of
reproduction is easy, there is a public interest in being able to access the
reproduction rights of that material.
This is in conflict with our system of
exclusive rights which acknowledges a public benefit in giving creators and
makers rights
in the fruits of their creativity and labour. Therefore a
balancing of public interests is necessary. The primary functions of any
collecting society are documentation, identification of use, collection and
distribution. They are all enormously detailed procedures,
time consuming and
expensive to administer. Imagine the size of the documentation task that is
required to properly document the
hundreds of thousands of works which have a
brief spark of commercial value and then remain forever in the so-called
"dormant repertoire".
Any system with administrative integrity must undertake
the task but if it were to be truly "efficient" the society would only expend
its efforts on the 15% of its repertoire that is active. Of course it can't, but
such cost-efficiency factors keep arising in any
examination of collecting
societies. Another example of this is in the identification and distribution
area. If every use of every
work by every author was perfectly reported and
perfectly recorded, it might be feasible to avoid instances in which a
disgruntled
rights owner could complain that, "I know my work was
copied/performed/etc but I didn't get any royalty. Something must be wrong
the collecting society!" Until technology gives us this capability to capture
all information, such processes will be imperfect.
Until then, we will have to
rely upon sampling techniques, approximation techniques; a balance between the
absurd cost of obtaining
perfect records and the aim of getting as much money to
as many of the right people as possible. Collection too, is an expensive
inherently inefficient aspect of collecting societies. If one could license just
a limited number of users, the process would
be easy. Similarly, if all
licensees were fastidious in their self-reporting of uses, it would be easy.
Instead, users quite understandably
object to paying licence fees, or object to
the quantum, or under-report their usage of copyright material, and all of this
that the societies have an extensive obligation to the enforcement of
their members' rights. It is the task of all collecting societies
to tackle the
challenge of administering their rights as efficiently as equity allows and as
equitably as efficiency allows. This
is the balance that determines whether a
collective administration of rights is in the interests of the relevant rights
permit interested parties to form an informed view as to the state of
this balance, it is essential that collecting societies adopt
an attitude of
transparency to their administration. This is an aspect of their
responsibilities that collecting societies throughout
the world have generally
been accused of failing. Accordingly this Report has taken the unusual approach
of providing a large amount
of adjectival material as to the administration of
the Australian societies. As such, it is intended not only to satisfy the
Government's
requirements as set out in the brief, but also to provide a
reference source for those who wish to know more about these bodies that
important to the orderly administration of intellectual property in our modern
2.9 RECOMMENDATIONS
• That collective administration should be the preferred mid-way house
between the exercise of individual exclusive rights and
a compulsory statutory
licence where mass usage requires that the community be given access to the
rights on reasonable terms.
• That there be a multiplicity of societies so that individual
societies can represent the disparate interests of the separate
groups of rights
3. HISTORICAL
3.6. NEW COLLECTING SOCIETIES
In 1956 the various music publishing companies carrying on business in
Australia incorporated a company under the NSW Companies Act
called Copyright
Owners Reproduction Society Limited (CORS). The Company was formed primarily for
the general purpose of promoting
and protecting the interests of parties owning
or controlling rights of mechanical reproduction in Australia and New Zealand.
objectives of the Company were:-
• Representation on behalf of members in connection with any proposed
legislation which may affect the interests of members.
A particular objective
was representation before the Spicer Committee of Inquiry which was set up in
1958 to make recommendations
for a new Australian Copyright Act following
enactment of a new UK Act in 1956.
• Liaison with other bodies representative of the various sections of
industry and commerce involved in the use of mechanical
• Dissemination of information to general industry and commerce
involved in the use of mechanical rights.
• Dissemination of information of general industry benefit and interest
to members.
• Liaison with similar associations on an international basis.
At this time the J. McFadden Agency was operating as agent for the music
publishers in the licensing and collection of royalties for
sundry usages of
mechanical rights. With the advent of television marketed records and TV
marketing companies, the role of the Agency
became more important. After the
formation of CORS, instead of the publishers meeting informally to direct the
operation of the Agency,
this function became treated as vested in the Council
of CORS. These arrangements continued until the end of 1973 without ever being
formally defined. On the 29th November 1973, CORS changed its name to Australian
Music Publishers Association Limited (AMPAL) and
at the same time adopted new
Memorandum and Articles of Association. Under the new Articles specific powers
were given to AMPAL and
its Council to determine the terms and conditions "upon
which licensing arrangements should be entered into by an agent for the members
pursuant to any common form of authority given by the members to the agent", in
order to formalise what had previously been the actual
practice. As from 1st
January 1975 AMPAL formed its own division called ANZ Music Copyright Agency for
the licensing and collection
of royalties in respect of sundry mechanical usages
in Australia and New Zealand of the works of its members. Each member of AMPAL
then executed a common form of "Appointment of Agent", although there was no
compulsion of any kind upon members to do so, and members
were free to decline
to do so, whilst still remaining members of AMPAL. At the same time as the new
agency was formed, the appointments
of the J. Mc Fadden Agency were terminated,
and the activities of that agency were assumed by the new agency. The
responsibilities
and duties of ANZ Music Copyright Agency included the licensing
of mechanical rights and collection of royalties in respect of sundry
usages; the supply of information to various members of the public and industry,
particularly in regard to the identification
of owners of copyright in
particular works; and the direction of enquiries to the relevant music
publishers. In 1979 the music publishers
made an application to the Copyright
Tribunal for a review of the royalty rate. For the hearing, an unregistered
association comprising
AMPAL and three other composer organisations was formed
to present the case for the copyright owners to the Tribunal. After the Tribunal
hearing, a decision was made to form a Society along the lines of overseas
mechanical copyright societies such as the MCPS in the
UK. Accordingly, AMPAL
established the Australasian Mechanical Copyright Owners Society Limited in 1979
as a company limited by guarantee
a wholly owned subsidiary of
AMPAL, as it is commonly described) and commenced business on the first working
day of 1980. The funds
existing in the ANZ Music Copyright Agency were then
transferred to AMCOS.
There are currently 189 music publisher members of AMCOS.
The Australasian Performing Right Association Limited was incorporated in
1926. It is by far the oldest collecting society in Australia.
established by the British Performing Right Society (PRS), together with a group
of local music publishers. How it was initially
funded is not clear from the old
records maintained by the society. It is, however, clear that the government
contributed no start-up
funds. The most likely scenario is that loan capital was
provided by the incorporators. It was established because it had become
worldwide, that the new technologies of sound recording and wireless telegraphy
were making it impossible for songwriters
and composers to exercise control or
gain reward from public performances of their works. Writers and publishers had
already formed
central clearing houses to administer the performing right in the
US (1909) and the UK (1911), and, indeed, had done so much earlier
These had worked well, and so the model was adopted in Australia.
Being established in January, 1990, the Audio-Visual Copyright Society
Limited (AVCS) is the most recently established of the major
societies. The initial impetus for the establishment of a copyright society in
the audio-visual field was the lobby for
the introduction of the educational
copying scheme that became Part VA and Part VB,
"). The Society was formed specifically to seek the declaration of
the Attorney-General as the collecting society under sections 135P
and 135ZZB of
(and to expand its activities in the collective administration
of rights, as appropriate, in the future). The Society was an initiative
Australian Copyright Council, which co-ordinated early meetings of an informal
committee of interest groups. These interest
groups became the Society's
Those organisations were:
* Audio Visual Distributors Association of Australia;
* Australasian Mechanical Copyright Owners Society;
* Australian Broadcasting Corporation;
* Australian Film Commission;
* Australian Record Industry Association;
* Australian Writers Guild;
* Federation of Australian Commercial Television Stations;
* Federation of Australian Radio Broadcasters;
* Film/Video Coalition;
* Special Broadcasting Service;
* Producers and Directors Guild of Australia; and
* Screen Production Association of Australia.
As such, it is a classic model for the establishment of collective
administration - one in which all of the relevant rights owners
The incorporation expenses were met by loans from the promoter
organisations of $1,000 each. The other establishment costs were met
gifts and loans in kind from the Australian Copyright Council and further
financial loans from the promoter organisations
ranging from $350 to $1,295.
(Different amounts were contributed to reflect, in some measure, the scheme of
allocation that would
determine future distributions. As is described elsewhere
in this Report, that scheme divides distributions between the owners of
in unequal proportions). Loans from promoters totalled
$21,395. These loans were
repaid from first collections in 1990 without interest.
AVCS states its mission as follows:
• The Society's purpose is to facilitate the equitable return of funds
to audio-visual copyright owners.
• The Society promotes and defends the copyright system as the means of
providing an incentive to creativity and investment
in film and television.
• In pursuit of this goal, the Society acts on behalf of copyright
owners in the collective administration of rights.
CAL had one of the longest gestation periods on record. Formed 1974, CAL did
not commence operations until 1986. Its promoters were:
The Australian Society
of Authors, The Australian Book Publishers Association and the Australian
The time lag was principally due to the fact that although the
provided that educational institutions were obliged to pay for copyright uses,
they refused to do so. Without compliance from the
institutions, CAL had no
money to collect or distribute. This situation was changed by litigation. The
Australian Society of Authors
and the Australian Book Publishers Association
were responsible for the funding of two cases which gave CAL force and impetus.
University of New South Wales
Department of Education
These cases established a rate of equitable remuneration for copying under the
statutory licence for education in the
The establishment of CAL's offices in 1986 was funded by:
(i) a bank overdraft facility from the Commonwealth Bank for $105,000.00 with
joint and several guarantees from twelve publishers;
(ii) two interest bearing loans each of $15,000 from the Australian Council;
(iii) a $15,000 consultancy to AMCOS for multiple photocopying of sheet
All CAL debts including debts to the Australian Society of Authors, the
Australian Book Publishers Association and the Australian
repaid with interest.
The Phonographic Performance Company of Australia Ltd was incorporated in
1969. The impetus for the Company was the
introduced broadcast and public performance rights in sound recordings. The
Company was established to license those rights
and collect income from them.
The organisations responsible for establishing PPCA were The Association of
Australian Record Manufacturers,
Actors' Equity and the Musicians' Union. Its
initial funding came from small loans by EMI Australia Ltd ($3,000) and
Association
of Australian Record Manufacturers ($1,061). PPCA was established as
a company limited by shares. Its original shareholders were
CBS Records
Australia Ltd ; Electronic Industries Ltd (Astor Records); PolyGram Records Pty
Ltd; RCA Limited; EMI Records (Australia)
Ltd; Festival Records Pty Ltd; W &
G Record Processing Co Pty Ltd. Astor was taken over by PolyGram and W & G
left the record
industry. WEA Records Pty Ltd were allocated shares in June
An integral part of the arrangement was the establishment of the PPCA Trust
which was to ensure payment of a percentage of PPCA collections
to artists and
musicians (through their representative unions) whether such artists performed
on recordings or not.
3.6. NEW COLLECTING SOCIETIES
3.6.1. Blank-Tape Levy Collection
If a blank tape levy/tax is reintroduced to compensate for statutory licence
permitting audio home taping, the money thereby collected
will be administered
by a new Declared Society, PACCS (the Private Audio Copyright Collecting
Society). PACCS, has been established
by AMCOS and ARIA for the purpose of
administering the blank tape levy - to collect the fees and distribute them to
through existing societies. AMCOS will be responsible for
making payments to the owners of copyright in the musical works and PPCA
responsible for making payments to the owners of copyright in the sound
recordings and to performers. Such distribution will
be based on sampling,
public performance and broadcast data and sales information. No consideration
has been made by this Review,
of the structure or intended function of PACCS but
given that it will be a Declared Society and subject to consequent scrutiny,
may well also be a suitable vehicle to administer the income derived from
CD Rental remuneration (if and when that right is introduced).
3.6.2. Christian Music Copyright Collecting
There are three agencies which have recently been established to collect
royalties and grant licences in relation to church music.
This is in spite of
the fact that CAL offers a church music licence and that CAL licences are less
expensive than its Christian competition.
It is an interesting proof that where
organisations see a niche, competition can follow. The societies are Christian
Asia-Pacific Pty. Limited; LicenSing (a division of MediaCom
Inc), and Word of Life Pty Limited.
They act as agents, granting licences and collecting royalties on behalf of
do not take a licence
or an assignment from the rights owners). All of them are very recently
established in Australia and are only
just starting to issue licences. It is
interesting to note that Christian Copyright Licensing is part of an American
based, international
organisation which has had extraordinary growth. As of May
1, 1994 its international figures were as follows:
No. of Licence-holders
New Zealand
4. LEGAL STRUCTURE
AND GOVERNANCE
4.1. STRUCTURE
4.2. EQUITY AND EFFICIENCY OF BOARD STRUCTURE
4.2.1. Board Size
4.2.2. Regular review
4.2.3. Voting mechanisms
4.2.4. Equality Of Voting Power In General Meeting - Hearing
The Voice Of The Rights Owners
4.2.5. Ability Of All Members To Stand and Vote For Board Positions
4.2.6. Voting Power Of Board Members
4.2.7. Limitations Upon Re-Election Of Board Members
4.2.8. Remuneration Of Board Members
4.2.9. Frequency Of Meetings
4.2.10. Attendance At Meetings
4.2.11. Minutes Of Board Meetings
4.1. STRUCTURE
4.1.1. AMCOS and APRA
AMCOS and APRA have chosen to be to be non-profit companies limited by
4.1.2. AVCS and CAL
AVCS and CAL are required by the
(as Declared Societies) to be
non-profit companies limited by guarantee.
4.1.3. PPCA
Only PPCA is structured as a company limited by shares. To some extent, the
actual legal structure is merely an accident of history
but nevertheless, it is
appropriate that this accident now be repaired. When PPCA was first founded,
there is little doubt that the
original shareholders represented almost all of
the relevant rights. They were merely setting up a company to control their own
Moreover, at that time, the radio and television stations were not
paying any money for their use of the relevant rights. They agreed
the record companies with contra, in the form of advertising air-time. This time
was purchased from PPCA by EMI and the
money thus obtained, was distributed
amongst the members. It was really only with the Triple-M decision in the late
'80s that the
stations started to pay large amounts of money and the
distributions of PPCA became significant. Although the legal structure of
does not limit access to its services by all owners of relevant rights, there is
no doubt that the control of the company itself
(as opposed to the services
delivered by the company) is firmly entrenched in the hands of the six largest
record companies in the
country. This is undesirable.
4.1.4. Declared Collecting Societies
As a declared collecting societies, AVCS and CAL operate within very specific
parameters designed to ensure equity and accountability.
These include specific
legal requirements in the
, Regulations and Government-approved
Articles of Association, in addition to obligations at general law on public
corporations and
the law relating to trustees. Further to these legal
requirements, they operate under the supervision of the Attorney-General, who
may withdraw his declaration if satisfied that the society is not functioning
"adequately" as a society. These stringent safeguards
aimed at achieving an
equitable, efficient and accountable administration, are appropriate to bodies
charged with the administration
of non-voluntary licences.
4.1.5. Conclusions As To Structures
If a collecting society is an absolutely commercial enterprise, it should be
able to structure itself legally, as it wishes. It does
not purport to be a
representative organisation except for the purposes of the issuing of licences
and administering those licences
as a contractual agent for the owner. The
satisfaction of the rights owners and rights users is a matter for contract. If
not satisfied, they will not renew.
Collective administration organisations which purport to be organisations of
and for their rights owners (and all of the five major
Australian collecting
societies come within this description) are best structured as companies limited
by guarantee. This provides
greater protection for the members whose rights are
represented by the organisation in that it gives them access to all of the
accorded to members by the Corporations Law, (including a right to board
membership and thus a board voice; protection against oppression;
the powers of
the General Meeting etc). Also, it prevents observers forming the perhaps
mistaken view that the shareholders will
put their own self-interests before
those of merely contractual members. After all, it is important that the form
reflects the purported
function. In a regime that is supposedly based on
collective administration, it is inappropriate to deny the relevant rights
access to membership and thus keep the control mechanisms of the legal
structure in the hands of a few. If a monopolistic collective
administration is
to be given any special treatment in respect of the Trade Practices Act, it
should allow open access to both the
the control of the
PPCA would be well advised, and should be encouraged (although it
cannot be forced), to alter its company structure to become a company
guarantee and allow company membership to be open to all relevant rights
The Guidelines For Declared Collecting Societies should be, with
necessary amendments, be used as the model guidelines for all collective
administration collecting societies.
The manner in which this may be
encouraged by Government (including compulsory reporting procedures and the
introduction of an Ombudsman
function), is discussed later.
4.2. EQUITY AND EFFICIENCY OF BOARD
4.2.1. Board Size
AVCS has eleven directors; APRA has 12; CAL has seven; AMCOS ten; PPCA did
have six but this has recently been increased to nine (see
4.2.2. Regular review
The Articles and Memorandum of any company need regular review to ensure that
they reflect the actual practice of the company and
that they are promoting
rather than hindering the objects of the company. The revision of the Articles
undertaken by PPCA in 1993
was with the intention of bringing it more into line
with the rules of the Declared Societies; APRA's changes to introduce postal
voting and to give writers an equal voice on the board, are all the sorts of
revisions that should be applauded.
4.2.3. Voting mechanisms
All societies which purport to be membership controlled (as opposed to the
private commercial operations) should have voting mechanisms
which promote the
ability of members to have a voice in company affairs, notwithstanding that they
may be geographically disparate
and distant. The more limited the entitlement to
speak and vote in company affairs, the greater the danger that power will be
and that the interests of the entrenched will be favoured over the
others who have a right, but not the means, to be properly represented.
ability to provide proxies does not adequately meet this need. All too often,
the control of large parcels of proxies can result
in the entrenchment of
control in the hands of a few. A direct personal voice is provided by postal
All collecting societies should at least provide for postal ballot by
rights owners/members.
None, other than APRA, do this.
desirable that they consider the ways in which the new technologies can assist
them to give voice to the rights of owners/members.
These may include the
provision of fax transmission, electronic transmission such as e-mail, video
conferencing and so on. These
are all techniques which are presently technically
available although not sufficiently utilised in most organisations (not just
societies).
4.2.4. Equality Of Voting Power In General Meeting -
Hearing The Voice Of The Rights Owners
The voting entitlement to the Board of AMPAL is laid out in the Articles of
the Association (Articles 30, 31, 32). In essence this
provides that each Full
Member's voting entitlement is calculated with reference to their APRA earnings
for the previous financial
year. This was adopted as a convenient means of
comparing the relative value of the respective catalogues of copyright music
in Australia by each Member, and it was considered equitable that
voting rights should be so related. However there is a stipulation
that no Full
Member (including associated or affiliated companies, or companies managed by
the Member) shall control more than 20%
of the vote. This is most important
because otherwise, the largest members, who own or control numerous publishing
companies, could
completely dominate the control of the Society to the detriment
of the smaller members. The 20% limit goes some way to ensuring equity
governance of the Society.
The voting power of APRA members has been the subject of certain criticism.
For those who are present at a meeting, a show of hands
each member has one
vote. However, on a poll, each member has one vote plus one additional vote for
each complete $500 allocated
to him/her in the preceding financial year (see
Art.41(b)), subject to the limitation that no writer or publisher can be
to more than 15% of the total voting entitlement of writers or
publishers respectively (see Article 41(c) & (d)).
There is also a mechanism by which the aggregate votes available to
publishers are equalised with the aggregate votes available to
writers (see
Article 40). This is designed to ensure a balance of power between writer
interests and publisher interests within the
Association.
All writer full members and publisher full members (except those who have
received no royalty allocation during the two preceding
financial years) have a
right to vote for writer directors and publisher directors respectively. The
method of voting, which is set
out in detail in Articles 67 to 73, entails the
choice of voting in person, by proxy or by post. Since the introduction of
voting in 1992 the overwhelming majority of members who cast a vote do so
by way of postal ballot. This change has gone a long way
to overcoming the
criticisms mentioned above. No longer, can a member turn up at a meeting with a
bag full of proxies and be assured
of winning the vote. Postal voting has given
full voice to the members.
A resolution put to a vote in a general meeting is decided on a show of hands
unless a poll is demanded before or on the declaration
of the result (Article 23
(a)). On a vote by show of hands, each member has only one vote (Article 27). In
the event of an equality
of votes, the Chairman has a casting vote in addition
to his or her deliberative vote (if any) (Article 25). If a poll is demanded,
the situation is quite different. In such case, Article 28 determines voting
entitlements as follows:
• the votes of each member shall be based on the total amount properly
allocated to that member in the preceding financial year
as that member's share
of moneys collected by the Society;
• every member shall have one vote plus one additional vote for each
complete $500 of that member's allocation during the preceding
• despite sub-articles (a) and (b) no member is entitled to exercise
more than fifteen per cent (15%) of the total votes available
entitled to attend and vote at a general meeting.
All members have an equal vote, except for the election of directors, as only
author members are eligible to vote for the election
of the author director and
only publisher members are eligible to vote for the publisher director.
Each of the six member
shareholders
has one vote in general meeting.
4.2.5. Ability Of All Members To Stand and Vote For
Board Positions
At AMCOS, the Board members are appointed by the foundation member, AMPAL.
The practice is for the members of the board of AMPAL to
be appointed to the
board of AMCOS. Each year, 1/3rd of the board of AMPAL retires in rotation and
their positions are offered for
election at the AGM. Although the Articles do
not require that board members be members of the Society, in its history, every
of the board of AMPAL has also been a member of AMCOS. The board
structure reflects the fact that AMCOS is a publishers' organisation.
not purport to represent writers although writers are obviously central to its
very existence. This anomaly is discussed
later in this Report. With this
reservation, the fact that the board members of AMCOS are appointed by (and are
basically identical
to) the board of AMPAL, is not a matter for criticism
because all members of AMCOS have access to membership of AMPAL and thus to
AMCOS. (This may be compared with PPCA's situation where none of the rights
owners (other than the Majors who are shareholders) can
get access even through
such a circuitous route).
The board members are elected solely by the members. Writers who are full
members having a right to attend and vote at general meetings,
vote to elect the
six Writer Directors, of whom one is elected by the New Zealand writer members.
Publishers who are full members
vote to elect the six Publisher Directors.
In the case of writers, candidates for the board must be "writer full
members". In the case of publishers, Directors must be the appointed
representative of a "publisher full member".
The first directors were appointed by the subscribers to the Memorandum of
Association and held office until the first Annual General
Meeting, held on 8
November 1990. Subsequently, all directors have been elected solely by members
in general meeting except where
casual vacancies were filled by the existing
directors. In the latter event, that director holds office until the next Annual
Meeting. Board members do not have to be members of the Society.
CAL's Board of Directors is made up of two nominee directors appointed by the
Australian Society of Authors; two nominee directors
appointed by the Australian
Book Publishers Association; one author member elected by the author members at
general meeting; one
publisher member elected by the publisher members at
general meeting; and one independent director appointed by the other directors
following the annual general meeting. Board members do not have to be members of
the society. To vote, a member must be present either
physically or by proxy. No
postal ballot is permitted.
The CAL model is interesting in that it is a mixture of appointed members and
elected members. The organisations with the power of
appointment are at least
representative of relevant rights owners although it is noticeable that the
Fellowship of Australian Writers
and other representative organisations do not
enjoy that privilege.
Now that CAL is reaching maturity it no longer needs
the structural stability of guaranteeing the ASA and the ABPA appointed members
with the majority of board positions, but it would be certainly sensible for
those representative organisations to retain the right
to nominate one member
The shareholders are each entitled to appoint one director. Each board member
has one vote. Up until 1993, a board member has always
had to be not only a
subscriber to PPCA services but also a shareholder. This will change in 1994
when the company amends its articles
to expand the board to provide
representation to the union/performance/manager sector. At present, the Chair of
the AMMF is acting
as a pro-tem director and attending meetings. This is a
welcome and desirable change which will permit greater transparency of
governance.
It is not however enough.
The governance of PPCA needs to be
opened up so that the present subscribers to the services of PPCA are given the
right to be true
members. They should be given a vote as to board membership and
thus a say in the controlling body of the organisation.
Until it does this,
PPCA cannot be said to be acting in accordance with the normal principles of
collective administration societies
as recommended by WIPO.
4.2.6. Voting Power Of Board Members
At APRA, AVCS, CAL, AMCOS and PPCA, each board member has one vote (except
that some of the organisations provide for the Chair having
a casting vote where
necessary).
4.2.7. Limitations Upon Re-Election Of Board
All of the organisations are obliged to hold annual elections. At CAL and
PPCA, board appointments are made for one year periods.
AMCOS, APRA and AVCS
have a more desirable system whereby members of the Board are appointed for
three year terms and retire in rotation
each year. This provides a process for
maintaining corporate memory amongst the board members whilst providing the
opportunity to
gain fresh blood (and get rid of the stale). None of the
Societies place any limit on the revolving door of board membership. Although
long term board membership can provide a degree of stability for an
organisation, it can also produce stasis.
It is recommended
amendment be made to the Articles of each Society so that no person can be a
board member for more than a set period or a limited
number of terms, without at
least a year's rest. Collective administration societies should not allow
procedures which promote the
entrenchment of the power of individual board
This is not to say that the interests of powerful rights owners
will not be represented if their managing director has a period off
It may well be that another representative of that organisation will be elected
or appointed for that period. When a board
member sits at the board table, he or
she is not there to represent the views of his or her company but rather to act
in the interests
of all rights owners. If there is resistance by board members
to the introduction of limited terms of board membership it is an indication
the acute need for such regulation. There is also an understandable resistance
to this by some of the executives of societies.
After all, training up new board
members is time consuming and bothersome. However, a static board membership can
be all too comfortable
for executives and it is healthy for the good
administration of collective administrations to have some disturbing new blood
board, asking new questions, and giving new insights.
4.2.8. Remuneration Of Board Members
AMCOS and PPCA
None of the directors receive remuneration. This is appropriate as all
present directors sit on the board as representatives of their
The aggregate remuneration for the Board approved by the Association's
members in general meeting is currently $67,600. This amount
is divided amongst
the 12 Board members in approximately equal proportions, subject to a special
allowance for the Chairman.
By resolution of the Fourth Annual General Meeting held on 9 November 1993,
the meeting approved a total of $28,000 in remuneration
for the Chairman and
Directors for the financial year ending 30 June 1994. A small number of
Directors have declined to receive remuneration.
Total remuneration for the Board in the 1992/1993 financial year was
Although the payment of external directors is accepted practice in commercial
operations, the matter is more difficult in collective
administrations.
Those organisations that do pay sitting fees to directors, average about
$5,000 each. This is modest enough, given their responsibility
and the time that
an active director should put into the affairs of the organisation beyond merely
attending board meetings.
Whether directors who are employees of member
companies should receive sitting fees at all, must be questioned
are performing their function as part of their employment responsibilities it
must be queried whether they should receive
additional payment. Every dollar
paid in directors fees is a dollar that is not available for distribution. To
this end, the attitude
of PPCA and AMCOS is quite proper.
It is certainly inappropriate that any paid employee of a collective
administration society be paid a director's fee for sitting on
the board of
another society.
If such fee is paid, it should be paid through to the
employee's society, to contribute to the expense that it incurs by providing
that employee.
If it is otherwise, societies and their senior employees are
open to the accusation that they are merely sitting on one another's
their own personal gain; each contributing to the other's gain. Whilst there is
absolutely no evidence of such motivation,
the system of collective
administration must avoid such speculation, however unfounded or cynical, if the
collective interests are
to be protected.
4.2.9. Frequency Of Meetings
The boards of all of the societies meet every six or eight weeks, which
permits satisfactory control of Society affairs.
4.2.10. Attendance At Meetings
The board attendance records were examined. Although the societies are never
short of a quorum, it is clear from a certain repetitiveness
in the Apologies
governance would benefit from the introduction of a rule strictly
limiting the number of absences in any year.
Each has, or has recently had,
a couple of directors who clearly need to reassess their commitment or
availability.
4.2.11. Minutes Of Board Meetings
The board minutes of the societies were inspected. Given their highly
confidential nature, no comment is appropriate other than to
note that all
societies maintain their minutes of meeting in an appropriate and acceptable
5.1. DEGREE TO WHICH THE SOCIETY REPRESENTS ALL OWNERS OF THE RELEVANT
5.2. METHODS USED TO INFORM OWNERS AS TO THE EXISTENCE AND FUNCTIONS OF
THE SOCIETY AND ATTRACT AND ENLIST NEW MEMBERS
5.3. INFORMATION PROVIDED TO NEW MEMBERS
5.4. CLASSES OF SOCIETY MEMBERSHIP
5.5. NUMBER OF MEMBERS
5.6. ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS
5.7. FEES AND/OR COMMISSION CHARGED TO MEMBERS
5.8. SERVICES TO MEMBERS (OTHER THAN COLLECTION AND DISTRIBUTION)
5.9. EQUITY IN BENEFITS OF MEMBERSHIP
5.10. ANNUAL REPORT
5.11. COMMUNICATION WITH MEMBERS
5.12. PROCEDURES PROVIDED TO DEAL WITH MEMBERS' INQUIRIES AND
COMPLAINTS.
5.1. DEGREE TO WHICH THE SOCIETY REPRESENTS ALL
OWNERS OF THE RELEVANT COPYRIGHT
It is a remarkable feature of the societies that such a high proportion of
the relevant rights owners have chosen to become members.
Some might say that
this merely reflects the fact that there is no substantial competition; that
there is "only one game in town".
That argument only answers why the rights
owner has joined that particular society. On the other hand, the high proportion
representation clearly demonstrates that for the majority of the rights
owners, collective administration of those rights is preferable
to individual
administration.
5.1.1. AMCOS
No definitive research has been undertaken to determine the exact percentage
of ownership of musical works controlled by the Society.
However the fact that
virtually all music publishers in Australasia are members of the Society;
virtually all music composers are
members of APRA and have access to AMCOS
membership through APRA; and that in many cases its affiliated societies
overseas are operating
as centralised licensing bodies and represent all works
in that territory; would indicate that the vast majority of musical works
under AMCOS' mandate.
AMCOS only represents the works (or parts of works) controlled by its
members, affiliated overseas Societies, writers who have executed
authority, and print publishers who have executed the Schools Photocopying
authority. AMCOS permits only publisher members.
Many overseas mechanical
collecting societies act for both authors and publishers and in years past,
there were some writer members.
There was apparently no resistance from writers
when the Society's Articles were changed so that writers would be represented
APRA rather than directly, as individual members. Writers are not
particularly disadvantaged by this because:
• the primary function of the society is to administer a statutory
licence rather than to grant licences and in this, the interests
publishers and the writers are one;
• writers can direct APRA to have all their mechanicals collected from
AMCOS pursuant to the APRA-AMCOS agency agreement if
they do not have a
publisher; or
• writers can form their own publishing company to administer their own
5.1.2. APRA
Clearly the Association could never claim to represent all people who claim
to have written original musical works. Nor has it conducted
research into the
numbers of writers who do not join the Association. That said, APRA assumes, on
the basis of the logs it receives
from both radio and television stations, that
the Association represents over 99% of all writers whose works are publicly
disseminated.
APRA is not aware of any music publishers who have failed to seek
membership.
5.1.3. AVCS
The Society collects under the statutory licence for all relevant copyright
owners. Where the owner is not currently a member, the
Society holds the
allocated funds in trust pending admission to membership. (Given the nature of
the statutory licence that it administers
and the youth of the society, it is
not yet a matter of concern that AVCS does not have the extraordinary depth of
owner-representativeness
that the other societies have achieved.)
Although it administers a statutory licence, membership in CAL is voluntary.
New member applications average thirty per month. The
Society estimates that for
education, it represents over 90% of copyright owners whose works have been
PPCA believes it represents copyright owners of over 95% of recordings. In a
report by Price Waterhouse to MIAC in 1992, it was estimated
that about 7% of
record business was not captured in ARIA statistics (which are also used by
PPCA). Since then, a number of new members
have joined PPCA thereby increasing
coverage. There has been criticism made of PPCA that artists cannot subscribe to
its services.
It is beyond the scope of this Report to survey artists to
determine if this is so, but according to the Company, it has never refused
individual who is a relevant rights owner. The confusion may arise from the
various degrees of copyright ownership that are possible
and the effect that
this has on eligibility. For example, in most record deals, the owner of all
is the record company. In such a case, the
artist is not an owner and therefore not eligible. In other cases, where the
negotiated a proportion of the copyright in the sound recording, he
or she has granted an exclusive licence over that share in favour
of the record
company. In such a case, the record company still has effective control over
100% of the record. In the third situation,
the artist owns all copyright and
licenses it to the record company. In such a case there is no doubt that the
artist has the right
to join PPCA and, subject to its licence agreement with the
record company, deal direct. Indeed examples were provided of individual
who had been admitted. From 1993, primary artists were able to register
(although of course, this does not mean "join") and
receive 20% direct. Where
those artists do not have a third party record label, such artists are entitled
to direct payment of the
relevant distributable sum. All of this would seem
somewhat of a stop-gap (albeit welcome) measure until the introduction of a
performers' copyright. The payment of 20% is in fact in excess of the
quantum agreed between the peak international bodies representing
musicians and
singers, and IFPI. That agreement says that where the record company owns the
rights, 33.5% of the money from
revenue is to be paid through
to performers. Because the artificial 1% cap on broadcast revenue would result
in an unduly low payment
to performers, PPCA does not limit the percentage
payment to just broadcast income.
5.2. METHODS USED TO INFORM OWNERS AS TO THE
EXISTENCE AND FUNCTIONS OF THE SOCIETY AND ATTRACT AND ENLIST NEW
If a society is to equitably represent relevant rights owners it must be
diligent in informing those rights owners not only that it
exists, but also what
it does and can do for those rights owners. If it does not, it becomes a club
for the privileged insiders.
In order to be truly open, it must inform.
5.2.1. AMCOS
AMCOS is a collecting society for music publishers. Anyone operating as a
music publisher could be expected to know of AMCOS and AMPAL.
It does not spend
a lot of money in maintaining a corporate profile, although it does advertise in
trade journals and directories;
attend and present seminars; sponsor awards at
industry events such as the RIANZ Music Award and a Tamworth Song Writers Award;
lectures at educational institutions; and appears to be consulted by the
media as the voice of the music publishing industry. The
Society publishes
informative booklets and brochures.
It would benefit from more of them, so
that members and users of the Society had a clearer picture of the suprisingly
diverse range
of its sundry operations. Distribution of this material is
unfocussed and the excellent printed material needs wider dissemination.
5.2.2. APRA
The Association does not actively enlist new members. It does place
advertisements in music industry trade publications advising of
its existence
and role. The Association's Membership Department also plays an active role in
industry seminars and conferences explaining
the services provided by the
Association. That said, however, most of the writers who apply for membership do
so through learning
by word of mouth of the Association's role.
5.2.3. AVCS
The Society identifies the television and radio programs copied under the
educational copying scheme through sample surveys and reports
record-keeping institutions. Relevant rights holders are identified from various
sources, notably from information on program
suppliers provided by broadcasters.
After assessment of their eligibility to claim, the Society then contacts
potential claimants
and invites them to membership. Every potential claimant
identified by the Society is sent:
(i) a letter initiating contact;
(ii) a brochure on the role of AVCS; and
(iii) a brief explanation of the broadcast copying scheme.
In addition, the Society has published general information in the newsletters
of relevant industry organisations, accepts invitations
to speak at seminars and
distributes its excellent newsletter widely to members and non-members. The
documentation provided potential
claimants, is clear and sufficient. It informs
the recipients of their potential claim and invites them to contact the Society.
the very early phase of its operations the Society hosted a meeting in Sydney
and one in Melbourne and spoke at a small number of
meetings organised by
industry associations. The members of some industry bodies were contacted
directly by mail and articles describing
the Society's operations were prepared
for various newsletters. The educational activities were on a very small scale.
The Society
then narrowed its focus and concentrated on identifying potential
claimants and contacting them directly. Priority was given to explaining
scheme to beneficiaries presently entitled to the funds held on trust over
general education programs to the industry at large.
This cautious approach has
been a responsible one for a fledgling organisation but
AVCS is now at a
stage of development at which it should undertake a series of national seminars,
in co-operation with its sponsor
organisations, to explain and promote its role
to its potential members, to increase awareness and understanding of AVCS within
CAL's main efforts in recruiting new members are in contacting those
non-members whose works have been copied in the sample surveys
of copying CAL
conducts. This is certainly a cost effective way of approaching the problem
because unless there is identified income,
there is little point in being a
member. However, if more eligible persons were members it would make the task of
tracking down payees
more simple and efficient. A number of comments made to
this inquiry suggested that there was insufficient knowledge in the writing
community about the functions of CAL and it seems that this ignorance has
created a cynical impression of the Society's function.
Although CAL issues a
number of informative and clearly expressed brochures about its operations,
conducts membership drives using
mail-outs, seminars, and has written articles
in various publications, it would seem that it needs to do more to inform both
rights owners who are not members and those members who do not receive
payments. Much of the negative comment about the Society is
ill-informed. The
problem indicates an absence of a marketing strategy by which information on the
Society is to be disseminated,
rather than any darker design. CAL is now
developing a marketing strategy and has recently appointed a Public Information
to address these matters. When entering a new licensing area CAL
conducts targeted membership drives. For example, since it has been
involved in
negotiations to licence government and corporate copying, it has been targeting
business and professional publications
for membership.
5.2.5. PPCA
PPCA makes no public efforts to attract new company members. The members are
the shareholders, and shareholding is tightly held.
As for attracting new subscribers to its services, until recently, PPCA has
made little or no effort. PPCA's argument is that the
majority of independent
labels in Australia are distributed through its members and that record
companies understand what the public
performance broadcasting right is, and how
PPCA operates. This confidence is not reflected in the views of some independent
as expressed to the Inquiry. (PPCA's response to this is that it has
written to the distributors of independent labels asking them
to advise as to
which labels the distributor can represent to PPCA and which it cannot. If it
cannot, PPCA has asked the distributor
to ask the label to contact PPCA
PPCA has agreed to pay a percentage of such collections through to performers
and the Company has placed numerous newspaper advertisements
inviting eligible
performers to apply. Unlike all of the other societies, there is no
comprehensive information kit supplied to owners
who may be interested in
subscribing to the Company's services. The Company publishes a pamphlet on sound
recording and one on music
video. These explain briefly what PPCA is, describe
the legal position and pose and answer the questions most frequently asked by
the public. These are useful, but
the Company would do well also to produce
printed material on the functions, methods, aims and performance of PPCA.
must be said, that as a private company, PPCA has no legal obligation to produce
such material. However, as a company providing
collecting society functions,
such material should be readily available. Much of the adverse publicity that
PPCA has attracted in
recent times has been because of its failure to make
available to the relevant public, any useful, informative material on its
functions and manner of operation. PPCA would be well advised to hire a
public communications consultant.
5.3. INFORMATION PROVIDED TO NEW
5.3.1. AMCOS
New members receive the published pamphlets mentioned above and the
membership agreement.
More information is desirable.
5.3.2. APRA
The Association provides new members with extensive information.
New writer members are provided with extensive written information. This
includes useful material on the history and services of APRA,
the basic rights
of copyright in general and the performance right in particular.
The following written information is provided to new publisher members:
(i) covering letter
(ii) user guide for contract and title registration procedures
(iii) standardised forms for the registration of contracts and titles
(iv) specifications for title registration by diskette
(v) live performance return notifications
(vi) jingle reporting form
In addition, many new members attend one or other of APRA's membership
offices and receive personal advice on a variety of matters
relevant to their
membership.
5.3.3. AVCS
Members receive a document entitled "Information for Members - Extracts from
the AVCS Corporate Plan". This is a most impressively
informative document and
is a model of its type. All societies would do well to supply its new members
with such a detailed and readable
document. In addition, the Membership
Agreement incorporates a copy of the Memorandum and Articles of Association.
New members are provided with information about the structure of CAL, how
sampling surveys operate and when distributions are made.
This information is
contained in the letter and materials they receive. These include the Membership
Application and explanatory
letter, CAL's Memorandum and Articles and various
brochures and newsletters. The package is comprehensive and useful.
5.3.5. PPCA
New licensors are supplied with a copy of the "input agreements", together
with a letter explaining the method of distribution. Nothing
Company recognises the value of a comprehensive "new member's kit" and is taking
steps to develop one.
5.4. CLASSES OF SOCIETY MEMBERSHIP
It is important to examine whether a society offers various classes of
membership. Differentials of class may act positively or negatively.
indicate an effort to maintain power in the hands of one class of members to the
detriment of another. On the other hand,
they may indicate that the society has
attempted to open up its membership to a group of rights owners beyond the
primary owners.
5.4.1. AMCOS
The Society has three types of membership: Foundation Members, Publisher
Members and Associate Members. Although the Articles provide
for the category
"Associate Member", there has never been a member admitted as an Associate.
There is now only one Foundation Member
- AMPAL. All other members are Publisher
The time has surely come, to do away with the class of Associate
Member. It is functionally redundant. Similarly, the role of Foundation
should be abolished.
5.4.2. APRA
The Association has essentially two classes of membership: full and
Full members are sub-categorised into "writer full members" and "publisher
full members", the only difference being that writer full
members vote for
writer directors while publisher full members vote for publisher directors.
Associate members (who comprise unincorporated publisher members and heirs
and successors to writer members) enjoy exactly the same
rights, entitlements
and privileges as full members except the entitlement to attend and vote at
general meetings. This is reasonable.
It should additionally be noted that members who fail to earn any royalty
allocation for two successive financial years cease to be
entitled to notice of,
or to attend and vote at general meetings until they do earn an allocation. This
too, is reasonable.
5.4.3. AVCS
AVCS has just the one class of membership.
CAL has two general classes of membership: publisher and writer. Members have
the option of either Full Membership (participation
in all licence schemes, both
voluntary and statutory), or Statutory Membership (participation in statutory
licence schemes only).
In response to members' requests, CAL has also recently
introduced a Restricted Membership (participating in selected licence schemes).
Agents (such as literary agents or the Media Entertainment and Arts Alliance may
join to collect and distribute fees on behalf of
the authors they represent.
5.4.5. PPCA
As already noted, PPCA makes a distinction between being a member of the
Company and a subscriber to the services of that Company.
Although the Articles of the Company allow for there to be different classes
of shareholders, with different rights attaching to that
class membership, there
is only the one class of shares issued in the Company.
As for subscription to its services, those who license PPCA to collect on
their behalf, do so on the same terms. The "Input Licence
Agreement" is
5.5. NUMBER OF MEMBERS
5.5.1. AMCOS
The Society has a slowly growing number of members. This fairly static
membership is not surprising, given that the number of music
publishers is
itself fairly static.
5.5.2. APRA
The numbers and growth of members in APRA is as follows:
* Successors in title
MEMBERSHIP FIGURES
(July 1984-April 1994)
TOTAL MEMBERSHIP
(July 1984-July 1993)
FULL MEMBERS ASSOCIATE MEMBERS
ELECTED ELECTED
(July 1984-July 1993) (July 1984-July 1993)
5.5.3. AVCS
As at June 30th, 1994, there were 112 members. Each year shows a creditable
growth of membership:
CAL does not keep records of its membership numbers from year to year.
However, current membership levels are:
970 (representing 4846 agencies /imprints)
16 (representing 108 agencies/imprints)
3 (representing 140 agencies/imprints)
The numbers above do not show the full extent of representation as:
• The above agencies and imprints indirectly represent hundreds of
thousands of rights owners.
• CAL's membership also includes around 12,000 journalists who are
members of the Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance; and
• Publishers are members on their own behalf and on behalf of their
Total Membership as at 8 April 1994 was 17,810.
5.5.5. PPCA
PPCA membership has been, not surprisingly, fairly static. (After all, it
already represents in excess of 95% of owners.)
These members in turn represent over 800 labels which, between them, (as
licensees or agents), control nearly all sound recordings
commercially released
in Australia.
The most recent and important development is that artists can now register
for direct distribution. As of December 1993 there were
562 individual artists
registered and PPCA expects this to be over 1,000 by December 1994.
5.6. ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS
It is important to consider the eligibility criteria when gauging the equity
of access to the societies.
5.6.1. AMCOS
All that is required for membership of AMCOS, is evidence of being a bona
fide music publisher. This is not difficult. Writers who
form their own company
to administer their own copyrights are eligible provided they are prepared to
perform the usual administrative
functions of a music publisher. Many have
chosen to do so.
5.6.2. APRA
The eligibility requirements for membership are as follows:
(i) for writers: Evidence of the public performance or broadcasting of at
least one composition;
(ii) for publishers: Evidence of bona fide music publishing activities -
usually satisfied by proof of ownership or control of publishing
relation to at least 12 commercially recorded or published compositions.
Successors in title are elected to associate membership upon proof of their
entitlement.
5.6.3. AVCS
The Articles of Association provide that a person is eligible for admission
as a member if the person is either:
(i) an owner of a relevant copyright, or
(ii) the agent of such a person.
["relevant copyright" means the copyright in a work, sound recording or
cinematograph film within the meaning of
applies to the relevant act.
"relevant act" means the doing in Australia of the acts which, but for
sub-sections 135E(1), 135F(1) 135ZS(1) and 135ZT(1) of the
be an infringement of the copyright in any particular relevant copyright.]
Any person who is eligible for membership may apply to the board for
admission to membership. The application must be made in writing,
signed by the
applicant, and must be made in such form as is determined by the Board.
The Board may require any applicant to supply such evidence of eligibility as
the Board considers reasonably necessary but when the
Board is satisfied that
the applicant is eligible, the Board
admit the applicant as a
member. This is not discretionary.
To be eligible for membership, the applicant must sign a warranty that the
applicant is a relevant copyright owner or the agent of
a relevant copyright
Royalties for the copying of musical works are distributed with the
assistance of APRA and AMCOS. Musical collecting societies must
sign different
Notification Schedules. The Notification Schedule signed by APRA for the
composer/lyricist provides that the composer/lyricist
are the owners of the
relevant copyright in the musical works registered with APRA and that APRA is an
agent for the composer/lyricist
in respect of the relevant copyright. AMCOS also
collects in the capacity of agent.
Whilst this may all seem complicated when formally set out as above, its
operation is quite straight forward.
Membership applicants must be either an author or publisher copyright owner
or the agent of the owner of copyright in a literary work.
CAL adopts an
inclusive approach to membership and relies on the representations of membership
applicants in determining their eligibility
for membership.
5.6.5. PPCA
Members must be the owners or licensees of the broadcast and public
performance rights in protected sound recordings or music videos
territory of Australia. Artists must be the primary artists performing on a
recording (so thus, paid session musicians cannot
5.7. FEES AND/OR COMMISSION CHARGED TO
5.7.1. AMCOS
AMCOS does not charge joining fees or membership fees but deducts a set
percentage from the gross revenue. Only AMCOS works on this
set commission
basis. (Worldwide, unlike
rights societies which deduct their
actual administration costs prior to distribution,
societies traditionally deduct certain standard percentages. As the WIPO Report
notes, throughout the world these administrative
deductions average between 15%
and 25% [par 66].)
Until 30th June 1992 the standard rate of commission was 7.5% of gross
receipts. From that date, the rate was increased to 12.5%.
This means that AMCOS
has one of the best administration cost to distributed sums ratio. This is
particularly impressive seeing that
it is not permitted by its members to
collect mechanical royalties that publishers receive direct from the major
record companies.
Inter-society collections (including collections on behalf of APRA members)
are charged at rates of 15% for mechanical usages and
20% for synchronisation
licences only. This reflects the greater amount of administration required.
Audit receipts and schools' photocopying income are commissioned at the
standard rate but specific costs associated with these activities
are deducted
from the gross receipts.
For two quarters only in 1993, a commission of 3% was charged on collections
by AMCOS New Zealand for the work undertaken in co-ordinating
the collection and
distribution of royalties from the major record companies.
AMCOS New Zealand charges 5% for facilitating advertising licences.
No commission has been charged to date for collection of music video
royalties from major record companies but, in future, such income
commissioned.
The rates are set by the Board after consideration of the financial factors
affecting the cost of collection and the financial state
of the Society. It is
worth noting that the income of the companies represented by the directors of
the Society is directly affected
by any deduction/commission by the Society.
This serves as an effective review mechanism to ensure that the Society's rates
of commission
are as low as possible. (The directors represent approximately 90%
of the Australasian music copyrights.)
5.7.2. APRA
There are no joining or membership fees charged by the Association. The
Association is entitled to deduct from its royalty distribution:
• its expenses of and incidental to the conduct, management and
operation of the Association (Article 93(a));
• contributions to staff superannuation funds (Article 95(a)(i));
• such sums as the Board determines proper for the purpose of promoting
the use and recognition of members' works (Article 95(a)(ii)).
There is also provision for the Board to establish a reserve fund (Article 95
(b)), but the Board has not regarded the establishment
of such a fund as
5.7.3. AVCS
There are no joining fees, there are no annual membership fees and no
percentage commission is charged on income collected. There
are no membership
fees of any kind.
The Society is entitled to charge a fee should a member exercise their right
to inspect the Society's records under Article 65. Article
65 (c)(iv) provides
that the member must undertake to pay "such reasonable fee as may be necessary
to defray the cost to the Society
of such inspection". This Article is
consistent with Guideline 25 of the Attorney-General's Guidelines.
Notwithstanding its entitlement
to do so, the Society does not charge a fee for
such access.
CAL does not charge joining fees or membership fees. No commissions are
charged on income collected but deducts its running costs
from its annual gross
5.7.5. PPCA
There are no joining or membership fees and no set commission is charged.
Administration costs are deducted from gross revenue.
5.8. SERVICES TO MEMBERS (OTHER THAN COLLECTION
AND DISTRIBUTION)
5.8.1. AMCOS
AMCOS provides the following services to its members:
(i) Negotiation on behalf of music publishers and composer of the industry
agreements - the AMPAL/AMCOS /ARIA Mechanical Copyright
Agreement, the
ARIA/AMPAL/AMCOS Music Video Agreement, the Schools Photocopying Agreement;
(ii) Representation on behalf of members in connection with any proposed
legislation which may affect the interests of members;
(iii) Raising with Government in Australia and New Zealand any matters of
concern to music publishers and composers;
(iv) Working with Government to promote stronger copyright laws and bilateral
the region;
(v) Enforcement of members' rights through litigation and the Music Industry
Piracy Investigations Unit;
(vi) International representation through membership of committees of BIEM,
CISAC and the International Copyright Coalition;
(vii) Researching ownership and referring users to the appropriate
(viii) Forum for discussion of industry matters, seminars and training
sessions for members and their staff;
(ix) Facilitation of advertising licences in New Zealand;
(x) Providing a presence for the music publishing industry in New
(xi) Liaison with representatives of the various sections of industry,
commerce and education involved in the use of reproduction
(xii) Liaison with similar associations on an international basis;
(xiii) Dissemination of information of general industry benefit and interest
to members such as:
• changes in copyright administration - new agreements etc.;
• an overview of international copyright issues;
• international licensing trends and copyright conventions;
• feed-back from copyright users concerning new technologies and the
• changes in government attitudes to copyright;
• statistics on copyright usages.
5.8.2. APRA
The Association provides seminars, workshops and publications, which provide
information to members not only on APRA-related matters,
but on matters relevant
to music industry issues generally. It also seeks to represent the voice of
writers and, to a lesser extent
publishers (because they have their own industry
body), on general copyright issues.
Although some submissions to the inquiry were critical of APRA's use of
litigation in enforcing its licensing and distribution function,
the Association
sees that one of its important services to members is in defending the value of
the music performing right in the
5.8.3. AVCS
AVCS does not purport to provide services to members beyond its
administration of the educational copying scheme under
of the Copyright.
Given its stage of development, this is not surprising nor a matter for adverse
The Society has apparently not yet been approached by members to perform any
additional services. There is certainly room for the
expansion of AVCS'
collecting activity. The Society is willing to administer voluntary licence
schemes sought by members and new
statutory licence schemes and considers itself
to be the appropriate licensing, collection and distribution mechanism for
of copyright in audio-visual works.
There are no legal restrictions on expanded operations flowing from the
or Attorney-General's Guidelines. The Society's Memorandum and
Articles of Association do not preclude the Society from expanding
operations in the administration of rights for owners of copyright in films,
sound recordings and underlying works.
Amendments to the Articles of Association would be required to admit to
membership any other classes of rights holders beyond the
owners of the relevant
performers). Depending on the nature
of any statutory amendments, further
changes to the Articles of Association might be required to comply with specific
features of
any legislation or requirements for the declaration of the Society
under non-voluntary licence schemes introduced in the future.
CAL's principal services to members (beyond collection and distribution) are
educational. The Society provides members with information
developments in technology and use of copyright works. Members also experience
difficulty understanding the more technical
aspects of the sampling process and
CAL has begun a program of free seminars for members addressing this. Moreover,
the education
and the advice it gives to licensees and other members of the
public about copyright and the limits of copying under CAL licences,
is intended
to encourage them to respect the rights of CAL's members.
Because many members are unsure if an infringement of copyright has occurred
(under CAL licences, some copying is permitted and it
is difficult for someone
not entirely familiar with the licence terms to make this assessment), CAL will
also assess infringement
evidence for members and, where the infringement is by
a licensee, attempt to arrange a settlement for the member concerned.
CAL runs litigation with its members where it is of strategic benefit to the
interests of copyright owners (either to minimise infringement
or to encourage
infringing institutions to take licences). It also lobbies government for
amendments to the
, which would benefit its members.
CAL also acts as a first contact point for members with copyright problems
and is able to refer them to other bodies better able to
assist them.
CAL conceives, develops, implements and markets new forms of licence for
institutions that infringe copyright.
5.8.5. PPCA
The company litigates to enforce member's rights and runs test cases to
establish those rights. (For example, the "MMM case" in the
to set broadcast licence fees payable by commercial broadcasters.)
5.9. EQUITY IN BENEFITS OF
None of the societies offer services or benefits to individual members that
are not offered to all other members. In the case of AVCS
and CAL, both as
trustees, and under the Guidelines for Declared Collecting Societies issued by
the Attorney-General's Department,
each Society has an obligation to operate
their scheme in an "even-handed" manner for current members, prospective members
currently entitled to a distribution) and future members (beneficiaries
from future distribution periods).
5.10. ANNUAL REPORTS
5.10.1. APRA, AMCOS, AVCS and CAL
These societies publish acceptable annual reports.
5.10.2. PPCA
PPCA only produces the minimum report required by law. They are only in the
form of accounts.
The company would do both itself, the public and its
subscribers, a considerable benefit if it produced a public document which was
more generally informative and accessible.
5.11. COMMUNICATION WITH MEMBERS
AMCOS publishes an interesting
occasional newsletter.
5.11.2. APRA
In 1993, the Association began publishing a high quality Year-Book which has
numerous articles of interest to the music community.
The Association also publishes a very informative newsletter called
to its members. The newsletter is published about 3 or 4 times a
5.11.3. AVCS
The Society publishes a newsletter entitled
Off the Air.
circulated free of charge to members, licensees, potential claimants, industry
associations and others. It is available on
subscription to libraries at $25 for
four issues. The newsletter is published irregularly, depending on the progress
of events that
form the subject of its reports.
5.11.4. CAL
Since 1988 CAL has published an informative newsletter, which is distributed
to member licensees and the general public. Since 1991,
the newsletter has been
published bi-annually.
5.11.5. PPCA
The company does not have a newsletter for those who subscribe to its
services. Although there is an ARIA newsletter, the Company
must acknowledge
that the news that is relevant to ARIA members is not necessarily the same as
that which is relevant to subscribers
to the services of PPCA.
The interests
of the subscribers would be well served by the introduction of some regular
channel of communication such as a newsletter
(or some other method). It would
give the Company a means of informing rights owners of its operations.
5.12. PROCEDURES PROVIDED TO DEAL WITH MEMBERS'
INQUIRIES AND COMPLAINTS.
Transparency of operation is essential to the healthy collective
administration of rights and this requires that complaints and requests
information be dealt with speedily and without prevarication. Where complaints
made are misinformed, every effort must be made
to correct the misinformation.
This is best done by full and ready disclosure rather by adopting a defensive
5.12.1. AMCOS
There are no codified procedures. Complaints in the main are directed to the
Chief Executive for resolution.
5.12.2. APRA
The Association has a Membership Department consisting of 3 full-time staff
in Sydney and officers in Auckland, Melbourne, Brisbane,
Adelaide (part-time)
and Perth (part-time). This department is generally the first point of call for
a member with a query or complaint.
If the query is, however, of a more
specialised nature (for example, concerning a royalty allocation deriving from
Australia or overseas)
the member may be referred to, or request, a particular
person from within the Distribution or Documentation departments. If queries
unsatisfied or if a complaint emerges then the Association's Company Secretary
or Chief Executive become involved.
Submissions to the Inquiry indicate that, in spite of its efforts, APRA falls
down in the manner in which it deals with complaints.
In an organisation of this
size, a more formal complaints procedure would seem to be called for.
Association would be well advised to consider implementing a system whereby the
handling of complaints is made more systematic
and formally supervised
This would also more easily permit reflection as to how the system
might be improved, in often small but important ways.
5.12.3. AVCS
Enquiries and complaints are responded to individually by the Chief Executive
or the Corporate Solicitor. It is a small organisation
and this somewhat
personal approach is appropriate.
5.12.4. CAL
Most members' complaints and inquiries are due to a misunderstanding of CAL's
role and operations. Therefore, providing members with
clear summaries of CAL's
operations is one of it's priorities, and most inquiries and complaints are
resolved by the provision of
this information.
The Membership Department is the focal point for member's inquiries
concerning CAL's operations, and it co-ordinates the responses
of CAL's various
departments to the members' inquiry.
5.12.5. PPCA
Complaints and enquiries are directed to the Executive Director, the General
Manager and the Administration Manager. Examination of
such correspondence
indicates that the PPCA has been deficient in the manner in which it has dealt
with some complaints or requests
for information about its operations. It has
had a defensive approach to such matters and this approach has only acted to
criticism and cynicism as to its operation.
This has been a weakness
of PPCA and must be remedied if the Company is to achieve effectively its
representative role.
RIGHTS AND LICENCES ADMINISTERED BY THE COLLECTING SOCIETIES
6.1.1. Licensing Of Musical Works Into Records
6.1.2. TV Blanket Licences
6.1.3. Production Music Licences
6.1.4. Mechanical & Video Blanket Licences
6.1.5. Radio Station Blanket Licences
6.1.6. Music Videos for Retail Sale
6.1.7. Special Event Video Blanket Licences
6.1.8. Dance School Blanket Licenses (Audio Mechanical)
6.1.9. Synchronisation Clearances
6.1.10. Importation
6.1.11. Statutory Licences For Educational Copying
6.1.12. Schools Photocopying
6.1.13. Blank Tape Levy
AMCOS is concerned primarily with the administration of the right to
reproduce a musical work in a material form - the right to make
reproductions of
the musical works controlled by its members and those of its affiliated
grants the owner of copyright certain exclusive rights over
his or her musical work under
section 31(1)(a).
AMCOS is the exclusive licensee
in Australia and New Zealand in respect of the
reproduction right
musical works which are under its control. AMCOS licenses the reproduction right
and collects the "mechanical royalty" for those
musical works that it controls
on behalf of its publisher members. AMCOS remits the royalty to the relevant
music publisher which
then distributes it to the composers according to the
terms of their agreements.
AMCOS also has reciprocal agreements with most equivalent collecting
societies around the world. On the basis of these agreements
AMCOS is authorised
to collect royalties on behalf of foreign rights owners who have not entered
sub-publishing agreements for the
territory of Australia and New Zealand.
Australian composers who are members of APRA and are not represented by a local
can sign an authority which permits APRA to use AMCOS as its agent to
collect the mechanical income. (see para 7.1.1.)
6.1.1. Licensing Of Musical Works Into
The principal exercise of this right involves the licensing of reproductions
of musical works onto "records" (as defined in the
- including
CDs, cassettes, MIDI files, etc.).
provides for the
statutory licence
under which records of musical works can be made in
Section 55(1)(d)(ii)(A)
provides that the manner of payment of the
mechanical royalty can be in a manner agreed between the manufacturer and the
owner or, failing such agreement, determined by the Copyright Tribunal
section 152B.
Section 55(1)(d)(ii)(B)
provides that if no such agreement or
determination is in force - the manner of payment can be according to that
prescribed by the
regulations.
Section 55(6)(a)
provides that the amount of the mechanical royalty
can be agreed between the manufacturer and the copyright owner or, failing such
agreement, determined by the Copyright Tribunal under
section 152A.
Section 55(6)(b)
provides that if no such agreement or determination
is in force - it will be an amount equal to 6.25% of the retail selling price
the record. This prescribed rate is the benchmark for all rates and agreements
entered into by the Society.
On the basis of
Section 55(1)(d)(ii)(A)
Section 55(6)(a)
, AMCOS, AMPAL
and ARIA entered the Mechanical Copyright Agreement, dated 24 April 1990. This
agreement regulates the manner of payment
of the royalty and fixes the royalty
The current Mechanical Copyright Agreement ends on 31 December 1994. It sets
out the quantum and the payment machinery of the mechanical
licence royalties
payable by the six major record companies which account directly to the music
publishers for the licensing of records.
These transactions do not utilise the
services of AMCOS. This a most important distinction to draw. Most of the
mechanical copyright
societies in Europe, collect
of the mechanical
income payable to the publishers from the record companies - irrespective of the
size of the record companies making
the payment. In Australia however, AMCOS
does not have the right to collect the vast bulk of mechanical income, (ie the
income which flows from records sold by the Major record companies).
Rather it only collects everything that is unprofitable for
the publishers to
collect individually.
The other ARIA members ("non-Majors") account to the music publishers for
mechanical royalties through AMCOS. Non-ARIA members execute
an agreement with
AMCOS with the same essential terms and conditions as the Mechanical Copyright
As the operation of the Agreement serves to grant credit to record
manufacturers, AMCOS has recently set up new procedures for licensing
companies who have no credit history. These new companies are treated in a
similar manner to "sundry" customers - people looking
to license works for small
runs and one-off recordings. They are invoiced on the basis of manufacture and
their licence is not valid
until paid.
The Mechanical Copyright Agreement is an illustration of the results of the
intense negotiating that precedes an industry agreement
between record companies
and music publishers. In many aspects of the agreement, the music publishers
have allowed for and reduced
royalties, in return for other advantages.
It is a useful model of the value in having a basic royalty set by the
independent decision maker (Copyright Tribunal) and then allowing
the industry
to negotiate away from that minimum. This ensures a level of equity while
allowing the industry parties to negotiate
other terms. Negotiation undertaken
in which both parties know that either of them can go to the independent
decision maker if either
is unreasonable, ensures that the negotiation is
commercially efficacious.
The weakness of this negotiation system is that all relevant interests are
not directly involved. Neither the performers nor the composers,
the primary
producers of the industry, have a seat at the negotiating table when this, one
of the most important agreements in the
music industry, is settled. It is all
very well to say that the publishers represent the views of the writers and that
companies represent the interests of the performers, but the argument
is specious. The commercial interests between publisher and
writer, and record
company and performer, are as different from one another as the commercial
interests between composer and performer.
6.1.2. TV Blanket Licences
Licences issued to television stations (including free-to-air, cable,
satellite and subscription) to reproduce musical works for the
purposes of
broadcasting are an extension of the "ephemeral" provisions of the
The licence permits the station to make reproductions of musical works for
the purposes of broadcasting across a network and to retain
copies of the
programs in which the music is incorporated beyond the statutory limits. The
licence is only for the territory of Australasia.
The sheer volume of copyright music recorded into TV programs has led to
representatives of broadcasters and copyright holders working
efficient methods of licensing. There are two reasons for this co-operation:
• If the large amount of daily music uses were subject to individual
clearances on each separate musical work, it would require
an unacceptably high
level of administration costs.
• It would be difficult for individual writers and publishers to
monitor the use of their music on all TV stations in the various
It is in this context that publishers have authorised AMCOS to grant licence
agreements to the ABC, SBS and all commercial television
stations throughout
Australia, authorising the reproduction of music into the soundtracks of
programs produced or commissioned by
the station. The stations are required to
submit to AMCOS cue sheets detailing all reproductions made.
Although there seems little complaint about the efficiency of the operation
of the AMCOS TV blanket licence system, it would seem
a corollary of the
criticism that the Federation of Commercial Television Stations ("FACTS") has
against APRA, (namely that the calculation
of a blanket fee based on gross
turn-over of the TV station is inequitable and that the Society abuses its
monopoly position) that
if FACTS were to succeed in its actions against APRA
scheduled for later this year, its existing arrangements with AMCOS may also
6.1.3. Production Music Licences
Production Music is a convenient yet inexpensive source of "off the shelf"
background music for film, audio-visual productions and
commercials. There are
many sources of production music and AMCOS is just one.
AMCOS administers a simple and effective licensing scheme for licensing the
rights to reproduce the musical work as well as the right
to reproduce and
broadcast the sound recordings in the Production Music Libraries distributed by
members of the Society. Some of
the Society's members licence AMCOS to
administer their production music libraries for them. Others don't. It is merely
that AMCOS offers all of its members should they wish to take
advantage of it.
All that is required is the submission of the standard Licence
Application/Cue Sheet and the payment of the licence fee indicated
on the AMCOS
Rate Card. AMCOS then ensures that the appropriate royalties flow back to the
publishers for on-payment to the composers.
6.1.4. Mechanical & Video Blanket
These blanket licences cover clients that distribute background music audio
recordings to retail shops or music video compilations
to hotels and clubs, in
flight audio programs, radio syndication companies etc.
6.1.5. Radio Station Blanket Licences
These licences primarily cover the use of production music recordings in
commercials. They also allow radio stations to make copies
of recordings of
musical works and retain them beyond the limits of the ephemeral provisions of
6.1.6. Music Videos for Retail Sale
AMCOS/AMPAL and ARIA entered an agreement last year to license the
reproduction of musical works in music videos for retail sale.
interesting agreement in that it illustrates the complexity and detail of these
intra-industry agreements and the extraordinarily
stubborn manner in which they
are negotiated.
6.1.7. Special Event Video Blanket Licences
(Synchronisation)
This is a licence administered by the Society on behalf of its members and
the members of ARIA to cover the use of musical works and
sound recordings in
videos made of private and domestic events (such as weddings and birthday
6.1.8. Dance School Blanket Licenses (Audio
Mechanical)
This licence scheme was set up in 1993 to enable dance schools to make audio
recordings of musical works for the purpose of instructing
6.1.9. Synchronisation Clearances
These include:
• Audio visual productions such as a feature film, documentary or
corporate video.
• Student Film or Video Licences.
• Synchronisation clearances which allow students to use musical works
in films or videos as part of a course of instruction.
• Sundry Uses
• Demonstration tapes, compilation tapes made by educational
institutions, audio only component of Karaoke and backing tapes,
6.1.10. Importation
AMCOS licenses the importation of musical works embodied in imported
recordings.
6.1.11. Statutory Licences For Copying Broadcasts In
Educational And Other Institutions
AMCOS is responsible for distribution of payments due to its members for the
copying of musical works and associated lyrics from programs
broadcast on
television and radio in Australia pursuant to statutory licences for educational
institutions contained in
, and for other institutions under
. (AVCS is responsible for administering the scheme and
payments to member music publishers are made through AMCOS.)
6.1.12. Schools Photocopying
Reproducing sheet music by reprographic reproduction and transcribing music
and lyrics in graphic form are also an exercise of the
right of reproduction.
licence for educational
institutions to make copies of print materials for educational purposes in
certain circumstances, subject
to equitable remuneration.
Print music publishers usually control these rights on behalf of the
license educational
institutions to photocopy sheet music and to transcribe music and lyrics for
educational purposes.
AMCOS also has an agreement to offer
educational institutions which extend the
statutory rights
granted under
These voluntary licences enable educational institutions to make a
limited number of copies from original sheet music that they have
The benefit of the Agreement is that schools do not have to approach
individual publishers to negotiate permission to photocopy their
works, which,
although required by law, they had not been doing prior to the introduction of
the scheme. If schools wish to photocopy
beyond the terms of the agreement, for
example for a combined schools festival, AMCOS will research the ownership and
refer the request
to the relevant rights holders. This was requested by
educational authorities for the effective musical education of their students.
The limits of the licence were a compromise to protect the interests of sheet
music publishers, wholesalers and retailers and to
place clearly defined and
realistic limits on copying of sheet music in schools.
6.1.13. Blank Tape Levy
AMCOS has authority from its members to collect payments from any future
blank tape remuneration scheme to compensate from losses
due to domestic
reproductions of musical works.
Subject to the exception of "grand rights", the Association administers the
rights of public performance, broadcasting and transmission
to subscribers to a
diffusion service which subsist in the musical works (and in any accompanying
words, protected as literary works)
written or published by members or by the
members of affiliated societies. These are the rights that subsist in works
pursuant to
sec. 31(1)(a)(iii)
,(iv) & (v) of the
The term "grand rights" refers to a number of exclusions from the rights
assigned. These are set out in the definition of "performing
right" in Article 3
of APRA's Articles of Association, but may be summarised as:
• the right to perform or broadcast a dramatico-musical work, an
oratorio or long choral work, or a work in association with
• the right to perform a work in a dramatic context.
The Society administers the statutory scheme under
whereby educational institutions and institutions assisting
intellectually handicapped persons in Australia can copy programs from
television or radio broadcast for their educational purposes or for the purpose
of assisting intellectually handicapped persons
provided that:
(i) the institution signs a Remuneration Notice under Section 135G or section
135ZU of the
, undertaking to pay equitable remuneration to the
Society for copies of broadcasts made;
(ii) pays equitable remuneration to the Society in accordance with the
Remuneration Notice and agreement with the Society; and
(iii) complies with the other requirements of the
Regulations.
The right licensed by the scheme is the right to make a copy of a program
broadcast on television or radio including:
(i) the cinematograph film together with any other underlying work
incorporated in the program directly from a television broadcast;
(ii) the sound recording together with any other underlying work incorporated
in the program directly from the radio.
scheme in favour of institutions assisting intellectually
handicapped persons extends to "item to item" copying - copying from
pre-recorded
audio-visual items such as purchased records and video cassettes
(sections 135ZS and 135ZT). Further references in this document
scheme should be read as including a reference to relevant sections of the
The owner of the right is the person who, but for the statutory licence,
would be entitled to bring an action for copyright infringement
or would be
entitled to offer a voluntary licence to an educational institution to copy the
broadcast or audio-visual item.
The statutory licences provided in
define the full extent of the Society's current collections.
CAL has been approved since 1 July 1990 by the Attorney-General to administer
licence for educational institutions to reproduce works or
parts of works in
There are only 25 educational institutions in Australia which copy under the
statutory licence.
The bulk of CAL's educational licences are
ones because, at
the time of negotiating licences in 1988, the statutory licence for education
under the (then) s.53B of the
was impracticable due to its full
records keeping requirements. When the
was amended in 1989, the
parties chose to remain with the then current voluntary licences.
CAL has also negotiated an agreement with the Commonwealth government for the
administration of photocopying under
PPCA administers broadcast and public performance rights which vest in sound
recordings and music videos under
of the Act.
The exclusive right in
is rendered a statutory licence by
section 108
section 109
. This allows "broadcasters" and public venues to play any
sound recording provided it gives an undertaking to the copyright owner
licensee ie. PPCA) to pay a fee for such use. If agreement cannot be made, the
make an "order". (See
7. LEGAL BASIS OF
ADMINISTRATION
7.1. GENERAL
7.1.1. AMCOS
7.1.2. APRA
7.1.3. AVCS
7.1.5. PPCA
7.2. POSSIBLE FUTURE AREAS OF EXPANSION
7.2.1. AMCOS
7.2.2. AVCS
7.2.4. PPCA
7.1. GENERAL
It is important to know the basis upon which a society controls the rights of
its relevant rights owner. Some act as agent, others
as licensees and one, as
assignee. That said, the basis upon which a society acts, may vary not only from
society to society but,
within a society, from right to right. Sometimes the
relationship is exclusive; others, non-exclusive.
No one basis is inherently better than any other. It is sometimes said that
demanding an assignment of rights rather than a mere licence,
is an abuse of
power. There is little substance in this argument. The important factor which
must be considered is how easy it is
for the owner of a relevant right, to
recover ownership/control of the right. For example, it may be that a
non-exclusive licence
with an unduly long notice period is far less fair than an
assignment with a short notice period requiring reassignment.
Many of the societies have chosen to adopt non-exclusive relationships with
their members. Given that the Societies are mindful of
the anti-monopoly
provisions of the Trade Practices Act, the move towards non-exclusive licensing
is an effort to appease the major
monopolistic fears. It is however, not the
best solution. The problem is one that needs to be dealt with in a more systemic
7.1.1. AMCOS
The Membership Agreement and Supplementary Agreements enumerate the rights
granted to the Society by its members as follows:
exclusive licence
to authorise:
(i) the making of records of the Works; this does not apply to records made
by any of the so-called "Major" record companies as listed
in the Annexure to
the membership agreement or as varied from time to time by mutual agreement.
(ii) the making of reproductions, other than advertisements, of the Works for
the purposes of broadcasting within the prescribed territory;
(iii) the making of videogrammes, other than advertisements, of the Works for
any purpose, including sale to the public;
(iv) the importation of records and videogrammes, other than advertisements,
of the Works into the prescribed territory for the purposes
of sale or hire or
distribution to the public or any other purpose which would contravene section
37 or section 38 of the Act;
(v) the making of cinematograph films of the Works for purposes other than
broadcasting within the prescribed territory; subject to
the proviso that the
Society shall in all cases refer any application for a licence to the Licensor,
which shall be entitled at its
discretion:
• to withhold permission for the grant of a licence;
• to grant the licence itself directly to the applicant; or
• to instruct AMCOS as to the terms subject to which a licence may be
(vi) the broadcasting of sound recordings (but not the musical works) which
constitute Library recordings (Production Music); and
(vii) the reproduction of Library recordings (Production Music).
The agreement also serves to appoint the Society as
(a) claim and receive any sums which may be or become due in respect of the
Works pursuant to any scheme, legislative or otherwise,
providing for the
payment of any levy, tax or royalty upon recording equipment, tape or any other
medium of reproduction and intended
as compensation or payment for the private
recording of copyright material;
(b) audit any record maker pursuant to any contractual authority conferred
upon the Society, whether jointly with another party or
otherwise, and to
receive and distribute in accordance with such methods of entitlement from time
to time fixed by the Society's
Board of Directors any sums found to be due and
owing in respect of the Works pursuant to such audit.
(c) claim and receive any moneys due in respect of musical works and
associated lyrics copied pursuant to statutory licences for educational
institutions contained in Part VB of the
and to issue
licences to educational institutions to make multiple copies of up to the whole
of a separately published work; the
whole of one or more parts of a work; and
transcriptions of works; for educational purposes under the terms of voluntary
negotiated by AMCOS.
The reciprocal agreement with affiliated foreign Societies provides that each
one of the contracting Companies entrusts to the other,
"the management of the
rights of any method of recording and mechanical reproduction of the works of
the repertoire of the other
Company and the circulating in any form or in any
place of the recordings and reproductions thus produced in the respective
territory of the contracting Companies".
Under the AMCOS/APRA agreement, AMCOS is appointed as the
APRA to collect mechanical royalties in respect of compositions written by APRA
members who do not have publishers and who would
otherwise have no means of
collecting their mechanical royalties.
AMCOS argues that status of
exclusive licensee
allows AMCOS to issue
licences for users seeking to make reproductions and negotiate terms with the
major record companies - make
industry agreements etc. Certainly, as exclusive
licensee, AMCOS can join with the publisher in pursuing legal actions to protect
members' rights. In any event, there seems little discontent with the exercise
of this exclusivity, either by owners or users of
rights, and there is no
apparent evidence of abuse of that position.
In respect of the Schools Photocopying Agreement, AMCOS is appointed
to collect moneys due under
and is authorised on a
non-exclusive basis to license the reproduction of works in graphic form beyond
the limits of the statute.
This is sufficient to enable AMCOS to negotiate
blanket licences for the photocopying of sheet music in educational institutions
which extend the statutory rights, as requested by educational authorities. It
will also enable AMCOS to enter into agreements with
tertiary educational
institutions for the photocopying of sheet music.
In contract, AMCOS' authority to issue the Schools Photocopying Agreement is
non-exclusive
. Moneys collected by CAL from educational institutions
other than schools are paid to AMCOS members through the Society, as agent.
Although the status granted to the Society by its publisher members is
described as "exclusive licensee" or "sole agent", the membership
provides certain conditions which allow the copyright owner to exercise
discretion as to whether particular licences are
to be granted and their terms
and conditions. In any area where the "moral rights" of the composer could be
affected, the licence
is referred back to the copyright owner. For example, if
AMCOS is approached to issue a licence for the use of music in an advertisement
it will get approval from the publisher owner before granting such licence.
Territorial restrictions in the membership agreement mean that if users wish
to exploit musical works beyond the territory, they may
be required to enter
into negotiations with the copyright owners directly. For example, AMCOS issues
a blanket licence to television
stations to reproduce the AMCOS repertoire for
the purpose of broadcasting within the territory only. Many program makers
world-wide rights directly with the copyright owners.
The membership agreement authorises AMCOS to license the reproduction of
musical works into "records". This does not extend to the
collection of
royalties from the major record companies by AMCOS. The companies listed in the
Annexure to the membership agreement
represent the major record companies and
the majority of mechanical royalties generated.
Equity Of Service Availability
Although there are no services provided by the Society that are not
to all members, services such as the licensing of musical works
in advertisements in New Zealand are not
by all members. Those who
use the service, pay for the service by way of a commission. The fee for
facilitating licensing of musical
works in advertising in New Zealand is
currently 5%. All commission rates are set by the Board after consideration of
the cost effectiveness
of the relevant service. The New Zealand situation exists
because few of the major publishing companies have offices in New Zealand
AMCOS is responding to the needs of users as well as acting in the interests of
its members.
Members are treated identically in the types of services that are offered. As
to the terms, changes made for individual members, flow
on to all other members.
The danger for AMCOS in permitting greater degrees of flexibility is that if the
most powerful members use
that flexibility to keep profitable collecting
functions to themselves, whilst leaving AMCOS with only the sundry (and less
profitable)
functions, the very viability of the organisation is endangered.
Moreover, the smaller members will still need AMCOS to offer the
full range of
services to them and they will inevitably pay more for these services because of
the larger members doing the most
profitable collection functions in-house.
Right To Regain Control Of
of their copyrights. Article 9 of the Society's Articles
of Association states
that "any member may by not less than 12 months notice in writing to the
secretary expiring on the 30th of
June determine his membership and his
membership shall cease accordingly at the expiration of such period of notice
provided that
the Board may in its absolute discretion accept shorter notice
and/or a different expiry date." Also, members may withdraw all or
part of their
repertoire from the Schools Photocopying Agreement and AMCOS is obliged to
notify licensees of such exclusions.
Membership Agreement Redraft
AMCOS is presently in the process of reviewing and redrafting its membership
agreement. The Board has already indicated that the Society
will be moving
towards a non-exclusive licence for the rights relating to the reproduction of
the sound recordings and the broadcast
right in sound recordings of Production
Music. This will give the record company or user of Production Music, the right
to negotiate
a lesser rate with the publisher than that offered by AMCOS.
7.1.2. APRA
The Association administers its rights as
. It is the only
society that becomes the owner rather than remaining a licensee.
The Association deals with tens of thousands of music users, many of whom are
reluctant to accept their obligations to copyright owners
. As an assignee of the rights, it is procedurally easier to commence
enforcement proceedings against music users which fail to obtain
licences. (If
it were otherwise, APRA would be obliged to join writers and/or publishers as
co-plaintiffs in any infringement proceedings.)
Such a procedure would hinder,
and add significantly to the costs of, the licensing process and the enforcement
Strictly speaking, the Association does not operate under any statutory
licence. It is doubtful, however, that there is any practical
difference between
the voluntary licence regime under which APRA operates and a statutory licence.
Even if it were so inclined (which
it is not, since the whole purpose of an
organisation like APRA is to facilitate the
of licences) APRA
could not refuse to grant a licence to any party who is prepared to comply with
the reasonable terms of a licence
or licence scheme. This is so because of both
and s. 46 of the Trade Practices Act.
To all intents and purposes the Association accordingly regards itself as
operating subject to a statutory licence.
The rights are
, except in the case of rights obtained under
agreements with the two US societies, ASCAP and BMI, which are
non-exclusive
. (It should be noted, however, that most US-originating
works are subject to control by an Australian sub-publisher. They are therefore
subject to the assignment that such publishers make in favour of APRA.)
Right To Regain Control Of
If a member wishes to resign membership, the Articles provide that 3 years'
written notice must be given (Article 9). This provision
is required because
APRA grants blanket licences for forward periods and is thus contractually bound
to continue, for a reasonable
period, to be able to license members' works. It
should be noted that the 3-year period may be waived at the Board's discretion.
The only instances of which the Chief Executive was aware of members wishing to
resign their membership have occurred in the case
of members wishing to join a
foreign society, (because they were moving to another country) and in such
instances the Board has always
waived the 3-year period.
There is also provision in the Association's Articles of Association, for
APRA to decline rights. Thus, in 1993 there was a change
to the definition of
grand rights in the Articles of Association made by APRA's membership. This
change effectively broadened the
range of exclusions from the assignment made by
members to APRA. In effect, the Society returned these rights to its
The rationale for the change to was that a writer or publisher should
reasonably be able to determine whether or not to approve or
prohibit the use of
a work in a stage show (for example a stage show built around the career or
works of a particular artist - the
so-called "tribute shows"). There are, in
such a context, important economic and moral rights considerations to be taken
into account
which are inappropriate to a collecting society.
It is important to note that the above return of rights was made to all
members generally. There are no instances of the Association
returning rights to
a particular member to exercise.
Equity Of Service Availability
The terms for all members are identical and all of the Association's services
and functions are available to all members. Members,
of course, avail themselves
of services to vastly different degrees.
7.1.3. AVCS
At the moment, AVCS operates only under the
statutory licence
VA of the Act.
As it is presently merely administering a statutory licence, the Society does
not, in the strict sense, administer
. The Society administers the
for the owners of the right in the film,
sound recordings and the underlying works in programs copied from a television
broadcast in the capacity of a trustee.
Under the Membership Agreement, the applicant for membership appoints the
for the collection of funds under
and the relevant clauses of
In fact, the Society has
received legal advice that it holds the funds under the more stringent fiduciary
relationship of
rather than those of a mere agent. Accordingly,
the Society does not rely on this appointment of agency.
The Society operates on an
basis. Section 135Z of the
provides that the statutory licence does not affect the right of
the owner of the copyright to grant a licence authorising an educational
institution to make a copy of a broadcast, film, sound recording or underlying
work without infringing that copyright. A similar
section exists for
• In spite of this, the Society does not attempt to regulate or control
the ability of its members in any way to deal directly
with licensees of the
Society or any persons who wish to use the members' copyright. In practice
however, there are no examples of
rights owners granting individual licences to
institutional users. One can assume that this indicates that the scheme works to
advantage to both the owners and the users.
Right To Regain Control Of
A relevant copyright owner or agent does not contract with the Society for a
set period of time. By becoming a member of the Society,
the claimant is simply
able to receive a distribution of royalties collected for the use of the right
under the statutory licence.
Article 11 of the Articles of Association of the Society provides that any
member may resign from membership of the Society by giving
not less than one
year's notice in writing (or such shorter period of notice as determined by the
Board of the Society).
Upon resignation of membership of the Society, the relevant copyright
(i) would not be able to claim any further payments of royalties collected by
the Society until it became a member of the Society
(ii) is not able to prevent educational institutions from copying broadcasts
off-air under the non-voluntary licence scheme in the
(iii) would be able to exercise its rights under section 135Z and section
135ZZF of the
to grant individual licences to educational
institutions authorising copies to be made. As noted above, the relevant
can exercise this right while a member of the Society.
For the moment, this is all somewhat theoretical. All members would be aware
that unless they are members, it is not practicable for
them to collect the
income they may be due from the institutions.
CAL does not take an assignment of rights nor does CAL have an exclusive
agency. The reproduction right is essential to CAL's members
in conducting their
primary business and therefore an assignment of rights is not practicable. CAL
for its members' reproduction rights, other than the right
to reproduce in volume form.
Equity Of Service Availability
For ease of administration, CAL prefers to use standard form agreements,
however if a particular term of the standard form agreement
is unacceptable to
an individual member and an amendment will not impede the efficiency of CAL's
licensing or other operations, then
CAL will make the amendments required. An
example is the difficulty some members such as government departments and
agencies have
with Clause 12 of the membership agreement. It is noted that CAL
intends undertaking a general review of its membership conditions
later in 1994,
taking into account both substantive matters (including Clause 12) and the
simplification of language.
Right To Regain Control Of
control of their copyrights. The membership agreement
provides that a member
must give 6 months notice of an intention to withdraw the licence from CAL. This
is reasonable.
CAL is considering a "transactional permissions licence" which will allow
each member to set their own fees for licensing document
delivery and anthology
compilation licences. This move is to be commended. The more flexibility that
can be built into licences,
the greater the control that members have over their
rights whilst at the same time having the benefits of collective
administration.
7.1.5. PPCA
PPCA acts only as a
non-exclusive licensee
In practice, the broadcast/public performance right is without exception left
to PPCA to administer.
The non-exclusive licensee relationship was chosen to avoid Trade Practices
problems. This was a key basis upon which PPCA obtained
an Authorisation from
the TPC in the 1980's.
Given that the rights of PPCA are non-exclusive, if an individual owner were
to so choose, it could enter an individual deal with,
say, a radio station, for
the right to play its record. What faster way could there be, to find radio
airplay oblivion, than to approach
a radio station to negotiate an individual
Rights owners are not restricted by the Company's rules in entering
independent deals in respect of the relevant rights. They are
restricted in the
sense that PPCA (like the other collecting societies) is the only collective
organisation which administers the
relevant right in Australia.
Equity Of Service Availability
The input agreement through which membership is obtained is a standard
document. Copyright owners can choose to licence PPCA to administer
all of the broadcast or public performance rights in sound recordings or music
Given the standard terms of the "input agreement" the services rendered to
all subscribers are the same - but of course the rights
of control in relation
to the company itself, are far from the same. Only the shareholders can exercise
that privilege.
Right To Regain Control Of
Under the agreement, five years notice must be given before a subscriber can
withdraw a licence. This is a long notice period but
reflects the term of the
licence with the broadcasters.
7.2. POSSIBLE FUTURE AREAS OF
Each of the societies were asked to consider the rights that it administers
in light of foreseeable statutory amendments, to see whether
the society would
be the appropriate licensing and collection mechanism. (For example, performers
protection/copyright, record rental,
etc.). Those societies which foresaw a
possible extended role were as follows:
7.2.1. AMCOS
The introduction of a CD Rental right would certainly demand a full review of
AMCOS' company and membership documentation but AMCOS
sees itself as an
appropriate Society to oversee that rental right.
7.2.2. AVCS
The collective administration of copyright in all areas on behalf of all
owners of copyright in audio-visual works is within the Society's
The Society is willing to administer voluntary licence schemes sought by
members and new statutory licence schemes and considers itself
appropriate licensing, collection and distribution mechanism for owners of
stand, it undoubtedly is. After all,
it is the society with expertise in the medium and has reasonable (albeit
imperfect) coverage
of the relevant rights owners.
7.2.3. PPCA
For PPCA, the main issue is that of the "information super highway". PPCA is,
in effect, responsible for licensing the communication
of sound recordings to
the public. It argues that new technologies necessitate the introduction of a
broad based communication right
and that PPCA is the appropriate body for use of
such rights on a collective basis. (This is a matter dealt with by the Copyright
Convergence group and is not within the present terms of reference.)
8. GEOGRAPHICAL
The Society's jurisdiction extends to Australia, New Zealand, Fiji, Papua New
Guinea, Solomon Islands, Christmas Island, Cocos (Keeling)
Islands, Cook
Islands, Irian Barat, Niue (Savage) Island, Norfolk Island, Tokelau (Union)
Islands, Western Samoa.
A New Zealand branch office was established in 1987. It currently employs
three people - branch manager, licensing officer, office
AMCOS has only one Australian office. It is in Sydney. While it may be
desirable to have a permanent presence in at least the other
capitals, it is not
economically viable given the sundry nature of its collections. Not only are the
majority of record companies
based in Sydney, as time goes by, and the
telecommunications revolution rolls on, the expense of branch offices becomes
In those territories where AMCOS does not have an office it licence- exports
to them from Australia and New Zealand. It is the Society's
view that in
territories such as PNG and Fiji, the copyright laws do not provide an adequate
level of protection to justify the establishment
of an office. It is tackling
these problems in conjunction with the Department of Foreign Affairs. (Most of
these other territories
do not have manufacturing facilities.)
The cost effectiveness of purporting to service subsidiary territories such
as Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Christmas
Island, Cocos (Keeling)
Islands, Cook Islands, Irian Barat, Niue (Savage) Island, Norfolk Island,
Tokelau (Union) Islands, Western
Samoa, must be questionable. It has not been
the subject of examination by this Report, but
the question must be asked,
whether the Australian and New Zealand rights owners are subsidising the
servicing of the subsidiary territories
without receiving a corresponding
benefit from them.
As has already been noted, the Association obtains an assignment of
performing rights from its members which is unlimited as to territory.
Association's "active" jurisdiction, however (in the sense of those countries
where it has the responsibility of actually administering
the rights) comprises
Australia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Fiji and a number of small Pacific
The cost effectiveness of administration of the subsidiary
territories must be subject to the same comments as applied to AMCOS
Besides its Australian offices, the Association maintains offices in New
Zealand only. The details are as follows:
• Auckland: (92 Parnell Road, Auckland), 5 full-time staff (General
Manager, Accounts Clerk, Licensing Officer, Re-assessments
Officer and
Membership Officer)
• Wellington: (Riddiford House, 150 Featherston Street, Wellington), 1
full-time staff (licensing officer) and one part-time
consultant.
Until early 1993 the Association maintained an office in Fiji. From that
date, however, responsibility for administration of rights
was handed over to a
locally owned performing right society, the Fiji Performing Right Association.
APRA continues to provide assistance
to this new society in the area of royalty
distribution. One must ask whether it is time for AMCOS to also hand over its
Fiji jurisdiction
to this local society.
The Association has never had an operational presence in PNG owing to the
fact that PNG does not have a copyright law.
The Association has personnel located in several capital cities around
Australia, as follows:
• Melbourne: (46 MacFarlan Street, South Yarra), 5 full-time and one
part-time staff (Deputy Licensing Manager/Office Manager,
2 Licensing Officers,
1 Membership Officer, one typist/receptionist and one part-time Compliance
Officer). The Compliance Officer
assists in verifying figures provided to APRA
by live and disco licensees by attending the venues on selected nights to count
attendances
and check entry fees;
• Brisbane: (38 Hartley Street, Spring Hill), 3 full-time and one
part-time staff (2 Licensing Officers, one Membership Officer
and one part-time
Compliance Officer);
• Adelaide: (Suite 9, 30 Kensington Road, Rose Park), 2 full-time and
one part-time staff (1 Licensing Officer, one
part Membership
part-clerical assistant and one part-time Compliance Officer);
• Perth: (36 Kings Park Road, West Perth): same personnel configuration
as Adelaide.
The Society operates solely within Australia, although its members who are
owners of relevant copyright in Australia, their exclusive
licensees or agents,
may be resident abroad.
The Society has an arrangement with APRA permitting the occasional use of
APRA's interstate offices when AVCS staff are visiting those
The addresses of those offices are published by AVCS in its newsletter to
provide a local point of initial contact for members and
educational
institutions. Enquiries are referred to the AVCS office in Sydney. To date, no
enquiries have been made through the APRA
interstate offices and one may assume
that this sharing of facilities assists the efficiency of the administration of
the Society
rather than acting as a real point of local contact for clients.
While it may be argued that it is desirable to maintain offices in larger
population centres to facilitate communication with members
and licensees of the
Society, the cost would not be justified at its present level of operations.
If such a stage is reached, the Society should be encouraged to continue its
present policy of sharing facilities with APRA (or some
other society) so as to
minimise the expense)
CAL's territory is also restricted to Australia. Although CAL staff regularly
travel interstate to conduct sampling, training, inspections
of licensees and
operating inter-state offices is
justified. Given its present information
gathering and licensing methods, CAL operates effectively from its centralised
administration.
If however it was to undertake the administration of a wider
range of rights, this may need to be reviewed.
The geographical jurisdiction of the Company is Australia. It does not
represent New Zealand rights owners (as do APRA and AMCOS).
It does not maintain
any offices outside of Sydney and all employees are Sydney based.
The company retains part-time inspectors throughout Australia to investigate
what music is played at various premises. These inspectors
are paid only on a
commission basis (they are not 'employees').
9. RELATIONSHIP TO
ALL OWNERS OF RELEVANT RIGHTS
9.1.1. Mechanicals
9.1.2. Synchronisation
9.1.3. Schools Photocopying Agreement
It was important to determine the degree of representativeness that the
society exercised on behalf of
owners of the relevant rights (not
just its members).
9.1.1. Mechanicals
Generally speaking, AMCOS does not collect on behalf of non-members. The only
exception is when AMCOS receives money from foreign
affiliates due to an
Australian composer, who is a member of APRA but has not executed the authority
for AMCOS to collect mechanicals,
and is not represented by a publisher. In
these instances AMCOS passes the money on without deducting commission. It then
the Society who sent the royalties in error that AMCOS does not control
the work, that it has passed the royalties on to the correct
owner in this
instance, but that it does not wish to receive further royalties for the work in
question. This is completely appropriate
as to process and conduct.
9.1.2. Synchronisation
Occasionally, AMCOS is approached to issue synchronisation clearances for
non-members' works. The Society does not grant synchronisation
clearances for
non-members' works without prior written authorisation. Commissions and fees are
generally the same as those that
would apply were the party a member of AMCOS or
of an affiliate society.
9.1.3. Schools Photocopying Agreement
Under the Schools Photocopying Agreement, AMCOS collects on behalf of
non-members who have authorised it to include their repertoire
in the Schools
Agreement. These may be small local publishers who publish sheet music for the
educational market or foreign publishers
who are not sub-published for this
territory. The AMCOS repertoire is so extensive that it cannot be defined in a
directory which
is supplied to schools, but rather is defined by exclusion. If
works appear in the sample that are controlled by publishers that
authorised AMCOS to include their repertoire in the agreement, AMCOS identifies
these owners of copyright, makes payment
to them, explains the statutory
provisions and the background to the voluntary licence and asks them to execute
and return an authority
and indemnity.
There is provision for these publishers to indicate to AMCOS that they do not
wish to participate in the licence. In that case AMCOS
will then notify all its
licensees under the provisions in the Agreement that those publishers' works are
not included in the AMCOS
Schools' Agreement. Their works may be able to be
copied under the more restrictive terms of the statutory licence and the
would then have to obtain payment from CAL.
This approach to non-members works being copied under the AMCOS agreement was
the only way of establishing a coherent and workable
agreement that the
educational authorities would accept and comply with, as they considered the
statutory limits, as they applied
to sheet music, too restrictive for their
educational needs.
Clearly the Association could never claim to represent all people who claim
to have written original musical works. Nor has it conducted
research into the
numbers of writers who do not join the Association. It is safe to assume,
however (on the basis of the logs that
it receives from both radio and
television stations) that the Association represents over 99% of all writers
whose works are publicly
disseminated. APRA is not aware of any music publishers
who have failed to seek membership.
The Society collects under the statutory licence for all relevant copyright
owners, whether or not they are members of the Society.
Where the owner is not
currently a member, the Society holds the allocated funds in trust pending
identification and admission to
membership.
Given that the
grants the right, the role of AVCS is to
identify and locate the relevant copyright owners to allow payment of royalties
on their behalf under the relevant scheme.
The Society had very few members in its establishment years and most
collections were on behalf of non-members. As the membership
base of the Society
increases, the proportion of royalties collected on behalf of non-members is
diminishing. Given the way that
the statutory scheme has been set up, there will
always be the situation where royalties are collected on behalf of programs
the rights are controlled by a non-member. It is the role of the Society
to identify these rights holders and advise them of the
royalties held and
invite them to membership of the Society so that they can claim the royalties
held on their behalf.
There has been criticism made of AVCS (and it is to be expected of any
collecting society operating a non-voluntary licence) that
it has no obligation
on it to notify non-member owners for whom they have collected, that it is
holding money for them. Owners have
to both know that AVCS exists and to ask if
they are a distributable author.
There is no foundation for this fear. Given that locating and paying relevant
society, the declaration
of the Attorney-General could and should be revoked should any declared society
cease adequately to fulfil
that identification function. The Society actively
seeks out relevant copyright owners to invite them to claim and the success of
these efforts is shown by its increasing number of members. A large part of the
Society's resources are devoted to this task which
is regarded by the Board of
Directors and management as an absolute priority. The process of attracting new
members is described
Unlike AVCS, CAL does not licence copying or collect revenue in respect of
non-members works. Where copying of non-members' works
is discovered in the
sample, it records it and then seeks to trace and contact the non-members and
inquire if they want to become
a member and accept the fees. In this manner, CAL
builds up its membership and repertoire.
The logic of the system that CAL must administer is, (as the submission
received from St Johns Ambulance Australia described it),
"serpentine". The
statutory licence allows educational institutions to copy, within certain limits
and subject to certain conditions.
The institutions pay a "per student" rate for
this statute-granted right. CAL collects all of this money but the rules under
it operates, forbid it to distribute to owners who are not members. This
has certainly raised the ire of certain rights owners who
do not want to join
CAL, but have been advised that certain copying of their work has occurred and
that, accordingly, a certain allocation
of the moneys collected, is payable to
them - but only if they join. That said, it must be made clear that CAL is
acting properly.
CAL is legally obliged to ensure that moneys which it collects are only paid
to members. The legal obligations imposed on CAL regarding
the collection of
moneys collected from licensees under statutory and voluntary licences are as
(i) Statutory Licences:
Pursuant to a notice in the
dated 13 June 1990, the Attorney
General declared CAL to be the collecting society for the purposes of
the Act, for
each owner of copyright in a work
other than a work in a
sound recording or a cinematograph film.
In order to be declared an approved society, CAL was required to satisfy
certain prerequisites set by the Attorney General under section
135ZZB (3) of
the Act. In particular, the Attorney General had to be satisfied that CAL's
distribution rules complied with the Regulations
to the Act [in particular
regulation 23JM(1)(g)]. The effect of this regulation is that CAL can only
distribute a share of the distributable
amount, to its members. If the copyright
owner or their agent declines to join CAL, their potential share of the
distributable amount
in held on trust [regulation 23JM(1)(g)(ii)(A)&(B)]
until the copyright owner joins CAL or for a period of four years, whichever
first occurs [regulation 23JM(1)(i)]. If the copyright owner or their agent does
not join CAL by the expiration of the trust period,
their potential share will
be returned to the distribution pool.
(ii) Voluntary Licences:
The funds collected under voluntary licences are outside the regime of
of the Act.
The voluntary licences between CAL and users do not contain a
licence to copy all works. CAL only licenses users to copy works by
(For example, St Johns Ambulance Australia is not a member and its
works are not licensed under the voluntary schemes.) Accordingly,
obligations of CAL as to the application of the funds collected by it as licence
fees, are obligations owed solely to the Society's
If the sampling reveals that a non-member's work has been copied, CAL
approaches the non-member and invites the owner to become a
member and offers
payment of that part of the distribution which would be allocated if that person
were a member. (For example, Australian
Consolidated Press received such an
invitation but has chosen not to join.)
The money is not collected on behalf of all rights owners whose works are
copied. It is collected on behalf of all owners who are,
or who become, members
Essentially, the Act proscribes the statutory licence and who is
eligible to be paid.
CAL would be well advised to review the correspondence that it presently
sends to non-members who are identified as having had works
reproduced. Their
letters and the "Remittance Advice" are inadvertently misleading as to the
nature of the process.
It is important for rights owners to be made aware that they cannot prevent
the institutions from copying their material under the
statutory licence and in
any event, it is impossible for individual rights owners to supervise mass
photocopying to ensure that the
terms of the statutory licence is not exceeded.
Without blanket licensing, users will not obtain individual permission to copy
infringements of copyright will occur. The benefit to copyright owners of
blanket licensing is that payment can be obtained for otherwise
unremunerated
copying. The benefit to all rights owners in requiring that payments are made by
only to members of the collective
administration is that it acts to increase
membership of the Society and thus, reduces the administration overhead of the
PPCA does not purport to represent all owners of the relevant rights. It
represents only its contracted members. The money collected
and distributed by
PPCA is only in relation to the copyrights owned or controlled by its
contractual non-exclusive licensors.
As with AMCOS and APRA, there is nothing to stop the owners of relevant
rights setting up another collecting society or negotiating
their rights
individually - except that at the moment, it is not commercially practicable.
Accordingly, PPCA is the only collecting
society collecting on behalf of the
relevant rights owners.
10. SERVICES OR
BENEFITS TO RIGHTS USERS
10.1. GENERAL
10.1.1. AMCOS
10.1.2. APRA
10.1.3. AVCS
10.1.4. CAL
10.1.5. PPCA
10.2. LICENSEE INDEMNITY
10.2.1. AMCOS
10.2.2. APRA
10.2.3. AVCS
10.2.4. CAL
10.2.5. PPCA
10.1. GENERAL
10.1.1. AMCOS
AMCOS acts as a central clearing house, enabling the copying of music to be
authorised swiftly, efficiently and economically without
the need to enter into
the labyrinth of copyright clearance. It also:
• provides a representative body for the recording industry and others
to negotiate industry agreements.
• provides users of copyright material with educational material to
inform them of their copyright obligations and how to fulfil
• processes label copy and sales reports from a variety of the smaller
record producers and produces Prescribed Notices, as
required by statute, at no
• provides a forum for copyright users for them to make representations
concerning mechanical rights administration.
• provides a "user pays" service to research copyright ownership for
advertising agencies, film-makers etc.
• does research and referrals of print music, grand rights and
synchronisation requests from educational institutions and other
community users
free of charge.
10.1.2. APRA
The benefit provided by the Association to licensees is the benefit of being
able to obtain a one-stop blanket licence to perform
or broadcast all of the
musical works they could conceivably want to use. APRA effectively guarantees to
broadcasters and other music
users non-exclusive access to the entire repertoire
of the world's music. (The users of that music may of course rail against the
amount that they pay for that use, but that is another matter.)
In a narrower sense, many members of the public from time to time become
involved in music performances, for example through involvement
with schools or
community groups. APRA is able to either steer the inquirer to the relevant
for the performance itself.
The Association seeks, (through seminars, workshops and publications) to
actively provide information to licensees not only on APRA-related
matters, but
on matters relevant to music industry issues generally. It also seeks to
represent the voice of writers and, to a lesser
extent publishers (because they
have their own industry body), on general copyright issues. It is certainly the
most vocal music
industry association in these regards.
The Association also provides to licensees whatever information they may
require concerning the works within APRA's repertoire.
10.1.3. AVCS
Within the general administration of the educational copying scheme, the
Society responds to queries and provides information about
obligations. Where licensees require permissions from copyright owners for
activities outside the scheme (for example a
licence to copy a purchased or
hired video cassette) the Society provides contact details, if it is able to do
so, to facilitate
seeking that permission.
10.1.4. CAL
The prime service that CAL provides is the provision of practical access to
legal copying at a reasonable cost. Without CAL licences,
institutions would
either continue to infringe copyright or contact each copyright owner of every
work they copy to seek permissions.
By obtaining a payment for use for copyright
owners, CAL helps ensure and maximise, public access to copyright works.
It also provides:
• telephone advice in relation to particular copying problems they may
• referral to members for individual arrangements if they want to copy
more than the limits of the licence;
• brochures explaining licence terms and summaries of the copying
provisions of its licences;
• conducts copyright training seminars in connection with the sample
surveys of copying;
• provide speakers to address licensees about copyright.
10.1.5. PPCA
PPCA sees its sole service as providing effective one-stop licensing for
those who wish to use sound recordings.
• To this end, it provides:
• telephone advice in relation to public performance arrangements;
• referral to members for special event arrangements (or organising the
special event arrangement as the agent);
• pamphlets on public performance and music video;
• provide speakers to address licensees about public performance
10.2. LICENSEE INDEMNITY
It is important to licensees that they be assured that the licensor has the
right to grant the licence and the right to collect the
money in respect of the
licence. Where the right is granted by an organisation acting as an agent,
licensee or assignee, the issue
is very simple. There is a direct relationship
between membership of the organisation and the rights of the organisation.
In the cases of the statutory licences administered by CAL and AVCS, the
societies don't grant the rights, the statute does. As to
whether the societies
have the right to collect, their status as Declared Societies guarantees their
right to collect.
As for AMCOS, the mechanical licence too is granted by statute. However, it
has the right to collect, only on behalf of its own members.
The situation becomes more difficult when the societies and their licensees
choose to move away from the statutory licence and negotiate
voluntary licences.
Both CAL and AMCOS do the majority of their work through voluntary licences
because the strict terms of the statutory
licence are inconvenient to both
10.2.1. AMCOS
AMCOS members warrant that they control the relevant rights in the works that
AMCOS licenses and they agree to indemnify AMCOS if
they are in breach of that
In the Schools' Photocopying Agreement, AMCOS offers an indemnity to
participating schools copying under the licence. In terms of
print rights, AMCOS
members and other publishers who have authorised AMCOS to include their
repertoire in the schools' agreement
cover most published musical works which
are copied in schools. However the "AMCOS repertoire" is so wide, it is defined
by exclusion.
It is impossible to provide licensees with lists of works as the
repertoire is constantly changing and growing. There is provision
licensees that certain works/catalogues are not included under the voluntary
licence. Those works may still be copied under
the more restrictive limits set
out in the statute. Most of those few publishers who initially refused to be
included in the scheme
are now participating. Educational representatives
insisted on the inclusion of the following indemnity:
Clause 9 Indemnity.
9.1 Provided the Participating Schools have substantially complied with
the terms and conditions of this Agreement, AMCOS hereby agrees
to indemnify and
keep indemnified the Minister and participating Schools and each of them from
all actions suits claims, demands,
verdicts, judgements, costs, charges and
expenses, legal and otherwise, and of any kind which has arisen or may hereafter
a consequence of or arising out of any Owner or any other person
claiming under or by virtue of the Owner claiming, taking action,
proceeding or
making demand against the Minister or any Participating School for infringing or
allegedly infringing the copyright
vested in said Owner in respect of any Copies
made by a Participating School, and provided that the Minister promptly notifies
of any such actions or suits.
9.2 This indemnity shall apply in relation to any Copies made pursuant to
this agreement notwithstanding the Owner of the copyright
in the Works alleged
to be infringed or the licensee of such Owner may not have authorised AMCOS to
act as his agent but it shall
not apply to those Works which AMCOS has notified
the Minister are excluded from the Agreement under clause 11.
10.2.2. APRA
Licensees of the public performance right have historically not been provided
with an indemnity. According to the Association, the
principal reason for this
is that the licensees have not requested one. Some broadcast licensees have more
recently been provided
with an indemnity.
The indemnity issue is a difficult one for the Association, because:
(a) the Association must grant blanket licences (they are demanded by
licensees); but
(b) the Association can never lay claim to representation of
writers' works from around the world at any given time.
The best that the Association can really do is to make accurate and fair
representations about the practical comprehensiveness of
its repertoire. This is
probably satisfactory while there is only the one performing rights society
representing writers and publishers
in Australia.
10.2.3. AVCS
The Society offered indemnities to licensees in certain of its early
contracts in relation to the period prior to the commencement
of their licence
Copying of television and radio broadcasts by educational institutions was
widespread prior to the introduction of the broadcast copying
scheme in 1990.
Due to the complexity of rights administration in film and television programs,
it can be assumed that the majority
of the copies made by educational
institutions infringed copyright. Understandably, the fear of such illegal
conduct and its repercussions
still prevailed notwithstanding the introduction
The Society believed that compliance with the new procedures might be
enhanced if they dispelled the institutions' fears associated
previous, unlawful broadcast copying. Accordingly, AVCS acceded to the requests
of the educational representatives and
provided an indemnity in respect of
unlawful copying made before the introduction of the statutory scheme.
Upon the commencement of the scheme in
agreements entered into by the Society with educational institutions made
provision for an indemnity as follows:
(i) The indemnity related to copies of broadcasts from television and radio
made by the educational institutions for their educational
purposes during a
limited period prior to the commencement of the broadcast copying scheme ("Past
Copies"). For example, the period
for schools was from 1 July 1984 to 30 June
1990 (the commencement date of the agreements). Other educational institutions
that entered
into an agreement with the Society at the commencement of the
scheme were offered a similar indemnity period.
(ii) The educational institution paid the Society remuneration for the Past
Copies. For example, the agreement between the Society
and the school sector
provided that a fee of $0.30 for each enrolled student of the schools for 1989
(the year prior to the commencement
date of the agreement) was paid for the Past
(iii) The Society offered to indemnify the educational institution which paid
the amount for the Past Copies against any claims arising
from the Past
(iv) The educational institution was not able to make any further copies of
the Past Copies.
The agreements with the university sector including the indemnity provision
expired on 31 December 1993 and the schools agreement
containing the indemnity
will terminate on 30 June 1994.
The most recent agreements with the university sector, which commenced on 1
January 1994, did not contain an indemnity provision.
Similarly, the schools
agreement, which is currently being negotiated, will not provide an indemnity to
the educational institutions
for copies not coming within the limits of the
statutory licensing scheme.
It is significant to note that as the funds collected under the indemnity
provisions of the Society's early contracts related to a
period prior to
commencement of the scheme, they are not funds collected pursuant to
. In accordance with law, the funds are kept separate from
funds collected under
as trustee. On legal advice, the funds are held
first, to meet claims arising under the indemnity provisions of the Society's
and secondly, may be employed for the benefit of the membership as a
Notwithstanding the indemnity granted at the introduction of the scheme, the
Society has taken the view that, as it does not acquire
rights under licence
from licensors, it is not appropriate that it offer any form of indemnity to
licensors. Given that the institutions
have now had ample notice of the
existence of the scheme and ample opportunity to avail themselves of the
statutory licence mechanism,
it is difficult to see why licensors need any such
indemnity or expect AVCS to give one. The statute provides the mechanism for
institutions
to copy lawfully and AVCS merely facilitates institutions to
benefit from it.
10.2.4. CAL
CAL provides an indemnity to its licensors for copying within the terms of
its licence. Depending on the type of licence, this indemnity
varies between an
indemnity against actions for copyright infringement by CAL's members and an
indemnity against actions for copyright
infringement by all copyright
10.2.5. PPCA
The Company does not offer any indemnity to licensees of any of its relevant
11. IDENTIFICATION
OF COPYRIGHT OWNERS
11.1. AMCOS
11.1.1. Identification And The Record Licensing Process
11.1.2. Other Uses
11.1.3. Overseas Department
11.1.4. Schools Photocopying Licence
11.1.5. Off-air Copying
11.1.6. Design Of The Process
11.1.7. Systems Review
11.2.1. Registration of title details
11.2.2. Logging of performances
11.2.3. Design Of Procedures
11.2.4. Systems Review
11.3.1. The Record Keeping System
11.3.2. The Sampling System
11.3.3. Criticisms Of The Sample Processes
11.3.4. Identification of Copyright Owners
11.4.1. Identification Process
11.4.2. Training
11.4.3. Criticisms Of The Sample Processes
11.4.4. Review of Record-Keeping System
11.4.5. Review of Sampling System
11.5.1. System Review
11.1. AMCOS
The process of establishing correct copyright ownership for musical works is
a critical part of AMCOS' operations. The Society works
on the principle that it
only invoices for the use of a musical work when it can establish that the work
falls under its control.
11.1.1. Identification And The Record Licensing
The procedure for licensing non-Major record companies for the use of musical
works on records is as follows:
(i) The record company issues an inquiry notice ("label copy") to AMCOS in
respect of every record first released for sale to the
public in Australia prior
to the release of the record. The inquiry notice lists the composer and song
details; proposed release
date; catalogue number; format; and dealer or retail
(ii) In the event that the record company is unable to provide the composer
details, AMCOS offers a service on a "pay per use" basis
to research the work
and determine the composer information. Without knowing the identity of the
composer it is very difficult to
determine the copyright owner for Australia.
Some of the reference material used in the research process are CD Roms
containing information
on all works appearing on the BillBoard chart, the CAE
(Compositeur-Auteur-Editeur) listing compiled by SUISA, access to the AEROS
directories, books and journals. However the greatest research
resource in the
company is the extensive musical knowledge of the research staff. Within the
company it has experts covering most
genres of music.
(iii) When AMCOS has the full label copy, the information is entered into the
(In the past, the label copy has been provided on paper. AMCOS' biggest
clients are now providing the information on computer disc.
AMCOS has written
software which allows the record companies to enter the label copy into their
own IBM PC compatible computers.
The information is recorded onto a disc which
is sent to AMCOS. The record company uses the information to build up their own
of their repertoire. The information and unique catalogue numbers
generated from this exchange also provides a simplified way for
company to later provide sales figures on disc.)
(iv) After AMCOS has input all the label copy details, a check is made to see
if the song information is contained in the AMCOS database.
The database
contains ownership information on some 350,000 works. It has been built up from
works previously licensed by AMCOS and
from information supplied by the
publisher members.
(v) It is being continuously updated as catalogues change hands. AMCOS is
notified when an agreement expires and the rights are acquired
by another of its
members. Members send AMCOS details of new agreements with song listings. From
APRA the Society receives copies
of the General Agreement Registration Forms
("GARF") and copies of all local writer registration forms. AMCOS also has
on-line access
to the APRA database, which is extremely useful in cross-checking
composer/writer/publisher details.
(vi) AMCOS compiles the information from the inquiry notices, including
publisher details as indicated by its database, into the form
of a "circulation
report" which is distributed to publisher members. Publishers indicate on the
circulation whether they own particular
works, whether they maintain or
relinquish an ownership claim and the percentage of the work they control. The
circulation process
is the historical method for AMCOS obtaining ownership
details and it remains the main way of finding ownership of new songs. The
circulation process lets the publisher know what AMCOS is licensing on their
behalf. Details of works where 100% ownership is not
known, are circulated
amongst the members.
(vii) If any dual claims arise (more than 100% of a work being claimed by two
or more publishers) the work is put "into suspense"
until the dispute is
resolved. Reports of all works with dual claims are sent to the relevant members
on a quarterly basis.
(viii) After receiving the publishers' responses to the circulations, AMCOS
issues the record company with a royalty rate advice ("RRA")
which indicates:
the composer and song details; where a work is controlled by AMCOS, the
publisher and percentage claimed; works
not controlled by AMCOS; format; royalty
rate; retail or dealer selling price; and the royalty payable per unit.
(ix) Any musical works (or parts thereof) which are not claimed by a
publisher member are thoroughly researched before an RRA is issued
with entries
under the heading "works not controlled by AMCOS". Occasions arise when AMCOS is
given the incorrect composer or title
details or publishers fail to identify
works as being part of their repertoire.
(x) At the same time that AMCOS issues the record company with a royalty rate
advice, the music publishers who have made claims for
works in the circulation
are issued a Prescribed Notice. There is a statutory requirement that record
companies issue a Prescribed
Notice to the copyright owner. The Prescribed
Notice contains essentially the same details as the RRA and notifies the
that AMCOS will be collecting royalties on their behalf in respect of
the listed works and is an opportunity for the publisher to
11.1.2. Other Uses
The above outlines the procedure for most record companies licensing musical
works embodied in records.
For small companies and individuals ("sundry" clients), blanket licence uses,
student films, demos, etc. the details are provided
in a slightly different
manner, but the process of identification involving research staff, database
inquiries and circulation to
the publishers is essentially the same. Production
Music ownership is usually supplied by the publishers. Production Music cue
are researched using printed catalogues and direct contact with the
publishers.
11.1.3. Overseas Department
The overseas department operates as a publisher in its own right,
representing (on a reciprocal basis) works controlled by affiliated
overseas but not represented by a sub-publisher locally. In this role it
licenses the Major record companies as well as
AMCOS clients. Some of the
identification procedures utilised are:
• referral to listings of works on microfiche sent to AMCOS by some
Societies (updated at regular intervals);
• receipt of specific instructions from a Society to collect mechanical
royalties for particular works;
• listings of member details and works from APRA;
• replies received from Societies in response to AMCOS requests for
information regarding specific works - usually per fiches
internationales, but
sometimes by advice/letter;
• establishing the original publisher(s) and/or composer(s) membership
of a particular Society by referral to the current CAE
• discussion and negotiation with AMCOS's Australian publisher members
in respect of the works that they partly or wholly control
on behalf of overseas
publishers.
11.1.4. Schools Photocopying Licence
The distribution is based on data from a nation-wide statistical sample of
all photocopying done by schools which was commissioned
by CAL and designed by
AGB McNair.
Under the sample, certain schools are selected from three states each year
and are required to keep records of all photocopying for
one term. Under this
random stratified sample, schools are selected according to the system
(government, catholic, independent),
size. The number of schools selected gives the most effective cost to accuracy
the sample.
The raw data supplied by AGB McNair is processed by CAL and supplied to
AMCOS, which edits the data by correcting references and determining
which works
under the category of "music" come within the AMCOS licence. For example, music
tutorials which are excluded from the
AMCOS licence are treated as books and
included in the CAL distribution. Similarly, there may be many musical works
which have been
wrongly classified.
The edited data is then supplied electronically to AMCOS which matches the
titles to known ownership details and prints out lists
of the titles for
circulation. The data for distribution used by AMCOS is supplemented by records
of copying of instrumental parts
by regional libraries in one school system, as
the sheet music purchasing policy for this system is different to other systems
that orchestral sets are not purchased by individual schools but rather by
regional libraries.
11.1.5. Off-air Copying
Titles of programs copied off-air in educational institutions which appear in
the sample conducted by AVCS are processed by APRA to
determine the musical
works appearing on those programs. This data is provided to AMCOS electronically
and matched to ownership details
on its database. Titles that are not matched
are placed on a circulation list. AMCOS enters new ownership details on the
the information circulated and researches unmatched titles. Moneys due
to titles of which ownership details cannot be found are returned
11.1.6. Design Of The Process
The process of circulating lists of works used in record production was a
natural evolution of the practice used by the major record
companies to identify
ownership information since
the beginning of the Society. This process (inquiry
notices by the Majors, circulation reports from AMCOS) also allows the
to monitor activity in the marketplace. Similar societies overseas
have had a process of registration of all works by their members.
However, as
AMCOS is a relatively new entity with limited resources it was not
cost-effective or practicable to process the huge
volume of catalogue ownership
information required to create an instant database. Unlike European and American
Societies it has never
operated as a centralised licensing body.
The sample used in the
Schools Photocopying Agreement
was developed by
CAL, the Australian Education Council and AGB McNair, due to the practical
failure of the full record keeping requirements
under the statutory scheme. The
initial sample was implemented in 1988. The next sample period was from 1991 to
1993. A new sample
cycle was commenced in 1994 and will continue until the end
11.1.7. Systems Review
Review is an ongoing process. The distribution key for the photocopying
licence was reviewed by the Board as recently as December
last year when it was
recommended that the same principles be applied to the distribution of moneys
collected by CAL for the photocopying
of sheet music under licences with
educational institutions other than schools.
Furthermore, AMCOS is working with its members, the record companies, and
computer consultants to come up with standards for Electronic
Data Interchange
(EDI) which will change the whole nature of the process of owner identification.
AMCOS is also currently undertaking
a feasibility study with APRA with a view to
developing an industry database and instituting joint mechanical and performing
registration procedures.
Record Clubs now provide AMCOS with copies of the Prescribed Notices issued
by the originating record companies and the Board has
approved the Society using
this information as the basis for preparing new Prescribed Notices circulating
the production details.
International standards for the documentation of copyright ownership have
been the subject of long and tortuous negotiations, but
there are indications
that standardised procedures will be agreed to shortly.
Schools Photocopying Agreement
- Amendments to the sampling process
are required from time to time to improve the accuracy of the data and the
identification of
works for distribution. For example, where a musical work is
included in a collection of works, schools had been supplying the name
collection only, which meant that it was difficult to identify the actual work
copied and therefore the relevant copyright
and print right owners of the work.
Participants in the sample are now instructed to place both the name of the
collection and of
the work in the record forms to ensure the work is correctly
identified. Amendments to the sample are designed by the independent
statistician to ensure the maximum cost efficiency to accuracy ratio.
The Schools Photocopying Agreement sample was reviewed prior to the
commencement of the latest cycle to assess and review the accuracy
and utility
of the data. However, making significant amendments to the sampling process
would require a renegotiation of the schools
licences. The administrative burden
placed on schools for the term they are selected to keep records of their
copying is such that
it is a major point of negotiation in the licences. Any
extension of the sample would be met with resistance from licensees and from
relevant unions.
Owner identification has two aspects: The registration of title details from
those represented by the Association and the logging
of performances by
11.2.1. Registration of title details
Members of the Association, and affiliated societies, provide the Association
with information relating to the works that they have
written or which they
control. This information is essentially as follows:
• the title of the work;
• the duration of the work;
• an indication of whether the work is instrumental only or has
• the names of the composer(s) and, if applicable, the lyricist(s) of
• the publisher(s), if applicable, of the work;
• the proportions, in percentages, in which each party is to share in
royalty allocations accruing to the work;
• if known, and if applicable, the performer who has recorded the
Writer members generally provide this information on index cards. Smaller
publisher members do likewise, while larger publishers now
provide the
information either on computer diskette or on-line.
These works are thus added to the Association's existing data base of titles.
This data base currently consists of approximately 600,000
titles and 200,000
cue sheets on computer file and approximately 2 million titles on cards.
When a music return, or log, is then received from a licensee, the titles
appearing in the log are matched against the title file
data base and a
performance credit is entered against the work (depending, obviously, on the
kind of performance involved). If the
work cannot be identified it is referred
to the Association's Research Department for investigation and, hopefully,
identification.
11.2.2. Logging of performances:
The information used by the Association to identify those writers and
publishers who are entitled to receive a royalty allocation
is provided in all
but one instance by licensees. The exceptions referred to above relate to the
area of live performances in venues
such as hotels, restaurants and nightclubs,
where the information analysed for distribution purposes is provided by the
Association's
own members, i.e., those who perform their own compositions live,
and to the reporting of music written or licensed to accompany
advertisements on
radio or television.
ANALYSIS BY REVENUE SOURCE
ABC TELEVISION 52 weeks p.a.
AUSTRALIAN COMMERCIAL TELEVISION 169 weeks p.a.
NZ NATIONAL TV (TV1) 26 weeks p.a.
NZ NATIONAL TV (TV2) 26 weeks p.a.
NZ NATIONAL TV (TV3) 26 weeks p.a.
SBS (CHANNEL 0/28) 12 weeks p.a.
AUSTRALIAN COMMERCIAL RADIO 400 weeks p.a
ABC RADIO ('METROPOLITAN' STATIONS) 35 weeks p.a.
ABC RADIO (2JJJ) 12 weeks p.a.
ABC RADIO (FINE MUSIC) 13 weeks p.a.
ABC RADIO (RN) 26 weeks p.a.
AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY RADIO 24 weeks p.a.
(Local content
SPECIAL BROADCASTING SERVICE (2EA/3EA) Varies according to
NZ NATIONAL RADIO NETWORK 13 weeks p.a.
NZ CONCERT RADIO NETWORK 13 weeks p.a.
NZ IBA RADIO 42 weeks p.a.
NZ COMMERCIAL RADIO 48 weeks p.a.
NZ STUDENT AND MAORI RADIO 13 weeks p.a.
(Local content only)
FIJIAN BROADCASTING CORPORATION 6 weeks p.a.
(Local content only)
ABC CONCERTS 100%
PROMOTER CONCERTS 100%
ANSETT 100%
(Local content only)
QANTAS 100%
AUSTRALIAN CINEMA Sydney Cinema Guides
NZ CINEMA 100%
(Local productions only)
LIVE PERFORMANCE NOTIFICATIONS Submitted by
(Other than concerts) members and
affiliate societies.
REGISTERED CLUBS 10 clubs p.a.
NZ SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA CONCERTS 100%
11.2.3. Design Of Procedures
In cases where a sample survey is adopted, the survey has generally been
designed by AGB-McNair.
In its essentials, the title registration process has been in force for many
years. In its technical aspects, however, it is continually
evolving. For
example, it has only been within the last three years that all new works
notified by writer members have been entered
straight into the computer data
base. Until then, only "active" works (i.e., those that received performance
credits) were so entered.
Similarly, the on-line title registration facility was
established approximately two years ago.
The logging system has, in its essentials, been in operation for many years.
It is, however, constantly being improved and up-graded.
For example, in
Distribution 29 (applicable to the financial year 1991/92) the roster of weeks
of Australian commercial radio analysed
for distribution purposes was increased
from 104 weeks to 400 weeks (an increase of 300%). This was made possible
because APRA's
IT Department devised an automatic title matching system which
enabled radio stations to provide their logs on diskette rather than
copy. This was duly negotiated with FARB and has apparently proven to be an
extremely successful project.
Insofar as title registration is concerned, the process has evolved over time
as the logical response to the problem of dealing with
the registration of tens
of thousands of new works each year and the performance of hundreds of thousands
of works each year. The
information gathered this way is inevitably incomplete.
It is a compromise, a balancing effort between accuracy and comprehensiveness
information on the one hand and cost efficiency on the other. The processes
involved are complex and interlocking. Ultimately
the Board is responsible for
devising them after considering the views and recommendations of management.
11.2.4. Systems Review
The title registration system is under regular but informal review. Each of
the logging plans is kept under constant review by APRA's
Distribution Manager,
while those which involve sample surveys are reviewed every two years by
AGB-McNair. AGB's recommendations
have been invariably accepted by the Board and
implemented.
The Association has no present plans to change the ways in which it
identifies those who should receive a royalty allocation, but
there is an
appreciation of the fact that, with the proliferation of broadcast media outlets
there will be greater pressure on the
logging system. Associated with that is a
belief that the automatic sound monitoring and identification processes
currently under
development in the US and Europe ultimately hold the key to
solving those problems.
There are two processes to determine which broadcasts are copied off-air from
television or radio under the statutory licensing scheme
- the record keeping
system and the sampling system.
The process of obtaining information from record keeping institutions as to
the copies of television and radio broadcasts that are
made from records
supplied on a quarterly basis is set out in Section 135K (2) of the
and in Regulation 23C.
The process of obtaining information from sampling institutions was devised
by AVCS and AGB McNair. AGB McNair had devised a sampling
procedure to monitor
print copying for CAL which had been operational for a number of years prior to
the commencement of the educational
copying scheme under
and VB of the
. As educational institutions had already participated in this
system and it was effective, it was logical to apply it to monitor
copying with some modifications.
The information provided by the educational institutions enables AVCS to
• which broadcasts have been copied in institutions using the
record-keeping system, and
• which programs have been copied by the sampling institutions as an
estimate of the actual copying of all educational institutions
participating in
the sampling system.
Program information then assists the Society to ascertain which owners of
rights in these programs should receive distributions.
11.3.1. The Record Keeping System
If an educational institution signs a Remuneration Notice undertaking to pay
equitable remuneration to the Society based on the record
keeping system, the
educational institution must attend to the following:
(i) Complete the following forms for every copy of a television or radio
broadcast made by the educational institution:
(a) If the educational institution makes the copy for its own educational
purposes, it must complete Schedule 1 to the Record Keeping
(b) If the educational institution makes the copy for or on behalf of the
educational purposes of another educational institution
which has signed a
Remuneration Notice, it must complete Schedule 2 to the Record Keeping
Agreement; and
(ii) Submit the forms to the Society quarterly together with the equitable
remuneration for copies declared in the forms.
When the Society receives the record forms from the record-keeping
educational institution, it examines the record forms to ensure
(i) All of the details to enable a program to be identified are contained in
each form, such as the broadcast date, channel, time
of broadcast, segment of
broadcast (if the program is not copied for its entire duration), program and
episode title and category
of program;
(ii) the details provided by educational institutions about the broadcast are
consistent with the information provided to the Society
by the broadcaster and
the television guides; and
(iii) the details provided by educational institutions are consistent with
information provided by the institution on a previous occasion.
For instance, if
an educational institution advises the Society that the copy is of a program
broadcast on an earlier date and the
educational institution has not previously
declared the original broadcast copy, the Society will demand an explanation
educational institution and outstanding remuneration if necessary.
In each instance, if the information supplied by the educational institution
is inadequate, the Society will contact the educational
institution and seek
that the situation be remedied to accord with its obligations under the
and agreement with the Society.
The information on the copies of broadcasts made by educational institutions
participating in the record keeping system is entered
into the database.
11.3.2. The Sampling System
If an educational institution signs a Remuneration Notice to pay equitable
remuneration to AVCS based on the sampling system:
(i) the educational institution must complete the following forms for the
period of the survey:
(a) The educational institution must sign a television/radio broadcast form
for every copy of a program copied from television or
(b) If a program is copied by an educational institution but is subsequently
destroyed within a period of 14 days from the broadcast
date without being used
for the educational purposes of the institution (that is, it has not been shown
to any students) in accordance
with section 135F of the
educational institution must complete the Preview Copy Form.
(c) Members of the academic and relevant administrative staff of the
educational institution must sign a form entitled 'Survey Verification
The member of staff will mark the form to indicate whether or not he/she has
made any broadcast copies in the preceding week.
(d) The Survey Verification Form is a checking mechanism to ensure that every
member of staff who makes copies of television and radio
broadcasts remembers to
complete the Television and Radio Broadcast forms.
(ii) The forms are collected by a field auditor of AGB McNair who attends the
educational institution on a regular basis. Initially,
the Field Auditor goes to
the institution on a weekly basis for the first month of the sample period and
then every fortnight for
the remainder of the survey.
(iii) The Field Auditor has contact with a representative designated by the
educational institution known as the 'Copyright Records
Officer'. This person is
nominated to supervise the conduct of the sample in the educational
institution.
(iv) If the Field Auditor notices that there are omissions or gaps in the
forms at the point of collection, the Field Auditor will
not take the forms but
rather will leave them to be duly completed.
(v) If the Field Auditor experiences any difficulties in compliance by the
educational institution with the requirements of the sampling
system at any
point of the survey, the Field Auditor will advise AGB McNair who in turn will
advise the Society.
(vi) If the problems are of a minor nature, officers of AGB McNair will
ensure that compliance is maintained. However, if there is
any real concern that
an educational institution or even an individual member of staff is not
complying with the legal requirements
of the sampling system, the Society will
to ensure compliance with the legal requirements.
The Field Auditor forwards the forms to AGB McNair on a weekly (for the first
month) and then a fortnightly basis for the duration
of the sample. After
preliminary analysis
AGB McNair forward the forms to the Society.
(vii) The Society then scrutinises the forms to ensure that they have been
completed correctly.
(viii) If the Society has any concerns as to the information provided by the
educational institution in the forms, the institution
is contacted by AGB at the
Society's request.
(ix) The information as to the copies of broadcasts made by the educational
institution participating in the sampling during the survey
period is entered by
the Society into its database.
11.3.3. Criticisms Of The Sample Processes
The Society has received few criticisms in the past in respect of the
sampling techniques which it has adopted. Criticisms are occasionally
individual teachers and administrators in educational institutions selected to
participate in the sample who naturally
would prefer to avoid the obligation to
complete copying forms, but these criticisms are answered by AVCS and the
educational authorities
in training sessions.
The sample has been designed to place the minimum burden on institutions that
is possible while preserving the integrity of the scheme.
AVCS' experience has
been that teachers and administrators recognise this and are co-operative,
diligent in meeting their obligations
and sympathetic to the legitimate claims
of copyright owners. There is strong support for the sampling scheme from
educational authorities
and teachers' unions.
The only criticism of the sampling techniques raised by a member of the
Society (to the recollection of the Chief Executive) related
to the fact that
sampling is not necessarily undertaken in educational institutions across all
viewing areas in each State at any
given time.
The member argued that curricula may vary between states and some programs
are not broadcast nationally but only on a state basis.
The criticism was given
very careful consideration and discussed at some length with AGB McNair. In the
event, it was determined
that the considerable cost to all members, and the
additional burden on educational institutions, of extending the sample to all
viewing areas at any one time could not be justified by the additional copying
data likely to be obtained.
11.3.4. Identification of Copyright Owners
Once the Society determines which programs have been copied by educational
institutions throughout the accounting period, it must
identify and locate the
owners of the relevant copyright in the films, sound recordings and literary or
dramatic works incorporated
in the programs.
The Society obtains a monthly report from the public television broadcasters
(namely ABC and SBS) on a regular basis throughout the
accounting period. These
reports provide a list of all programs which have been broadcast on either the
ABC or SBS throughout the
previous month together with details as to the
supplier of the program to the broadcaster. The address and contact of the
of the program is sometimes provided or is obtained by the Society from
a number of sources including its own database and published
Australian and
overseas reference books.
If the monthly reports from the ABC and SBS omit the supplier details for
specific programs, the broadcasters are asked to provide
this information on an
individual basis.
To date, the commercial broadcasters have been more reluctant than the public
broadcasters to supply the Society with details as to
the supplier of a program.
Although the Society is currently seeking the additional support of these
broadcasters, it supplements
the information provided by the commercial
broadcasters with information from its own database, the APRA database and
published reference
books and trade journals to obtain details of potential
This information is entered into the AVCS database.
AVCS then writes to each supplier of a program to ascertain if they are the
owners of the relevant copyright in the films or literary
or dramatic works
incorporated in the program. If they can claim the royalties, the Society
forwards a membership agreement and notification
schedules (or warranty) for
completion. If the supplier contacted is not the owner, exclusive licensee or
agent for the owner or
exclusive licensee of the off-air copying right, the
Society will then write to the person referred to by the original supplier
This process continues until the Society is able to identify and locate
the correct claimant.
Some broadcasts are copied by educational institutions that were copied in
previous accounting periods and in such instances, the
Society will simply
The owners of the relevant copyright in the musical works are identified by
APRA and AMCOS. The acquisition of cue sheets for all
programs broadcast on
television and radio to identify the owners of copyright contained in programs
copied from television would
be an enormous task for the Society to undertake.
The more cost-efficient and effective approach has been to utilise the database
of APRA which already contains this information.
Details for all programs copied under
are entered into the APRA
system to match information from cue-sheets already stored. Most of these
programs can be matched immediately
with some requiring further research into
the cue-sheet files not entered into the system with a small amount remaining
unidentifiable
where APRA does not have any cue-sheet information.
After the allocation of royalties in the musical works as described later,
the APRA system identifies the owners of the performing
rights in the musical
APRA collects the royalties for local unpublished writers in the capacity as
agent for the relevant copyright owner. Published works
(both local and foreign)
and unpublished foreign works are distributed through AMCOS. The procedures for
this distribution are still
being developed.
To date, the Society has not identified owners of relevant copyrights in
programs copied from radio. Understandably, the identification
process has
proved difficult and the amounts of money available for distribution are very
11.4.1. Identification process
The data processing to determine the royalty payments to copyright owners is
performed over a 12 month period. The full process occurs
over the following
(i) Sample survey
CAL retains an independent statistician, AGB McNair to:
(a) Design the sample survey in co-operation with licensees;
(b) Select the institutions and terms of survey;
(c) Co-ordinate the data collection;
(d) Liaise with CAL and the sampled institutions; and
(e) Provide auditing of the record keeping, and CAL's data entry to provide
statistical and data analysis.
The survey of copying has two purposes:
• To establish the volume of pages copied, thereby enabling the licence
fee to be calculated;
• To objectively identify what has been copied and the volume of
copying of the particular copyright works in order to distribute
the fees to the
In schools, AGB McNair draws a sample which builds over 5 years. The data is
weighted year by year to recognise the partial nature
of the sample that is
drawn in a particular year. Therefore, although the survey is an annual process,
and national estimates of
copying volumes are provided annually, each year's
sample is an element of a five year national sample cycle. The partial nature
annual estimates is dealt with by calculating rolling averages of yearly copying
volumes over the period of Agreements. For example,
the first Schools Agreement
commenced in 1988 and was completed in 1991, while the second Schools Agreement
runs over the period
1992-1996. Distribution is conducted according to each
year's sample data.
National surveys are also conducted for Universities and TAFEs. Over the
period of the national survey, representative numbers and
are included to participate in the survey.
(ii) Data Processing
AGB McNair field auditors remain in constant contact with each institution to
ensure that reasonably reliable data is supplied to
CAL for its distribution.
AGB field auditors visit the institution every 1-2 weeks.
Five fully qualified and experienced librarians/researchers are employed at
CAL to clean, research and validate each and every bibliographic
citation of
copying provided by the staff at each institution. Various databases and
resources are utilised to research the records
and complete deficient or
illegible citations.
Because the research of the records is a specialised task, CAL also employs
two full time data entry personnel to enter the records,
which are then fully
audited by the data researchers. AGB McNair also completes its independent audit
to verify CAL's research and
data entry.
(iii) Distribution
The completed records are then further processed so that recipient allocation
can occur. Identical records are compiled and the correct
recipient researched
and identified.
11.4.2. Training
Staff representatives from each institution participating in the sample
survey are contacted and attend a briefing session prior to
the survey period.
The briefing sessions held throughout the country are an important part of the
conduct of the survey. They are
normally one day seminars conducted by a
representative from AGB McNair, a senior representative from CAL and
representatives from
the relevant educational systems and institutions.
At each briefing session, a representative from the peak body introduces the
system and discusses the need for the co-operation of
each sample participant.
The representative from the peak body explains how the institutions are required
by the terms of their licence
agreement to co-operate in the survey and that as
a whole the education system is in favour of the sampling process continuing.
participation of a representative from the educational system being sampled
is crucial to the level of co-operation obtained from
the institutions.
The senior representative from CAL discusses the terms of the agreement
between CAL and the relevant educational institution and the
role and operation
of CAL. The role of the CAL representative is to motivate the staff of the
sample institution or faculty into
willing co-operation by explaining the
importance of the survey to authors and publishers. The CAL representative also
explains copyright,
discusses what CAL is, explains the copying limits under the
licence, and answers questions about copying practices. However, because
important that the photocopying habits of the staff of the institution do not
change simply because the institution is being
surveyed, the CAL representative
explains that CAL provides an indemnity during the period of the survey for any
copying which exceeds
the limits of the licence. A package explaining what CAL
does and is, together with a copy of the latest issue of CAL's newsletter,
copying limits, and some general information on copyright and CAL, is presented
to the representatives from the institutions.
The representative from the statistician, AGB McNair explains the importance
of accurate sampling and the need for the support of
all staff if the results of
the sample are to be of use. Also presented is a detailed description of the
sample procedure. AGB McNair
documents are explained to the institution
representatives. The photocopying record form is discussed in detail, with the
representative discussing and providing examples for each column
required to be completed by the institution. Organisational details
discussed, for example the location and number of photocopying machines used by
staff. Several common issues are also dealt
with, (such as, that the "no. of
pages copied" column refers to the number of pages of the original material
which is copied and
that the most important title information is the name of the
publication rather the name of the article itself in regards to newspapers
periodicals).
A package from AGB McNair is also provided to each attendee. The kit explains
the recording scheme and provides guidelines for staff
members. Copies of the
documents, forms, and signs to be utilised in the survey process are included in
this kit. A copy of the 1994
University kit is provided with this Report.
Business cards for the CAL and the AGB representative are provided for each
attendee and all are invited to make enquires either prior
to, or during the
survey period, or at any other time that information is required from CAL. A 008
telephone number is provided for
their use. In addition AGB McNair field
auditors remain in constant contact with the institution during the survey
period to ensure
that the data collection processes progress as smoothly as
possible. AGB field auditors visit the institution to place the survey
just prior to survey commencement and thereafter every one to two weeks to
collect the records at which time the records
are checked for accuracy and
advice can be given.
11.4.3. Common Criticism
There is a common criticism made of CAL, that there is no obligation on it to
notify non-member owners for whom they have collected,
that they have money for
them. It is said that owners have to both know that CAL exists and to ask if
they are a distributable author.
CAL is well aware of this criticism. However, although there is no legal
obligation on CAL to do so, it is the finding of this Review
that the Society
makes strenuous effort to identify, locate and contact either the author or
publisher of any work appearing as having
been copied in a CAL sample.
CAL uses a number of resources ranging from CD Rom Databases to reference
works, library catalogues to telephone books to locate individual
publishers or
authors. CAL also has a policy of co-operating with authors and publishers
organisations and centres across Australia
in efforts to raise the awareness of
CAL amongst the literary community generally. As publishers are generally easier
to locate than
authors, CAL attempts to locate publishers first. When the
publisher returns a Membership Form and an Undertaking and Indemnity,
undertaking that it is the copyright owner of the stated works and that it will
distribute fees to any other copyright owner entitled,
CAL distributes to that
Where CAL's researchers are unable to locate publishers they make an effort
to track the author down, especially when there is a large
amount of money
owing. (It would be an inappropriate waste of members' funds to spend much
effort on tracking down non-members who
are owed only small sums.) A number of
examples of such efforts to identify relevant rights owners (or to find those
who were identified)
were considered. What was apparent, was that CAL often has
to play the role of a private investigator to track down the appropriate
and publisher. Companies fold, authors change houses, cities and State,
published information is often incomplete or sometimes,
simply wrong. All of
this must be sifted.
At the end of the day, CAL's drive for membership can only be successful if
it tracks down parties to whom money is owed and if those
parties want to
11.4.4. Review of Record-Keeping System
This process is reviewed on an on-going basis and was substantially reviewed
at the time of negotiating new agreements with universities.
Amendments are
designed by the management of the Society.
11.4.5. Review of Sampling System
The sampling system is reviewed on an on-going basis by AGB McNair and the
Society. More systematic reviews are performed twice a
(i) when drawing the sample and selecting the educational institutions which
will be representative of all participating sampling
institutions for the
subsequent year; and
(ii) when analysing the results of the sample and calculating the equitable
remuneration which is due to the Society from educational
institutions which
participate in the sampling system.
The last major review of the sampling system by AGB McNair and the Society
was at the time of preparing the sample for universities
which moved to this
system as from 1 January 1994. Due to the different needs of universities for
broadcast material depending upon
their curriculum, the Society introduced
tiered groups to represent the low, medium and high copiers. AGB McNair devised
by which universities from each sample group will participate in the
survey during 1994.
Besides the review process already outlined, the Society and AGB McNair will
review the sampling procedure to ascertain if amendments
are required if the
Society receives any suggestions from educational institutions or if problems
arise that can be resolved by a
change in procedure.
Distribution for classical music is done on market share based on audited
sales data collected by PPCA's auditors. For non-classical
sound recordings,
logs are supplied by APRA. APRA warrants that its logs are based on a sample in
excess of the minimum sample base
standard. It is important to note that APRA
logs contain information as to performers as well as writers.
APRA logs are supplied to PPCA for a fee. Upon receipt of the logs PPCA:
(i) checks each entry in the APRA logs and
(ii) converts the entries into
(a) protected and unprotected titles (PPCA only collects on protected
recordings);
(b) artists and record company;
(c) country of origin groupings; and
(iii) allocates identification numbers to titles for future use and internal
The contract with APRA is in place for another two years. This year PPCA will
add video play lists that it compiles itself, to the
The cost of identification of relevant copyright owners seems extremely
modest. It would appear that the co-operative arrangement
with APRA to buy their
data, is most cost effective.
In earlier days, before PPCA started to receive useful income flow, the costs
of log supply was high in comparison to the distributable
(1983-$16,500; 1984 $16,500; 1985 $13,400). The Board ceased to purchase them.
In 1993 the system was resumed. It represents
a cost of only 3% of even the
present distributable amount. In between 1986 and 1992, distributions were based
on members' audited
sales figures. These figures were provided in commercial
confidence to PPCA's auditors who calculated each owner's entitlement. In
the cost was $35,000 (paid to APRA). This does not include the in-house cost
associated with the processes outlined above (which
are estimated to be no more
than $15,000). This should decrease as the work done on the APRA logs are
re-useable in future years.
PPCA intends that with the increasing coverage of the ISRC code (developed by
IFPI and administrated by ARIA in Australia), logs will
be directly sourced by
PPCA. Cost of collection of such data will be minimal, accuracy perfect and thus
the current substantial work
done by PPCA on APRA supplied logs will be no
longer needed. (Indeed, the PPCA hopes to reverse the present deal and offer its
to APRA as it should be suitable for APRA (as it also includes composer
details). The system will also be suitable for much of PACCS
11.5.1. System Review
The present system has only operated since 1993. No review is planned for
next 2 years. The previous system was reviewed in 1991 and
as a result it was
(i) to adopt airplay distribution logs and
(ii) to distribute a percentage share direct to all Australian artists who
Planning and design of procedural change is done by PPCA staff with computer
consultants. (The sampling system is presently provided
by APRA, so PPCA's task
is only to check and correct rather than ensure statistical accuracy.) It is
subject to the approval of the
Finance Committee.
[See too, Chapter 15, "APRA And CAL Sampling Schemes"]
12. LICENSING
12.1. AMCOS
12.1.1. AMCOS' blanket licence activity
12.1.2. AMCOS' individual licence activity
12.2. LICENSEES BY USE AND STATE/TERRITORY
12.2.3. Qantas
12.2.4. Stellar Sound
12.4.1. Licences By Type And Territory
12.5.1. Schools
12.5.2. Universities
12.5.3. TAFEs
12.5.4. Other Non-profit Educational Institutions
12.5.5. For-Profit Educational Institution
12.5.6. Adult Education
12.5.7. Media Monitors
12.5.8. Churches
12.5.9. Commonwealth Government
12.7. RELATIONSHIPS WITH LICENSORS
When one considers the amount of licensing activity performed by the
societies, one cannot help but be impressed. The huge volume
of legal and
administrative processing that is carried out by the societies is indicative of
the how important it is that the relevant
sectors of the community have ready
access to copyright material through efficient procedures. It is impossible to
conceive of how
this volume of licensing could be achieved, other than by
collective administration of rights.
When one considers the amount of licensing carried out, it is clear that the
collective administration is an efficient and cost effective
mechanism for both
licensors and would-be licensees. There will always be disputes as to whether
one party is paying too little or
too much for particular rights. That is at the
heart of commerce. What cannot be disputed, is that the societies provide a
function within society by permitting access to, and therefore
promoting use of, copyright material.
12.1. AMCOS
Individual Licence
is defined as a single production (such as a
record release or a film production) having a specific royalty liability for
invoice is raised.
Blanket Licence
is defined as a licensed client whose royalty
liability is either a specific agreed amount or a percentage of revenue which is
distributed across the total number of works used. The royalty liability is
not directly related to the number of works used. Blanket
licences are issued to
the following sorts of licensees:
• Television Stations
• Radio Stations
• Recording Studios
• Production Companies
• Background Music Audio Recording Suppliers
• MIDI Computer Disc Suppliers
• Music Video Compilation Suppliers
• Dance Schools
• Wedding Video Operators
12.1.1. AMCOS' blanket licence activity :
Licence Type
"Sundry" Mechanical
"Special" Mechanical
Synchronisation Licences
Mechanical/Video
(% of Gross)
TV Blanket Licences
(incl. ABC/SBS)
Radio Blanket Licence
Production Music Licences
Special Event Video Licences
Dance School Licences
12.1.2. AMCOS' individual licence activity
AMCOS issues licences for the following number of works annually:
Licence Type
Sundry Mechanical
Special Mechanical Agreements
Synchronisation Licences
Mechanical/Video (% of Gross)
TV Blanket Licences (incl. ABC/SBS)
Radio Blanket Licence Agreements
Production Music Licences
12.2. LICENSEES BY USE AND
STATE/TERRITORY
It should be noted that the following figures represent the actual business
address of the licensee to whom a licence was issued.
Virtually all licences
issued allow usage within the territory of Australia as a whole and are rarely
limited to the state or territory
indicated. Information is provided for the
1993-94 financial year:
SYNCHRONISATION CLEARANCES
(Excl TV Blanket Licences & Production Music)
STUDENT FILM & VIDEO LICENCES
MECHANICAL & VIDEO BLANKET LICENCES
(% of Gross Revenue)
SPECIAL EVENT VIDEO BLANKET LICENCES
DANCE SCHOOL BLANKET LICENCES
TV BLANKET LICENCES
A. NETWORK STATIONS
B. NETWORK AFFILIATES
C. INDEPENDENT
COMMERCIAL RADIO STATION BLANKET LICENCES
Breakdown is by number of licences issued rather by percentage:
NARROWCAST RADIO STATION BLANKET LICENCES:
Information is only available for 1993 Calendar year
MUSIC-ON-HOLD
PRODUCTION MUSIC LICENCES
(Breakdown By State/Territory)
NEW ZEALAND BLANKET LICENCES
Background Music
Inflight Video
Inflight Audio
Midi Imports
Special Events
Music On Hold
Video Shows
AMCOS has the most complex pattern of licensing of all the societies because
it deals with the greatest range of different licences.
Its function as a
"sundry rights" licensor is illustrated in the following breakdown of its
licensing activities. The volume of its
licensing and the diverseness of its
licensing indicates that it is fulfilling a function that its individual members
would be hard-pressed
to provide as efficiently or for such a cost, without the
benefit of collective administration.
Licensing of records:
Number of Works
Number of Licences (SR)
Number of Works
SP Clients - "Special Recordings"
- are record makers that are under
licence agreements which allow for the payment of royalties to be made quarterly
in arrears on
units sold rather than units produced. These clients are issued
with a Royalty Rate Advice which provides details of the value of
the royalty
payment applicable for each production. The number of actual clients operating
under such agreements is as follows:
SR clients - "Sundry Recordings"
- are all record makers that are
required under the terms of their licence to pay royalties on the total number
of units produced.
The total number of these clients are as follows:
SYNCHRONISATION CLEARANCES
(Excl .TV Blanket Licences & Production Music)
19 (to date)
Figures for the above types of licences are falling due to the fact that
publishers are issuing licences directly for most synchronisation
involving theatrical, non-theatrical and video rights.
STUDENT FILM OR VIDEO LICENCES
PRODUCTION MUSIC LICENCES
These are issued to any audio or audio-visual production which utilises any
of the recordings contained in the Production Music Libraries
distributed by
members of the Society.
The apparent drop in licences issued for the 1992-93 financial year was due
to the fact that multiple territories and licence categories
can now be included
on a single licence for a client.
TV BLANKET LICENCES
MECHANICAL & VIDEO BLANKET LICENCES
(% of Gross Revenue)
Radio Station Blanket Licences
Special Event Video Blanket Licences (Synchronisation)
Dance School Blanket Licenses (Audio Mechanical)
Music-on-Hold
12.2.3. Qantas
Qantas approached the Society in 1988 to secure a blanket licence due to the
large volume of production music used. A per 30 second
rate was negotiated which
is CPI linked. The client is able to report usage on a quarterly basis.
12.2.4. Stellar Sound
Another high volume user of production music. An agreement was negotiated to
commence in September 1989 which charges this client
the same rate as a
metropolitan radio station.
The Association currently has the following licences in place:
(i) Public performance - Australia: 19,043 (for 34,424 venues)
(ii) Public performance - New Zealand: 904
(iii) Radio broadcasting - Australia: 352
(iv) Radio broadcasting - New Zealand: 93
(v) Television broadcasting - Australia: 42
(vi) Television broadcasting - New Zealand: 7
(vii) Diffusion - Australia: 3
(viii) Diffusion - New Zealand: 9
Blanket licences are granted to all licensees except casual permits for the
performance of particular named works.
The following numbers of works were allocated royalties in the Association's
last two complete distributions:
Distribution 30(a) - 1 July 1992 to 31 December 1992 72,762 works paid
Distribution 30(b) - 1 January 1993 to 30 June 1993 100,768 works paid
(A proportion of works paid in 30(a) will also have been included in
The breakdown requested is really only relevant to the area of general public
performances licences and in this respect the breakdown
is as follows:
Most of the Society's collection scheme agreements are for terms exceeding
one year. The Society does not issue any short-term licences
or agreements for
use of individual works only.
All agreements that AVCS has with educational institutions are by their
nature blanket licences to the extent that they allow an individual
educational
institution to copy any television or radio program for educational
For AVCS' purposes a blanket licence is one with an entire education sector
(for example, each of the state education departments
or state TAFE
commissions). An "individual" AVCS licence is one with a stand-alone educational
institution.
The following table details the breakdown as to the number of blanket
licences and individual licences currently held by AVCS in the
educational
EDUCATIONAL SECTOR
Universities
12.4.1. Licences issued by AVCS by type and
The number of blanket licences and individual licences held by AVCS, by State
or Territory, are as follows:
STATE / TERRITORY
South Australia
Western Australia
Northern Territory
As discussed earlier, CAL only grants blanket licenses or licences to copy
the works of its members. It does not grant licences in
respect of non-members'
rights. Licences are currently granted to educational institutions,
quasi-educational institutions; churches;
media monitor services and
Commonwealth government bodies. CAL eventually intends to licence other types of
users also.
As at 26 July 1994, CAL holds 1,546 licences. All of CAL's licences are
ongoing, terminating and being renegotiated again at various
times. It is
therefore probably more useful to present a list of the numbers of each type of
current licence:
12.5.1. Schools
All schools in Australia are licensed via either the Education Department of
their state, the Catholic Education Office in each state,
the Association of
Independent Schools in each state, the Seventh Day Adventist Association in each
state, the Christian Schools
Association or the Christian Parent Controlled
Schools Association. The number of school licences is
incorporates approximately 9,950 schools and 3.1m students.
12.5.2. Universities
Most of the universities in Australia are licensed through a Head Agreement
with the AVCC and an individual agreement with each university.
universities (licensed by the AVCC). There are 2 universities licensed
through the E Scheme and 1 on the Statutory Licence.
12.5.3. TAFEs
In all states but Victoria, there is one Head Agreement for all TAFE colleges
with the appropriate government department of that state.
In Victoria there are
individual agreements with each Victorian TAFE.
12.5.4. Other Non-profit Educational
Institutions
The Society's E Licence Scheme is available to non-profit educational
institutions that do not fit into one of the categories above,
Colleges, Hospitals, preschools, Police Academies, Skillshares, Health and
Nursing Colleges, Secretarial and Business
Colleges and some Specialist
Colleges. There are
E Licences.
12.5.5. For-Profit Educational Institution
The T Licence Scheme is available to profit run educational institutions that
do not fit into one of the categories above, e.g. English
Language Colleges,
Private Tutors, Commercial Business, Travel Colleges, Speech and Drama Colleges
and some private company training
such as Ansett Australia. There are
T Licences.
12.5.6. Adult Education
CAL holds licences with
adult education organisations.
12.5.7. Media Monitors
Media Monitor licences.
12.5.8. Churches
church licences held by CAL. A number of these are group
licences so that in effect CAL licenses approximately 2,500 churches.
12.5.9. Commonwealth Government
All Commonwealth Government departments have agreed to pay CAL for the
copying of CAL members' works under
. There are
current negotiations with State Government departments but none are presently
participating with CAL.
All licences issued are blanket licences. The company issues 13,000 current
annual licences.
There are four main types of blanket licenses:
• public performance of sound recordings
• public performance of videos
• broadcast of sound recordings and
• broadcast of videos. (For types of users see tariff sheets
By these blanket licences, users are given access to in excess of 500,000
individual works. The geographical distribution of licences
granted is not
surprising:
12.7. RELATIONSHIPS WITH LICENSORS
The Inquiry received four submissions from individuals and organisations who
expressed dissatisfactions with the manner in which certain
societies sought to
effect licences. These particularly related to CAL, APRA and PPCA. Basically it
was alleged that the agencies
"do not provide proof of their bona fide right to
collect fees" and that they do not properly or adequately describe who they are,
or the basis upon which they are empowered to collect or the extent of the
repertoire that they represent.
This may indicate that either the written material made available to intended
licensors or the training of the field operatives is
deficient. (The quality of
the available printed material has already been discussed.) However, the initial
interaction between a
collecting society and a business person who probably
knows nothing about copyright or collecting societies, is very likely to be
fraught with suspicion and hostility. The collecting society is viewed as yet
another impediment to the business making a profit.
13. SETTING OF RATES
FOR COPYRIGHT USAGES
13.1. THE PROCESS BY WHICH THE SOCIETY SETS THE RATES OF
FEE/ROYALTY
13.1.1. AMCOS
13.1.2. AVCS
13.1.3. APRA
13.1.4. CAL
13.1.5. PPCA
13.2. EQUALITY OF FEES PAID FOR THE USE OF RIGHTS
13.2.1. AMCOS
13.2.2. APRA & PPCA
13.2.3. AVCS & CAL
13.3. DEGREE OF GOVERNMENT CONTROL OVER THE LICENSING PROCEDURES
13.3.1. AMCOS
13.3.2. APRA
13.3.3. AVCS
13.3.4. CAL
13.3.5. PPCA
13.4. PUBLISHED MATERIAL AS TO RATES AND HOW RATES ARE STRUCK
13.4.1. AMCOS
13.4.2. APRA
13.4.3. AVCS
13.4.4. CAL
13.4.5. PPCA
13.1. THE PROCESS BY WHICH THE SOCIETY SETS THE
RATES OF FEE/ROYALTY
13.1.1. AMCOS
Mechanicals
The backbone of the Society's licensing is the compulsory licence provisions
of the Act and the prescribed rate set down in
Section 55(6)(b)
. after representations from ARIA, the Board negotiated with ARIA to
translate the statutory rate into a more workable payment regime.
The 6.25% of
retail set down in the Act therefore became 10.6% of a "Published Price to
Dealers" (PPD).
The basis for charging for other uses which may not qualify for the statutory
rate but are of a like nature - such as royalties on
imports - is the 6.25% of
retail or 10.6% of PPD. For uses such as demos, educational reproductions etc. a
notional retail price
is set which relates to comparable product available
commercially and the statutory rate is applied.
In New Zealand the statutory rate and provisions of the
similar but not identical.
(i) Synchronisation Clearances And Advertising
(Excl TV Blanket Licences & Production Music)
All synchronisation rates and advertising rates are as quoted by the
(ii) Student Film & Video
The AMCOS Board has fixed the rate for these licences at $10.00 per 30
seconds plus a $10.00 service fee.
(iii) Production Music Rate Card
Rates for the various categories included in the AMCOS Production Music Rate
Card are set by the management of the Society and subject
to review by the
Board. The published rates are varied each year according to changes in the
Consumer Price Index. These rates are
open to negotiation between users and the
management of AMCOS.
(iv) TV Blanket Licences
(a) Commercial TV Stations:
Original licence agreements were structured according to a "Rate Card"
negotiated with the Federation of Commercial Television Stations
(FACTS). In
order to facilitate administration of the licence agreements, the Society
negotiated new agreements commencing 1 July
1989 which established annual lump
sum fees. These fees had a direct correlation with total amounts previously
collected under the
"Pay-per Usage" system. The lump sum amounts were varied
annually according to the CPI.
Smaller regional stations that were not affiliated with any of the major
networks were given the option to continue with a "Pay-per-Usage"
system or pay
a lump sum that was based on a pro rata percentage of the network amounts based
on the population reach of the station.
(b) ABC & SBS:
These agreements were negotiated between representatives of the organisations
and subject to approval by the relevant Boards.
(v) Radio Station Blanket Licences
These rates are negotiated with the radio industry body FARB (Federation of
Australian Radio Broadcasters). The fees are based on
the broadcast population
of each station. There are four station types with each type licensed at a set
1. Stations in Sydney or Melbourne
2. Stations in Adelaide, Perth or Brisbane
3. Stations in other cities having populations in excess of 150,000
4. Stations in other cities or towns
(vi) Narrowcast and Community Radio
Presently under review, these stations were initially licensed for the same
rights as commercial stations and charged at the rate
applied to type 4
(vii) Music Videos For Retail Sale
The rate of 6.5% of Published Price to Dealers was set after negotiation
between AMCOS/AMPAL and ARIA.
(viii) Mechanical (% Of Gross Revenue) Blanket
The benchmark rate of 6.25% of the retail price is used in setting the rates
for uses such as background music, in-flight audio services
etc. The rate is
levied on the gross income generated by the usage.
(ix) Video (% Of Gross Revenue) Blanket
Music video compilations to clubs, in-flight music video programs etc.
Similar to above but the rate is 5% of gross income to reflect
the reduced rate
as per the industry agreement.
(x) Special Event Video Blanket
Rates for these blanket licences were negotiated between the Society and
ARIA. The revenue derived is split with ARIA. The system
provided a means
whereby licensees could avoid infringing copyright and the copyright owners
would receive some remuneration for
(xi) Dance School Blanket Licences
This licence fee structure was authorised by the AMCOS Board.
(xii) Schools Photocopying
The per-student annual fee for the rights granted under the voluntary print
licence for schools was negotiated with the National Council
of Independent
Schools and the Australian Education Council Working Party on Copyright (now
known as "MCEETYA", the Ministerial Council
On Employment Education Training And
Youth Affairs).
The rate was renegotiated in 1990 based on results of copying undertaken in
schools for the first two years of the scheme. The rate
is adjusted annually by
reference to the annual percentage change in the average of all states of the
all-groups CPI.
(xiii) Sundry Licences And Fees
Sundry and miscellaneous fees, for example research fees, are set by the
management after negotiation with the user and subject to
the approval of the
Efficiency and fairness of process
The Society sees itself as a means of facilitating the use of copyright
material without encumbering copyright owners and users with
costly and time
consuming administration. The process of negotiating royalties and fee
structures is, on the whole, fair and reasonable
with very few examples of
objections from users. Such licensing systems actually encourage the authorised
use of copyright material
by creating ease of access and thus maximising the
returns to the Society's members.
The efficiency and fairness of the Schools Photocopy Agreement flows from
photocopying in schools.
Photocopying had been occurring unchecked for many years. However, it is
difficult to obtain accurate data
of the quantum of copying of sheet music that
does occur in schools. To implement a system like the CAL schools licence where
sample data from year to year is used to determine not only distribution but
also the per-page rate based on the volume of copying
undertaken during the
sample period, would require the sample to be reworked to give a more accurate
view of music usage in the various
schools systems. The expense involved in
creating and implementing an additional sample which related specifically to
music use would
be so great as to render the administration of the licence
uneconomic. Reference to the Copyright Tribunal may be useful if the parties
were unable to agree on a rate, however, the problem with obtaining reliable
evidence about the extent of copying remains.
13.1.2. AVCS
Under section 135H and 135J the equitable remuneration payable by a body
administering an educational institution is determined by
agreement between the
administering body and the collecting society or, failing such agreement, by the
application of either of them. [Section 135H relates
to payments by institutions operating under a Records Notice and section 135J
relates to payments by institutions operating under a Sampling Notice.]
To date, all remuneration payable to the Society has been determined by
agreement. No application has been made to the Copyright Tribunal
by the Society
or administering bodies.
(a) Universities
The first agreement concluded by the Society was signed in mid 1990 with the
Australian Vice-Chancellor's Committee and the Australian
Committee of Directors
and Principals (AVCC/ACDP). The AVCC/ACDP represent universities. That agreement
was a Head Agreement incorporating,
as a schedule, the individual agreements
subsequently signed with all but one of the universities represented by the
The universities elected to participate in the statutory scheme by furnishing
the Society with a Records Notice. Under the record-keeping
system, institutions
pay equitable remuneration assessed by reference to the number of copies made
and the duration, in minutes,
of those copies. Each instance of copying is to be
reported. [Note that the Society has no control over the election of the
institution
to furnish a Records Notice or Sampling Notice and, indeed, over
whether the institution furnishes a Remuneration Notice at all.]
The agreements with universities embodied the principle of payment for use.
Under these agreements the amount of equitable remuneration
was a rate per
minute, varying according to the nature of the program copied. The rates
Category B (General): $2.50 per minute
Category C (Ephemeral: $0.75 per minute
Category A (Special): $4.50 per minute
$2.50 per fifteen minutes or part thereof.
These rates are adjusted in accordance with increases in the Consumer Price
The royalty for most television programs was $2.50 per minute. This included
documentaries, educational programs and feature films.
The royalty was 75 cents per minute for news, sport, series and serials,
current affairs and light entertainment. This lower rate
recognised that some
programs are ephemeral in nature and are likely to be shown in class only once
or only a few times over a short
period. Early discussions were held on the
feasibility of charging different rates according to the length of time the
institution
retained the copy but this was abandoned as being administratively
cumbersome.
Provision was also made for special cases, for example programs made
specifically for the educational market or having a significant
potential for
sale as an educational program. In such cases the Society could nominate the
program as being in the highest payment
category and inform the educational
institution of this nomination. The rate for these special cases was $4.50 per
One university elected a sampling system. This agreement calculated payment
using a time-based sample at the standard rates.
(b) Primary and secondary schools
Agreements for the school sector were concluded with Departments of
Education, most Catholic Education Offices, Associations of Independent
in each State and Territory and with the Christian Community Schools Ltd,
Christian Parent Controlled Schools Ltd and the
Australian Conference
Association Ltd. Most of these were signed in September 1990.
Early negotiations revealed that the parties had significant differences of
opinion on the rate of equitable remuneration and the
appropriate method of
calculation of that rate. For reasons including certainty in budgeting, schools
representatives insisted that
rates of remuneration be fixed over a four year
period. The Society was obliged to accept this proposal in the initial phase of
operation in the interests of bringing the scheme into operation without
delay and because it did not have the funds to apply to
the Copyright Tribunal
to have the rate set by arbitration.
The Recitals to the fixed rate agreements with schools state:
"F. The parties differ as to the proper basis of calculation of equitable
should be payable for copying after the termination of this
remuneration and
have reached this agreement without prejudice to the rights of either party to
claim that a different remuneration
agreement. "
Under the current agreements, a rate of 50 cents per student in the first
financial year (1990/91), 70 cents per student in the second
year, 90 cents in
the third year and $1.00 in the fourth year was adopted.
On 30 June 1993, the Society gave twelve months notice of its intention to
terminate these agreements. The Society is currently negotiating
with schools'
representative with a view to concluding new agreements to commence on 1 July
1994. The Society is aware that schools
in general copy a great deal more
television, expressed in minutes per student, than TAFE colleges and
universities. The schools'
representatives have indicated that payments
calculated in the same manner as payments calculated in TAFE colleges and
universities
are likely to result in annual fees that are beyond their capacity
to pay and will not be accepted. Although the negotiations have
concluded, the Society is discussing methods of determining equitable
remuneration that differ from those in place in the
tertiary education
(c) Technical and Further Education
Most TAFE systems entered into agreements on the sampling system with an
annual fee per student. The fee is determined from the level
of copying in the
previous year as revealed by sampling procedures. Some colleges on an individual
basis have entered into record-keeping
agreements on the model of the university
agreements. Again, the rates for calculation of remuneration are the standard
Current University and TAFE Sampling
New agreements were negotiated for the university sector with the Australian
Vice-Chancellors Committee last year. These agreements
commenced on 1 January
1994. Under these agreements, like those with TAFE colleges operating under
sampling, equitable remuneration
is determined by applying the standard
per-minute rates used in record-keeping institutions to the level of copying per
student determined
under the sample surveys.
Universities are grouped into strata depending on whether they are assessed
to be high, medium or low copying institutions. Details
of copying in
institutions selected within each sample period are aggregated to establish the
annual fees for the institutions in
the group. Aggregates of the three
categories of program (corresponding to Category B, Category C and Radio in the
existing agreements)
are calculated and then divided by the total number of
students in each of the relevant institutions (expressed as equivalents of
full time student or "EFTSU"). This is used to calculate the average number of
minutes copied annually per student within each
group. Annual fees for each
group for the copying in the year subsequent to the relevant sample year are
calculated by applying each
group's average to the standard per-minute rates.
Note that the Category A per-minute rate does not apply to sampling
agreements.
Annual fees for universities for 1994 were fixed by agreement, by reference
to past copying practices under record-keeping. The rates
Strata Rate per EFTSU
The annual fees in the TAFE sector for 1994 have not been finally calculated.
For 1993 they were:
For New South Wales: $1.31
For Queensland: $0.78
For other States: $1.07
Current Record-Keeping Agreements
Agreements under the records system are similar to the initial agreements
entered into with universities in 1990. The rates have been
adjusted in
accordance with increases in the Consumer Price Index. The rates for the 1994
Category B (General): $2.77 per minute
Category C (Ephemeral: $0.83 per minute
Category A (Special): $4.98 per minute
: $2.77 per fifteen minutes or part thereof.
Efficiency and fairness of process
The negotiated agreement on rates under both the sampling and record-keeping
systems is efficient and fair in principle. In practice,
the record-keeping
system is inherently suspect as a mechanism for determining equitable
remuneration to copyright owners.
The preferred method of achieving the payment of equitable remuneration from
large and diverse educational institutions would be through
a Collection Scheme
Agreement that is based on a sampling system. While the records system is based
strictly on payment for usage,
in a large and diverse educational institution
there is an inherent danger of under-reporting of usage of copyright material.
the administrative burden of full record keeping, is one that the
institutions could well do without.
Accordingly,
it is recommended
that consideration be given to the
repeal of the present system of record-keeping provided by the
relation to the educational use of audio-visual materials .
13.1.3. APRA
The Association generally seeks to negotiate new licence schemes with bodies
representative of licensees, for example: the Federation
of Australian Radio
Broadcasters, the Federation of Australian Commercial Television Stations and
the Cinematograph Exhibitors Association.
If no agreement can be reached, either
the Association, a licensee or the organisation representative of licensees may
apply to the
In APRA's view the process is efficient and fair. It requires both sides to
advance arguments in favour of their case and to have
those arguments
adjudicated upon by an independent tribunal. There are obvious costs to be taken
into account but they are an equal
factor for both sides. Although parties to
Tribunal cases tend to be legally represented, there is power for the Tribunal
to dispense
with the rules of evidence
, and proceedings are required
to be conducted with as little formality, and with as much expedition, as a
proper consideration of
the matters before the Tribunal permit
(s.164(c)).
said, they remain very formal.
APRA to date has been the most frequent litigant before the Tribunal, and
currently has two references under
before it. Over the years a relatively
straightforward procedure governing the making of submissions and the provision
of evidence
has evolved. This procedure seems to work satisfactorily for
13.1.4. CAL
Educational Institutions
For schools, universities, TAFEs, adult education, open learning and other
non-profit educational institutions, the rate was set by
the Copyright Tribunal
in 1985 and has since been indexed according to CPI rates. This rate is
currently about 3 cents per copy page,
although this has been discounted in
various agreements in the course of negotiations in exchange for administrative
(i) Profit run Educational
Institutions
As these institutions are not educational institutions for the purposes of
, a higher rate was offered by CAL in the contracts with them
and accepted by each individual profit run educational institution.
This rate is
between 3 and 9 cents per copy page.
(ii) Commonwealth Government Rates
The Commonwealth Government has a special statutory licence under
. The rates were negotiated over a period of four years between
the Attorney-General's Department for the Commonwealth Government
and CAL. This
rate is 1 cent per page for newspapers, 4 cents per page for magazines, 5 cents
per page for books and 12 cents per
page for journals.
(iii) State Government Rates
An agreement has not yet been entered into with any of the State Governments
but they have agreed to pay the same rates that were
negotiated with the
Commonwealth Government.
(iv) "Worship" Licences
The fee is currently 50 cents per congregation member plus $47 administration
fee with a minimum fee of $87 each year. This rate is
a result of negotiation
between individual churches and CAL. CAL has some doubts about the cost
efficiency of the church licence
and whether these rates are too low.
(v) Media Monitor Organisations
This rate was negotiated between Media Monitors Pty Ltd (a company that has
subsidiaries in each State) and CAL over a period of many
years. The rate is 5%
of their invoiced fees to their customers or 6 cents per page for newspaper and
magazine articles. Copying
of journal articles is priced at a percentage of
subscription price due to the wide variation in subscription costs for journals.
These rates have been accepted by other media monitor companies.
(vi) Corporations
CAL has not yet concluded any licence agreement with any corporation,
although it has commenced negotiations with a significant number
of companies.
The Society has sent out a draft licence which provides for at a payment per
equivalent full-time employee. This rate
is still under negotiation.
Equity of process
As rates are set by negotiation with the licensee groups, this process seems
to be the most efficient and fair process available.
CAL's first rate, the rate
per page for copying by educational institutions was set by the Copyright
Tribunal in 1988. The rates
negotiated since then have taken that rate as a base
This is a useful model of rate setting: a governmental mechanism locating
a fair base and leaving it to the parties to negotiate the
actual rate.
13.1.5. PPCA
Licence fees for the broadcast of protected sound recordings are set in
negotiations with the following:
Broadcaster
Negotiated with
Commercial Radio
* FARB Members
* Non-FARB Members
Individual Radio Stations
Commercial TV
Community Radio
* CBAA Members
Members of CBAA
* Non CBAA Members
Individual Radio Stations
Satellite & other Broadcasters
Individual Broadcasters
Public Performance fees are increased annually to reflect the increase in the
consumer price index. Six months notice of intending
increases are given to the
various associations in accordance with the requirements of undertakings given
to the Trade Practices
Commission.
Equity and Efficiency of process
PPCA was of the view that their system of setting
public performance
rates is efficient in that it is done annually and mainly through relevant
associations e.g. AHA, RCA. The PPCA believes that the
rates are too low and
they are only increasing by CPI. (The company argued that this provides
certainty to users, but also gives
them the ability to negotiate if desired.
Users can easily forecast annual costs from PPCA. It noted that is rare that it
a complaint about the quantum of fees.)
PPCA was also of the view that the
fees are inadequate and
inequitable. In this, the company is undoubtedly correct. The artificially low
fee broadcasters pay PPCA
simply means that the fees are unfair to
and 5% of turnover.) PPCA is negotiating much higher rates with new
broadcasters. This will substantially increase income in the
Broadcasters are in no need of the protection offered by the present cap.
They are sufficiently well represented to be able to negotiate
market rates
without the protective arm of government interfering in that process. Experience
has shown that the best way of setting
rates is by inter-parties negotiation
with access to the Copyright Tribunal to determine matters that cannot be
resolved in that
It is recommended
that the ceiling on the
broadcast fee payable pursuant to
section 152
be removed forthwith.
13.2. EQUALITY OF FEES PAID FOR THE USE OF
13.2.1. AMCOS
In general the royalties and fee structures are the same for all users.
Occasionally, subject to Board approval, charitable bodies
are given access to
Advertising and synchronisation licences negotiated through the Society are
set at the rates stipulated by the copyright owner.
The use of Production Music is subject to negotiation. Factors taken into
consideration when licensing include:
• Medium of exploitation
• Territory for clearance
• Volume of music used
• Frequency of the usage i.e. TV series
• Market forces i.e. comparison to cost of commissioned and/or
published music
• Production budget
• Client involved e.g. charity
13.2.2. APRA & PPCA
At APRA and PPCA, all licensees falling within an identifiable class to which
a licence scheme applies, pay according to the formula
for payment set out in
that licence scheme. A summary of all of the APRA's existing licence schemes is
provided in the materials
accompanying the Report.
Although this may be seen as inflexibility, it is difficult to see how they
could cost effectively do it any other way. Indeed, given
that so many licensees
are commercial competitors, it is probably important that each licensee falling
within an identifiable class,
be dealt with in exactly the same way.
13.2.3. AVCS & CAL
Both AVCS and CAL have had to show considerable flexibility in their attitude
to setting rates. In both societies there is a considerable
difference in the
rates charged between various types of educational sector for the use of the
same rights. In other words, within
each educational sector, licensees will pay
the same amount for the same use of rights but there may be differences between
This has been partly necessary in order to establish the remuneration
system at all. Persuading the sectors to participate has demanded
this flexible
13.3. DEGREE OF GOVERNMENT CONTROL OVER THE
LICENSING PROCEDURES
There is no specialised Government control over the quantum of rates or the
manner in which they are set. Two mechanisms are relevant
however: (i) The Trade
Practices Commission Authorisation procedure, and (ii) the Copyright
13.3.1. AMCOS
On 30 December 1977 the Attorney-General, Senator Peter Durack, requested
that the Copyright Tribunal hold an Inquiry in relation
to the royalty payable
in respect to records in order to determine an equitable statutory royalty for
the compulsory mechanical licensing
system. At the preliminary hearing on 6th
November 1978, leave was given to the Australian Copyright Owners (ACO) to
present a case
on behalf of the Fellowship of Australian Composers, the
Composers Guild of Australia, and the Australian Music Publishers Association
Ltd, and to the Australian Record Industry Association. The Copyright Tribunal
published a report detailing its findings, entitled
"Report of the Inquiry by
the Copyright Tribunal into the Royalty Payable in Respect of Records
Generally." The ACO was successful
in gaining an increase in the royalty
AMCOS was also a party to the application by the Private Audio Copyright
Collecting Society Limited (PACCS) for the determination
of a rate for
remuneration under
of the Act. The hearings were abandoned after the
Blank Tape Royalty legislation was declared unconstitutional by the High
13.3.2. APRA
The Association has on several occasions initiated proceedings under
. These cases have related to:
• the ABC - on two occasions: 1981 and 1992
• the SBS - in 1981
• discotheques and dance clubs - in 1992
• aerobic classes - in 1993
• Australian commercial television stations - in 1993.
The Association has been a respondent to an application under
Act on one occasion, at the suit of FACTS in 1993.
13.3.3. AVCS
The Tribunal has not been involved with any of AVCS' rate setting. It has
been by negotiation.
13.3.4. CAL
The Copyright Tribunal can be used by CAL or licensees for the setting rates
for statutory licences (either educational or government)
but not for other
Department of Education of N.S.W. and
1985 the per page rate for copying in education was set. CAL also took
action against the Australian National University, University
of New South Wales
and University of Technology, Sydney in 1989 to establish a page rate for
copying of academic journals in universities.
That action was settled prior to
13.3.5. PPCA
Only PPCA has the benefit of a Trade Practices Commission Authorisation. Its
important appearance in the Copyright Tribunal was the
FM MMM case which set the
present broadcast performance rate. No party has taken PPCA to the Tribunal.
13.4. PUBLISHED MATERIAL AS TO RATES AND HOW
RATES ARE STRUCK
13.4.1. AMCOS
The prescribed rate as set down in the
is referred to in the
AMCOS brochure "A Guide to Mechanical Rights and the Concept of Copyright". This
is always included in information
forwarded to inquirers.
Record companies who are members of ARIA are informed of rates and changes in
any agreements by their industry association. Non-ARIA
companies entering into
full agreements are given the "Guide For The Payment Of Mechanical Royalties".
Sundry applicants are provided
with a Mechanical Copyright Licence Application
which contains all relevant information on rates.
Rates applicable to synchronisation clearances are not published as they are
set by negotiation.
Rates for the use of Production Music are published on the AMCOS Production
Music Rate Card which is available on request. The rate
card indicates that
rates are subject to negotiation.
Rates for the Special Event Video Licence are also published and available on
request as part of an information package.
Rates for commercial television broadcasters are set out on the FACTS rate
card and are distributed to stations by FACTS.
13.4.2. APRA
All existing licence schemes are available to the public in printed form.
Similarly, if any member of the public wishes to be supplied
with a copy of a
Tribunal decision, it is supplied. If any licensee falling within a particular
licence scheme has queries concerning
the origin of the scheme or the rationale
for charges, there was evidence that the Association makes an effort to explain
those things
and, if required, to provide the inquirer with copies of documents
that may be relevant, (for example, correspondence with some representative
with whom negotiations may have been conducted).
13.4.3. AVCS
The Society publishes the rates and how they are struck, in various
publications including the Information for Members booklet and
newsletter.
13.4.4. CAL
Information as to the rate per page in licence schemes generally is
available. However, many of CAL's actual payment rates are confidential
CAL and the licensee concerned. CAL is the only Society that maintains this
confidentiality. The rationale for this apparent
failure of transparency is that
these are commercially negotiated and therefore commercially sensitive.
13.4.5. PPCA
Published tariff rates are available to the public on request. These are sent
with letters to prospective and renewing licensees.
RECOMMENDATIONS
* that consideration be given to the repeal of the present system of
record-keeping provided by the
in relation to the educational use
of audio-visual materials.
* that the ceiling on the broadcast fee
payable pursuant to
section 152
be removed.
PROCESSES/TECHNIQUES USED TO
QUANTIFY ROYALTIES
14.1. AMCOS
14.1.1. Licensing Of Records
14.1.2. Television & Radio Licences
14.1.3. Production Music - Studios
14.1.4. Schools Photocopying Licence
14.1.5. Overseas Societies
14.1.6. Mechanical & Video (% Of Gross Revenue) Blanket Licences
14.1.7. Music Videos For Retail Sale
14.1.8. Synchronisation Clearances
14.1.9. Student Film & Video Licences
14.1.10. Special Event Video Blanket Licences
14.1.11. Dance School Blanket Licences
14.3.1. Distributable Amount
14.3.2. Allocation of Royalties
14.3.3. Process Review
14.3.4. Frequency Of Distributions
14.6. TRAINING SUPPLIED TO PARTICIPANTS IN SAMPLING PROCESS
14.6.1. AMCOS
14.6.2. APRA
14.6.3. AVCS
14.6.4. CAL
14.6.5. PPCA
14.7. ALLOCATION OF PERCENTAGES BETWEEN THE VARIOUS COPYRIGHT
14.8. DETERMINATION OR APPROVAL OF SAMPLING
SYSTEM USED BY THE SOCIETY
There are a number of different techniques by which the societies determine
how much each rights owner will receive. Some are one-off
licences where the
rights owner will receive the negotiated fee, less whatever administrative fee
is payable. Most, however, are
blanket licences where the fee is much more
complicated to determine.
One of the most common complaints about collecting societies seems to stem
from the rights owner's lack of understanding of how his
or her royalty cheque
was arrived at. It is very simple when the transaction is a one-off licence. We
can readily understand that
a negotiation has taken place and that a particular
fee has been agreed upon. However, when the size of the licensing transaction
necessarily huge, such as the photocopying needs of educational institutions or
the public need for live performance of music,
it is economically inefficient to
account to rights owners on a strict pay-for-use basis. All that one can
reasonably expect is a
process which is equally fair (or unfair) to all owners
of the relevant rights. This demands that the process be statistically
Unfortunately, statistic-based schemes are difficult for the uninitiated to
understand. They are also not particularly easy to describe
with simplicity. For
this reason, there is much adverse comment about the allocation processes used
by societies which require the
use of sampling techniques.
14.1. AMCOS
14.1.1. Licensing Of Records
After being issued with an RRA, the record company is required to supply
AMCOS with sales reports on or before the sixtieth day from
the end of each
accounting period. The accounting periods are three month periods ending on 31
March, 30 June, 30 September and 31
December. The sales reports indicate the
quantity sold of each format of a particular catalogue number for the accounting
and the nominated retail or dealer price. Some clients provide their
sales reports on disc.
AMCOS generates an invoice on the basis of the information in the sales
reports and the RRA. This indicates the total royalty payable.
The companies pay
the royalties to AMCOS.
The AMCOS computer allocates the money to each work taking into account:
• number of units sold;
• selling prices;
• the number of tracks on the record; and
• the appropriate royalty rate.
All money allocated to that work is then divided up amongst all the owners of
the work according to their percentage ownership.
Small companies and individuals wishing to license musical works for release
onto records are referred to as "sundry clients". They
are required to submit a
Mechanical Copyright Licence Application with details of the works to be
released. They too are issued an
RRA but they are invoiced on the basis of the
number of units manufactured. Payment is expected before the product is sold or
distributed.
Royalties are paid out to the copyright owner according the same
process outlined above.
14.1.2. Television & Radio Licences
Network Television:
Networks are issued with a blanket licence invoice every quarter in arrears.
This licenses Network Stations and their Affiliates for
the use of Published and
Production Music in programs and promos made by them; and Network Stations only
for the use of Production
Music in advertisements produced by them.
Cue sheets detailing all uses of music covered by the agreement are required
to be submitted to AMCOS as soon as is practicable, but
in no case later than
six weeks after production. Essentially, distribution is based on three months
worth of cue sheets divided
into that quarter's payment.
Until this year AMCOS received and entered cue sheets from each station. All
program cue sheet information is now provided to AMCOS
by APRA on disc.
For each work, the duration of each separate music cue is entered. Each 30
seconds of music or part thereof, is recognised as one
unit. The computer sums
the total number of units raised in all productions for a particular blanket
licence and divides the total
into the blanket licence amount. Each unit is
thereby allocated a dollar amount on a pro rata basis.
Production Music usages in promos and advertisements attract a double
Unaffiliated Television Stations:
Unaffiliates are issued with a blanket licence every year in advance. This
licenses these stations for the use of Published and Production
programs, promos and advertisements.
The reporting and distribution calculations of cue sheets are treated the
same as for Network Stations.
Television Pay-Per-Use
Affiliated television stations are required to pay for every usage of
Production Music in advertisements on a per 30 second unit basis.
The rates for
these usages are outlined in the FACTS rate card. All other FACTS member
stations that do not elect to enter into a
blanket licence agreement with AMCOS
are required to pay for all usages of Published Music in programs and promos and
Music in programs, promos and advertisements on a per 30 second unit
ABC & SBS licences apply to radio and television. Invoices are issued to
the ABC every six months and to SBS annually. Cue sheet
information is supplied
on disc by APRA and royalties are distributed accordingly.
Commercial Radio Stations
Commercial radio stations are issued with a blanket licence yearly in
advance. This licenses the stations for the use of Published
and Production
Music in programs, Production Music in advertisements and provides for an
extension to the ephemeral right.
Information on the use of Production Music in commercials is supplied to
AMCOS on disc from APRA. Each 30 seconds of music or part
thereof, is recognised
as one unit. Six months' worth of licence fees is divided into the total number
of units represented. Subsequently,
the number of units attributed to each work
determines the royalty pay out.
Narrowcast and Community Radio
Fees received from these stations are minimal and have been pooled with the
commercial radio distribution.
14.1.3. Production Music - Studios
For standard pay-per-use clients, Production Music is licensed on a per 30
second unit basis or part thereof (known as one unit).
The royalty rate
applicable is dependent on the "Licence Type" and "Territory" applied for in
respect of each production.
Studios that are making reproductions of Production Music are required to
enter into a Production Music Licensing Agreement with AMCOS.
(Clients that are
authorising these reproductions may also enter into an Agreement.) For each
production using Production Music,
the Licensee must submit a cue sheet within
28 days after the reproduction has occurred. This Licence Application/Cue Sheet
AMCOS of the party to be invoiced, and details the "Licence Type" and
"Territory for Clearance" applied for and the works, including
durations, used
in each production.
For each production, Production Music ownership is determined and the total
duration of music for each separate music cue is entered.
The computer converts
the durations to 30 second units and multiplies the number of units for each
work by the rate according to
the "Licence Type" and "Territory". These rates
can be found on the Production Music Rate Card. There is also a $5.00 service
payable on licences granted for each separate production.
An invoice is generated and forwarded to the appropriate party. Upon receipt
of moneys, the computer flags this invoice as ready for
distribution. Royalties
from these productions are distributed quarterly.
There are some clients who pay royalties on a percentage of gross revenue
basis, for example, Music on Hold operators. Their agreement
non-exclusive licence to reproduce and distribute and/or import and distribute
Production Music audio recordings in Australia.
For these productions, a royalty
equal to 10% of their gross revenue and a service fee for each separate
production is paid. This
applies irrespective of the duration of music used. For
each activity a Licence Application/Cue Sheet is completed. These cue sheets,
along with copies of invoices issued to the Licensee's client/s and a statement
showing royalties and licence fees payable in respect
to these photocopying
licence may not have been contemplated in the grant of print rights. The
question of allocation is somewhat
complicated owing to the variety of contracts
and commercial arrangements that prevail in the market-place.
14.1.4. Schools Photocopying Licence
The distribution of the share of photocopying fees under the AMCOS schools'
licence is governed by a resolution of the AMCOS Board
which adopted a report by
the Print Committee. (The Print Committee is made up of AMCOS members who
specialise in print or have large
print catalogues, together with major retail
representatives, who meet quarterly to review the schools agreement, discuss
affecting sheet music and make recommendations on print matters to the
AMCOS Board.)
It was noted that two separate rights holders are affected by the scheme: (a)
in the underlying musical work and (b) in the published
edition. The owner of
print rights, i.e., the owner of copyright in the published edition and the
print arrangement, is entitled
to a share to compensate for lost sales. The
owner of copyright in the underlying work is also compensated as the income from
right to print and sell copies of the work (or arrangement) in question.
Those recipients may in turn be obliged to account to writers/arrangers
publishers under the terms of their agreements. A distributor or sales agent is
not entitled to a share in the distribution.
If the publisher owns both the
print rights and the copyright in the underlying work or arrangement, they are
entitled to payment
based on the full page rate.
A control list of titles which occur in the sample is circulated to AMCOS
members who make claims in those two categories of ownership.
Where no claim is
made in one of those categories or for a whole title, it is placed on hold and
researched. If the titles are published
by an overseas publisher who is not
sub-published for this territory, the relevant overseas publisher is paid
The standard commission and expenses are deducted from fees collected and
then the remaining pool is divided into the total number
of pages copied
appearing in the data to obtain the page rate for distribution for the year in
It was resolved by the Board that the distribution be 50% to the print-right
owner and 50% to the owner of copyright in the underlying
work or works. The
print right owner is taken to be the holder for Australia of the exclusive
reproductions, are submitted to AMCOS
which uses this information to distribute
the royalties.
14.1.5. Overseas Societies
Enquiries listing details of the proposed recording are received from major
record companies and AMCOS Licensing Department. These
are checked for possible
claims, then details of the recording are entered into the computer and claims
are lodged with the Record
Company/AMCOS Licensing Department.
Prescribed Notices are received from the Record Company/AMCOS indicating the
works it controls, price of recording, rate payable per
track etc. These details
are added to the information already registered.
When quarterly royalty statements are received from the Major Record
Companies, the sales for each catalogue containing works controlled
by AMCOS are
keyed in and the computer calculates the amount that the Society should receive.
If this differs from the amount the
Society is being paid, AMCOS requests an
amendment from the Record Company.
Detailed royalty statements accompany remittances to affiliated
14.1.6. Mechanical & Video (% Of Gross Revenue)
Blanket Licences
A similar system to that used for the TV Blanket Licences is used for this
category. Moneys received from these blanket licences are
distributed according
to cue sheet information supplied from the clients. It is a requirement of
virtually all licence agreements
that clients supply lists of musical works
reproduced in each reporting period.
It is, however, not possible to obtain complete information from some
licensees and while every effort is made to distribute according
to actual usage
the only practical solution in some cases is by way of a sampling procedure.
Between 2,500 and 3,000 works are used
for each reporting period derived from a
cross-section of clients that exhibit a programming list representative of other
in the same category.
14.1.7. Music Videos For Retail Sale
The major record companies provide AMCOS with summarised statements of
payments due to copyright owners from the reproduction of musical
works in music
videos for retail sale. AMCOS checks and collates the information, draws cheques
and forwards them on to its members.
Non-major record companies account to AMCOS for music videos in the same way
as for records.
14.1.8. Synchronisation Clearances
Fees received are paid directly to the copyright owner. Note - the fee is set
by the copyright owner.
14.1.9. Student Film & Video Licences
Moneys are collected according to the AMCOS Board approved rate of $10.00 per
30 seconds and distributed to copyright owners on an
"as used" basis.
14.1.10. Special Event Video Blanket
This income is shared with ARIA as the licence includes the right to
reproduce the sound recordings. It is not feasible to get title
and composer
details from these licensees.
14.1.11. Dance School Blanket Licences
These licences are a recent innovation. No title and composer details are
Distribution processes have been developed by the AMCOS staff and are
reviewed by the Board. The process of distribution is based
on the principle
that payment should be linked to usage. Practical considerations dictate that it
is not possible to distribute moneys
from uses such as Special Event and Dance
School licences on this basis. In these cases the cost of determining royalties
attributable
to each work used would be greater than the distributable
Where data is supplied from elsewhere - for example AVCS, CAL, or APRA, AMCOS
quite reasonably, relies on their methodology.
The process by which income is quantified is very complex. It is described in
the Association's published Distribution Rules. Special
attention should be
given to the flow chart and accompanying explanatory guide prepared specially
for this Review and which are provided
in the supporting material to the
The distribution system involves a great number of interlocking and quite
complicated processes. No one person has been responsible
for devising all of
these processes. Ultimately the Board is responsible for a system which has
evolved over a considerable period
Distributions are made twice-yearly: in May/June for the six months to the
preceding 31 December, and in November/December for the
six months to the
preceding 30 June. The system, substantially in its present form, has been in
place for three years, but core aspects
of the approach to distribution have
been in place for many years.
The last major review of the overall system was conducted in 1992. That
review involved a five-stage process:
(i) the publication to the membership of a discussion paper;
(ii) the receipt and analysis of members' comments and submissions;
(iii) the making of decisions by the Board.
(iv) The Board's decisions were published to members in the Association's
newsletter.
(v) The decisions were implemented.
The scheme of allocation was devised by the Chief Executive of the Society
and approved by the Board of the Society. It has been in
existence since the
commencement of the statutory licensing scheme.
14.3.1. Distributable Amount
Regulation 23J(2) of the Regulations provides that the distributable amount
is the amount of equitable remuneration received by the
Society that is
attributable to that period (in accordance with the practice of the
For funds receivable from institutions under the sampling scheme, this
includes amounts referable to the accounting period whether
or not actually
received in that period. The Society will include sums attributable to the
period but received after the end of the
period without deduction of operating
expenses or other deductions where these amounts can be determined when the
accounts are prepared.
For funds received from record-keeping institutions, the amounts are
accounted on a cash receipts basis. This is done because the
amount that will be
received after the close of the period cannot be determined at year end to
permit accounting on an accrual basis.
At the end of each accounting period, the gross sum collected (including any
interest earned on the investment of these moneys) is
determined and deductions
for the following purposes are calculated in accordance with Article 13 of the
Articles of Association:
(i) the payment of all proper and reasonable expenses of and incidental to
the conduct, management and operation of the Society;
(ii) special purposes (including cultural or charitable purposes) as the
Board thinks conducive to furthering the interests of the
Society; and
(iii) a reserve to meet the anticipated future obligations of the
The sum remaining after the deductions in accordance with Article 13 is the
Distributable Amount for the relevant accounting period.
(To date, AVCS has not
established any general reserve, although it has made provisions in the accounts
for specific purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles.)
Scheme of Allocation
Article 14 (a) provides that the distributable amount in respect of an
accounting period is to be divided in accordance with the scheme
of distribution
determined by the Board for that accounting period having regard to:
(i) the nature and value of the relevant copyrights;
(ii) the effect of copying on the value or potential market for the relevant
(iii) the need to safeguard incentives for the future production of relevant
Distribution Categories
In the Scheme of Allocation determined by the Society in accordance with
Article 14(a), there are three "Distribution Categories"
in relation to
television programs and three in relation to radio programs.
For television programs, the Distribution Categories are:
(i) "Category A Program" means a program notified as such to the Society by
an owner of the copyright in the program or its representative
(a) principally intended to be used for educational purposes; or
(b) having a significant potential market for sale as an educational program,
and accepted by the Society as being a Category A program.
There are only twelve
Category A programs and the Society identifies them by title.
(ii) "Category B Program" means any program not falling within the
definitions of Category A Program or Category C Program.
(iii) "Category C Program" means a program classified by the Society as
* current affairs (magazine style current affairs)
* sports programs
* advertisements
For radio programs, the Distribution Categories are:
(i) "Music program" means a broadcast consisting principally of music
(ii) "Talk program" means a broadcast consisting principally of talk,
literary works or dramatic works, notwithstanding that music
may be included in
the program.
(iii) "Music/Talk" means programs featuring both music and talk.
In relation to allocations from the Samples Fund, television programs will be
classified only as Category B or Category C. Those programs
that are included in
Category A for the purposes of the Records Fund will be regarded as Category B
programs for the purposes of
the Samples Fund.
The IBNR Fund
An allocation (in past accounting periods equalling ten percent of the
Distributable Amount) is made to a separate fund known as the
Incurred But Not
Reported Fund (IBNR) in accordance with the Guidelines For Declared
Unlike the Records or Samples Fund, the Society does not allocate royalties
from the IBNR fund to a particular program copied by an
educational institution
under the statutory licence or film or literary, dramatic or musical work
incorporated in a program. Allocation
of royalties for the exercise of the
relevant copyright in a particular program will be made when a relevant
a claim that is accepted by the Society in accordance with
the Scheme of Distribution or when information becomes available to identify
potential share.
Distributions anticipated from this fund include:
(i) payment to a member of a share of the Distributable Amount being a share
already paid mistakenly to another member. Any amount
mistakenly paid to the
non-entitled member will be off-set against any entitlement that an overpaid
member may have in the future
under Article 15(e)(iii) of the Articles of
Association.
(ii) payment to a relevant copyright owner not otherwise specifically
provided for such as an owner of copyright in an artistic work
included in a
broadcast or footage and stills included in a broadcast (other than a news
broadcast).
(iii) payment to correct errors, including data entry errors.
(iv) payment based on late records submitted by a record-keeping institution
for the relevant accounting period after allocation has
been made to the Records
Fund. (This paragraph restates the distribution policy but in fact is not
applicable as the practice of
the Society is to include late returns in the
accounting period in which they are received).
(v) payments for ad hoc claims from members. For example, payment to a
disclosed in
samples. In such cases the Society would require evidence of substantial copying
either obtained by the Society itself
or from independent investigation.
A smaller percentage is likely to be allocated to the IBNR fund in future
accounting periods as the ten percent allocation is likely
to prove to be in
excess of requirements. Quite properly, a conservative sum was determined in the
early years of operation when
the likely allocations from the fund were
difficult to estimate.
Records and Samples Funds
After allocation is made to the IBNR fund, the Distributable Fund is divided
into the Records Fund and the Samples Fund.
The allocation to the Records Fund is that percentage which reflects the
proportion of the total equitable remuneration received for
the period under the
statutory scheme from institutions operating under a Remuneration Notice based
on the record-keeping system.
Similarly, the allocation to the Samples Fund is
that percentage of the total equitable remuneration received for the accounting
period from institutions operating under a Remuneration Notice based on the
Sampling System.
14.3.2. Allocation of Royalties
Article 15 of the Articles of Association of the Society provides that the
Board of the Society must determine for each accounting
period the entitlement
of a person to a share of the distributable amount under the scheme of
distribution. In exercising this power,
the Board must take all reasonable steps
to ensure that any person's entitlement to a share of the distributable fund is
equitably and accurately. In making this determination, the Board can
consider all relevant matters including the extent to which
the copying of the
relevant copyrights has occurred as disclosed by records or samples. In
practice, the extent to which the copying
of the relevant copyrights has
occurred (as disclosed by records or samples) is the only criterion considered
in determining the
allocation.
The Society must ensure that no owner is unduly advantaged or disadvantaged
by the maintenance of the IBNR fund. Accordingly, the
Society should devise a
procedure whereby owners who have a percentage of their earnings deducted for
IBNR purposes have the balance
of that money paid through to them incrementally
during the next two to four years.
Division by program
The records in each fund are collated so that the total number of minutes for
each program title and episode can be determined.
Subsequent to the abovementioned calculation, the following processes must be
undertaken:
(i) discounting the incidental advertising and "non-program" components
(including community service announcements, program promotions
and station
identifications) in programs copied from commercial television.
(a) The Society obtained information from the Australian Broadcasting
Tribunal (as it was then known). For instance, a sixty minute
program on a
commercial television station will generally only contain 45-48 minutes of
actual program matter. The effect of failing
to discount advertisements and
non-program material is to assume a longer duration for programs broadcast on
commercial stations
and thereby give a bias or weighting to them in favour of
programs transmitted by public broadcasters.
(b) The duration of non-program material on the ABC and SBS is substantially
less than on the commercial stations. The non-program
matter and advertising
also takes place at the end of a program and is not likely to be copied by an
educational institution when
copying the program in question.
(c) To address the imbalance between levels of non-program matter on public
and commercial television, certain percentages of 'minutes
copied' from programs
broadcast on commercial television are deducted.
(d) A sliding scale of percentages takes into account that a ten minute
segment has been copied which may not contain any advertisements
at all compared
to a full one hour program which is likely to contain up to 12-15 minutes of
non-program matter. The Society discounts
all copies of a program made from
commercial television broadcasts which exceed ten minutes in length by twenty
percent to the nearest
whole minute. The Society limits the discount to twenty
percent to reflect the minimal amount of non-program matter which is not
discounted from public television broadcasts. The factoring has the effect of
increasing the notional rate per minute for all programs
copied as revealed by
the sampling records.
This process is only applied to the Sampling Fund
. It does not apply
to the Records Fund as the record-keeping agreement provides that the
institution will deduct the minutes of non-program
matter in its calculation of
the duration of the copied program. In the records fund there is a direct
correlation between the minutes
for which royalties are collected and the
minutes for which royalties are paid.
nil allocation
- for the 1993 accounting period, the Society
determined that no royalties should be allocated to a very small number of
copied broadcasts
as it would be impossible to distribute these funds if
allocated. Circumstances in which a nil allocation was made include reports
institutions that did not identify a program title or transmission date and
subsequent inquiry failed to elicit this information.
"points" calculation
- each minute of copying recorded under the
record-keeping or sampling system is multiplied by a certain "factor" depending
Distribution Category of the program (whether Television A, B or C or
Radio) to arrive at a tally of "points".
(a) The following categories of programs have been attributed the following
Category C three points per minute
Category B ten points per minute
Category A eighteen points per minute
Radio ten points per fifteen minutes
(b) The ratio of 3:10:18:10 is the ratio of the copying rate for Distribution
Category C, B and A television programs and radio respectively.
(c) The different weightings or "points" reflect the different collection
rates described elsewhere in this Report
(d) The total Records Fund is divided by the number of points in total to
establish an amount of money per point.
(e) The value of one point in the Records Fund for the previous three
distribution periods has been as follows:
(e) The Samples Fund is similarly divided by the number of points in total to
establish an amount of money per point. The value of
one point in the Samples
Fund for the previous three distribution periods has been as follows:
Division by work/subject matter
Once an allocation per program title has been established, allocation is then
made to the various copyrights subsisting in the programs.
The division as
between the copyrights in films, sound recordings, literary and dramatic works
and musical works is as follows:
(i) Television Programs:
* as to the copyright in films 70%
* as to the copyright in literary and dramatic works 22.5%
* as to the copyright in musical works 7.5%
(ii) Music programs on radio:
* as to the copyright in musical works 33 1/3%
* as to the copyright in sound recordings 66 2/3%
[Note that the reference to sound recordings is a reference to the recording
embodying the musical work and not the recording of the
program as a whole.]
(iii) Non-music programs on radio:
* as to the copyright in the sound recording 50%
* as to the copyright in literary and dramatic works 50%
(iv) Music/talk programs on radio:
* as to the copyright in sound recordings of music 25%
* as to the copyright in the musical works 25%
* as to the copyright in literary and/or dramatic works 25%
• as to the copyright in the sound recording (comprising the program)
If a program copied from a television broadcast does not contain a literary
or dramatic work, the royalties allocated to this work
will then be allocated to
the owner of the relevant copyright in the film. Examples of this are found in
game shows broadcast on
television.
Any royalties allocated to a work or subject matter incorporated in a
broadcast copied under the statutory scheme which is in fact
in the public
domain (and therefore not entitled to the benefit of the Part VA licence) will
be deposited in the trust account and
dealt with in accordance with Article 16
of the Articles of Association.
The allocations for music copyright owners are set aside by the Society and
distributed with the assistance of APRA. AVCS supplies
to APRA a list of all
programs copied, showing program title, episode information, broadcast date and
broadcast channel. APRA then
undertakes an identification process from its
The APRA system then allocates credit points to each musical work contained
in each program in accordance with its standard weighting
system, namely:
(i) Duration of work - points are awarded for each second of a work's
duration; and
(ii) Type of music use - points for 'featured' music remain at 100% with
points for 'background' and 'theme' music being reduced by
Each musical work in every identified program will then have an allocation of
credit points which will be divided pro-rata into the
distributable amount
referable to this pool to end up with a dollar amount due to copyright owner of
the musical work. The result
of this approach is that the total money available
for musical works is pooled and then shared pro-rata, according to the number
credit points each work has accrued. In this way, a one minute work in a
category C program will earn the same amount as a one
minute work in a category
14.3.3 Process Review
Review of scheme of distribution
The scheme of distribution is reviewed on a regular basis by the Society and
the Board. Since the formulation of this policy, it has
been reviewed on the
following occasions:
* 28 May 1992
* 23 July 1992
* 10 December 1992
* 19 January 1994
Review of distribution policy
The Scheme of Distribution is under constant review and was last amended on
19 January 1994. Amendments to the distribution policy
are made by the Board of
Directors after consideration of recommendations by management.
14.3.4. Frequency Of Distributions
The allocation process is performed annually. Once completed, the Society
will distribute to its members as soon as the member guarantees
to the Society
that it is the relevant copyright owner.
Article 70 (a) of the Articles of Association of the Society provides that
the royalties allocated to a program shall be distributed
as soon as is
reasonably possible once it is ascertained that the member is the relevant
For this reason, the Society may distribute royalties to its members several
times in respect of the one distribution period as:
(i) the member may be subsequently referred to the Society as being an
interested party in the program; and
(ii) the member provides additional warranties to the Society.
Each time a member receives a payment of royalties from the Society, the
member receives a distribution statement. The distribution
statement is the same
for each of three distribution periods.
The Society prefers to negotiate with educational sectors to use a sampling
system rather than full record keeping. Its sampling system
is a form of
record-keeping by rotation, wherein a sample of representative institutions is
drawn to keep records for short periods.
This system allows the Society to be
continually monitoring the particular educational sector without the need for
major administrative
procedures to be put in place in each individual
educational institution on a permanent basis. The results from this on-going
can then be extrapolated across the whole sector for the purpose of
determining what level of usage of copyright material is occurring
within that
It is believed that sampling creates a climate that assists in achieving the
Society's objective of full and accurate disclosure of
copying practices.
The sample survey which CAL operates in education has been operational since
1988. Given that any sampling method is an inconvenience
and an annoyance to
those being sampled, CAL has made a genuine attempt to create a system that is
equitable, cost efficient and
administratively acceptable to licensees. By and
large, they have succeeded.
Criticisms of the sampling techniques adopted are generally made by
individual authors or by smaller regional publishers. These criticisms
the fact that CAL's sample is a sample and may therefore miss some works,
particularly works less frequently copied. Another
criticism is that the survey
for schools and TAFE institutions rotates among states. In each year, two or
three states are sampled.
It would be too costly, in proportion to revenue, for
CAL's school sample to include every state each year.
There was discussion in 1992-1993 about the representation of various states
in the survey. The first survey cycle for schools was
completed at end 1991 and
for 1992, the survey was redesigned to include Queensland more frequently, which
is neither a large or
a small state.
The process was last reviewed in July 1993. No changes were recommended. A
new computer system is being implemented and once that
computer system is fully
operational, its performance and the performance of the distribution will be
AGB McNair advised in and developed the initial process for distribution with
CAL. Arthur Andersen was retained to consult in preparing
the specification for
the computer systems for distribution and to ensure that a proper audit trail
was structurally instituted.
Subsequently, the CAL Board of Directors have
determined the total distribution pool. That is used as a basis to calculate the
per copied page. The present system has been in use since 1989.
The amount each copyright owner receives from the distribution is determined
by the number of pages of their works recorded as having
been copied in the
previous year's sample survey of copying. Separate pools for each licence group
are established and the total
number of pages recorded as having been copied in
the sample survey for that licence is divided into the pool. This determines the
payable rate per page for that year. For example, in 1993 the total schools pool
was $6,029,751.34; the total number of pages was
1,342,388 and the per page
payment rate was $4.492.
The per page rate for each pool is multiplied by the number of pages of each
copying record of the member's works. The royalty payable
for each copying
record is added to arrive at the total due to the copyright owner.
In the past, independent reviewers such as Arthur Andersen have considered
the distribution process. Ongoing testing and implementation
is be undertaken by
CAL's computer consultants, Sequel, and CAL's in-house highly trained
programmers and computer administrators.
The method of distribution is as follows:
(i) All licensees are requested to supply to the PPCA details of all
protected sound recordings and music videos which have been released
(ii) All local artists who have performed as major artists, (not session
musicians who have been paid fees as backing musicians,)
are requested to
register all recordings on which they perform with the company.
(iii) At the present time, PPCA obtains from each licensee the wholesale
sales value of protected classical recordings as a percentage
of total protected
sound recordings sold by them during the year ended 30 June.
(iv) The Company purchases from APRA their weighted logs compiled by them for
the year ended 30 June.
(v) The net distributable revenue is then allocated as follows:
(a) 12.5% is paid to the PPCA Performers Trust;
(b) an amount equal to the percentage of classical music sales collected in
item (iii) is allocated and paid to the copyright owners
on a sales percentage
(vi) the balance is then allocated on the basis of the logs. The funds are
distributed as follows:
Australian Recordings
Overseas Recordings (protected)
20% to the appropriate Australian artist (or split across group or part of
group if registered
100% to record company
80% to record company (or if no artist registered 100% thereof to record
This allocation system was devised by the company staff. It is based on the
English company's (PPL) method of distribution and on
an IFPI/FIM/FIA
arrangement.
As a result of an internal review which took place in 1991, the method of
distribution was changed to the current method in 1993.
Under the previous
method, distribution was made only to the PPCA Trust and the record companies.
It was based on the reported sales
value of protected sound recordings. The
gross payment was made to the Company's auditor who calculated each rights
owners' royalty
entitlement and prepared the cheques.
This present method of distribution should be formally reviewed by the
undertaking of a systems audit by a suitable firm of accountants
(rather than
internal staff) after the December 1994 distribution.
Two years of operation
will have given all participants an opportunity to have informed views as to the
strengths and weaknesses
of the new system.
14.6. TRAINING SUPPLIED TO PARTICIPANTS IN
SAMPLING PROCESS
It is important that persons working within organisations which are being
sampled, receive training which not only helps them to fulfil
the mechanical
functions that are required of them but also gives them an understanding of why
it is important that they fully participate.
Training makes the data gathering
more accurate.
14.6.1. AMCOS
Schools Photocopying Agreement - Day long training sessions are provided to
the Principals and Copyright Records Officers from the
schools selected for the
sample by AGB McNair and representatives from the three collecting Societies,
CAL, AMCOS and AVCS. On-going
training, monitoring and assistance are provided
by AGB McNair field auditors during the sample period.
14.6.2. APRA
APRA does not have field personnel working in the sampling area. This is
outsourced.
14.6.3. AVCS
Every educational institution which participates in the sampling system is
provided with training prior to the survey taking place.
As the survey periods
are generally for a term (ten or so weeks), training is provided in each
educational sector several times throughout
The training is in the format of a seminar for the duration of approximately
four or five hours. Training seminars are conducted in
each State where the
survey is being undertaken. These seminars are generally attended by two
representatives from each individual
educational institutions participating in
the seminar, namely the person who will be responsible for the actual sample
the institution (known as Copyright Records Officer) and a person
occupying a management position. The Society recognised the importance
total commitment from the managerial staff of an educational institution to the
successful operation of the sample process.
It is for this reason that the
agreements between the Society and licensees demands that this dual attendance
at the seminars is
compulsory.
The Society conducts combined training seminars with Copyright Agency Ltd for
all schools and for TAFE Colleges as far as possible.
The training sessions are
conducted on a joint basis with CAL as the sample is in respect of both print
and off-air broadcast copying.
It is in the interest of the sampling system to
conduct such joint samples wherever possible to reduce the frequency with which
educational institutions is required to comply with the record-keeping
obligations of the sample. As the university sector has only
been participating
in the sampling system since the beginning of 1994, any training sessions for
universities are being conducted
primarily by the Society individually. They are
conducted on the campuses of the relevant universities.
The importance with which the Society regards such training sessions is
reflected by the fact that they are attended by either the
Chief Executive, the
Business Affairs Manager or the Solicitor of the Society.
The Society seeks to impress upon attendees at the training sessions the
critical importance of the role of the sample to the overall
functioning of the
Society and more importantly, the payment of royalties to owners of rights for
the use of their material. It is
important that attendees at the training
session understand the correlation between payment of royalties to authors of
audio-visual
material and the creation of additional educational resources.
At each training session:
(i) the introduction of the broadcast copying scheme in the
the role of AVCS in administering the scheme;
(ii) the agreement between AVCS and the administering body administering the
educational institution;
(iii) the rights and obligations of the educational institution under the
agreement, the
and Regulations; and
(iv) the allocation, identification and distribution process which flows from
the information supplied during the sample period.
Representatives of AGB McNair, the independent survey authority contracted by
AVCS to conduct the survey, also attend the training
seminars. The AGB McNair
representative explains every form which is to be completed during the sample
period and the purpose of
every form. The attendees are advised of the timetable
for the sample and every step of the process.
14.6.4. CAL
Staff representatives from each institution participating in the sample
survey are contacted and attend a briefing session prior to
the survey period.
The briefing sessions held throughout the country are an important part of the
conduct of the survey. They are
normally one day seminars conducted by a
representative from AGB McNair, a senior representative from CAL and
representatives from
the relevant educational systems and institutions.
At each briefing session, a representative from the peak body introduces the
system and discusses the need for the co-operation of
each sample participant.
The representative from the peak body explains how the institutions are required
by the terms of their licence
agreement to co-operate in the survey and that as
a whole the education system is in favour of the sampling process continuing.
participation of a representative from the educational system being sampled
is crucial to the level of co-operation obtained from
the institutions.
The senior representative from CAL discusses the terms of the agreement
between CAL and the relevant educational institution and the
role and operation
of CAL. The role of the CAL representative is to motivate the staff of the
sample institution or faculty into
willing co-operation by explaining the
importance of the survey to authors and publishers. The CAL representative also
explains copyright,
discusses what CAL is, explains the copying limits under the
licence, and answers questions about copying practices. However, because
important that the photocopying habits of the staff of the institution do not
change simply because the institution is being
surveyed, the CAL representative
explains that CAL provides an indemnity during the period of the survey for any
copying which exceeds
the limits of the licence. A package explaining what CAL
does and is, together with a copy of the latest issue of CAL's newsletter,
copying limits, and some general information on copyright and CAL, is presented
to the representatives from the institutions.
The representative from the statistician, AGB McNair explains the importance
of accurate sampling and the need for the support of
all staff if the results of
the sample are to be of use. Also presented is a detailed description of the
sample procedure. AGB McNair
documents are explained to the institution
representatives. The photocopying record form is discussed in detail, with the
representative discussing and providing examples for each column
required to be completed by the institution. Organisational details
discussed, for example the location and number of photocopying machines used by
staff. Several common issues are also dealt
with, such as that the "no. of pages
copied" column refers to the number of pages of the original material which is
copied and that
the most important title information is the name of the
publication rather the name of the article itself in regards to newspapers
periodicals.
A package from AGB McNair is also provided to each attendee. The kit explains
the recording scheme and provides guidelines for staff
members. Copies of the
documents, forms, and signs to be utilised in the survey process are included in
Business cards for the CAL and the AGB representative are provided for each
attendee and all are invited to make enquires either prior
to, or during the
survey period, or at any other time that information is required from CAL. A 008
telephone number is provided for
their use. In addition AGB McNair field
auditors remain in constant contact with the institution during the survey
period to ensure
that the data collection processes progress as smoothly as
possible. AGB field auditors visit the institution to place the survey
just prior to survey commencement and thereafter every one to two weeks to
collect the records at which time the records
are checked for accuracy and
advice can be given.
14.6.5. PPCA
No training is given or necessary. PPCA relies entirely on the APRA
14.7. ALLOCATION OF PERCENTAGES BETWEEN THE
VARIOUS COPYRIGHT OWNERS
One area of complaint amongst society members is the allocation of various
weightings to particular types of rights or uses. The basic
systems of income
allocation used by APRA, PPCA and AVCS, have at their core, such weightings.
It is not suggested that weightings in themselves are improper. Nor is it the
function of this Report to comment as to whether the
present weightings are
fair. However societies must be very careful as to the methods by which they
come to these weightings and
how they vary them. Suggestions that various
weightings have been influenced by the personal interests of key board members
made but unproven. Other submissions indicated resentment that members had
been insufficiently consulted when weighting changes were
Confronted with this, societies should not merely reject the criticism as
unfounded but rather, acknowledge that these decisions have
a great influence on
large sectors of their membership and accordingly, that such decisions must be
made with an abundance of caution.
No change should be made to weighting
systems without prior notification of the membership and particular notification
of all members
who will be peculiarly affected. Those members should be given
full explanation of the changes mooted and given an opportunity to
comment. The
advice of an independent statistician should be obtained, and certainly, no
board member who is likely to benefit from
the proposed changes should be
permitted to vote in relation to the change.
14.6. DETERMINATION OR APPROVAL OF SAMPLING
SYSTEM USED BY THE SOCIETY
Given that the fairness of the sampling system is one of the greatest
concerns of all rights owners and rights users,
the societies which use
sampling, should retain an consultant that is independent of the society and any
survey company that is on
retainer, to give an opinion as to the validity of the
sampling techniques adopted. Such review process should take place every three
to five years.
It is not sufficient to leave such an important matter to the good will of
the society's staff or the staff of the survey company
which devises and/or
carries out the sampling tasks.
As is discussed elsewhere in this Report, the Copyright Tribunal has the
a licence scheme. But
does not give a
of a society the power to take a grievance
determination of
what is reasonable as between a licensor and a licensee. It
does not extend to a determination of what is reasonable as between a
society and its members.
15. APRA & CAL
SAMPLING SCHEMES
15.1. APRA'S SAMPLING SCHEMES
15.1.1. Television
15.1.2. Radio
15.1.3. Non-Broadcast Categories
15.2. CAL'S SAMPLING SCHEMES
15.2.1. Non-sampling errors
15.3. SAMPLING ERRORS
15.4. SUMMARY
The Inquiry investigated the statistical aspects of the sampling schemes used
by APRA and CAL. These are the two societies which rely
most heavily upon
15.1. APRA'S SAMPLING SCHEMES
The report entitled "APRA Sampling Systems", which is supplied with this
Report, was provided by APRA. It explains the sampling used
by APRA as part of
its administration of the Performing Right in copyright music for Australia, New
Zealand and Fiji.
Statistical sampling, rather than a complete census, is generally used to
estimate the number of times each piece of music is performed
or broadcast. The
royalty payments to copyright owners are made on the basis of these estimates.
Effective sampling schemes of both
the total amount of copyright material (to
determine total royalties due) and the mix of material (to allow accurate
distribution
of royalties) are needed in order for these estimates to be
APRA categorises the media by which music can be broadcast or performed
(i) Television, including the three major network stations, the ABC and
regional stations.
(ii) Radio including commercial radio stations, the ABC and community (or
public) radio.
(iii) Non-broadcast categories including live performances, dance clubs,
films and in-flight entertainment.
APRA's report describes in detail the sampling schemes used in each of these
three media. Comments on these schemes appear below.
15.1.1. Television
A 100% analysis (or complete census) is undertaken of all fully networked
programs shown on the 3 commercial networks and the ABC.
Local programming is
analysed from a sample of programming logs collected for a predetermined number
of weeks in each year. Due to
the relatively small number of television stations
and the extensive sampling, this scheme is likely to result in an accurate
of both the total amount of copyright works broadcast, and the mix of
material used.
15.1.2. Radio
Obtaining an effective sampling scheme for the use of copyright material by
radio stations is more complicated that television, since
there are many more
radio stations than television stations. This means that an accurate sampling
scheme for radio has to be much
more extensive and sample from a much larger
number of sources. The sampling scheme used with commercial radio and for ABC
is such that there is a better than 95% chance that a work broadcast 100
times per year will be included in the respective sample.
The most challenging area in radio in which to obtain accurate estimates of
the number of times a work is broadcast is Community (or
public) radio. Due to
the nature of local radio, a relatively large number of works are broadcast a
small number of times. Since
the total APRA licence fees in this area are small,
totalling around $200,000, the cost of an accurate sample would be larger than
the total licence fees. APRA has thus adopted the strategy of sampling the 12
community radio stations with a current annual licence
fee of $5,000 or more.
This system appears reasonable as a way of balancing sampling costs against
potential royalties.
15.1.3. Non-Broadcast Categories
Concerts and the in-flight audio programs on Qantas and Ansett receive a 100%
analysis. Royalties payments are based only on those
films showing in cinemas in
Sydney at the time.
The most difficult areas to in which obtain an accurate sample in this
category are discos or dance clubs and clubs or hotels with
live artists,
because of the large number of potential venues. In this case an estimate of the
total royalties due can be obtained
by estimating hours of performance.
Obtaining an accurate estimate of the mix of material is more difficult, due to
the large number
of venues. For live artists, the mix of material is estimated
by equal weighting of two sources;
• radio logs, since it is considered that the mix of music at these
venues is comparable to music played on the radio.
• logs provided by performers.
Give the diversity of venues, this system would seem to be a reasonable way
of determining the mix of royalties.
15.2. CAL'S SAMPLING SCHEMES
The reports entitled "The 1993 Copyright Review Study", "The 1993 School
provided by CAL. These
materials are in the materials accompanying the Report. These reports explain
the sampling schemes used in
tertiary institutions, schools and TAFE colleges
across Australia. The purpose of the sampling is two-fold, namely:
(i) To estimate the volume of copying of copyright materials, since this is
the basis of the licence fees paid to CAL; and
(ii) To provide CAL with an information base from which it can distribute
licence fees collected to copyright owners on the basis
of the number of copies
Effective sampling schemes are needed in order for these estimated volumes to
be reliable.
The material provided by CAL discusses the reliability of the estimates from
the School, TAFE and University samples. Comments on
these schemes appear
Estimates of the total amount and mix of copyright material reproduced by
photocopying presents a much more difficult problem than
music royalties. This
is because the total amount of material broadcast by radio or television is
determined by the existing capacity,
i.e., 24 hours a day, so the total use of
addition, there
are a limited number of users of copyright material (limited by
the number of television or radio stations, or the number of performance
venues), and this number can be estimated fairly precisely.
Within institutions, every photocopier is a potential user of copyright
material, and the use of each might vary from essentially
nothing to continuous
use. In these circumstances it is very difficult to assess with any degree of
accuracy the total use of copyright
material. In addition it is likely that
there will be more diversity between photocopy machines than between electronic
live performances, since the diversity of the source material (written
material) is so great, and use will vary enormously between
institutions eg.,
between a public library and a tertiary institution. This means that a sampling
scheme based on one institution
may not be able to be applied with confidence to
another institution, unless it has a similar range of materials and users.
15.2.1. Nonsampling errors
CAL has in place a number of initiatives to minimise nonsampling errors, that
is, errors which may introduce bias into the samples
collected. These
initiatives include:
(i) Training staff at institutions included in the sample about what is
required of them.
(ii) Checking for discrepancies between the amount of copying recorded on
photocopying record forms for each machine with that taken
from each machine's
counter. Discrepancies of more than 10% are investigated.
(iii) Comparing the percentage of copyright material copied across
institutions in order to detect under reporting.
15.3. SAMPLING ERRORS
The situation in which CAL operates is much more complex than that facing
APRA. In particular in APRA's case, it is relatively straightforward
to estimate
the total volume of copyright material being broadcast and thus to obtain an
accurate estimate of the total royalties
due. Thus the issue for APRA is to
determine the split of total licence fees into royalties due to the various
This breakdown should be able to be estimated with reasonable
accuracy by the existing sampling schemes. Since in APRA's case, there
limited number of sources from which copyright music can be broadcast or
performed and the provision of programming logs is
a relatively straightforward
task. Thus, for example, standard calculations can be used to calculate the
probability that a work
broadcast 100 times per year is included in the sample
In contrast, CAL is faced with the fact that there are a very large number of
photocopiers in schools, TAFE colleges and universities
on which multiple copies
of an enormous variety of copyright material are made. In this situation, the
assumptions behind the standard
probability calculations are invalid and a more
complex probability model would need to be developed in order to calculate the
probability
that a particular type of copyright material is included in the
sample. (See accompanying material for a detailed discussion of this
In CAL's case the licence fees paid by educational institutions is based on
an estimate of the number of pages copies per student.
Thus, it is important
that such estimates are relatively precise. In the case of schools, the total
volume of licensed copying per
student in 1993 was 111 pages. The relative
standard error of this figure was calculated by AGB McNair to be 3.4%. (See
accompanying
material which also contains the result for TAFE colleges). Thus,
we can say with 95% confidence that the total volume of licensed
copying per
student was somewhere between 111 Â± 7 pages, that is, between 104 and
118 pages. At the request of the Inquiry,
these calculations were also performed
for the university samples since, from the comments above, it cannot be assumed
that the amount
of copying is the same in these different segments.
15. 4. SUMMARY
The sampling schemes used by APRA appear to be soundly based, and should
provide a relatively precise estimate of the total amount
of copyright material
used, and the mix of the material.
Due to the inherently greater potential for copying and the greater diversity
of the material, estimating both the total amount of
material and the mix is
much more difficult for CAL. They appear to have put in place effective measures
to minimise nonsampling
error, but it is recommended that calculations should be
undertaken to estimate the precision of the estimate of copyright material
per student for universities.
16. COLLECTION OF
16.1. GROSS SUMS COLLECTED
16.1.1. AMCOS
16.1.2. APRA
16.1.3. AVCS
16.1.4. CAL
16.1.5. PPCA
Collecting societies are big business. In 1994, they will collect
approximately $85,000,000. The collection pattern indicates that
this figure
will continue to increase. This is a blunt indicator of the importance of
societies in the cultural economy of Australia.
16.1. GROSS SUMS COLLECTED
16.1.1. AMCOS
$12,484,303
$10,352,562
16.1.2. APRA
The breakdown of income for the last five years was as follows:
Public Perf
16.1.3. AVCS
The growth of AVCS is readily apparent from the following table which shows
the gross revenue collected as a result of agreements
between AVCS and
educational institutions in accordance with
$5,387 343 (est)
16.1.4. CAL
10,900,000 (est)
16.1.5. PPCA
The following figures differ from published figures as they include interest
# Possibly understated by investment income.
ENFORCEMENT
17.1. PERCEIVED ACCURACY OF REPORTING
17.1.1. AMCOS
17.1.2. APRA
17.1.3. AVCS
17.1.4. CAL
17.1.5. PPCA
17.2. POLICING OF RIGHTS BY THE SOCIETY
17.2.1. AMCOS
17.2.2. APRA
17.2.3. AVCS
17.2.4. CAL
17.2.5. PPCA
17.1. PERCEIVED ACCURACY OF
17.1.1. AMCOS
The audit program has proved to be very successful in discovering
under-payments by licensees - which underlines the need to have
a regular audit
process. Confidentiality requirements of its agreements prohibited revealing
details of an audit of any particular
company. However the following table shows
returns to the Society from audits:
The sampling system for the Schools' Photocopying Agreement has many checks
in terms of the monitoring of photocopying machines and
the pages copied from
the meter readings. The meter readings are correlated to the records of copying
In the training sessions, the importance of the sample and the accuracy of
the data is emphasised to encourage schools to comply.
The collecting societies
take a co-operative rather than a big stick approach, as the system could be
sabotaged if an unco-operative
school wished to. The sanction of having to keep
records for a further period should be enough to ensure the data is reasonably
7.1.2. APRA
Insofar as the broadcasting right is concerned, the level of compliance is
extremely high. The vast majority of licensees are scrupulously
accurate in the
information provided. No licensing department is required, although the
Association has a full-time Licensing Officer
to ensure compliance with existing
licence schemes and, increasingly, to notify the vast number of new licensees in
areas such as
narrowcasting of their legal obligations.
In the area of public performance, the position is quite different. The
Association currently has 19,043 licensees covering 34,424
premises, and it is
APRA's experience is that many licensees take advantage of a self-reporting
system to under-report relevant details
in order to minimise their fees to APRA.
In this area, audit and enforcement is essential.
On the other hand, submissions were made to the Inquiry arguing that it was
unreasonable for APRA to demand to see the books of a
venue to check the
correctness of the licence fee calculation. It is difficult to see how else such
matters can be verified. If the
venue has a particular objection to disclosing
its books in commercial confidence, one can only suggest that the licensee
be prepared to pay for an independent auditor to do the task. It is
doubtful that this would appeal, given the extra expense involved.
17.1.3. AVCS
Historically, the Society has had concerns with the accuracy of the reporting
of broadcast copying under the record-keeping system.
However, the Society now
believes that any risk of under-reporting by the remaining three universities
and seven individual TAFE
Colleges has substantially diminished because these
educational institutions are aware of the relative ease for the Society to be
record-keeping obligations. Only time will tell.
AVCS is confident that the records provided by schools during the survey
process are accurate given the high level of co-operation
received from
educational authorities and the schools themselves. In any event there is little
motivation for under-reporting because
the schools are aware that the sample is
only relevant for the distribution process (that is, the identification of
programs that
have been copied) and has no relationship to the calculation of
remuneration to be paid to the Society for the schools.
Although AVCS is reasonably satisfied with the level of compliance in
sampling TAFE colleges, AGB McNair have expressed to the Society
their concerns
report on the 1992 sample AGB McNair observed
that "while the data quality was
of a minimally acceptable standard there are sufficient signs that the volume of
audio visual copying
is still somewhat underestimated". The Society and AGB
McNair have continually monitored the sample and made some amendments to the
procedures. Both organisations have observed a significant improvement in
reporting standards over time.
17.1.4. CAL
Both the statistician, AGB McNair and CAL, are of the opinion that licensees
regularly under report actual usage.
Sample results have consistently demonstrated that in education, copying of
information to be
derived, staff are required to record all copying whether copyright or not. This
recorded usage is then compared
to the photocopier meter reading usage.
The monitoring of the photocopier meters systematically demonstrates under
reporting. Whether this is of copyright works or not is
indeterminable. However,
if the proportion of copyright works against all copying is constant with the
reported figure of 10%, then
substantial under reporting does occur.
Auditing of records against meter readings takes place, as does comparison of
overall volumes of copying against matched institutions
to try to ensure that
recording of copying, and copying itself is not suppressed during the sample
However, the recording of the sample data is still basically an honour
system. CAL relies on the co-operation of each staff member
and each sampled
institution. Therefore, the derivative that 10% of all copying is of copyright
works may in itself be lower than
the actual. Both AGB McNair and CAL have
received many anecdotal reports both from staff at the sampled institutions and
McNair field auditors that support this view.
17.1.5. PPCA
PPCA believes that its broadcast licensees are accurate in reporting. Given
that this is based largely on the company's experience
with the public
performance right as exploited by broadcasters, this view is probably correct.
After all, that is also the experience
As to non-broadcast users, PPCA is experiencing the same under-reporting
faced by every other collecting society. However, its staff
are trained to ask
appropriate questions, the answers to which provide a good indication of whether
the user is telling the truth.
For example, when a restaurant owner is asked how
many seats he or she has (a matter that every restaurant owner knows well),
in answering suggests that a spot check is called for.
17.2. POLICING OF RIGHTS BY THE
17.2.1. AMCOS
Where possible, audit provisions are inserted in licensing agreements entered
into by AMCOS. There is certainly an active program
of auditing record
manufacturers.
AMCOS and ARIA have recently established an anti-piracy unit known as MIPI
(Music Industry Piracy Investigations) to investigate and
infringements of members' copyright rights.
The Society's legal officer, in conjunction with the Anti-Piracy Officer,
investigates all reports of unauthorised usages of AMCOS
controlled works.
In the schools agreement, AMCOS investigates all reports of alleged
infringements in schools and also reports them to the relevant
peak bodies. It
also analyses the data to see if there are any irregularities which could
indicate that the limits were being exceeded.
However, sample schools are
offered an indemnity during the sampling process to ensure that all copying is
accurately reported. Like
CAL, it is more through education and support that the
Society seeks to enforce the agreement. The educational institutions would
agree to the inclusion of rights of inspection in the agreement, although
compliance with the agreement has become part of the
audit program of the
relevant Education Ministries.
For Production Music, an incentive scheme was introduced in 1989 for
recording studios. In return for reporting every reproduction
of Production
Music that occurred at their studio, AMCOS would rebate the service fees
applying to all clearances resulting from
such reports. This turned out to be so
successful that AMCOS was rebating thousands of dollars a year. It has since
been discontinued.
Finally, AMCOS regularly participates in seminars where the rights of its
members are outlined to users, as are the repercussions
for failing to comply
with copyright obligations. This educational function is a useful method of
promoting compliance through promoting
respect for members' rights.
(a) Enforcement litigation
At AMCOS, no fighting fund or budget line as such exists, and the relevant
provision should be made.
The Board determines which cases are pursued. Among the factors that the
Board take into account are: the severity of the infringement,
the nature of the
party and the circumstances of the unauthorised activity, the likelihood of any
defences being raised, the probability
of success, the value of the publicity
for the action and the costs of taking the action. Examples of such litigation
were reviewed.
They were seen to have been prudently selected and were generally
cost effective.
17.2.2. APRA
(a) Enforcement mechanisms
Insofar as the public performance right is concerned, the Association
maintains a Licensing Department consisting of the following
HEAD OFFICE STAFF
General Licensing Manager
Secretary to Department Licensing Representatives - NSW (2)
Compliance/Reassessment Supervisor Compliance Field Representative Client
Services Clerk Client Services/Data entry Clerk Filing Clerk
MELBOURNE BRANCH
OFFICE STAFF
Deputy General Licensing Manager Licensing Representative -
Victoria (2) Compliance Field Representative General Secretary
BRISBANE OFFICE STAFF
Licensing Representative - Qld (2) Compliance
Field Representative General Secretary
ADELAIDE OFFICE STAFF
Representative - SA Compliance Field Representative General Secretary
OFFICE STAFF
Licensing Representative - WA Compliance Field Representative
General Secretary
The task of the Licensing Department is two-fold:
(a) to ensure that those who are not licensed but should be, do in fact take
out a licence, and
(b) to ensure that those who hold licences, properly comply with conditions
relating to the supply of information relating to, for
example, the amount of
admission charges or the expenditure on live artist entertainment.
The Association also maintains an in-house law firm (Faulkner and Associates)
to handle the majority of infringement actions. Given
the work load, this is a
cost effective mechanism.
(b) Enforcement litigation
Because APRA takes an assignment rather than a mere licence, it is able to
sue infringers in its own name. This may not make the Association
popular but it
is ultimately in the benefit of its members.
APRA, being by far the biggest society, commences an enormous number of
actions throughout its territory. In the past two years, (which
may be taken as
representative of practice over the past 10 years) the APRA Legal Department
(a) opened 217 new files relating to infringements of the Association's
(b) commenced proceedings in the Federal Court of Australia in 26
A selection of cases during the last two years were examined. They were found
to be generally cost effective.
(c) Litigation funding and policy
The Association does have a budget line by which anticipated costs of
litigation form part of the Association's normal administration
costs and are
budgeted for accordingly.
The Association has no written, or indeed fixed, policy in relation to the
matter. Generally, however, the Association will sue an
infringer where the
prospective licence fees are significant (in excess of $500 per annum) or where
some particular point of principle
is at stake.
17.2.3. AVCS
The Society has undertaken (and continues to undertake) measures to demand
and seek compliance with legal obligations by educational
institutions which
have entered into agreements with the Society, including the following:
(a) Contact with Administering
The Society has regular contact with the major administering bodies of
educational institutions including the AVCC for the university
sector, the
Australian Education Council Working Party on Copyright for school sector and
the various government departments for
the TAFE sector. The Society has a policy
of continually informing these bodies of any non-compliance by individual
institutions
and seeking immediate and prompt redress.
For instance, the original agreement between the Society and the AVCC in
respect of universities required the Society to advise the
AVCC of those
universities which did not comply with the record-keeping requirements on a
quarterly basis. Each quarter, the Society
would inform the AVCC of those
universities which had not forwarded returns and payments by the due date. As
the university agreements
were being re-negotiated last year, the Society had
many meetings with representatives of the AVCC whereby compliance was a major
issue in the negotiation process.
The new agreement between the Society and AVCC provides that the AVCC
undertakes to use its best endeavours to ensure that the universities
with the agreement with the Society and the
and its accompanying
regulations. Further, the AVCC has undertaken to advise the Society of any fact,
matter or circumstance which
is relevant to the non-compliance by a university
with the agreement with the Society or the
and regulations.
(b) Emphasis on Sampling System
enables an educational institution to elect to participate
in the broadcast copying scheme on the basis of a record-keeping or sampling
system. The election lies with the educational institution.
All of the university sector (excluding one institution) from the
commencement of the scheme to 31 December 1993, operated on the
record-keeping
system. Because AVCS believes that record-keeping tends to lead to
under-reporting, it focused much of its attention
and resources during 1993 to
move the university sector onto the sampling system. This program was
successful, with all of the universities,
excluding two) participating in the
sampling system from 1 January 1994.
(c) Inspections
Although in the past the Society has conducted inspections in a number of
universities by the powers conferred upon it under Section
135L of the
, it has not been able to conduct systematic inspections due to the number of
record-keeping institutions. However, as the number
of such institutions is now
far more manageable (there are currently only two universities and several TAFE
Colleges in Victoria
and Tasmania which operate under the record-keeping
system), the Society can more efficiently exercise this power if necessary.
(d) Review of Records by Record-Keeping
Institutions
The Society scrutinises each record forwarded to it from a record-keeping
institution. If the institution has not completed the form
or if there are any
inaccuracies on the face of it when compared to television guides or earlier
information supplied by the institution,
the Society seeks that the inaccuracies
or inconsistencies be clarified or corrected.
If the educational institution is late in providing its records and payment
of remuneration calculated from the records, the Society
seeks that interest,
set under the agreement, be paid.
(e) Review of Records by Sampling
Institutions
With regards to records provided by sampling institutions during the sampling
period, the survey authority AGB McNair monitors receipt
of records and advises
the Society if there are any concerns as to the operation of the survey. Once
the survey is completed, the
Society receives the records and scrutinises them
to ensure that all of the information which is sought has been provided.
Representatives of educational institutions participating in the training
seminars are advised that if the institution does not comply
requirements of the sampling system for the duration of the sample, serious
consequences can result, including:
(i) the need to undertake the survey again during the subsequent sample
period with AVCS and AGB McNair costs being reimbursed;
(ii) a breach of the agreement between the Society and the educational
institution; and
(iii) the copies of television and radio broadcasts not being protected by
the statutory licence and therefore amounting to infringing
In the past when the Society has been concerned as to the compliance by an
educational institution with the sampling procedures, it
has taken the following
(i) statutory declarations as to copying were required from every member of
staff of an educational institution; and
(ii) one educational institution was required to undertake the sampling
process on a second occasion reimbursing the Society of the
costs of such
further sample.
(f) Copies of Broadcasts to be Kept on
As many homes have video cassette recording machines, current licensing
agreements of the Society require that all copies of broadcast
material be kept
on the premises of the educational institution unless they are loaned to staff
or students. This facilitates any
inspection process which may be undertaken by
the Society under the
or the agreement between the Society and the
educational institution.
(g) Student Audits
Current agreements contain an acknowledgment by the educational institution
that the Society may conduct an audit of its copying practices
through students
of the institution.
During the period of the survey in sampling institutions, a number of
students in each sampling institution are approached by a representative
McNair to keep a diary of any audio-visual material shown in class in return for
a fee. The students are not advised of the
purpose of the audit.
The student audit provides the Society with a valuable indicator of the
amount of audio-visual material which is being used as an
educational tool in a
particular educational institution. It may also indicate areas within the
institution where staff need to be
reminded of their obligations under the
sample scheme.
More importantly, as representatives of an educational institution are
advised at the training seminar conducted prior to the sample
of the existence
of the student audits, it acts as an incentive to a member of staff to comply
with the sampling requirements and
duly complete the forms for every copy of a
broadcast made.
Student audits have also been conducted in record-keeping universities.
Results of these audits were raised in the context of the
negotiations with the
AVCC in response to the initial argument of the Committee that the
record-keeping system was operating adequately.
The Society does not conduct student audits in primary or secondary
(h) Enforcement litigation
To date, the Society has only instituted legal proceedings on one occasion to
recover payment of a debt (that is, unpaid remuneration
under an agreement) and
interest on the debt from an administering body administering educational
institutions.
AVCS has threatened to bring such proceedings against many other licensees
under Section 135N of the
from time to time but on each occasion,
upon receipt of a letter of demand by the Society, the outstanding remuneration
without the need for further action by the Society.
The Society has not sued educational institutions which participate in the
broadcast copying scheme for infringement of copyright
in circumstances where
copies of television and radio programs are made outside the ambit of
for the following reasons:
(a) the Society has recognised that the administrative burden inherent in the
record-keeping system provides the greatest opportunity
for educational
institutions not to comply with the legal requirements of the system and not
declare all copies of broadcasts made
to the Society;
(b) all institutions in the university sector (excluding one) originally
elected to participate in the
scheme on the basis of the record-keeping
system together with a number of individual TAFE Colleges in Victoria and
(c) the Society elected to pursue a strategy of negotiation with the
administering bodies of educational institutions which operated
record-keeping system to persuade them of the benefits of the sampling system
and the dangers of the record-keeping system,
including the likelihood of legal
proceedings for infringement of copyright;
(d) the strategy referred to in paragraph (c) was successful as all
institutions in the university sector (with the exception of two)
entered into
sampling agreements with the Society which commenced from 1 January 1994. Since
this date, one of the institutions which
renewed its record-keeping agreement
has sought to move into the sampling system; and
(e) the strategy was less successful in some of the TAFE institutions in
Victoria and Tasmania due to the low copying practices of
some of these
institutions as a result of their curriculum. Nevertheless, a number of
individual colleges have sought sampling agreements.
Not surprisingly, although perhaps optimistically, AVCS does not maintain a
budget for litigation nor have a policy as to what cases
it would take on.
17.2.4. CAL
In CAL's major education licences, CAL does not have the right to inspect
licensee's premises. Therefore, CAL relies on reports of
infringements from
parents, teachers or other concerned parties. In CAL's other licences,
inspections are permitted and do take place.
CAL argues that education and
motivation of licensees is the best means of compliance.
Electronic monitoring of digital copying may well ameliorate the problem in
future. In the meantime, CAL has been advised by its statistician
that active
steps to improve awareness are more appropriate than more stringently policing
and monitoring the copiers. More stringent
monitoring has proved
counter-productive.
Enforcement litigation
In its administration costs, CAL provides a budget for conducting legal cases
and also maintains a legal indemnity fund as part of
its reserves. CAL's policy
is to fund cases that will assist its licensing efforts; are of strategic
benefit to the interests of
or which deal with flagrant infringement of the rights of CAL's members.
CAL has been involved in a number of major legal actions since the
commencement of operations. A selection of these were looked at.
generally well chosen and cost effective.
17.2.5. PPCA
Each licence renewal includes a re-assessment form wherein licensees are
asked to report any changes to their company. When there
is a strong suspicion
that a venue is not reporting or is under-reporting, an inspector visits the
premises to verify the position.
Once a specific problem is recognised
appropriate correspondence is generated and if necessary (and as a last resort)
legal action
is undertaken. There have been numerous enforcement cases during
the last two years. They are an important part of the PPCA enforcement
PPCA has a budget for legal costs incurred in enforcement proceedings. (In
1993, $60,000 was budgeted and $76,000 was spent.) Its
policy is to litigate
every case of infringement, except in rare circumstances.
18. DISTRIBUTIONS TO
18.1. MECHANICS OF THE DISTRIBUTION PROCESS
18.1.1. AMCOS
18.1.2. APRA
18.1.3. AVCS
18.1.4. CAL
18.1.5. PPCA
18.2. FREQUENCY OF DISTRIBUTIONS
18.2.1. AMCOS
18.2.2. APRA
18.2.3. AVCS
18.2.4. CAL
18.2.5. PPCA
18.3. PROPORTION OF SOCIETY'S GROSS INCOME DISTRIBUTED TO MEMBERS
18.3.1. AMCOS
18.3.2. APRA
18.3.3. CAL
18.3.4. PPCA
18.3.5. Conclusion
18.1. MECHANICS OF THE DISTRIBUTION
18.1.1. AMCOS
The computer distribution system produces lists of amounts payable to
Cheques are prepared in a separate computer process and reconciled to the
detailed statements of royalties owing. Cheques and royalty
statements are
either couriered, collected or mailed to publisher members. Bank drafts in the
appropriate currency are drawn for
the overseas Societies after the deduction of
withholding tax. One cheque, supported by individual statements, is drawn for
APRA members.
18.1.2. APRA
Insofar as the mechanics of payment are concerned:
(i) payments are made by cheque;
(ii) the cheques are computer-generated;
(iii) each semi-annual distribution currently involves about 6,500
Up until 1992 members only received a full statement explaining their royalty
allocation if they requested it. As from 1992 all members
have received a full
statement of domestic royalty earnings, and as from 1993 details of any foreign
earnings accruing to a member
have been integrated with domestic royalty
statements. This is one of the most important and welcome reforms of recent
too long, APRA was subject to criticism that it provided a royalty
cheque but no means by which a member could see how that sum had
been derived.
This opaqueness of accounting to members inevitably leads to suspicion - whether
or not it is well founded.
18.1.3. AVCS
Members resident in Australia are paid by cheque. Cheques are not computer
written. Members resident abroad are paid either by international
bank cheque or
direct transfer to their nominated bank account. Most payments are in Australian
dollars. To a small number of countries
(for example, Russia) distributions have
been made in U.S. dollars.
Each time a member receives a payment of royalties from the Society, the
member receives a distribution statement.
18.1.4. CAL
Because of the statutory licence with it administers, and the number of
of all societies:
After the sampling process, the distribution process begins. Statements for
each owner recipient are printed and:
(i) Statement(s) over $50.00 are sent to each recipient along with an
Undertaking and Indemnity and any statements still outstanding
distributions. Statements from each distribution are held until the total
royalty payable exceeds $50.00.
The recipient then checks the statement and deletes those works if any for
which they are not able to claim the royalties. CAL will
then issue an amended
(ii) Australian authors and publishers have not agreed on a standard royalty
split for photocopying fees, but deal with them in the
subsidiary rights clauses
of their contracts. CAL therefore distributes the total royalties for a work to
one copyright owner and
requires that the copyright owner shares the fees with
the other copyright owners for that work, according to their contracts. For
example, if the author is a member, CAL will distribute the total fees to the
author and ask the author to account to the other copyright
holders (such as the
publisher or illustrator). If the author is not a member and the publisher is,
the total royalty is paid to
the publisher with the same requirement to account
to the other copyright owners. Royalty Recipients are required to sign an
Undertaking
and Indemnity in which they undertake to distribute the correct
share of the royalties to the other copyright owners in accordance
contract they have or, in the absence of express terms in their contracts, in
accordance with general copyright law principles.
(iii) In completing the Undertaking and Indemnity the recipients are required
(a) Fill in their name and address in the spaces provided.
(b) Check each item on the statement(s) listed on the Undertaking and
Indemnity to ensure they are the copyright owner of each work
(c) Calculate the amount they are entitled to claim and write it in the
appropriate spaces provided.
(d) Sign and return the completed form to CAL.
(iv) Upon receipt of the completed Undertaking and Indemnity, CAL will:
(e) confirm the membership status of the recipient;
(f) check that the amount claimed is correct;
(g) transfer any amounts not claimed to returns for further research and
distribution to the correct recipient; and
(h) draw a cheque for the amount claimed by the Finance Department and send
it to the recipient.
18.1.5. PPCA
All by cheques which are printed by computer. In 1993 there were 114 cheques.
No other means of distribution is used.
18.2. FREQUENCY OF DISTRIBUTIONS
To some extent, the value of the royalties distributed depends upon the
frequency of the distribution and the promptness with which
money is transferred
to and from foreign sister organisations.
18.2.1. AMCOS
Mechanical Royalties
Synchronisation Clearances
Student Film & Video Licences
Production Music
Music videos for retail sale
Commercial TV Blanket Licences
Quarterly to AMCOS members and to AMCOS Societies Department. AMCOS
Societies Department distributes bi-annually to affiliated Societies.
Mechanical & Video (% of Gross Revenue) Blanket Licences
Radio Station Blanket Licences
Bi-annually.
Schools Photocopying & AVCS
18.2.2. APRA
Distributions are made twice-yearly: in May/June for the six months to the
preceding 31 December, and in November/December for the
six months to the
preceding 30 June. This is a welcome improvement over the previous system of
annual distribution. Increasing computer
power will eventually allow APRA to
account to members on a quarterly basis of required although there is likely to
be some resistance
to this from publisher members, for whom this will mean
double administration, given that they only account to their writers on a
monthly basis.
18.2.3. AVCS
The allocation process is performed annually. Once completed, the Society
will distribute to its members as soon as the member guarantees
to the Society
that it is the relevant copyright owner.
Article 70 (a) of the Articles of Association of the Society provides that
the royalties allocated to a program shall be distributed
as soon as is
reasonably possible once it is ascertained that the member is the relevant
the Society may distribute
royalties to its members several times in respect of the one distribution
18.2.4. CAL
CAL makes an annual distribution (in July) to its members whose works appear
as having been copied in the sample survey conducted
in the previous calendar
year. Given the necessary complexity of its processes, for the moment it is
reasonable that distributions
be made once a year, but is acknowledged by the
Society as desirable, that it move to six monthly distributions as soon as
18.2.5. PPCA
The distribution is made annually. This is because of the timing of its
receipt of the logs from APRA and the additional work that
must be done to those
logs to ensure their accuracy for PPCA distribution purposes. The Company
executives intend the Company to
move to quarterly payments in line with normal
record industry practices as soon as the data can be processed within that time
and within acceptable cost parameters. This will depend on the development
of new technologies to facilitate the capture of uses
(in particular the
introduction of the International Standard Recording Code).
18.3. PROPORTION OF SOCIETY'S GROSS INCOME
DISTRIBUTED TO MEMBERS
18.3.1. AMCOS
Gross revenue includes amounts which have been invoiced but not paid and are
therefore not available for distribution.
It will be noted that 1991 showed a considerable drop in the % Gross Revenue
Distributed and that the % Gross Distributable rose abnormally
in 1992 (and to a
lesser extent in 1993). This is due to the introduction of the new computer in
the Overseas Department in the 1991
period. This meant that no payments were
made to overseas owners during 1991 and these payments were made in the
subsequent periods.
Year % Gross Revenue % Gross Revenue % Gross Distributed Re Unpaid
Invoices Distributable
1993 81.20% 4.00% 85.20%
1992 82.60% 8.90% 91.50%
1991 68.50% 7.10% 75.60%
1990 74.50% 4.20% 78.70%
1989 65.90% 10.15% 76.05%
1988 70.80% 13.20% 84.00%
1987 65.40% 3.20% 68.60%
Commission rates are outlined elsewhere. However the Society also retains
interest, management and service fee income and is reimbursed
for specific costs
related to record company audits and Schools Photocopying costs. In recent years
the Society has introduced a
number of "pay-per-use" fees for research and other
purposes and revenue raised from these sources offsets the cost of providing
It will be noticed that only AMCOS retains these incomes. Other societies
pass them on to their members. AMCOS however, is the only
society that works on
a set commission rather than taking its expenses out of the gross. It is
therefore appropriate that is retain
these sources of income as they are merely
one of the factors that the board takes into when striking the commission rate
for members.
The Board is responsible for setting a rate which allows the
Society to operate efficiently, but since any money not distributed
foregone by the publishers - including those represented on the Board - they
exercise great care to see that apart from
running costs, and any specific needs
of the Society, all money is distributed.
Any extraordinary expenditure by the Society requires Board approval. The
policy of AMCOS is not to distribute gross income less administration
but rather to arrive at a commission rate which achieves essentially the same
end. (This is one of the classical, if quaint,
differences between the
mechanical and public performance collecting societies throughout the
18.3.2. APRA
In 1992/93, 88.39% of the Association's gross income was distributed to
members (including the members of affiliated societies). This
is a remarkable
figure. (The WIPO Report indicates that the "administrative costs of the
performing rights organisations are, in
general, around 20-30% of the amount of
royalties collected. There are, however, certain societies which keep their
costs below 20%,
and there are still others which are more expensive".)
18.3.3. CAL
Percentage of Gross Income distributed was:
75.8% Projected
It is the goal of the Society (reflected in its 5 Year Plan), to increase
this percentage to 80% by year ended June 1999.
As distributions take into account the Society's five year sampling and
distribution cycle. Sensibly, monies are also retained to
ensure that the
Society is able to meet its administrative financial commitments as and when
they fall due. Moreover, from 1994,
CAL's administrative deductions will include
an allocation for cultural purposes of up to 1% of collections.
The percentage distributed in 1993 was lower than usual because of the $2
Million Indemnity Reserve which was set up in September
1993. This sum is made
up of monies that were undistributable over the five year national sample cycle.
It is the policy of the Society
to run down the general reserves (ie other than
the Indemnity Fund) over the term of a national sample cycle.
It is recommended that the Society reassess the mechanisms by which it
retains and eventually distributes its reserves. Whilst an
Indemnity Fund is a
sensible and desirable safeguard, in relation to the currently held reserves,
there does not appear to be in
place a mechanism whereby yesterday's or today's
members do not subsidise the members of tomorrow. There must be instituted a
whereby those who contribute to reserve funds are assured of receiving
their rightful share of those funds, albeit on a delayed basis.
member treatment demands this.
18.3.4. PPCA
The percentage of income available to copyright owners is very low. This must
be addressed. (It is the subject of further later discussion.)
% available to Copyright Owners
One other point must be made in relation to PPCA distributions. In section
14.5 of this Report it was noted that the distribution
is divided according to
whether the recording is Australian or overseas. While the allocation in respect
of local recordings is divided
between the PPCA Trust and the record company,
100% of the royalty in respect of overseas recordings is paid to the record
This does not mean that 100% of the allocation to foreign records is
remitted overseas. This is a common misconception.
All distributions relating to overseas recordings are paid to the local
company that represents the overseas owner in Australia. A
large portion of that
money remains in Australia (but to go into detail about this is beyond the scope
of this Report). More significant,
is the fact that 40-50% of the recordings are
non-protected overseas recordings (predominantly those from the USA). Of the
45% is Australian and 55% is other (mainly UK). This is a very
similar breakdown to that which applies to record sales in Australia.
One of the most useful indicators
of efficiency of a collecting society is the percentage of its collected revenue
that is eventually
distributed to its members. The above figures provide that
base information.
Whether the percentage retained by a society to cover its costs is
reasonable, depends on a wide range of factors. One must look to
the range of
rights administered by the society; the complexity and exactness of the system
of identification, collection and distribution;
the general level of activity of
the society in the welfare of its members; the existence of artificial income
caps (such as PPCA's
1% cap); the age of the society, and so on. These are the
sorts of matters that are the subject of description and comment in other
of this Report.
It is the view of the Inquiry that Australian collecting societies, for the
most part, are administered in a highly efficient and
cost effective manner.
Whilst it is tempting to gauge efficiency by comparing local figures with those
of overseas organisations,
this must be treated with caution as the societies
display huge variations in the factors raised in the above paragraph. It is very
difficult to compare like with like as the societies all have distinguishing
characteristics which affect the validity of direct
comparisons. That said, one
can look at the general figures given in the WIPO Report and compare APRA's
distribution performance
with its overseas counterparts and say that its members
get one of the highest returns in the world (see WIPO Report, para 48).
one can say that the percentage charged by AMCOS for its
administrative costs is one of the lowest - particularly impressive given
it does not have the advantage of performing the centralised licensing functions
which allow many of its overseas counterparts
a much higher gross collection.
The percentage distributed by CAL is comparable to the few organisations with
similar levels of activity.
There are no comparable overseas organisations to
compare to AVCS. Only PPCA is an exception.
PPCA's position is discussed at length in Chapter 24. Its low percentage
distribution to members has been the subject of considerable
adverse comment.
Moreover, the WIPO Report commented that the "administrative costs of
organisations representing performers' and
phonogram producers' rights do not
usually exceed 10-15%" (WIPO Report, para 153). That said, the Company has
provided projections
that indicate that if the artificial 1% ceiling was
abolished, the percentage of revenue spent on administration would be less than
10%. Notwithstanding the comments made in chapter 24 as to the administration of
the Company, there is no doubt that the single most
important factor for PPCA's
apparently appallingly low percentage of income distributed to members, is the
artificial ceiling placed
on its income.
To emphasise the importance of the need to consider the particular factors
which affect efficiencies, one can compare the situation
of PPCA (mentioned
above) with that of CAL. Without the artificial ceiling, it would cost PPCA no
more, to collect a much greater
gross. The payments would be received from the
same parties and payments would be made to the same parties. All that would
is the quantum of the payments. There are no extra administrative costs
involved. In contrast, given the nature of the cumbersome
identification and
quantification process which is the lot of any collecting society administering
photocopying, when CAL increases
its gross income it does not necessarily mean
that it thereby gains great efficiencies.
19. FOREIGN
DISTRIBUTIONS, INCOME AND SOCIETIES
19.1. AFFILIATION WITH INTERNATIONAL NETWORK OF COLLECTING
19.1.1. AMCOS
19.1.2. APRA
19.1.3. AVCS
19.1.4. CAL
19.1.5. PPCA
19.2. TERMS UPON WHICH OVERSEAS DISTRIBUTIONS ARE MADE AND
19.2.1. AMCOS
19.2.2. APRA
19.2.3. AVCS
19.2.4. CAL
19.2.5. PPCA
19.3. COMPARISONS OF OVERSEAS REMITTANCES AND RECEIPTS
19.3.1. AMCOS
19.3.2. APRA
19.3.3. AVCS
19.3.4. CAL
19.3.5. PPCA
19.4. DEDUCTIONS BY THE LOCAL SOCIETY PRIOR TO OVERSEAS REMITTANCE
19.4.1. AMCOS
19.4.2. APRA
19.4.3. CAL
19.5. DEDUCTIONS BY THE OVERSEAS SOCIETY PRIOR TO AUSTRALIAN
19.5.1. AMCOS
19.5.2. APRA
19.5.3. CAL
19.6. EFFICIENCY OF FOREIGN SOCIETIES IN REPRESENTATION OF LOCAL
19.6.1. AMCOS
19.6.2. APRA
19.6.3. CAL
19.7. THE PRINCIPLE OF NATIONAL TREATMENT
19.8. ROLE OF UMBRELLA ORGANISATIONS
19.8.1. AMCOS
19.8.2. APRA
19.8.3. CAL
19.8.4. PPCA
19.9. STANDARDISATION OF DOCUMENTATION WITH OVERSEAS SOCIETIES
19.9.1. AMCOS
19.9.2. APRA
19.9.3. AVCS
19.9.4. CAL
19.10. USE OF ELECTRONIC DATA TRANSFER AND PROCESSING BETWEEN
19.10.1. AMCOS
19.10.2. APRA
19.10.3. CAL
19.11. RECOMMENDATION
19.1. AFFILIATION WITH INTERNATIONAL NETWORK OF
COLLECTING SOCIETIES
One of the extraordinary features of APRA and AMCOS, is that they have
developed a very sophisticated web of affiliations which stem
not only from
common membership of international copyright conventions but also from
reciprocal contracts. CAL has started to develop
such reciprocal arrangements
and AVCS is both too young (and perhaps too unusual), to have yet developed such
19.1.1. AMCOS
AMCOS is affiliated to an extensive network of foreign societies with which
it has reciprocal arrangements.
Although AMCOS is affiliated to overseas
agencies, payment
for copying under the schools'
photocopying
licence for foreign
publishers who are not sub-published for this territory cannot be made to the
foreign societies. Such payments
must be made directly to the foreign publisher.
This is because these societies do not represent their publishers for print
and therefore cannot collect on their behalf. To AMCOS' knowledge, only
Germany and Austria have schemes where schools may copy sheet
music under
statutory licence.
AMCOS is entering a reciprocal agreement with the German collecting society
VG-Musikedition concerned with the administration of reprographic
sheet music in schools so that it may make payments to German publishers through
19.1.2. APRA
APRA is affiliated to a very extensive network of international societies.
These societies are linked by a pro forma reciprocal agreement.
The effect of
the agreement is essentially that in return for a reciprocal exchange of
national repertoires each society undertakes
to properly administer the
repertoire of the other and to apply the principle of national treatment in
accounting for royalties.
19.1.3. AVCS
The Society is not affiliated with an international network of collecting
societies or any individual societies.
There are only two organisations outside of Australia, of which the Society
is aware, which deal with educational recording, namely
Educational Recording
Agency Ltd of the United Kingdom and Suissimage of Switzerland and these
organisations do not operate in a
way that is similar to AVCS. For good reasons
(which were supplied to the inquiry) AVCS has chosen to not enter reciprocal
with these societies.
19.1.4. CAL
CAL is a member of the International Federation of Reproduction Rights
Organisations ("IFRRO") and an associate member of CISAC (International
Confederation of Societies of Authors and Composers).
CAL has direct reciprocal arrangements with eleven foreign societies.
19.1.5. PPCA
The Company has no affiliation with similar foreign organisations. As it
distributes no income to foreign societies, it does not receive
19.2. TERMS UPON WHICH OVERSEAS DISTRIBUTIONS
ARE MADE AND RECEIVED
19.2.1. AMCOS
(i) Schools Photocopying royalties are distributed direct to the overseas
(ii) Other royalties are distributed only to collecting societies except in
special circumstances where the overseas society permits
direct distribution to
the copyright owner.
No distributions are made to collecting societies with whom AMCOS does not
have reciprocal agreements. Like CAL, in its dealings with
those countries,
AMCOS subscribes to the WIPO principle of national treatment in copyright
collections and distributions, (that is,
it accords foreign rights owners the
same rights as it accords national owners). Accordingly, income collected on
behalf of foreign
owners is treated the same as local owners.
The exception to this is the timing of payments. Reciprocal agreements with
affiliated societies specify distributions must be at
least semi-annually in
March and September. In late 1990 the AMCOS Overseas Department began
computerisation of its royalty processes
which caused delays in remittances
overseas. These have been progressively reduced and it is anticipated that
distributions will
comply with the agreement terms by October 1994.
The rate of income paid to and from AMCOS is dependent upon the reciprocal
agreement with the foreign society. As the WIPO Report
"Although bilateral agreements contain the principle of equal treatment of
nationals and foreigners, this principle is not necessarily
followed when it
comes to deductions. In certain cases, the deduction from royalties due to
foreigners is higher than the one from
royalties due to nationals (e.g.,
sometimes from nationals' royalties, 5%, and from foreigners' royalties 10 to
25% is deducted depending
on the bilateral contracts)."
19.2.2. APRA
The rights administered by the Association are recognised in the countries of
all societies with which APRA has reciprocal agreements.
Payments of the writer shares of performing right royalties are made via the
collecting society of which the writer is a member. Payments
of the publisher
shares are made via the collecting society of which the publisher is a member
where the publisher has no sub-publisher
in Australia. If the publisher does
have a sub-publisher in Australia, the publisher share of the royalty is paid to
that local sub-publisher.
In a few exceptional circumstances the writer share of royalties is paid
directly to the writer, for example, where the writer member
of an affiliated
society lives in Australia, or conversely, where an APRA writer member lives in
another country.
Except for the timing of payments, the terms upon which the Association
collects and accounts to foreign affiliates are precisely
the same as those upon
which the Association collects on behalf of its own members. The Association has
a contractual (and, it considers,
a moral) obligation to give equal treatment to
the works of foreign and local works.
Although the same semi-annual time periods that apply to the distributions to
local members apply to the distributions to affiliated
societies, payments are
actually made about three months after those to local members.
19.2.3. AVCS
Any distribution of royalties by the Society to the relevant copyright owners
or their agents who reside outside Australia are made
directly to the owner of
the rights or their agent.
AVCS collects remuneration from educational institutions for the copying of
all broadcasts from television and radio. The Society
then distributes the
royalties collected to any entity which warrants that it is entitled to the
royalties either as the relevant
outlined above) irrespective of whether the holder of the rights or the agent
in or out of Australia.
Before a distribution is made to a member not residing in Australia, the
claimant must undertake the same process noted above as any
claimant residing in
Australia, namely:
(i) sign a Membership Agreement;
(ii) complete a warranty for the film or literary or dramatic work or
(iii) complete a warranty by the owner or exclusive licensee of the relevant
royalties; and
(iv) provide copies of agreements to support the warranties where
The Part VA scheme, like the other societies, and consistent with Australia's
obligations under the Berne Convention, is predicated
on the principle of
national treatment rather than reciprocity.
19.2.4. CAL
Distributions are made on exactly the same terms as they are made to
Australian copyright owners. CAL only makes overseas payments
through affiliated
At present, all CAL's agreements with overseas collecting societies are
reciprocal collection agreements. However, in the past this
was not always the
case, [e.g. CAL's first agreement with CCC (USA)]. Although the agreements are
all reciprocal collection agreements
they are not all reciprocal distribution
agreements but instead are repertoire swap agreements.
Repertoire swap agreements are entered into by CAL and other societies when
the fees collected by each society are roughly equivalent
insignificant amount, and the cost of transferring and distributing the fees
would exceed the amount of the fees concerned.
The works for which those fees
are collected are excluded from the distribution and, as a consequence, the per
page fee in the distribution
is slightly higher.
All countries with which CAL has an agreement provide a right for authors and
publishers to receive remuneration for photocopying
of their works. An example
of where Australian rights are more extensive than in the foreign country is by
comparison with the USA
where much multiple copying for educational purposes is
a fair dealing and not remunerable. However, CAL does distribute royalties
collected in Australia for copying in education to US rights holders.
On the other hand, it is also a common problem for CAL that foreign law,
particularly in the European Community and Nordic Countries
provides more
extensive rights than Australian law.
19.2.5. PPCA
Only local owners are entitled to participate in the direct distribution
scheme. Internationally, this is very common with societies
administering the
public performance right in sound recordings. Most of these organisations use
the so-called category B agreement
"no payments are transferred between the contracting organisations; all
the income remains in the country where it is collected and
accordance with the rules of the organisation of that country (it is either used
for social or cultural purposes or is
distributed to the performers of the
country in order to compensate them for the remuneration they are entitled to in
other countries
but do not receive)."
[WIPO Report, para 159]
19.3. COMPARISONS OF OVERSEAS REMITTANCES AND
The following information reflects only the
remittances
overseas. It is not possible to determine what proportion of a society's entire
distribution is remitted to overseas
position to know what proportion of fees Australian companies remit to their
overseas principals
for the copying of foreign works in Australia.
19.3.1. AMCOS
In 1993, 18.3 % of the distribution was remitted overseas. In stark contrast,
1.42% was received. This is not as bad as may first
appear. All the big European
societies (with the exception of MCPS in the United Kingdom) have agreements
with their writers which
provide that, in most cases, 50% of the mechanical
income flows directly to the writers and 50% via their publishers. The societies
then assign AMCOS the right to collect the writer's 50% share for Australia.
On the other hand, Australian writers who have a publishing deal (which is
almost every Australian writer whose works are exploited
overseas), receive all
their royalties via their publisher and its sub-publishers around the world.
AMCOS receives royalties on behalf
of a member when one of its works are
exploited in a foreign territory in which the publisher has no
sub-publisher.
Another factor in the imbalance of payments relates to the practice of
writers in some territories (including the United States and
Britain) to
structure themselves so that they can collect their mechanical royalties
directly from their society. (Centralised licensing,
which is not the practice
in Australia, makes this feasible.) If such writers do not enter a sub-licensing
deal for Australia, AMCOS
will collect the income on their behalf. The reverse
scenario is uncommon because most Australian writers use the services of a
to collect all royalties, particularly in the major markets of the
United States and Britain.
19.3.2. APRA
(i) Amount Distributed To Overseas Copyright
The following is a table showing, for the past 5 years:
(a) the total amount distributed by the Association to foreign copyright
owners, via affiliated collecting societies;
(b) the proportion of the Association's total royalty distribution for each
year accounted for by such amounts:
Foreign Societies
Proportion of Net
Distributable
(ii) Collection Income Received From Overseas
By contrast, the receipts are considerably less, (although it has certainly
risen). Against the dollar figure for each year is the
proportion of total
revenue accounted for by such income.
Proportion of
Total Income
Extensive information was provided to the Inquiry showing the growth in
revenue received by the Association from individual societies
around the world
over the past few years.
19.3.3. AVCS
(i) Collection Income Paid To Overseas
To date, the Society has remitted the following amounts overseas to owners of
rights residing outside of Australia from the three
distribution periods. (This
occurs only where the owner of the relevant copyright or the agent of the owner
of the relevant copyright
resides outside Australia):
As noted before, the Society has remitted the above sum of $405,494 overseas
to owners of rights residing outside of Australia. This
sum represents the
following percentage of the royalties collected by the Society for the following
three distribution periods:
DISTRIBUTION % Remitted Overseas % Remitted Overseas
PERIOD of Distributable Amount of Amounts Distributed to Date
1991 9.6 19.8
1992 6.9 18.0
1993 0.1 3.4
TOTAL 4.7 18.3
There is no material difference in the way in which Australian and
non-Australian owned copyrights are administered and accounted.
(ii) Collection Income Received From Overseas
No money has been received from overseas sources. Again, this is an
illustration of the inequitable result of the interpretation given
principle of "national treatment".
19.3.4. CAL
(i) Collection Income Received From Overseas
Amounts collected from overseas are gradually increasing:
Prior to June 1990 collections were minimal and amounts not easily
(ii) Collection Income Paid To Overseas
The proportion of direct remittances from CAL to overseas copyright owners
are as follows:
Distribution Year
In return, CAL has received virtually nothing from overseas. CAL has fee
exchange agreements with only the UK and the USA.
19.3.5. PPCA
All payments are made to Australian resident companies and people.
"Non-protected" sound recordings are deleted by PPCA staff when
processing the
19.4. DEDUCTIONS BY THE LOCAL SOCIETY PRIOR TO
OVERSEAS REMITTANCE
Inquiry was made of the societies as to whether any sums were deducted by the
society, (other than tax), before such payments are
made. There is a suggestion
that a proportion of the income presently remitted to foreign copyright owners
should be retained for
the development of the local industry.
19.4.1. AMCOS
AMCOS make no cultural deductions. It believes that the principles of
national treatment and the absence of such provisions in its
BIEM standard
reciprocal agreements, forbid this. The Society was not aware of any of the
major foreign societies which made cultural
deductions from mechanical royalties
before remittance.
19.4.2. APRA
In general, 1.25% of the sums remitted to foreign societies are deducted for
the promotion of Australasian works (see above). In some
cases such societies
permit APRA to deduct 10% where they themselves deduct 10%.
It should be noted that there is a strong international push in performing
rights societies to reduce the sums deducted for "national
cultural purposes" by
societies. APRA is very much a part of that push, along with the US, UK and
Canadian societies. The 10% figure
deducted by several European societies is
considered to be a grossly excessive subsidy of European culture by writers and
from the English-speaking countries.
APRA is opposed to any suggestion that the 1.25% which is currently deducted
should be increased. It argues that such a move would
run directly counter to
the interests of Australasian writers and publishers who gain significant
royalty income from abroad and
to the Association's attempts to increase foreign
(i.e. export) earnings. The logic of this argument is difficult to recognise
the figures seem to clearly indicate that a greater proportion of the
Association's distribution is exported than is received from
foreign sources.
(See "National Treatment" following.)
19.4.3. CAL
As CAL deducts its operating expenses before declaring a distribution pool,
the deductions from fees due to local copyright owners
and fees distributed
overseas are the same. The Society believes that to make separate further
deductions from the fees due to overseas
rights holders is in this context
unjustifiable.
19.5. DEDUCTIONS BY THE OVERSEAS SOCIETY PRIOR
TO AUSTRALIAN REMITTANCE
19.5.1. AMCOS
Commission is deducted according to the reciprocal agreement and withholding
tax relevant to the country paying the royalty.
19.5.2. APRA
The principal deductions made by the foreign societies are "Cultural
deductions". It is important to note that APRA's complaints in
this area have to
do with the
of the deductions rather than the principle of the
19.5.3. CAL
All societies deduct their operating costs. The societies in the UK and the
USA, which are the only societies with which CAL has fee
distribution
agreements, do not make general cultural deductions from fees collected for
foreign copyright owners.
19.6. EFFICIENCY OF FOREIGN SOCIETIES IN
REPRESENTATION OF LOCAL SOCIETY
19.6.1. AMCOS
Although AMCOS acknowledged that there are some societies that are not as
reliable as others, the main societies of Europe and North
America, where most
accountable activity takes place, are seen as being generally satisfactory.
The problems it does have are shared with the other societies and are
addressed in international forums such as BIEM and CISAC.
19.6.2. APRA
The Association has serious concerns with the manner in which certain
European societies collect and distribute royalties. The Association
the Inquiry with detailed information about its concerns with regard to overseas
practices and its efforts to overcome them.
APRA has done extensive analyses, on
a country by country basis, of the various discriminatory royalty regimes. It
was agreed that
this be kept confidential although if the Government wishes to
discuss these matters with the Association directly, it is prepared
Suffice it to say, that it is of considerable concern in an environment of
"national treatment". The important matter to
note is that APRA are actively
attempting to address these problems:
• it has raised its concerns within the various CISAC committees on
which it sits;
• it has attempted on a bilateral basis to change the approaches or
rules adopted by certain societies; and
• most recently, it has joined with the societies from the other
English-speaking countries to present a united approach to
certain European
societies in order to achieve reforms.
The fact remains that many of the overseas societies either have
discriminatory practices or are inefficient. There are several complaints
local rights owners that they have not received income from overseas
performances that should have returned substantial income.
That this is so, is
not APRA's fault and all it can be expected to do, is efficiently follow through
with the relevant enquiries
on behalf of the local owner. This it appears to
Again, it indicates the problems inherent in the principle of "national
treatment".
19.6.3. CAL
Most collecting societies in the reprography field are at a very early stage
of development, so very few of them have many licences.
The Society's principal
dissatisfaction arises from the variations in sampling techniques adopted and
the difficulties this poses
for distribution of the foreign fees in
19.7. THE PRINCIPLE OF NATIONAL TREATMENT
The Berne Convention, of which Australia is a signatory, is based on the
principle of "national treatment". In other words each member
country must
accord every other member country the same rights that it accords its nationals.
One cannot say, let's treat a foreigner's
royalty entitlement any differently to
that of a national. Given that this philosophy was developed by countries which
exported more
sophisticated colonialism of intellectual property. This is particularly
given that some of the European societies have been notoriously discriminatory
in the barricades to reciprocality that they have
built up over the years.
Nevertheless, Australia is a signatory to the Berne Convention and with it comes
the philosophy of "national
treatment".
Even a cursory glance at the above figures shows that in relation to the
relevant rights, Australia is a nett importer of copyright
material. Perhaps
what is surprising is that the societies do not remit a greater proportion of
their income to overseas societies.
This should not be a matter for surprise.
The amounts actually remitted are far greater than is indicated by the figures
collecting societies.
Most of the overseas companies have established local corporate entities who
licence the repertoire of their foreign related companies.
Thus the local
company receives payment from the collecting society as the licensee for the
territory and the amounts thereby collected
go to defining the profit of the
local company. Where these are wholly owned by overseas corporate entities (as
is the case with
all of the large record companies and most of the large
publishers), a considerable proportion of the nett profit of the local company
is remitted to its foreign parent.
This imbalance of income sent to and received from foreign sources indicates
that Australian societies and Government need to reassess
the societies' present
attitudes to foreign distributions. It is all very well for a society to say
that it is part of an international
structure of collection and distribution
which is based on the principles of National Treatment (or some other cant). It
remembered however that these inherently disadvantage smaller countries
such as Australia and that many foreign societies have distribution
rules which
disadvantage Australian owners. It would be much fairer to all owners if there
were to be a system by which remittences
to foreign owners took into account not
only the discriminatory practices of particular foreign societies but also the
need to support
the development of the local industry. Being hugely respected by
the overseas societies for the efficiency with which we collect
and remit out
money is a self-deceiving measure of success.
It is recommended
that there be a further review of the rules of
collecting societies as they relate to relationships with foreign societies and
conversely,
the rules of foreign collecting societies as they relate to
relationships with Australian societies.
19.8. ROLE OF UMBRELLA
ORGANISATIONS
19.8.1. AMCOS
Like APRA, AMCOS is a member of CISAC. It is also a member of BIEM which is
the umbrella organisation for mechanical rights societies.
Through these, Australian rights owners are represented at international
and negotiation of
standard form international agreements; development of new documentation and
distribution formats; exchange of
information between Societies. AMCOS is also
planning to join The International Federation of Reproduction Rights
Organisations (IFRRO).
19.8.2. APRA
The umbrella organisation for music rights societies is CISAC. The annual
subscription payable is an amount equal to 0.070% of gross
collections.
Principally, CISAC provides a forum for societies from around the world to
meet and discuss common issues. The Confederation itself
has a number of
committees which deal with particular kinds of issues, for example the Legal and
Legislation Committee which reviews
and advises of relevant legal developments
around the world. The Confederation also operates a number of regional
committees, including
the Asia-Pacific Committee on which APRA sits and which,
with an annual budget of approximately A$650,000, has provided (and continues
provide) vital assistance to authors and composers in the region in the
establishment and operation of new collecting societies.
19.8.3. CAL
CAL is a member of IFRRO. The annual fees are calculated as a percentage of
collections, presently A$10,000 per annum. IFRRO provides
a forum for discussion
and consideration of the international consequences of issues facing copyright
19.8.4. PPCA
PPCA is not a member of any international umbrella society although, as noted
elsewhere, it pays ARIA's membership of the International
Federation of
Phonogram Industry ("IFPI"). This payment has been the subject of considerable
controversy. IFPI carries out a wide
range of activities on behalf of its
members including extensive anti-piracy/bootleg policing. Its activities also
include promoting
the establishment of broadcast and performance rights and
negotiations with union bodies as to the distribution of broadcast and
performance income.
19.9. STANDARDISATION OF DOCUMENTATION WITH
OVERSEAS SOCIETIES
Efficiency of operating procedures requires that there be reasonable
standardisation of documentation between societies.
19.9.1. AMCOS
The Society has an impressive degree of standardisation. The documents
(i) Fiche Internationale
(ii) Composers Authors and Publishers Register (CAE) maintained by the Swiss
Society (SUISA). This documentation is constantly referred
administration of Society collections.
(iii) BIEM - IFPI Standard Contract For The Phonographic Industry 1975
(amended in 1980, 1985, 1988, 1989, 1992) is used as a model
for mechanical
collecting societies. On the basis of a BIEM standard contract, AMCOS and other
collecting societies, such as The
Harry Fox Agency in the United States, use
standard forms for notification regarding product being exported royalty
(iv) BIEM - provides a standardised agreement which is used as a model for
reciprocal arrangements entered into by affiliated mechanical
19.9.2. APRA
APRA has an impressive degree of standardisation. Clearly there has been much
international work carried out to establish this degree
of standardisation
between affiliated societies. The most important standardised documents shared
with affiliated societies are:
(i) BIEM/CISAC Documentation and Distribution guide for non-theatrical music
(small rights) CT/88/880
(ii) BIEM/CISAC International Distribution and Documentation Regulations
(iii) BIEM/CISAC Royalty Distribution tape layout "E - 3" CT/86/296
(iv) BIEM/CISAC Royalty Distribution tape layout "F" (Films) CT/78/45.537
(v) WWL (World Works List) file layout
(vi) CAE (Composer, Author, Editor(Publisher)) file layout
(vii) Title registration format/Fiche Internationale
(viii) Cue Sheet
(ix) Contract notifications in respect of General Catalogue and Specific Work
(x) Unidentified work Query Lists (Incoming and Outgoing)
19.9.3. AVCS
AVCS has no standardisation of documents with overseas organisations. This
merely reflects its stand alone status. With the development
audio-visual societies, this will surely change.
19.9.4. CAL
CAL shares no documentation but is prominent in efforts through IFRRO to
establish a technical committee to develop standardised distribution
documentation. CAL chaired the international committee which developed a
standard reciprocal contract between Reproduction Rights
Organisations (RROs).
This contract is now in widespread use by IFRRO members.
19.10. USE OF ELECTRONIC DATA TRANSFER AND
PROCESSING BETWEEN SOCIETIES
As information technology improves it is an obvious efficiency to introduce
electronic data transfer and processing between societies.
The societies were
asked about their use of such tools and evaluate them.
19.10.1. AMCOS
Electronic data transfer is not presently available but discussions have
commenced with several of the larger Societies with a view
to implementation as
soon as practicable.
19.10.2. APRA
APRA is highly advanced in this. The following EDI functions are now in place
and practised between affiliated societies:
• World Works List: a directory of all societies' repertoires showing
musical works and the copyright owners;
• CAE file: a list of all writer and publisher members of all
societies, including pseudonyms;
• "E" Royalty: for reporting recipient societies' members' distribution
earnings in Radio and General categories;
• "F" Royalty: as for 'E3', but reports Cinema and Television
• Unidentified Works Lists: reports works which earned royalties but
the ownerships of which are unknown.
• English-language Cue Sheet Index: provides cue sheet data exchange
between US, UK, Canadian and Australian societies.
The last two are relatively new, and their success is yet to be quantified.
The others have been in place for many years, and their
effectiveness varies
between societies. When the specifications are properly implemented, they are
all extremely valuable tools which
vastly reduce the effort and expense of
identifying works, owners and royalty earnings.
19.10.3. CAL
The Society is evaluating its preliminary efforts and EDT will be introduced
when the integrity of the data can be assured.
19.11 RECOMMENDATION
That there be a further review of the rules of collecting societies as they
relate to relationships with foreign societies and conversely,
the rules of
foreign collecting societies as they relate to relationships with Australian
20. DISTRIBUTIONS TO
NON-MEMBERS
20.1. AMCOS
20.3. AVCS & CAL
Collecting societies are generally membership based organisations. The larger
the membership, the larger is likely to be the repertoire
of rights that is
administered and, accordingly, the larger the cost efficiencies. It is therefore
generally in the interest of the
organisation to insist that payments are made
only to members. After all, that is a great incentive for joining.
Further, apart from societies that merely administer statutory licences, they
are also essentially licensing organisations and as
such, can only license the
rights of their members. Accordingly, they can only collect for and distribute
to, their members.
20.1. AMCOS
For AMCOS this matter only arises in respect of the Schools Photocopying
Agreement. The controlling publishers of works not claimed
in the circulation
lists are identified on the basis of the publisher/title details in the sample
data. If works have previously
been copied under the scheme, the Society will
have details of the ownership already. If an unknown work is not sub-published
this territory AMCOS can obtain mechanical ownership details from its
equivalent societies in the relevant countries. AMCOS also
has a research
department that has access to the APRA database and CAE indexes
(Compositeur/Auteur/Editeur) on CD-ROM. The international
department,
responsible for distribution to foreign societies and for distributing foreign
income to its members, also assists with
this research.
There is no difference in the way members or non-members are treated for the
purposes of the schools print agreement, except that
non-members do not receive
circulation lists of titles.
The Association grants blanket licences for the use of any and all works
within its repertoire. In return it receives blanket licence
fees which are then
allocated across the works reported as having been performed. If the writer
credited with a particular work cannot
be identified as a member of APRA or of
an affiliated society, the steps taken are described below:
(i) The shares attributable to overseas writers who cannot be positively
identified as members of a society are credited, where possible,
to the society
of the original publisher of the work. Where this is not possible, moneys are
paid into the '
APRA Unallotted Composer Shares
' account, to be
redistributed in the next distribution.
(ii) Non-member shares for
writers are credited to a special
account, following which the Membership Department attempts to locate the
writers concerned (a
minimum earning of $500 per writer is applied for economic
reasons). Such writers are invited to apply for APRA membership. Upon
the amounts in question are released for payment.
Any unpaid moneys are re-distributed in the next distribution.
(iii) The shares attributable to non-member publishers are credited, where
possible, to the writers of the work. Where this is not
possible, moneys are
paid into 'APRA Unallotted Publisher Shares' account, to be redistributed in the
next distribution.
(iv) In accordance with international practice, foreign works for which owner
details cannot be fully identified by APRA are credited
where possible in
accordance with the "Warsaw Rule" (reflecting a resolution adopted by CISAC at a
meeting held in Warsaw) which
"If at the time of distribution there is no documentation available for a
work that has been performed or broadcast, but if one of
the writers is
identified as a member or copyright owner belonging to a sister-society, the
total royalty payment for this work must
be forwarded to this sister-society.
The receiving society will carry out the distribution according to the
documentation available
20.3. AVCS & CAL
Neither Society distributes to non-members.
Article 70 (a) of the Articles of Association of the AVCS provides that where
the owner of the relevant copyright is not a member
of the Society royalties
shall be distributed to that person or that person's agent as soon as is
reasonably possible after the relevant
member of the Society.
Similarly, under its articles of association, CAL may only make distributions
to members. Although CAL does not distribute to non-members,
it make substantial
efforts to identify and trace non-members whose works appear in the sample so
they may be given the option of
joining the society and collecting fees. These
efforts are described elsewhere in this Report.
PPCA only makes distributions to members. (It does not collect on behalf of
non-members.)
21. UNDISTRIBUTABLE
21.1.1. Undistributed Money Where Owner Unidentified Or Located
21.1.2. Trust Fund
21.1.3. Amount Involved Each Year
21.1.4. Dealing With The Undistributable Funds
21.2. AMCOS
21.2.1. Use Of Undistributed Money Where Owner Unidentified
21.2.2. Dealing With The Undistributable Funds
21.4.1. Undistributed Money Where Owner Unidentified Or Located
21.4.2. Amount involved each year
21.4.3. Dealing With The Undistributable Funds
21.4.4. Accounts
21.6. CONCLUSION
One of the common criticisms of collecting societies is that they are awash
with undistributed money and that they have no incentive
to make full
distributions because they benefit from the interest. These sorts of comment are
based on an absence of hard information
but where an anecdote is based on
stories on untold wealth and corporate deception, they gain a currency that is
often beyond their
Accordingly, it was important that the Inquiry examine whether there were
vast pools of undistributed monies and what was done with
undistributables.
21.1.1. Undistributed Money Where Owner
Unidentified Or Located
The Society's main difficulty is in identifying and locating the relevant
rights owners for payment. The identification process is
quite slow, especially
in the early years when potential claimants are not familiar with the operation
of the Society.
Although the distribution process appears straightforward, it often takes a
considerable period of time before the Society can identify,
locate and obtain
signed documentation from the claimant to enable distribution to take place for
the following reasons:
(i) the main source of information for identification comes from the
broadcaster of the program. The broadcaster's only dealings are
licensor of the broadcast or transmission rights. As the broadcast right is not
the right administered by the Society, the
original source of information
provided by the broadcaster may not be the relevant copyright owner or its agent
and further research
is often required;
(ii) the complexity of ownership, licensing and general administration of all
of the variety of rights involved in the creation and
exploitation of material
broadcast on television, namely feature films, documentaries and
television-produced programs means that
claimants are often not aware as to the
specific rights held by them and those assigned or licensed away to other
(iii) most agreements in respect of production of audio-visual material
simply deal with the traditional markets of theatrical, non-theatrical
and sales, home video, and broadcast rights. As these agreements do not
specifically deal with the off-air copying right,
many claimants are under the
misapprehension that they are entitled to the royalties on the basis of the
non-theatrical or broadcast
rights held. Substantial analysis of production and
licensing agreements must be undertaken by the claimant and the Society;
(iv) if a distributor cannot claim the rights as exclusive licensee, the
Society needs to identify and locate the rights holders earlier
in the chain of
title, often back to the producer. However, a production company is often only
established to produce a film and
is wound up relatively soon thereafter. In
these circumstances, it is difficult to ascertain the appropriate owner of the
(v) some participants in the chain of title of a program reside outside
Australia and cannot communicate to the Society in English;
(vi) notwithstanding the fact that many claimants could be paid a substantial
amount of royalties, there is a marked reluctance to
undertake the necessary
work to identify and warrant rights which is an obvious prerequisite before
payment. This is the case despite
considerable and persistent communication from
representatives of the Society.
21.1.2. Trust Fund
Section 135P (3) of the
requires the rules of the Society to
provide for the holding on trust of amounts for relevant copyright owners who
are not its members.
Thus Article 16 of the Articles of Association of the Society provide that
the Society shall manage a trust fund consisting of monies
from each accounting
period where:
• the member cannot be located;
• the relevant copyright owner is not a member;
• there is a dispute as to the person entitled to be paid any money; or
• the money allocated to a member is less than $10.00.
If a period of four years lapses from the date of the allocation of these
funds to the trust account, the money must be transferred
from the trust fund
and treated in like manner to collections received in that year. Article 16
provides that the Board of the Society
has a discretion, if it is satisfied that
special circumstances exist which justify the retention of those monies in the
trust account,
to hold the monies for a further period of no more than two years
(unless distribution becomes possible prior to this date).
The period of four years for the distributable amount for the first
accounting period (that is, the period from commencement of the
scheme to 30
June 1991) will lapse on 30 June 1995.
21.1.3. Amount involved each year
As noted above, the Society has not currently resolved that any money
collected is not able to be distributed. The distributable amounts
for each of
the accounting periods which are currently in the Article 16 Trust fund are as
DISTRIBUTION BALANCE AS AT
PERIOD 30th June 1994
1991 $1,013,722
1992 $1,779,588
1993 $3,282,517
TOTAL $6,075,827
21.1.4. Dealing With The Undistributable
At this stage, it is likely that the Board of Directors will recognise the
existence of the above mentioned factors as amounting to
special circumstances
to justify the retention in the trust account of any undistributed money for the
1991 accounting period for
a further period of two years. This is sensible. The
important task for the Attorney General to devise a coherent plan to use these
undistributable funds in manner which is not merely providing a windfall to
identified owners of other, irrelevant works. It is too
easy to say that the
Society should simply pay the undistributable funds back into the distribution
fund, after a certain time. That
is simple but it unduly benefits existing
members instead of acting to the benefit of the whole class of Australian rights
This is not a criticism of the Society. It is merely complying with the
requirements made of it under the Guidelines.
21.2. AMCOS
21.2.1. Use Of Undistributed Money Where Owner
Unidentified Or Located
As might be expected of a society which is principally concerned with sundry
licensing, there are numerous ways in which undistributable
(i) There are occasions where AMCOS can identify ownership at the time of
licensing but can no longer determine ownership at the time
of distribution.
(ii) If publisher loses a catalogue, but does not inform the Society, they
may be paid in error.
In these instances the publishers return the money to AMCOS. Any such money
is put into a "Control Account". Details of works held
in Control are regularly
circulated to members.
(iii) The Board has approved a scheme whereby records imported on an indent
basis (that is, small quantities to fulfil specific customer
requests) do not
require the importer to provide full details of the works imported.
(iv) It is also not uncommon for audits to demonstrate that a record company
may owe royalties but may not be able to attribute the
money to particular
(v) Special Event and Dance School licensees are not required to provide
details of musical works reproduced.
(vi) In the sample data used for the distribution of schools' photocopying
moneys, sometimes it is impossible to identify a work at
all, even after going
account in determining the
page rate. An example of the difficulties sometimes
faced is where the work is "unknown" by author "unknown" and publisher
or a public domain work without information about the print
arrangement, (e.g. "Amazing Grace", author "unknown", publisher "unknown").
Where there are some details about the work, but ownership is unknown, the
moneys allocated to this title are placed on hold and
researched, as described
elsewhere in the Report.
(vii) There are also titles where the publishers are in dispute as to who
controls the rights (referred to as "dual claims"). These
are also placed in
suspense until the Society is advised how the dispute has resolved.
It may be a surprise to many, that given the complexity of its sundry
licensing, AMCOS has a very small amount of undistributable
income. It is quite
clear that the Society does not claim for works which it does not control and
does not actively seek to accrue
money in "Control Accounts".
NET TRANSFER TO CONTROL
1994 to date $184,133
1993 $281,847
1992 $164,584
1991 $51,593
1990 $11,172
Ex Indents, Audits, Special Events
1993 $13,772
1992 $17,227
1991 $155,739
1990 $14,504
21.2.2. Dealing With The Undistributable
The apportionment of any unidentified moneys is at the discretion of the
Moneys which are identifiable by song and transferred to Control accounts
remain in those accounts and the details are circulated
to members. To date no
money has been transferred from the Control Account for any other use by the
Where moneys are collected for which no practicable method of specific
distribution is available, the Board has in the past authorised
apportionment of
the moneys on the basis of similar uses of works released by the record company.
Money from the Schools Photocopy
Agreement in suspense is held for 6 years,
after which it is placed back in the distribution pool.
The Board has in three cases approved the application of certain specified
unidentified moneys for special industry and Society requirements:
(a) royalties received for indent records to be made available to pay for
development of a new computer system;
(b) fees arising from Special Event licensing to be made available to fund
anti-piracy action; and
(c) unidentifiable audit income of $90,000 was put towards extraordinary
costs incurred by the Society in connection with the Prices
Surveillance
Authority's Inquiry into the music industry.
To date, costs for both the computer development and the anti-piracy fund
have been met from Society revenue and no apportionment
of unidentified moneys
has been made to cover them. It is further noted that the accounts of the
Society (quite properly) include
an accrued liability to on-pay all unidentified
moneys after deduction of the standard 12.5% rate of commission.
Different procedures come into operation when the owner of a work cannot
immediately be identified or can be identified but not located.
Procedures also
vary according to the source of the use/earnings and the value. In all cases
unidentified works are rigorously checked
against numerous reference points
including the CISAC "World Works List", music industry journals etc. Those still
unidentified are
then dealt with as follows.
(i) Works from affiliated societies included in distributions:
(a) TV or film works are further researched with the overseas society
concerned. If, after 2 years, the cue sheets are still outstanding,
an "average"
cue sheet is compiled using the episodes of the same series where the music used
is consistent.
(b) Other works (value of $50 or more) are circulated to publishers and
societies. Any performances remaining unclaimed after 6 years
are deleted unless
there has been a subsequent performance.
(ii) Local works assumed to be written by APRA members but not registered.
The values of such performances (with minor exceptions)
are placed in a royalty
adjustment account and are paid out when identified. This account is cleared by
adding remaining monies to
the subsequent distribution but replenished with the
earnings of all relevant works from the subsequent distribution.
(iii) Registered works in which one or more copyright owner is a non-member
of any society. Local works are treated similarly to (ii)
above. The writer
share of overseas works is normally paid to the society of the original
publisher, but if not published (or the
publisher is not a member) then
treatment is as per (ii) above. Non-member publisher shares are, where possible,
paid to the writers
of the work or, if not, treated as in (ii) above.
(iv) Unresolved disputes between interested parties stay in suspense accounts
until resolved. On occasions monies are paid out against
a member's indemnity.
(v) Identified owners with no known address.
Lists of such members are regularly circulated with newsletters etc. as well
as individual research through managers, booking agents,
other band members etc.
Mailouts are also made to last known addresses and advertisements placed in
local and national newspapers.
After 6 years such amounts as remain are paid to
the NSW Government under the provisions of the Unclaimed Monies Act.
UNDISTRIBUTED FUNDS AT YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE
1. Royalty adjustment and suspense accounts
2. Items in dispute, unidentified concert promotions, reversionary
528,258 551,198
3. Overseas Societies Distribution suspense accounts: items in dispute/not
21.4.1. Undistributed Money Where Owner
Unidentified Or Located
CAL is not able to identify or locate a payee at the time of distribution in
(i) Where the work copied has been successfully identified from the
information supplied on the sample record (or CAL feels that the
work may be
identified with further research), however, it has not been possible to locate
the payee/recipient. These fees are held
pending further research of the
owner at the expiry
of six years, these fees are rolled into the general
distribution fund;
(ii) The copyright information supplied on the sample record is inadequate to
allow identification of the copied work or no copyright
information has been
supplied. Prior to 1994, these fees formed CAL's distribution fund known as
Distribution B. From 1994, these
fees will be treated in the same way as the
fees in (i) above.
(As to the practice of rolling the undistributed funds back into the
distribution, see comments at 21.1.4 as to need for Attorney
reconsider this system.)
21.4.2. Amount involved each year
The figures provided below provide a total for the monies discussed above.
All figures include both the royalties set aside for further
research and the
unidentified copyright material.
Distribution
21.4.3. Dealing With The Undistributable
Where CAL considers further research will identify or locate the copyright
owner for a work, the fees are held by CAL in the royalty
account pending
further research of the records and eventual distribution.
Until recently, where the information supplied to CAL was inadequate to
identify a copyright owner, the money allocated for that copying
was set aside
for distribution under Distribution "B". This distribution scheme for otherwise
undistributable fees has been disbursed
to bodies representing copyright owners
for purposes that foster and protect the interests of copyright owners
generally. The policy
and operation of the scheme was established by the
directors in 1989. Its purpose was to apply undistributable monies for the
benefit of copyright owners. The directors also took into account that
many collecting societies in Europe make distribution to author
and publisher
bodies only, without making individual distributions.
The 'unknown' copyright owner pool has remained steady at around 5% but, due
to increasingly sophisticated research techniques and
the accumulation of
research data, the percentage is decreasing. However, as CAL's total
distribution pool has increased, equitably
allocating increasingly large sums of
money through Distribution "B" became a strain on CAL's resources.
In accordance with advice from CAL's legal counsel, CAL's directors have
recently determined that cultural and educational allocations
will be an amount
equal to 1% of collections. This allocation will be an administrative expense
and not part of the quantum of the
distribution fund. (The statutory licence
allows a 1% cultural deduction.) The unknown copyright owner pool will remain in
for six years at which point if research has not identified the copyright
owner it will be rolled back into the distribution fund.
The following payments have been made from unidentifiable funds in the years
Australian Copyright Council
(to support author and
licensee advice services)
Australian Book Publishers Association
(for copyright related projects of benefit to
publishers)
Australian Society of Authors
(used for purchase of
National Book Council (reading campaign)
Western Institute Foundation (copyright essay prize)
Gus O'Donnell Biannual Prize Trust (essay prize)
Australian Journalists Association (Qld branch) (to fight copyright
infringement action)
Education Lending Right (financial support for lobbying)
Centre for Copyright Studies (ANU)
CAL Database Establishment (to improve services to members)
NAVA non-recourse loan (to assist in establishment of VISCOPY)
21.4.4. Accounts
CAL maintains an account into which all licence revenues are paid and from
which it draws moneys for operational expenses and distribution
moneys claimed
by members. Undistributed moneys are also held in this account but are accounted
for separately.
The Attorney-General's guidelines for collecting societies declared to
administer the statutory licence, require CAL to hold any undistributable
collected under such licence in a trust account. Moneys in this account are
invested by a funds manager in securities authorised
Trustee Act 1925
Moneys are transferred from this account to a separate account to cover
operational expenses.
Undistributed monies that have been collected under the statutory licence are
held for a period of four years and then rolled back
into the distribution pool
for redistribution to copyright owners.
Royalties calculated from monies collected under the voluntary licence
schemes (most of CAL's licence schemes are voluntary schemes)
are held for six
years. At the expiry of this period the royalties are also rolled back into the
distribution pool.
All of PPCA's is either expended on administration or distributed. There are
no undistributed sums.
21.6. CONCLUSION
Contrary to rumour, there are no unreasonably large sums of money that are
retained by the societies as
undistributable
funds. Certainly AVCS has an
amount that is unduly high given the over-all scale of its operations but that
is entirely explicable
given its early stage of development. If similar
proportions were evident in five years time there would be cause to reconsider
procedures.
Similarly, CAL has a large undistributable pool, but this is inevitable given
the nature of rights that it is administering. Photocopy
records will always
contain imperfections and this is more often a reflection of those who fill in
the records rather than the Society's
ability to process them.
RECOMMENDATION
• That the Attorney General reconsider the Guideline for Declared
Societies which obliges them to pay undistributable sums into
the general
distribution pool after a certain period.
Recommendations as to how undistributable sums might be dealt with are
discussed further in "Cultural Functions".
22.1. AMCOS
22.1.1. Summary of Assets and Liabilities
22.2.1. Summary of Assets and Liabilities
22.3.1. Summary of Assets and Liabilities
22.4.1. Summary of Assets and Liabilities
The accounts of all the Societies have been audited for each of the last 10
years for which they have been in operation. None of the
accounts presented have
been qualified. Audited annual accounts are available to members and non
The information available in audited annual reports is an aggregated summary
of income and expenditure, profit and loss and does not
provide a picture of
revenue is derived and
expenses are incurred. To obtain a
more complete picture of the operation of the Societies from a financial
viewpoint more detailed
income and expenditure reports were reviewed against the
objectives and strategic plans of the enterprise and an understanding of
administrative procedures in operation.
All the Societies made detailed accounting information available to the
Review, but some asked that it be treated in the strictest
confidence as they
considered it could be misinterpreted by uninformed observers. Without access to
this more detailed information
it is extremely difficult to make an informed
decision about the efficiency of the Societies with respect to their
collections, administration
and distributions of funds. Besides being accurate
and clear, it is important for the sake of achieving a reputation for ethical
operation, that the accounts be available not only to members but also, to the
wider community. The impact of collecting societies
is such that the commercial
and cultural interests of the general community demand such openness and
transparency.
It is recommended that to increase accountability, all Societies should
have in place a procedure for annual budgetary approval and
authorisation of day to day expenditures. They should also be required to make
available more detailed accounting information
to members on request.
More comment on the costs and efficiency of collection, administration and
distribution will be made under "Administrative Expenditure"
22.1. AMCOS
Accounts for 1983 to 1993 were provided and have been reviewed. The
accounting year is July 1st to June 30th. The accounts are well
presented with
explanatory notation where appropriate.
AMCOS accounts are audited annually by KPMG Peat Marwick.
A copy of the audited AMCOS accounts is supplied to all members and
affiliated Societies and is also lodged with the Australian Securities
Commission where it is available to the public. There is no policy of public
supply upon request.
22.1.1. Summary of Assets and Liabilities
Assets Total
Liabilities
Retained profits
(All amounts in $ millions)
Accounts for 1983 to 1993 were provided and have been reviewed. The
accounting year is July 1st to June 30th. The accounts are well
presented with
explanatory notation where appropriate.
APRA accounts are audited annually by KPMG Peat Marwick and have never been
qualified. The accounts are furnished to those members
entitled to attend and
vote at General Meetings (of whom there are currently 8,087) in the printed
form, examples of which were provided
to the Review.
The accounts are regarded as documents on the public record and are available
to anybody. The reason they are only provided in the
first instance to members
entitled to attend and vote at meetings is that the cost of printing and
providing them to all members
would be substantial, without any real
corresponding benefit to those who earn no income from the Association. This is
APRA's controlled entity Music Management & Investment Pty
Ltd was established at the recommendation of Peat Marwick as a service
in order to provide APRA's administration and distribution services. This was
investigated to the satisfaction of the Inquiry
and found not to give rise to
any concern. It was wound up on the 30th June 1994. (See also "Taxation".)
22.2.1. Summary of Assets and Liabilities
Assets Total
Liabilities
Retained profits
(All amounts in $ millions)
AVCS was established in 1990. Accounts for 1990,91,92 and 1993 were provided
and have been reviewed. The accounting year is July 1st
to June 30th. The
accounts are well presented with explanatory notation where appropriate.
AVCS accounts are audited annually by KPMG Peat Marwick and have never been
qualified. Internal audits are conducted throughout the
All members of the Society receive a copy of the audited accounts as part of
the Annual Report which is provided to members with the
notice paper for the
annual general meeting.
A copy of the Annual Report and financial statements is also provided to the
Attorney-General in accordance with section 135R of the
that provision the Attorney-General must cause a copy of the report to be laid
before each House of the Parliament within
15 sitting days of that House after
receipt of the report(135R(2)).
Copies of the Annual Report and audited accounts are made available by AVCS
to any person, on request, and are also available through
publication in
In addition to its reporting to members, a copy of the auditors report and
financial statements are furnished to the Attorney-General
in accordance with
section 135R of the
. The Attorney-General must cause a copy of the
report to be laid before each House of Parliament within 15 sitting days of that
after the receipt of the report (section 135R(2).
22.3.1. Summary of Assets and Liabilities
Assets Total
Liabilities
Retained profits
(All amounts in $ millions)
Accounts for 1983 to 1993 were provided and have been reviewed. Until July
1990, the accounting year was January 1st to December 31st.
They are now based
on a financial year. The accounts are well presented with explanatory notation
where appropriate.
CAL's accounts are audited annually by Camphin Boston & Co and have never
been qualified. The accounts are also subject to monthly
internal audits carried
out by external auditors as directed by the board Audit Committee. Those
accounts are also provided to the
Attorney General's Department in accordance
with s.135ZZD. The accountability levels is very high.
Audited accounts are mailed to all members with the notification papers for
the AGM. CAL's audited accounts are available to all non-members
on request.
22.4.1. Summary of Assets and Liabilities
Assets Total
Liabilities
Retained profits
(All amounts in $ millions)
CAL holds considerable cash amounts that are not reflected in
the above table. At 30th June 1993 these amounted to $21.2 million.
This accumulation of monies in the cash reserve was due to a number of
factors. Some of the retained surplus was due to the manner
in which indemnity
fees were distributed and some due to provision the payment of tax. Both matters
are now satisfactorily resolved.
The reserves will be run down and the cash will
be distributed over the next few years.
PPCA was formed in 1969. Annual accounts (financial statements) for the years
1983 to 1993 were provided and have been reviewed. (The
accounting year is July
1st to June 30th.)
22.5.1. Translucency Of Information
At first glance, the annual accounts appear to be presented in a fairly
standard form. However, when specific amounts are tracked
from year to year,
especially transfers of monies between PPCA and ARIA, these are difficult to
follow through without access to
further information. Similarly, the size and
reason for bad debts is difficult to follow. This latter is particularly
significant
in the earlier years when the size of the bad debts seems
unreasonably large for the type of enterprise under review.
All further financial information requested, was provided to the Inquiry. It
was concluded that some of the anomalies were due to
inadequate detail or
explanation in the annual accounts and some were due to previously unfound
errors. Thus it would be difficult
for reasonable conclusions to be drawn on the
accounts without access to the additional information provided to the Inquiry.
is more, from 1989, the format of the annual financial statements was
changed and only summary accounts were provided (although it
is stressed that
these comply with the relevant corporate law requirements). This makes any
analysis of the accounts from the annual
financial statements even more
It is recommended that the format of the PPCA annual accounts be changed
such that more information is provided. The best way to do
this would be to
provide more informed notes to the accounts.
(More detail and additional comments on these matters are provided in the
Chapter - "Administrative Expenditure".)
22.5.2. Auditors
PPCA's accounts are audited annually by Deloite Touche Tomatsu and have never
been qualified. Deloites also audit ARIA accounts. As
the two sets of accounts
are so inter-related, it would seem sensible that both accounts are audited by
the same firm. However, it
is for that very reason that they should be audited
by separate firms.
It is recommended that, to preserve the separation, accountability and
integrity of both organisations, (PPCA and ARIA,) different
auditors be
appointed for each entity.
PPCA's audited accounts are mailed to all members. PPCA's audited accounts
are made available to non-members on request and are also
left on display at the
reception desk.
22.5.3. Summary of Assets and Liabilities
Assets Total
Liabilities
Retained profits
(All amounts in $millions)
23.1. INCOME TAX
23.2. SALES TAX
23.3. WITHHOLDING TAX - AMOUNT OF TAX GATHERED FROM FOREIGN COPYRIGHT
23.4. AMCOS
23.9. RECOMMENDATIONS
23.1. INCOME TAX
Taxation arrangements for each of the collecting Societies vary greatly. Some
arrangements are governed by the nature of the enterprise
and the rules of
incorporation but it would seem that the time is right for an approach to the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO) for
a consistent ruling to cover all Societies.
This ruling may involve a change in articles of association or method of
incorporation
itself, but it would seem inappropriate to
treat monies collected by the Societies differently. These past differences have
innovative and often complex taxation minimisation procedures, and high
consultants fees. This would seem inappropriate when the
objective of each
Society should be to maximise distributions to members who in turn pay tax on
their receipts.
The collecting society should be seen (and treated) as a conduit of money to
the rights owners - owners who will have a tax obligation
in respect of that
income. This is certainly the view taken by the ATO in respect of some of the
Societies, but not all. This divergence
of approach is undesirable. It will be
necessary for the ATO will be to understand the complex and divergent methods of
the Societies
and to understand that, notwithstanding these differences, their
underlying purposes are the concurrent.
Considerable time and expense has been spent by the societies in clarifying
their tax position. AVCS and CAL have favourable (and
sensible) rulings from the
Australian Tax office which recognises that receipts under the
are the corpus of the trust administered by Society and therefore not income for
tax purposes. Amounts allocated to cover
administration costs become subject to
taxation at the point of allocation and these are offset by the allowable
expenditure incurred.
Only interest on the funds is treated as income and taxed
in the Society's hands (less allowable deductions). That Ruling was obtained
only after considerable expense was incurred in obtaining professional advice
and after lengthy negotiations with the Australian
Tax Office. Further, any
change in the Society's practices is likely to necessitate obtaining a further
ruling. Resources allocated
by the Society to establish its tax position from
time to time reduce the amount payable to copyright owner beneficiaries.
PPCA has received tax advice that no income tax is payable if all net
proceeds are distributed to copyright owners within 6 months
of the end of each
tax year. Similarly, APRA has received counsels' advice that the fees and
royalties collected on behalf of owners
is not taxable in the hands of the
Society but that the income from interest and any investments is taxable
(although the administration
costs of the Association are deductible).
The important principle is that collecting societies are conduits for
royalties payable to authors, composers and other copyright
owners. Insofar as a
society is simply a conduit for the flow of funds between copyright users and
for income tax to be levied solely in the
hands of the ultimate beneficiary of those funds where the tax status of that
beneficiary
(for example tax exempt members) and any allowable deductions can be
taken into account.
It is recommended that discussions be held with the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO) to rationalise taxation arrangements for the
Generally, it would make sense for it to be recognised that the
monies which the societies collect are held on trust for members
and thus are
not subject to tax. The amounts allocated to cover the administration costs
become subject to taxation at the point
of allocation, and these are off-set by
the allowable expenditures incurred.
It is recommended that tax exempt status be formally accorded collecting
societies that are appropriately structured and administered.
This would be
fair and equitable and would eliminate the allocation of member's funds to
re-confirming its position from time to
time. Tax exempt status would be
particularly helpful to new societies who are still establishing their
procedures.
23.2. SALES TAX
Sales tax is paid on all purchases. The societies have no sales tax
23.3. WITHHOLDING TAX - AMOUNT OF TAX GATHERED
FROM FOREIGN COPYRIGHT OWNERS
The societies withhold taxes on overseas distributions in accordance with the
relevant reciprocal agreement between Australia and
the country concerned. (New
Zealand 15%, other countries with double taxation agreements with Australia
mainly 10%, countries with
no double taxation agreement at rates advised by the
Taxation Department.) As the figure below show, the amounts of tax collected
increasing annually.
AMCOS believes that it is anomalous that the rate of withholding tax between
Australia and New Zealand is higher than between Australia
and many other
countries and between New Zealand and many countries. AMCOS and the music
publishers are based in Australia so royalties
from New Zealand attract a 15%
withholding tax, notwithstanding they may be remitted on to the USA or Europe.
If the royalties were
sent directly from New Zealand to those countries there
would only be a 10% withholding tax. This is a sore point with some music
publishers.
23.4. AMCOS
AMCOS enjoys no tax relief or tax exempt status.
When making distributions to foreign copyright owners, APRA deducts and pays
withholding tax, as required by law
Tax payments from royalties collected in Australia and New Zealand over the
past 5 years is considerable as shown in the table below.
AVCS enjoys no form of tax relief or tax exempt status. The Society has
obtained a tax ruling from the ATO as to its tax position.
AVCS believes that tax exempt status would be fair and equitable and would
eliminate the allocation of member's funds to reconfirming
its tax position as
changes are made.
YEAR ENDING 30 JUNE ROYALTY WITHHOLDING TAX PAID
1994 (to date) $40,346
CAL has received a very favourable tax ruling from the ATO.
CAL treats its income from collections and any interest accrued from that
income as a "trust fund" administered by CAL. The funds
utilised by CAL and
shown in their accounts are budgeted amounts taken from that "trust fund"
annually to administer the enterprise.
Under the ruling, amounts allocated to
cover administration costs become subject to taxation at the point of allocation
are offset by the allowable expenditure incurred. Any residual at the
end of the year is transferred back into the "trust fund".
Thus CAL makes no
"profit". By this method CAL pays no tax. Moneys distributed to members are paid
directly from the "trust fund".
CAL withholds tax on overseas distributions in accordance with relevant
reciprocal agreements between Australia and the country concerned.
distributions to date have been to the Copyright Licensing Agency in the UK. In
all cases 10 percent withholding tax was deducted
at the point of remittance and
paid to the ATO. Amounts involved are as follows :
Distribution
Amount of Tax
( A$ '000's)
The issue of withholding tax does not apply to PPCA because all distributions
are made to Australian resident copyright owners or
Australia resident
agents/licensees of overseas copyright owners.
23.9. RECOMMENDATIONS
That discussions be held with the Australian Taxation Office to rationalise
taxation arrangements for the collecting societies.
That tax exempt status be formally accorded collecting societies that are
appropriately structured and administered.
24. ADMINISTRATIVE
EXPENDITURE
24.1. SUMMARY OF ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENDITURE AND PROPORTION OF INCOME
AVAILABLE FOR DISTRIBUTION TO MEMBERS.
24.2. AMCOS
24.2.1. Staff summary
24.3.1. Staff summary
24.3.2. Premises
24.3.3. Other
24.4.1. Staff summary
24.4.2. Premises
24.5.1. Staff summary
24.5.2. Premises
24.6.1. The Business
24.6.2. Profit And
24.6.3. Bad Debts
24.6.4. Administrative Costs In Proportion To Funds Distributed To Owners
24.6.5. Inter-relationship Between ARIA And PPCA
24.6.6. Staff Costs
24.6.7. Premises
24.6.8. Abnormal Item
24.6.9. Further Review
24.7. RECOMMENDATIONS
The administration of the enterprises under review varies considerably from
excellent to very poor. It is difficult to summarise the
findings overall as the
administration of each entity varies with the amount, source and method of
collection and distribution. These
elements have also varied over time and
administrative procedures have similarly varied as the enterprise changes and
as key executives have changed the culture of the enterprise.
A well administered enterprise should have clearly stated goals and
objectives which are easily available to, and meet the approval
stakeholders. In the case of the Collecting Societies the stakeholders are the
Members, the Board, the employees, and the
general public.
A strategic plan should specify how these goals and objectives are to be
achieved. The way in which they are to be achieved should
be reflected in
clearly defined organisation charts and operational procedures which include
authorisation procedures, and job descriptions
which define the responsibilities
and authorities of each staff member. There should also be review and auditing
procedures to ensure
that objectives are being met and to provide for a process
of continual improvement as the economic, technical and cultural environment
which the enterprise operates changes.
As part of this review, the extent to which these procedures are in place has
been evaluated and comment made where there are perceived
deficiencies plus
recommendation for improvement.
Because the administration of the enterprises is so different recommendations
made, where appropriate, relate to a specific collecting
One key element on which a useful comparison should be able to be made is the
proportion of collections that are distributed to members.
This is largely
dictated by the proportion of collection revenue spent on administration,
although maturity of the enterprise, the
actual dollar amount collected, and
policy decisions on the amount of funds to be distributed each year or retained
for future distributions
also affect the amount distributed.
Figures for administrative expenditure as a proportion of total revenue over
the last 10 years are provided as part of the summary
information for each
enterprise. A comparison of the 1993 expenditure is given below. These
comparisons should be treated with caution
until the reason for the differences
are fully understood by reading the summary for each enterprise.
24.1. SUMMARY OF ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENDITURE AND
PROPORTION OF INCOME AVAILABLE FOR DISTRIBUTION TO MEMBERS.
% Administrative Expenditure
Other Expenditure
% Available to Copyright Owners
All the collecting Societies have a declared objective to improve the
proportion of collections to be distributed to members. In some
cases this will
be achieved increasing administrative expenditure whilst increasing collections
at an even higher rate. In other
cases there is an objective to reduce
administrative expenditure.
24.2. AMCOS
AMCOS appears to be now a well administered enterprise.
The purpose and objectives of the Society are clearly stated in easily
understood form in a number of brochures available to members,
members, staff and the general public. These brochures include details of
bodies and their relationship
The current strategic plan, which should be the basis for the achievement of
these objectives is little more than a budget with notes
attached. When
questioned about the content and format of the Strategic plan, the Chief
Executive, Mr Jeremy Fabinyi, stated that
the environment in which AMCOS is
operating has many uncertainties which make the development of a detailed
strategic plan difficult
and somewhat irrelevant until the outcome of some
crucial issues is known.
The AMCOS submission lists 3 crucial issues to be resolved this year the
outcome of which could have far reaching effects on the operation
• AMCOS states that the results of negotiations of the new industry
agreements between AMCOS and ARIA (the Australian Recording
Association), and AMCOS and RIANZ (the Recording Industry Association of New
Zealand) will have a major impact on the music
publishing industry and the
operation of AMCOS.
• There is still uncertainty about government plans, mooted for July
1994, to repeal the importation provisions of the
• A feasibility study is underway to examine ways in which AMCOS could
further co-operate with APRA to introduce more efficient
systems for the
administration of royalties. AMCOS believes that the results of this study will
have far reaching effects.
AMCOS should produce a strategic plan each year for the following year at
least, and possibly the following 3 years. This plan should
restate the goals
and objectives of the Society, the economic, technical and social environment in
which AMCOS is likely to operate
and any assumptions made.
If there are several likely scenarios, separate plans showing different
assumptions should be prepared with an indication of the most
The plan should be the basis of the operating budgets for the next 3 years
for Board approval and the targets and objectives for each
operating division of
the Society. From this plan should flow changes in business procedures and job
descriptions and personal objectives
for each staff member.
AMCOS has provided some very good organisation charts and workflow diagrams.
Visits to the Society showed that the establishment is
well organised and staff
functions are well defined. There are appropriate, regular, ongoing audit and
review procedures in place
to ensure that processes in operation are maintained
at an optimum level.
The proportion of the Society's gross income expended on administration and
other overheads, and available for distribution to members
is listed below for
the last 7 years. This expenditure seems appropriate for the operation under
revue. A more detailed breakdown
of this expenditure has been reviewed and all
individual components seem appropriate.
Summary of administrative expenditure and proportion of income available
for distribution to members
%Administrative Expenditure
Other Expenditure
% available to Copyright Owners
(Note that the above figures do not add up to 100% because AMCOS works on a
system whereby set percentages are deducted for administrative
charges. Some
years, the charges have been slightly in excess of actual costs and some years,
less. The abnormally large percentage
available for distribution in 1992 and to
a lesser extent in 1993, was due to the computerisation of the Overseas
Department in 1991-1992
which meant that no royalties were paid overseas in
1991. These payments were caught up in the subsequent periods.)
24.2.1. Staff summary
Staff salary costs budgeted for the year end June 1994 are $.728 million.
Numbers of staff employed in the last 5 years are shown
in the table below.
Full-time staff
Part-time staff
AMCOS does not own premises but rents appropriate office space in North
Sydney and in New Zealand.
Abnormal item
AMCOS has contributed one third of the formation expenses of PACCS. The
amount contributed by AMCOS to date is $.134 million. The
start date of PACCS
has been delayed but due to government assurances that legislation will be
enacted the debt is held in the AMCOS
accounts under Sundry Debtors. These costs
will be recouped from PACCS' first year's income.
APRA is an exceptionally well administered enterprise.
The purpose and objectives of the Association are clearly stated in easily
understood form in a number of brochures available to members,
members, staff and the general public.
APRA's current strategic plan is excellent. It contains all the elements of a
good working document including the background environment
in which APRA is
operating, statistics of past performance indicators and clearly defined,
measurable plans for achieving current
objectives.
APRA has also provided excellent workflow diagrams which would be equal to
the best to be found in Australia today.
Visits to the Association showed that the establishment is well organised and
staff functions are well defined. There are appropriate,
regular, ongoing review
procedures in place to ensure that processes in operation are maintained at an
optimum level.
APRA also experiments with new procedures for increasing collections. One
current initiative is that of reviewing overseas TV program
guides to identify
the occasions for possible use of members' works. Although costly, this
procedure has proved extremely cost effective
and APRA is currently establishing
a department to carry out this new method of collection.
There is a high level of use of Information Technology to reduce costs and
improve quality of service to members. There are impressive
audit procedures in
The one area of concern is the high dependence on the knowledge and skills of
key staff. APRA has several initiatives in place to
ensure that the effect of
the exposure to this dependency is minimised.
• APRA ensures that most key staff can fulfil more than one function.
Staff regularly undertake jobs other than their own to
ensure that they are able
to fulfil other functions.
• APRA ensures that staff morale is high. That this initiative is
successful is evidenced by the fact that staff career episodes
are much longer
than those in equivalent enterprises. In addition, if staff do leave they often
• Jobs are structured in work-groups with a great deal of autonomy and
responsibility for a complete function. Members check
each others' work and
there are impressive audit procedures in place.
The proportion of the Society's gross income expended on administration and
other overheads, and available for distribution to members
is listed below for
the last 10 years. This expenditure seems appropriate for the operation under
revue. A more detailed breakdown
of this expenditure has been reviewed and all
individual components seem appropriate.
Summary of administrative expenditure and proportion of income available
for distribution to members
%Admin Expenditure
Other Expenditure *
Nett Distribution %
• includes tax and cultural deduction
24.3.1. Staff summary
Staff salary costs budgeted for the year end June 1994 are $3.92 million.
Numbers of staff employed in the last 5 years are shown
in the table below.
Full-time staff
Part-time staff
24.3.2. Premises
APRA owns its premises in Australia and New Zealand. There is no mortgage on
either premises. The Australian premises are valued at
$3.800 million and those
in New Zealand at $.335 million.
In Sydney, APRA sub-lets part of its premises to AVCS at market rate rental.
70 sq. metres is made available to Export Music Australia
as an in-kind
contribution towards the industry export drive. In Auckland, APRA sub-lets part
of its premises to AMCOS at market
rental rate.
As a matter of equity, it is important that APRA develop procedures by
which the funds which are expended on such capital assets are
amortised over a
long period so that the rights owners of a few years do not pay for such long
term investments while the owners
of later years reap the benefits. There are no
such procedures in place yet and this must be addressed.
24.3.3. Other
APRA provides information from its computer system to AVCS, AMCOS and PPCA.
All pay negotiated rates for the service.
AVCS appears to be a well administered enterprise.
The purpose and objectives of the Society are clearly stated in easily
understood form in a brochure available to members, potential
members, staff and
the general public.
The current strategic plan, which should be the basis for the achievement of
these objectives, contains good background material including
all relevant
support documents such as the Society's Mission Statement, Acts under which it
operates, Memorandum & Articles and
comment on the prevailing Economic and
Political environment. However, the plan itself, seems more like a statement of
and policy than a plan of how these will be achieved with well
defined, measurable goals and targets. A detailed budget was also
AVCS' Chief Executive, Ms Susan Bridge, commented that in these uncertain
times it is difficult to provide a more comprehensive Strategic
AVCS should produce a strategic plan each year for the following year at
least, and possibly the following 3 years.
This plan should restate the goals and objectives for the Society,
the economic, technical and social environment in which AVCS is
operate and any assumptions made.
If there are several likely scenarios, separate plans showing
different assumptions should be prepared with an indication of the most
The plan should be the basis of the operating budgets for the next
3 years for Board approval and the targets and objectives for each
division of the Society. From this plan should flow changes in business
procedures and job descriptions and personal objectives
for each staff
The operation of AVCS is simpler than that of the other collecting Societies
under review and the enterprise is newer. Discussions
with the Society showed
that the establishment is well organised.
In the paper on projects for 1993 there was a plan to install a comprehensive
computer system. Development estimates for the initial
specification varied from
$ .008 million to $ .250 million. This initiative is currently suspended until a
more detailed specification
has been prepared. Some simple computer systems are
in place but there is a need for a more comprehensive system.
The proportion of the Society's gross income expended on administration and
other overheads, and available for distribution to members
is listed below for
the last 5 years. This expenditure seems appropriate for the operation under
revue. A more detailed breakdown
of this expenditure has been reviewed and all
individual components seem appropriate.
Summary of administrative expenditure and proportion of income available
for distribution to members
%Admin Expenditure
% Other Expenditure
% available
to Copyright Owners
* This amount was borrowed to establish AVCS.
24.4.1. Staff summary
Staff salary costs budgeted for the year end June 1994 are $0.373 million.
Numbers of staff employed in the last 4 years are shown
in the table below.
Full-time staff
Part-time staff
24.4.2. Premises
AVCS is located in the same building as APRA and rents appropriate premises
CAL appears to be an exceptionally well administered enterprise. In addition
to the statutory annual audit, monthly internal audits
are carried out by CAL's
external auditors as directed by the board audit committee.
The purpose and objectives of the Agency are clearly stated in easily
understood form in a number of brochures available to members,
members, staff and the general public. CAL has just appointed a Public Relations
specialist to increase understanding of
CAL's role and purpose amongst CAL's
constituents and the general public. This is a positive initiative.
The current strategic plan is excellent. It includes background information
detailing the environment in which CAL is to operate over
the next 5 years and
statements of objectives and policy with measurable goals and targets. It also
provides detail of future areas
of potential collection opportunities such as
the continuing education enterprises of Australian Universities and areas of
including the new technological distribution facilities available through
the Internet.
CAL's strategic plan is reflected in the objectives for each department.
Progress on departmental objectives is updated every two
weeks by the department
Manager in a report to the Chief Executive. The report is used in a progress
meeting of all Managers and
the Chief Executive, who form the Management
Committee. Every two months, Department Managers prepare a more detailed report
is sent through the Chief Executive to CAL's Board.
Departmental objectives also form the basis of duty statements for each staff
member, these in turn form the basis of staff performance
evaluations.
CAL operates a well co-ordinated, open enterprise where staff are well
informed of enterprise objectives and progress towards those
objectives.
Although individual duties are well specified, staff are encouraged to be
flexible and assist other members when work
overloads occur.
Being a newly established, fast growing enterprise, CAL Chief Executive has
chosen not to delegate his authorities to other executives
at this stage,
although managers participate in authorising expenditures and decision making.
Audit procedures are rigorous but not
onerous, as befits a "young"
enterprise.
CAL's operations include several innovative administrative and accounting
processes such as the capitalisation of all software costing
over $500. Software
costing under $500 is expensed.
The proportion of the Agency's gross income expended on administration and
other overheads, and available for distribution to members
is listed below for
the last 3 years. This expenditure seems appropriate for the operation under
revue. A more detailed breakdown
of this expenditure has been reviewed and all
individual components seem appropriate.
NOTE: CAL has an objective to reduce administrative expenditure to 20% of
income by the year ended June 1999. This will be achieved
by a combination of
economies of scale and increased efficiencies, in particular from already
installed Information Technology.
Summary of administrative expenditure and proportion of income available
for distribution to members
% Administrative Expenditure
% available to Copyright Owners
* Projected amount.
24.5.1. Staff summary
Staff salary costs budgeted for the year end June 1994 are $.9256 million
(exclusive of bonuses, superannuation contributions, leave
loading and other
benefits. The amount inclusive of such amounts is $1.075 million.
Numbers of staff employed in the last 4 years are shown in the table
Full-time staff
Part-time staff
24.5.2. Premises
CAL rents appropriate premises from National Australia Trustees Ltd.
PPCA has had a varied history. From the information reviewed it would appear
that the company was poorly administered during the period
to 1990. The reason
for this conclusion is the overall lack of information available for that period
to explain significant poor
performance indicators such as:-
• the high cost of administration in the years 1984-1990 compared with
the proportion of income available for distribution to
members, (the declared
purpose of the enterprise.)
% available to Copyright Owners
• the level of bad debts was much higher in the years to 1991 than
would be expected from a similar enterprise:
Debt as a % of revenue
• the high degree of interrelation of ARIA and PPCA financial
transactions, especially in the area of inter company loans.
This detail is impossible to derive from publicly
available records such as PPCA and ARIA annual reports.
Bal. owing by ARIA to PPCA at start of year
Bal. owing by PPCA to ARIA at start of year
IFPI fees paid by ARIA reimbursed by PPCA
Man. fees paid by PPCA reimbursed by ARIA
Net payment made by PPCA to ARIA
Net payment made by ARIA to PPCA
Bal. owing by ARIA to PPCA at
end of year
Bal. owing by PPCA to ARIA at end of year
(Table presented in format provided by PPCA. All figures in $ millions
rounded to nearest $1000)
It is obvious, after discussion with PPCA's current executives and a detailed
analysis of company records made available to the Inquiry,
that the information
from which to draw reasoned conclusions is not available in printed or
computerised form or in the current corporate
memory. (The current executives
were appointed in 1990 and advised that records on take-over were poor or
non-existent.)
This review has therefore concentrated on an analysis of administrative
processes from 1991 to date.
24.6.1. The Business Plan
Given the very poor corporate 'health' of PPCA in the period up to 1990, the
progress made since then, towards putting the company
on a more business-like
footing, has been good. However, there is still more work to be done to bring
the administration of the company
to a satisfactory level.
The strategy of the current Executive Director is to increase revenue, to
'revitalise' licensing and, to a lesser extent, to reduce
costs. Whilst these
are good goals, and indeed the number of licenses has increased impressively
from 4000 in 1990 to 13,000 in 1994,
the written corporate management plan
presented to the Inquiry of
these broad objectives are to be achieved
is poor. The plan revealed to the Inquiry, which comprises one A4 page, is
little more
than a mission statement and a statement of objectives. The
executives state that they have the "how" part of the plan in a number
documents but not in one document. The executives refused to show the Inquiry
these documents. Certainly the business plans revealed
to the Inquiry were
insufficiently detailed.
It was stressed many times to the Inquiry that the PPCA's budgets and targets
are overseen by the Finance Committee which is made
up of experienced financial
controllers. They should require no less a standard than is required of them by
their own controllers.
It is imperative that the Company have a have a corporate plan which
details achievable, measurable tasks with target dates, cost
consequences and
fall-back procedures if increased revenue targets are not achieved.
society recommendation at 24.4.)
It is recommended that the Finance Committee
of the Company obtain from the executives not only budget and target
documentation but
also full corporate plan (including "how" details) on an
annual basis.
Such a corporate plan would form a good basis for budgeting and review of
performance against subsequent income and expenditure.
24.6.2. Profit And Loss
In a review of the profit and loss statements for the last 5 years there is
considerable room for improvement in at least four important
(i) The actual content of each cost line varies from year to year so
comparisons, and therefore future budget projections, are difficult
to identify.
Also, as the composition of each cost line is not documented, changes, either
for better or worse, are difficult to
Further effort be made to keep the composition of each cost line constant
or at to least document the content and reason for change
of each line.
(ii) Some items included together in specific cost categories seem
inappropriate. For example the "sundry account" included pirate
records purchased to support litigation (a cost of business), together with
expenditures for courtesy flowers and birthday
cakes (staff benefits). (It was
stressed by the executives that the latter two items were in the correct
account. The Inquiry does
not agree with this. Where such expenditures are
placed in the accounts of a record company is neither here nor there, but
because of the high level of transparency required of a collecting society,
staff amenities and benefits must be clearly identified
rather than put into
sundry or miscellaneous accounts.
(iii) PPCA and ARIA expenditures are very closely intermixed.
It is imperative that all ARIA and PPCA accounts are kept separately
(which they are)
and all joint expenditures, where made, are clearly
apportioned at the time of expenditure.
Written documentation on the apportionment of all items must be completed,
kept up-to-date and regularly reviewed by the Finance Committee.
(iv) In the accounts before 1991 it is difficult to identify ARIA and PPCA
costs. Since 1991 an apportionment of costs has been made
but it is not clear
that the apportionment is appropriate. In some cases there is a basis for
justification, such as the floor area
occupied by ARIA and that occupied by
PPCA. However, for example, it is not clear how 'shared' areas are treated.
PPCA must ensure that written procedures are put in place such that
expenses for PPCA and ARIA are appropriately apportioned. It would
also aid the
executive memory and future budgeting if the reasons for the apportionment were
to be clearly documented.
24.6.3. Bad Debts
The Finance Committee reviews bad debts monthly.
PPCA's provision for bad debts was clearly inadequate in the early years of
the review period. However, in the last 2 years, when
bad debts have been better
controlled, the provision has been over conservative. Although an over-provision
for bad debts has no
effect in the long term, in the short term it serves to
withhold funds that could otherwise be available for distribution earlier.
Actual bad debts
Provision for bad debts as shown in balance sheet
All figures given in $ millions rounded to nearest $1000.
PPCA must ensure the provision for bad debts is in line with current
24.6.4. Administrative Costs In Proportion To Funds
Distributed To Members
PPCA's administrative costs are still high in proportion to funds distributed
to members.
SUMMARY OF ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENDITURE AND PROPORTION OF INCOME AVAILABLE
FOR DISTRIBUTION TO MEMBERS
%Admin Expenditure
% available to Copyright Owners
# Possibly understated by investment income.
NB: These figures differ from published figure in that they include income
from interest.
The % available to copyright owners in the above table is possibly lower than
given in the table. Only the 1993 figure has been reconciled
Even though the strategy of PPCA's executive is to increase revenues such
that the proportion of expenses is lowered, and understanding
that it is often
necessary to 'spend money to make money', it would seem that administrative
expenses could be reduced.
It is recommended that PPCA makes an effort to reduce administrative costs
to 30% of revenue in the 1995/96 year.
This will only be achievable if PPCA
stops paying the IFPI fees on behalf of ARIA and if the Company achieves its
present 10% target
(to be achieved without changing the IFPI arrangements). (NB:
By the Company's own figures, eliminating the IFPI payment would reduce
administrative costs to 39.9%. Thus the company's 10% reduction target, together
with non-payment of IFPI by the Company, would
achieve the 30% goal.)
(As recommended later in this Report, if the artificial 1% ceiling is lifted,
the Company calculates that administrative costs will
be reduced to approx
Once PPCA has developed an appropriate business plan and an achievable
budget, staff duties will need to be reviewed to fit the plan
and individual
duty statements including quantifiable, measurable personal goals be set by
negotiation with staff. It is understood
that staff do have duty statements but
it is imperative that these are consistent with the corporate strategic plan and
process of continuous staff appraisal and regular formal performance
reviews against target and a set of written procedures which
document PPCA's
business processes will complete the administrative process. Again, it is
understood that elements of this procedure
are in place. The need now is for
consistency with well documented plans.
It is recommended that personnel and
administrative procedures are put in place consistent with higher levels of
corporate plan.
24.6.5. Inter-relationship Between ARIA And
There has been much comment, both publicly and in this Report, about the
financial and administrative interrelations between ARIA
and PPCA. The Executive
Director of PPCA is also Executive Director of ARIA and several staff serve both
enterprises. Office space
and many administrative services are shared. Although
it would seem likely that before 1991 the division of costs and duties between
the enterprises was not 'fairly' apportioned and it was highly likely that ARIA
was the beneficiary of that arrangement, it is equally
clear that the current
Executive Director of PPCA is making every effort to fairly apportion costs.
There are two significant areas
where it is considered that improvement should
(i) Currently, PPCA pays the annual subscription to the International
Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI). "The main objective
to promote, defend and develop the rights of its members.... IFPI represents the
sound and video recording industries
in dialogue with governments, international
organisations and other similar bodies." Source: IFPI promotional material.
The amount paid by PPCA in the period 1982-1993 as shown in the table of
inter-company loans, column 4, is around $1.416 million.
Indeed, it would appear
that in the years 1983 and 1985 part of the IFPI fee was paid by ARIA.
In 1993 the subscription paid to IFPI was $.276 million. The amount is likely
to increase in 1994. It is the opinion of this Review,
given the low proportion
of income to members, there is a real question whether it is appropriate for
PPCA to pay the IFPI membership
fee for ARIA. If PPCA's expenses to distribution
ratio were better, the matter might not be of such significance but this is not
the case. The Company's rationale for the current arrangement is that the IFPI
has agreed to spend the money "in the Asia-Pacific
market to establish copyright
laws obviously including public performance and broadcast laws and eradicate
piracy. IFPI also promotes
the improvement of the international conventions such
as the Rome And Phonograms Convention, to establish new rights such as
broadcast/communication
and anti-piracy rights for the benefit of record
producers and thus performers. Indeed, one of the most realistic ways that we
to obtain better broadcast or public performance rights in Australia will be
through the initiatives of IFPI with the WIPO secretariat.
Additionally, the
IFPI Groups in the Asia-Pacific region, such as IFPI Hong Kong and Singapore,
have set up the equivalent of PPCA
and do pay, to licensees of Australian
repertoire in those territories, public performance and broadcast income
relevant to the exploitation
of Australian materials in those territories."
It is strongly recommended that PPCA establish a dispute resolution
mechanism to resolve whether PPCA should have paid and should
continue to pay
any of the IFPI fee and if so, what proportion.
The committee which decides this should be made up of the two artists
representatives, the representative of the Managers Forum, a
senior staff member
and the Company Chairman. Given the inherent potential for conflict of interest
in this decision it is important
that persons directly connected with ARIA have
the ability to inform the decision but not determine it.
This decision should be reviewed annually in accordance with the
proportion of IFPI work in the Asia-Pacific region that is directly
performance and broadcast rights as opposed to the other rights of phonogram
producers and performers.
It is further recommended that no further IFPI payments be made by PPCA
until such process is completed.
(ii) The PPCA Executive Director has a much higher profile as head of ARIA
than as head of PPCA. Indeed ARIA has a much higher profile
than PPCA. This
serves to reinforce the generally held opinion that he and his staff spend most
of their time promoting ARIA whilst
PPCA bears their costs. This is used
(unfairly) as a "reason" why PPCA distributions to members are very low when
compared with other
collecting societies.
It is recommended that the PPCA Chief Executive makes every attempt to
publicise PPCA and his role as Executive Director of both PPCA
Loans between PPCA and ARIA are difficult to follow through the annual
accounts. Further detail of inter-company loans was provided.
This showed that
at the end of the review period PPCA owed ARIA $6,894.
A letter from PPCA's auditors dated 28th March 1994 states that all
inter-company loans between PPCA and ARIA have now been repaid.
In his covering
letter on this issue, the Executive Director of PPCA stated "There are no
projects on hand now or in the foreseeable
future where ARIA would seek such
loans and, in any event, such loans would be subject to PPCA board approval
(which board now includes
artists and artist management)."
It is strongly recommended that the complex inter-company loan situation
between PPCA and ARIA built up over the past 10 years not
be allowed in the
future and that amounts are repaid as they occur, or at least at the end of each
24.6.6. Staff Costs
Staff salary costs budgeted for the year to June 1994 are Numbers of staff
employed in the last 5 years are shown in the table below.
Comparison with the
other societies shows these to be high for the nature of the company and the
amount collected and administered.
STAFF SUMMARY
Full-time staff
Part-time staff
The salaries of the following staff are paid in part by PPCA and in part by
ARIA as shown. The Review makes no comment as to the appropriateness
proportions. (The effect of the artificial ceiling on income has been noted
elsewhere.)
Executive Director
General Manager
Administration Man
Secretary to Exec Dir.
Secretary to GM & AM
Receptionist
Lic Dept. Manager
(some part time)
24.6.7. Premises
PPCA rents the 9th floor and part of the 8th floor of 263 Clarence
Subtenants are:-
• The Australian Electronic Retail Ordering System Pty Ltd
• The Australian Record Industry Association
• Music Industry Piracy Investigations
There are no sub-tenant leases in place. Rent is determined on the basis of
floor area occupied.
At least a memorandum of understanding should be entered between the
companies to cover the sub-lease cost reimbursement procedure.
24.6.8. Abnormal Item
As mentioned under the administrative costs for AMCOS, the formation expenses
of PACCS, (The Private Audio Copyright Collecting Society)
were shared between
AMCOS and ARIA. Although an analysis of ARIA accounts and expenditures is
outside the terms of reference of this
Inquiry, because of the close
inter-linking of ARIA and PPCA accounts, and the significance of the amount,
well in excess of $.350
million, assurance was sought from PPCA that any
expenditure on the establishment of PACCS by PPCA has now been repaid by ARIA.
assurance was provided, in writing, and it is in accord with the current
status of inter-company loans as outlined above. Findings
are that there is a
high degree of certainty that any such payments made by PPCA have been repaid by
ARIA in the years 1991-1993.
However, such assurances cannot be given by the
Inquiry for the period before 1990.
24.6.9. Further Reporting
During the course of the Inquiry there have been many discussions with PPCA
executives about ways in which the administration of the
Company might be
improved. The Company has been made aware of certain problems that were not
appreciated by it, prior to the Inquiry
The Chief Executive and General Manager of the Company suggested that, in an
effort to achieve greater transparency, the Company was
prepared to provide
voluntary annual reports to the Attorney General's Department, in the same
manner and to the same level of detail
as the Declared Societies.
It is recommended that the Government seek a written undertaking from PPCA
to make voluntary annual reports and that the undertaking
expressly require the
Company to confirm that the further written documentation/plans required in this
Chapter 24, have been done
and approved by the board.
24.7. RECOMMENDATIONS
• That the Government seek a written undertaking from PPCA to make
voluntary annual reports and that the undertaking expressly
require the Company
to confirm that the further written documentation/plans required in this Chapter
24, have been done and approved
by the board.
25. LONG TERM
FINANCIAL INVESTMENTS AND ARRANGEMENTS
25.2. OWNING
25.4. INDEMNITY
25.1 THE PRINCIPLE
It is a recurrent theme of this Report that all collecting societies must
implement procedures which ensure that members of today
do not subsidise members
of tomorrow. Where money that would have been available for distribution is
spent on long term investments
or other arrangements, members have a right to
ask, "What arrangement is being made so that I am not deprived of my rightful
of the distribution?"
For example, in the late '80s, APRA bought a small building of commercial
offices for an investment. Some might say that a society
has no business being
in the real estate rental industry, others would say that the Association
controls an enormous amount of money
at any one time and that it is prudent
financial management to invest it in a manner likely to maximise its value to
The fact that the building was bought at the height of the real estate boom
and that its value subsequently decreased considerably,
together with the
difficulty of obtaining commercial tenants during the recessionary period, is
merely an example of the dangers
of any speculative investment. No criticism is
made of the fact that the investment lost money. The question is a larger one
The members who were to receive distributions in the year of purchase were,
in effect, deprived of a proportion of their income. When
the investment is
eventually realised, what arrangement will or can be made to ensure that they
are compensated for that loss of
income? When an investment such as this losses
money over a period, those losses are met by those who are members in the year
the loss. How are or can they be compensated, when the investment eventually
turns a profit? Is it really a lottery that simply benefits
those who happen to
be members at the time that the investment is realised?
It must be stressed that the Chief Executive and Company Secretary are
determined that the Association will never again enter such
investments. The
reason of choosing the example of the APRA investment is merely that it is a
useful, and already well-known, example
of a difficulty that can potentially
face all organisations that have a flux of membership.
25.2. OWNING PREMISES
As shown in Chapter 25, only APRA owns its own premises. This is not
necessarily a matter of criticism. Indeed, it is the dream of
many non-profit
organisation to own its own premises and smote the problems of ever-escalating
rents. The question is the same as
that posed above. If several million is paid
for a building in one year, how does that affect the distribution otherwise
by the members in that (and subsequent) years?
25.3. RESERVES
It makes very good corporate sense for any company, whether a collecting
society or not, to hold reserves to ensure its survival in
the event of
unfavourable contingencies. Some of the comments made to the Inquiry suggested
that it was somehow improper that collecting
societies should maintain capital
reserves rather than distributing as much as they could. This view is
short-sighted.
It has been a criticism of CAL that it retained high levels of income in its
early years. It is the finding of this Inquiry that this
retention was
well-advised until the board could be sure that the Society's future was
certain. Now that it is so, the Society is
distributing the reserves over a full
sample cycle. Again, this is an example of the general criticism that future
recipients of
distributions receive a wind-fall at the expense of past
would-have-been recipients.
25.4. INDEMNITY FUNDS
The point made above, need not be laboured. If the society provides on-going
indemnities for users, maintaining an indemnity fund
is a sensible precaution.
It is appropriate for any self-insurer to take such precaution. That said, the
societies must strive to
implement mechanisms whereby the sums retained for
indemnity purposes are fed back to the correct owners after a set period. The
principle may be likened to that which underlies the royalty retention system
used by record companies to protect themselves from
paying artist royalties in
respect of records that are returned.
26. THE USE OF
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY BY AUSTRALIAN COLLECTION SOCIETIES
26.1. GENERAL FINDINGS
26.2. COMMENTS
26.3. STRATEGIC PLAN
26.4. STAFFING
26.5. SECURITY AND BACKUP
26.6. CAPACITY PLANNING AND BUDGETS
26.7. TRAINING AND DOCUMENTATION
26.8. QUALITY OF SERVICE
26.9. REVIEW OF COLLABORATIVE DATA BASES AND I .T. SERVICES
Each of the five major collecting societies were visited to determine their
use of Information Technology. After the initial visits
and talking at some
length with staff responsible for the computing within each organisation, the
specialised Information Technology
requirements were determined. Factual data on
computer usage was decided to be best collected from a survey of Information
usage, designed by the review committee and answered by people from
each Society.
Substantial effort went into creating a survey which would highlight the
extent that technology was seen as part of core business,
what budget priorities
existed, what investment had been made in technological infra-structure
(hardware, software, people and networking),
as well as probing various aspects
of "good management" practice. With respect to the latter, issues of security,
organisational
backup, staff training and user satisfaction were addressed.
The optimal result from the survey was to get the Societies to respond to
questions on all the above issues in a simple way that would
provide accurate
answers. The survey was designed to "catch" issues that were missed in the
initial meetings, and to cross reference
each Society's use of Information
Technology with the current understanding of their organisational needs.
26.1. GENERAL FINDINGS.
The most important finding from the investigations was that the Societies saw
that Information Technology (IT) was critical to their
operation. Most had
invested in quality equipment and personnel to maintain their computing systems.
All had an ongoing commitment
and annual budget to support their IT operations.
This differed from the frequently held misconception that IT was a peripheral
in the societies. Rather, the truth is that each Society is a data
processing operation, addressing the needs of legal contracts
and producing
accounting results.
The investigation examined whether each society was managing its IT areas
well, whether their investment in data was secure and whether
each society
effectively uses IT to address the needs of its members. It was considered
whether there has been a sufficient investment
in IT, whether it is configured
to make use of national and inter-national networked information resources,
whether the commercial
operation is kept secure and whether each society
monitors the quality of IT service they provide. A comparative view of the
for critical IT activities is listed below.
Service Levels
Self-regulated
None listed
Self-regulated
5 year plan
Self-regulated
Self-regulated
26.2. COMMENTS
Of all societies surveyed, CAL have the strongest IT operation in place and
have a clear strategy of organisational development. All
Societies had invested
in equipment and software appropriate to their current needs, though there was a
common thread that "if we
invested more in IT then we could collect more in
royalties". The factor which was not clear from any of the societies, was how to
determine how much to invest in IT (or how many royalties to attempt to collect)
as the classic problem of "diminishing returns"
becomes a limiting factor in
determining the appropriate level of IT investment.
No organisation had connected to AARnet to make use of information bases (eg.
Library catalogues or international music/film publishing
exchange information, though AMCOS and APRA are investigating whether a joint
venture database is economically feasible.
Future use of AARnet by CAL, AVCS and
AMCOS is under consideration at this time. AMCOS was actively pursuing AARnet
access and is
probably connected to the international network by now.
Whilst the societies all worked towards collecting royalties for their
members, all had developed their IT operations independently.
The chance of
being able to exchange data easily between societies pursuing similar goals is
not ruled out, but will require planning
quickly if this is a joint objective.
Already most societies have substantial investment in specific databases and
data formats to
suit their specific needs. As investment in individual projects
continues, flexibility to adapt existing systems to adopt or supply
other societies will diminish.
The basic fact that no common index exists to uniquely identify work
between societies, let alone between societies across countries,
urgent attention is required to stop divergence and duplication of database
It is recognised that this would be an enormous task.
All organisations realised that their databases were critical to their
survival. To this end, the societies employed reasonable care
with backup
practices. All systems employed password protected user accounts, though only
two (APRA and CAL) stated that they utilised
password ageing to automatically
expire their system's security passwords. Whilst operations remain confined "in
house", existing
security measures are adequate.
26.3. STRATEGIC PLAN
All organisations should have their IT staff write their own mission
statement. There should then be discussions how the role that
the IT staff sees
matches the organisational goals that are set by the chief executive.
is worth doing regularly to ensure that IT efforts continue to be focussed on
primary organisational business goals. The rate
of change in the IT area is such
that technological leverage to solve problems needs constant review.
The idea of developing IT systems to be able to collaboratively share
data, or to have one computing centre providing IT services
collecting Societies should be discussed in open forum.
For this to be
effective, each Society will require careful organisational strategic review to
ensure that core business interests
are protected, whilst attempting to maximise
economies of scale arising from collaborative efforts.
The absence of a strategic plan from most societies implied that to date each
society operated on a solitary basis, adopting new technologies
upon demand of
the internal users. This is sub-optimal because IT areas can easily get warped
away from primary organisational goals
through incremental decisions which
appear reasonable in isolation.
Therefore, there exists the need for an organisational IT strategy for
each society, which is reviewed annually in conjunction with
organisational strategy. The importance a strategic plan to ensure continued
growth and a smooth development path cannot
be over stated.
26.4. STAFFING
AVCS and PPCA must look seriously at appointing someone to be responsible
for maintenance and development of their IT operations.
There is a need for
a single person to take responsibility for IT issues in each society. AVCS seem
to share the responsibility across
existing staff and PPCA use external
contractors to good effect, however whilst data processing is critical to core
business, it
is prudent to ensure that at least 2 people understand the systems
design, can keep the system operational in the short term and
relationship the organisation which is long term. The risk of loosing the entire
IT staff, either through resignation or misadventure,
must be managed and
The recurrent education of key organisational personnel in the IT area
should be budgeted for, probably on a bi-annual basis to ensure
technological
advances are learnt and incorporated into the organisation as
appropriate.
26.5. SECURITY AND BACKUP
It is recommended that all organisations adopt an internal practice of
changing user passwords on a 30 day interval. Ex-employee accounts
immediately made secure by application of a new password. All issues of security
and database access be thoroughly checked
by every organisation before
connecting to any external network, especially AARnet.
Although backup procedures described for all societies was thorough,
site archives of databases and on site use of fire resistant storage for backup
media should be employed
26.6. CAPACITY PLANNING AND BUDGETS
When IT is recognised to be core business, it is essential that budgeted
expenditure appear before the organisational executive and
that an indication of
capacity expansion accompany the budget to keep the board abreast of real costs
in the IT area.
It is recommended that a detailed annual budget (as is done
by all societies now) but with a 3-5 year projection of cost areas -
depreciation
- new purchases etc. be included in reports to the board. The
budgets will be supported by the strategic IT plans.
Board members will then
be able to see current costs and future projected costs, whilst understanding
the strategic directions intended.
26.7. TRAINING AND DOCUMENTATION
The importance of systems documentation, if only to leave an audit trail
in case of disaster, needs more attention by all organisations.
occurs, it is generally reported as "at the direction of the User" etc.
central reference point for all organisational documentation should exist which
holds a master copy of all materials. This should
be the responsibility of a
single person and the organisational executive needs have confidence that any
aspect of the operation
could be learnt from reference to the documentation
. Much of this need not be locally written except where an application
has been written specially and is probably therefore unique.
26.8. QUALITY OF SERVICE
Most responded that the organisation was small enough to cope with service
issues on the spot. Whilst this is good service, it does
not allow for users to
sit and put on paper what they would like changed to improve quality. The issue
here was not
maintaining
existing service levels, rather asking for
suggestions of how to improve the existing service levels. It appeared that no
organisations
had asked their members/clients what could be improved in the
service levels currently offered. This should be addressed, probably
conjunction with the next dividend distribution and could be as simple as a
short 1 page, 3 - 5 question survey to ensure that
members expectations are
being addressed.
focussed on the goals which are not only important to
internal staff, but are
also important to the Society members.
26.9. REVIEW COLLABORATIVE DATABASES AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SERVICES.
There is undoubtedly scope for some societies to share databases, probably
share basic equipment and also share the cost of computing
staff to keep systems
operational.
The issue of sharing what at first glance appears to be
operations and data critical to each business is not too far fetched to be
easily dismissed. Economies of scale in shared resources would mean that IT
would cost each society less, thus allowing them to collect
more material at
current cost levels and in turn allow the return of greater dividends to their
members. Thus, this is one way of
addressing the issues of diminishing returns
experienced by all societies.
The second advantage is that collaborative IT services should reduce the risk
of being dependant upon a single person for the operational
stability of the
entire organisation. With a larger IT department servicing more than one
society, the investment in a larger IT
staff will allow for skills sharing
between computer staff. This is not possible in the current small computer areas
of individual
Having databases built around a uniform system would allow each
participating society to search for references on a wider scope across
across all sections of the industry, must
be more beneficial in tracking
royalties payable to individual members than the disjoint current arrangement.
Note that this is NOT
a concept of a single database, but rather a collection of
The end result of this is to out-source the IT functions around data entry,
storage and manipulation. This would allow each society
to then concentrate on
the business of royalty collection, free from the issues of technology, but
remaining in control of funding
and service levels provided by the IT service
So the major advantages with the collaborative approach would be in reduced
costs, reduced risk and ability to search on a wider scope
without having the
ongoing responsibilities of IT management.
The start-up costs for the above are significant. Major costs would stem from
the differences inherit to each society and their established
market niche.
However the problems are solvable, (in fact have already been solved by each
individual society) and the concept of
centralised services are not new to the
IT industry. The issues arising from a centrally administered resource, critical
to an organisation
have been successfully resolved (eg. company payroll /
account out-sourcing) for some time. Assurances would be required to protect
ownership of data and current investments.
The real issues are whether the cost of establishment for a centralised
national database service would return sufficient benefits
to be worth pursuing.
An open forum discussion on this topic would be a first low cost step in a
feasibility study.
27. MERGER OF
SOCIETIES - ARE THERE TOO MANY?
27.1. STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL
27.2 MERGER OF PUBLIC PERFORMANCE RIGHTS
27.3. MERGER OF MUSIC COMPOSITION INTERESTS
27.4. CO-OPERATION NOT FUSION
27.5. OWNERSHIP OF THE
27.6. COLLABORATIVE
Users of copyright who must seek licences from the relevant copyright owners
(or the societies that represent those owners) often
voice their discontent as
to the difficulty of dealing with disparate owners and societies, and call for a
streamlining of that process.
One must ask whether the present system of maintaining several independent
collecting societies is administratively efficient, in
other words, whether the
rights presently administered by the societies would be just as (or more)
efficiently administered by combining
one society with another. One must also
question whether the alternatives are practicable.
It is the answer to the latter question that really determines the issue.
27.1. STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL
Overseas collecting societies display a wide range of structural and
functional possibilities. The possibilities may be summarised
as follows: The
societies may:
(i) represent one right, and only one class of owners relevant to that
(ii) represent one right, but all owners relevant to that right;
(iii) represent one category of rights, but only one class of owners relevant
to those rights;
(iv) represent one category of rights, but all owners relevant to those
(v) represent several categories of rights, but only one specific type of
right owner; or
(vi) represent several categories of rights, and all owners relevant to those
The society may also be, in effect, a joint venture of separate societies
which band together for discrete, mutually advantageous
purposes but maintain
separate identities for all other purposes.
Perhaps the greatest determinant of society type, is 'accident of history' -
social, political and technological. It is really only
in countries in which
collective administration based on
rational principles of efficiency.
As was shown in Chapter 3 of this Report, the Australian societies have
developed in a piecemeal fashion over many years, in response
to different needs
and as the initiative of various pressure groups. As a result, it is no wonder
that they reflect a wide range
of structures, functions and interests. For
example, using the categories provided above, they may be described as
AMCOS: Type (iii)
APRA: Type (ii)
AVCS: Type (ii)
CAL: Type (ii)
PPCA: now Type (ii) but was, until recently, Type (iii)
Although the above classification of the local societies may be subject to
some debate, it is clear that none of them are Types (iv),
(v) or (vi). It is
the latter groups which make up the "super-societies" which exist in some
overseas countries. It is also these
latter groups that copyright users would
prefer (particularly those in the newly emerging multi-media industry) as they
likely to be able to offer a "one-stop shop" for licensing.
Accordingly, the existing societies were examined as to the possibility of
efficient and compatible merger.
27.2. MERGER OF PUBLIC PERFORMANCE
One possibility for merger would be APRA with PPCA, as both license public
performance rights. (This would create a type (iv) society.)
Neither is interested in such fusion and each represents a group of owners
with separate legal and commercial interests. Certainly
the experience of those
European societies which collect both rights, is not a particularly happy one.
(In Europe, there would appear
to be a belief amongst the sound recording
organisations
and tend to treat them as "second class citizens" and that the
publisher/composer interests are in essential conflict of interest
with those of
the record companies.)
There is no real likelihood of fusion between APRA and PPCA. The likelihood
of record companies wanting to be a part of an organisation
with publishers and
composers on the board, is at best, remote. On the other hand, the publishers
and composers would fear that their
interests would be dominated by those of the
record companies. Why would the membership of APRA wish to merge at this stage
the very sophisticated operation already working on their behalf. Merger
happens between societies when members see mutual advantage.
It is not driven by
user convenience.
27.3. MERGER OF MUSIC COMPOSITION
The more obvious possibility for merger is AMCOS and APRA because they
essentially represent the same sectors of the industry. (This
would create a
also administered by the same organisation
that administers the performing
It would be technically feasible for APRA to administer the mechanical right
in musical works, but it would require:
(a) a policy decision on the societies' members in favour of such a change
(which is, at the moment unlikely);
(b) significant changes to computer systems in order to administer the right
in accordance with industry standards.
The factors in favour of such a move are probably a saving in overheads such
as office accommodation and computer hardware, together
with a marginal saving
in staff costs. An intangible factor in favour of the move is probably a reduced
level of public confusion
One factor working against such a proposal is undoubtedly the short term cost
of integrating mechanical right licensing and distribution
systems onto the APRA
As discussed elsewhere in this Report, AMCOS and APRA are increasingly
sharing information and resources but it is unlikely that a
complete merger
would bring significant economies to the operations of either organisation. In
brief, given that:
• the societies cater to different user groups;
• the rights administered are completely different;
• those rights are owned by different parties; and
• mechanical right royalties and performing right royalties are
licensed and accounted for in different ways.
None of these factors however, would prevent merger if the members of both
societies so wanted. But is it desirable, anyway? Fusion
would only result in a
larger administration, and a more powerful, monopolistic, control of rights.
Certainly, the European societies
which administer both the reproduction and
performing right have become large bureaucracies and are no longer models of
efficiency.
27.4. CO-OPERATION NOT FUSION
There is a reasonable level of co-operation between the societies. As noted
elsewhere, APRA provides log functions for PPCA, AVCS'
distribution to music
sampling in educational institutions
is conducted largely by CAL. (It is also
foreshadowed that VISCOPY would contract CAL's services for this purpose.)
There is no inclination within the societies to merge, as opposed to
co-operate. Given that each collecting society represents different
owner groups and different rights this is hardly surprising. It is valuable that
each group of rights owners have an organisation
that represents its particular
As to the members interests, it is the experience of the multi-right European
societies, that there would be the possibility of subjugation
of one group of
rights owners over a smaller group, conflict between members as to the size of
distributions made to each class of
membership and the possibility of
cross-subsidies.
As to the public interest, this is more likely to be served if such
conglomerations are avoided. Such "super-societies" would be likely
bargaining power which is unduly in excess of the sum of their parts and this
would have important Trade Practices disadvantages.
That said, as discussed in the previous chapter, there is considerable scope
for increased Information Technology co-operation. Given
the already foreseeable
demands of the multi-media industry, this co-operation may not only be
efficient, it may well become essential.
27.5. OWNERSHIP OF THE SOCIETIES
The other feature that must be remembered when gauging the practicability of
society merger is that the societies are independent
legal entities controlled
by their members. Unless the Government were to undertake a most radical
upheaval of the present law, there
is no way that the societies can be forced to
merge - or even co-operate. They do co-operate, when and if they perceive it to
in the interest of their members. That said, societies exist for the
efficient administration of rights on behalf of the rights owners;
they do not
exist, as a primary purpose, to promote the interests of the users of those
rights. That, is a desirable but merely secondary
27.6. COLLABORATIVE VENTURES
Although society mergers are unlikely, it is certainly desirable that
societies give thought to the ways that greater inter-society
co-operation might
improve the complexity and expense of the present licensing system.
possibilities would certainly be increased if the societies were to co-operate
in the development of collaborative Information
Technology services to achieve a
collaborative data base. (See section 26.9 of this Report.)
Once there is a collaborative data base, it is a very small step to
collaborative licensing.
Both of these things would achieve real
efficiencies for users of copyright although there would undoubtedly be
substantial costs
in establishing such a venture - a cost that presently would
have to be met by the rights owners, not the rights users. The owners
to be persuaded that the long term efficiencies would make such a changes
cost-efficient. That is a matter for a separate
28. ROLE OF
SOCIETIES IN PROMOTING LAW REFORM AND FORMULATION OF GOVERNMENT
28.1. AMCOS
All of the societies, except the PPCA, recognise that they have an important
role in representing the interests of their members and
potential members, in
promoting debate on law reform issues and making representations to Government
and related authorities.
28.1. AMCOS
AMCOS has played an important role in lobbying for retention of the import
provisions of the
; in lobbying and designing legislation to
implement a blank tape levy to compensate copyright owners for lost revenue from
and working for legislation to control CD Rental. It has also been
working with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade to implement
Recent submissions made on behalf of music publishers include those to the
on the question of the US government's proposal to postpone the meetings
regarding the proposed Protocol to the Berne
Convention and the Possible
Instrument for Performers; responses to a submission made by the National
Council of Libraries and Information
Services to amend the
proposals put by the Australian Tape Manufacturer's Association.
As befits its responsibility as the largest collecting society and the
representative of the largest number of rights owners, the
Association plays an
active role in the determination of government policy in areas relevant to the
interests of its members. It
does this by way of submissions to relevant
government departments and inquiries, and by maintaining an on-going dialogue
with government
For example, it has made submissions to government, or to relevant inquiries,
on the subjects of:
• the Blank Tape Royalty
• parallel importation rights
• moral rights
• rental rights
• convergence with communications technologies
The Society has made submissions on the following issues in the current
financial year:
• To the Attorney-General's Department on copying of audio-visual works
in libraries, in response to the submission of the Australian
Libraries and Information Services (ACLIS);
• To the Minister for Justice and relevant members of Federal
Parliament in all political parties on the need to urgently pass
the Copyright
Amendment (Re-enactment) Bill;
• To the Minister for Justice on the copying of audio-visual works by
government departments and more generally for the services
of the Crown; and
• To the Copyright Convergence Group on the implications of new
technologies for copyright industries.
AVCS hosted a public meeting in May to discuss the need for a blank tape levy
to compensate owners of copyright in audio-visual works
for domestic
CAL's role is not limited to licensing, collecting and distributing fees, but
extends to promoting copyright law reform in areas relevant
to its members.
One of the reasons for CAL's establishment in 1974 was to provide a united
voice for authors and publishers in protecting their rights.
CAL perceives an
important element of its role to represent its members in consultations with
government and in pressing for amendments
that promote its
members' interests. Examples are the amendments to the Act in 1989 introducing
More recently, CAL has been involved in negotiations with the
Government in relation to the amendment of
the option of a sample scheme for government photocopying, submissions to the
in response to those made by ACLIS
(Australian Council of Libraries and Information Services) to amend the
The Chief Executive of PPCA is aware of the range of issues relevant to the
Company's licensing base and the welfare of the relevant
rights owners. The
principal issues of focus for the Company are: the lifting of the 1% ceiling on
the fees that PPCA can charge;
the impact of new technologies; and anomalies in
(including issues relating to protected-non protected
recordings, the playing of radios in public places and the synchronisation
recordings in film).
29. EDUCATIONAL
29.1. EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES UNDERTAKEN AND PLANNED
29.1.1. AMCOS
29.1.2. APRA
29.1.3. AVCS
29.1.4. CAL
29.1.5. PPCA
29.2. CONCLUSION
29.1. EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES UNDERTAKEN AND
Since their earliest days, collecting societies have always played an
educational role. Sometimes this role is merely within the industry
which their relevant rights are created, and sometimes this commitment is made
to a wider sector. In general, such educational
activities are to be welcomed
for they benefit not only members, but also all owners and users of the relevant
rights and indeed,
the public in general.
Each of the societies, with the exception of AVCS and PPCA have embraced the
need to provide educational programs. Certainly those
provided by AMCOS, APRA
and CAL are extensive, not only in quantum but also in geographical coverage.
AVCS and PPCA are both young
societies and have had more pressing establishment
priorities, but both now should be in a position to tackle this role to the
of the owners and the users of their relevant rights.
29.1.1. AMCOS
AMCOS is viewed by the public as the first point of inquiry for issues
involving the reproduction of music. Hundreds of telephone
and written inquiries
are dealt with each week.
The external educational activities of the Society include:
(a) Public speaking and liaison
• Speaking at music industry seminars, colleges of advanced education,
universities and conservatoria, media colleges, film
schools and providing
workshops at national music festivals.
• The production music department at AMCOS visits clients such as
television stations, radio stations and recording facilities
on a regular basis.
The production music department has also been directly involved in speaking at
various music industry functions
and organising industry-specific seminars. For
instance, APRA and AMCOS were involved in holding a joint seminar at the APRA
in August 1991 where more than 40 television stations from around
Australia attended.
• The print music consultant also conducts a national training program
for schools and other music users. This usually coincides
with attendance at AGB
McNair training sessions for sample schools. This year, he is also a guest
speaker at seminars to be held
at various state capitals conducted by the
Australian Copyright Council on music and copyright and copyright for choirs,
and ensembles.
• Numerous conference papers are presented by society staff and
articles on copyright and AMCOS are written for newsletters
of industry
publications.
• AMCOS has organised Print Music Trade Fairs for educational users
(Brisbane 1989, Sydney 1990 and Perth 1991).
(b) Educational literature:
The society publishes an extensive number of information brochures and
packages which are distributed to the public free of charge.
• In the audio and/or video reproductions area, publications include:
Mechanical Copyright Application & Guide; Import Application
Special Event Video Licence & Guide; Information for Churches; Information
for Dance Schools; Guide to Music Reproduction
& the concept of copyright.
• The production music department has produced literature regarding
to the needs of
clients and potential users.
• The Print Committee of AMCOS has prepared copyright guidelines on the
use of sheet music for a wide range of music users.
These guidelines are similar
to the "Code of Fair Practice" published by the UK Music Publishers' Association
in that they seek to
give a practical interpretation to fair dealing principles
in photocopying sheet music. These, together with the booklet "Music Copyright
for Schools", which explains the AMCOS schools agreements and other music
free of charge. AMCOS
also deals with hundreds of general telephone inquires about print music
usually free of charge, and refer people requiring permission to the relevant
• There is also print & reprographic right information relating to:
Amateur Musical Societies; Eisteddfods; Music Students;
Private Music Teachers;
Sheet Music for Choirs, Churches and community groups; Sheet Music for
Orchestras, bands etc; Reprographic
Licensing Agency List; Copying for liturgy
under the educational licences.
These guidelines are regularly updated and guidelines on other topics are
being prepared.
29.1.2. APRA
The Association runs seminars and workshops for its members regularly in all
state capitals and throughout New Zealand. The Association
also publishes a
newsletter to its members and helps with other educational functions run by
organisations such as the Australian
Guild of Screen Composers. These activities
are in addition to the normal day-to-day activities of the membership
department. (It
was noted in that regard that the department currently handles
between 30 and 50 telephone inquiries per day from members or applicants
membership.)
The Association provides no formal educational activities for non-members but
has expended a total of $129,000 over the past 5 years
in running seminars and
workshops for its members.
29.1.3. AVCS
In the very early phase of its operations the Society hosted a meeting in
Sydney and one in Melbourne and spoke at a small number
of meetings organised by
industry associations. The members of some industry bodies were contacted
directly by mail and articles
describing the Society's operations were prepared
for various newsletters. The educational activities were on a very small
The Society then narrowed its focus and concentrated on identifying potential
claimants and contacting them directly. Priority was
given to explaining the
scheme to beneficiaries presently entitled to the funds held on trust - over
general education programs to
the industry at large.
The Society does, however, accept occasional invitations to speak at seminars
and workshops, notably the series of seminars conducted
by the Australian
As the Society has had to focus its attention upon the establishment of
proper facilities for the operation of the broadcast copying
scheme in the
earlier years, it is understandable that it has not had the time or staff
resources to provide a comprehensive program
of educational seminars or events
for its members and non-members. This is an area of service that the society
must now look at developing.
29.1.4. CAL
CAL both undertakes educational activities itself, and funds other bodies to
undertake such projects. It requires the bodies to whom
it provides funding to
undertake projects of benefit to authors and publishers generally, not only to
CAL's current membership because
it expressly recognises that as a young
society, it's membership is not yet completely representative of its
constituency.
CAL has provided funding for a large number of educational activities in the
last five years. Most of these have been undertaken by
bodies such as the
Australian Society of Authors, the Australian Book Publishers Association and
the Australian Copyright Council.
These organisations make an annual report to
CAL on the use of their funds. CAL has strict criteria for these funding
It is useful to note that one of the Society's recent projects was the
Sampling Seminars for Members. These seminars were held as
a consequence of
members' misunderstanding of CAL's sampling procedures and explained to members
why the sample was structured in
its current form. Seminars were held in Sydney,
Melbourne and Perth. Further seminars on the topic will be held in Brisbane and
later in the year. (The Sydney seminar in August will introduce members
to the new licence for corporations.) The target audiences
for the seminars are
CAL's members and other interested persons. No fee is charged for
admittance.
CAL has also provided funding to establish the Centre for Copyright Studies
at the Australian National University. One of the Centre's
functions is to
invite a visiting fellow to undertake lectures and media interviews in an effort
to raise the awareness of CAL's
members and others of issues in copyright
protection.
CAL receives many requests for speakers from groups such as libraries,
fellowship of writers, Rotary, church groups, (etc). CAL also
participates in
the seminars conducted by the Australian Copyright Council.
29.1.5. PPCA
PPCA has no written educational policy. To date, its educational services
have been limited to internal staff training, sending educational
material on
responding to numerous telephone enquiries about
public performance rights and
the role of PPCA. The Executive Director also speaks at a number of conferences
and seminars. To date,
the Company has not arranged seminars and workshops of
its own. It is intended to remedy this later in 1994. (Subjects planned,
registration and distribution; copyright issues in the face of new
technologies; the Copyright Convergence Report; the Moral Rights
Paper.) This
initiative is welcome.
The PPCA provides a questions and answers pamphlet on the use of sound
recordings and another on the use of music videos. These are
intended to answer
the questions most commonly asked by the public.
The Company's staff take a huge number of telephone enquiries every year,
mainly from the recipients of a letter from PPCA informing
them of licensing
The Company is proud of the educational value of this telephone advice
but it may reduce the enormous number of calls (and consequent
staff time) if
the Company were to initiate a regular external education program targeted at
the greatest body of callers and the
most commonly arising issues.
29.2. CONCLUSION
All of the societies would benefit from a formal review of their
educational programs.
APRA, CAL and AMCOS have certainly made considerable
efforts but it appears that these efforts are reactive, rather than part of
educational strategic plan.
Such a review would consider the educational needs, not only of their
members, but those of related sectors.
Such programs assist members directly
and also assist non-members to better understand the function and benefits of
collecting societies
and are an important means of reducing the suspicion about
collecting societies that often stems from ignorance or misinformation.
they have the effect of increasing the community knowledge of copyright related
issues - an aim that is integral to the
interests of all copyright owners and
30. FUNDING OF
CULTURAL OR BENEVOLENT PURPOSES
30.1. AMCOS
30.6. COMMENT
30.7. CULTURAL AND SOCIAL SUPPORT ROLE FOR COLLECTING SOCIETIES
30.8. CULTURAL AND CHARITABLE PURPOSES FUND
30.9. FUNDING THE CCPF
It was important to learn whether the societies applied funds to purposes
other than the general headings of Administration, Education
and Distribution,
such as general cultural purposes, awards, prizes, benevolent purposes and the
All of the societies were asked whether they intended to develop a greater
cultural role. They were also asked whether there were
there any government
initiatives which would assist the society in performing this more expansive
Government cultural agencies such as the Australia Council were generally
perceived as being irrelevant to the interests of the great
majority of PPCA,
AMCOS and APRA members. Their major source of funds is the popular music
industry (including film music) - a sector
of Australian culture in which the
Australia Council has never played more than a token role.
Apart from that consideration, the music publishers on the board of both APRA
and AMCOS see these societies as having an essentially
commercial nature. AMCOS
has never played a cultural support role (other than that flowing directly from
its primary functions) and
APRA is apparently cutting back on its contributions.
This is hardly surprising as, over the last few years, the income of the music
publishers has dropped and local managements have been under considerable
pressure to achieve maximum collections. As controllers
of these societies, they
have little or no interest in supporting wider cultural purposes.
There is little communication between collecting societies and state or
Federal funding bodies and there have been no discussions
to promote a greater
understanding of one another's role or to promote within the societies, a
recognition of any more expansive
cultural responsibility.
30.1. AMCOS
The Board assesses each proposal but generally considers this to be the role
of the members rather than the Society. The Society has
no written policy
concerning the allocation of funds for cultural purposes.
That said, it has donated money to a limited number of purposes that may be
described (somewhat broadly) as cultural purposes: Export
Music Australia, Music
New Zealand, Music New Zealand Forum, RIANZ Silver Scroll Award. These purposes
would be described more accurately,
as promotional rather than cultural.
APRA provides a considerable amount of money to cultural purposes. A
breakdown of the Association's expenditure on cultural grants
etc. from the
1.25% deduction referred to earlier, for the years 1992/3 and 1993/4 is provided
in the materials accompanying this
It is interesting that the WIPO Report notes that the "majority of
(performing rights) organisations make use of the possibility of
deducting not
more than 10% from all royalties collected for cultural and social purposes. In
certain cases, the percentage of the
deduction is only 2, 3 or 5% but it is more
frequently 10%."
The Society has no written policy concerning the allocation of funds for
cultural purposes. The policy is a general one, simply, that
the Board must
consider that the purpose promotes the use or recognition of the members' works.
It should be added that in recent
years the Board has moved away from projects
that have tended to benefit individual members (for example, assisting with
commissions)
in favour of projects that have a wider benefit for the membership
at large. The Board is also considering giving a greater emphasis
promotion of Australasian music abroad rather than just in Australia and New
The Regulations to the
and the Attorney-General's Guidelines
provide that gifts for cultural or benevolent purposes may not exceed a certain
of royalties attributable to an accounting period as stated in the
Articles of Association (which are, in turn, approved by the
Attorney-General).
Article 13 of the Articles of Association of the Society provides that such a
sum as the Board considers proper may be set aside for
special purposes
(including cultural or charitable purposes) as the directors think conducive to
furthering the interests of the
Society but is not to exceed one per cent of
receipts under
for that accounting period.
The Society does not see a significant role for itself in promoting culture
through direct grant assistance or other general support.
It does not regard
itself as being well placed to select recipients for direct grants, nor does it
consider it appropriate that it
should seek to use funds held in trust for
individual copyright owners for such purposes.
$9,500 has been allocated by the Society from 1992 and 1993 distribution
periods as follows:
(a) 1992: Encore concert: $3,750
(b) 1993: Encore concert: $3,750
Australian Copyright Council: $2,000
The donation to the Australian Copyright Council was a contribution with
several other organisations towards the cost of hosting a
delegation from the
National Copyright Administration of China. Given the Copyright Council's
initiating role in founding the society,
this would be churlish to criticise,
but it illustrates the need for the development of appropriate policy.
The society has no policy by which benevolent or cultural allocations are to
To date, the Society has not considered that the interests of the Society and
its members and potential members can be furthered by
allocating any substantial
funds to cultural or charitable purposes. Given that the Society has been in
existence for a relatively
short period of time, it was undoubtedly important
that the film and television industry recognise that the Society is channelling
all of its resources into maximising the remuneration received for the use of
audio-visual works by educational institutions while
minimising deductions from
the amounts collected to enable the largest possible sum to be distributed to
the relevant copyright owners.
That said, t
he IBNR fund and the unidentified owners' trust fund is a very
rich source of funds to which no one owner (except the actual owner)
claim. It is to these funds that the society should look for the funding of its
benevolent and cultural purposes. Rather
than sending them back to a class of
owners as a windfall, they would be an important source of funding for
organisations that service
those classes of owners
(such as the Australian
In the years 1990-1993, CAL allocated 5% of its total distribution for
education and cultural purposes. In 1994, this "Distribution
B" scheme is
discontinued. An amount up to 1% of revenue will be allocated from operations
expenditure for cultural purposes.
CAL funds the Centre for Copyright Studies at the Australian National
University and has recently established a Copyright Advancement
Fund, to be
administered by the National Book Council.
CAL is the only Society with a carefully articulated cultural policy. It is
an excellent document which provides a framework by which
such funding decisions
can be made.
PPCA says that it provides no money for cultural purposes and has no publicly
available written policy in this regard. That said,
it does pay 12.5% of the
distribution to the PPCA Trust.
The Trust Deed provides that performers, either individually or as a class
may apply for funds for the following purposes:
(i) performance at concerts or for charitable institutions such as hospitals
or homes for the aged; or
(ii) scholarships for the promotion and encouragement of musical and
theatrical education; or
(iii) the promotion and encouragement of the performing arts to the general
(iv) the aid or assistance of any beneficiary who, in the opinion of the
trustees is unable to adequately maintain himself by his
own professional
exertions and other income.
Under the Trust deed, the PPCA nominates two members and the Musicians' Union
of Australia and the Media Entertainment and Arts Alliance
nominate one each.
There appear to be no written policies in relation to the application of the
Fund (except that the trust deed
requires that two thirds of the fund be applied
to musicians and one third to performers). It merely considers applications on
individual basis.
Since 1975, the Trust has distributed approximately $800,000 to the unions
for the benefit of their members ($416,396 in the last
five years).
30.6. COMMENT
Involvement of the societies in cultural and social support relevant to their
rights owners, does not prevent individual members from
also participating in
such work. Rather it allows the individual members to participate in a
structured, well articulated and focussed
Only PPCA and AMCOS do not acknowledge that they have any cultural role in
the community other than their collection and distribution
function for rights
owners. This is perhaps a reflection of their structure in that both
organisations are treated by their respective
boards as merely a commercial
extension of their members' operations. These societies take the attitude that
decisions as to cultural
and charitable spending are a matter for their
individual corporate members.
In spite of its disavowal of such responsibilities, PPCA does have the PPCA
Trust which makes sums available for cultural, industry
support and charitable
purposes. It is difficult to reconcile the Company's denial of any
responsibility in this area with the fact
that they pay a greater share of their
net distributions to such purposes than any other collecting body. Given this
conflict, it
is easy to see how the cynics have described the payments by PPCA
to the Trust as "paying off the unions".
The Inquiry has made no detailed examination of the operation of the Trust.
What is apparent however, is that the system of written
policy formulation,
publication of grant procedures, written selection criteria, formal acquittal of
grant procedures and formal
reporting of awards of grant to the membership, are
inadequate or non-existent and need to be addressed if the Trust is to maximise
the benefit of the Fund.
The Company has taken the view, to date, that how the money in the Trust is
allocated, is a matter for the Unions representing the
beneficiaries. This
should not be so.
The PPCA has a fiduciary obligation to ensure the proper
management and application of the fund and accordingly must accept that it
play an active role in implementing the matters referred to in the above
Such funds have a wonderful potential to benefit the relevant community
sector but if they are not to be viewed cynically, they must
strive for and
achieve, a faultless degree of transparency. High fiduciary standards are
demanded of all trustees but where it is
part of collective administration, a
high degree of public reporting is to be expected.
Urgent attention must be
given to bringing the administration of the Trust up to the highest standards of
public accountability.
30.7. CULTURAL AND SOCIAL SUPPORT ROLE FOR
COLLECTING SOCIETIES
Collecting societies have an important representative and leadership role in
their industry. As such they have a potentially important
function in the
development and maintenance of the culture of the country.
Where societies recognise this role, it is important that such allocations be
according to a very carefully considered strategy. However,
although all of the
societies have in fact given money to cultural purposes, none do so in
consultation with the Federal and State
Government funding mechanisms. This
failure alone, illustrates the piecemeal manner in which such funding is
allocated, applied,
and accounted for.
It is not suggested that government funding authorities should have any power
over the way that collecting societies distribute such
it seems an
extraordinary inefficiency in the application of such limited funds that there
are no channels of communication between
Government agencies and the societies,
so that the cultural and social support expenditure of each party may be applied
with maximum
effectiveness.
(The exception to this is AVCS which seems to
have regular communication with the AFC, but as it does not have a policy or
for cultural and social support, the relationship has had little or no
impact in this area.)
APRA, AVCS and CAL have considerable undistributed funds (or funds that are
not yet able to be distributed but have not yet been declared
undistributable) and although they have in place plans to reduce these amounts
(as discussed elsewhere in this Report),
it is recommended that a portion of
these funds should be allocated to cultural and social support purposes relevant
to the rights
owners represented by each society.
As the old saying goes: "two wrongs do not make a right". It is regrettable
if the money cannot be paid to the right individual but
it does not ameliorate
the situation by paying the money to the wrong one.
Where the appropriate
payee cannot be identified or found, it is recommended that a proportion of such
moneys be used for the general
interest of the relevant right group rather than
putting such sums back into the general distribution pot as a windfall
distribution
to other owners.
30.8. CULTURAL AND CHARITABLE PURPOSES
It is suggested that given their important representative role in their
respective cultural sectors, all societies should be encouraged
to establish a
Cultural And Charitable Purposes Fund ("CCPF)
This fund would be used, not to fund awards nights or litigation expenses)
but to provide support to the general sector of the industry
represented by the relevant rights owners. For example, it could support
writers/composers studios, travel grants, educational
programs, scholarships,
benevolent schemes supporting arts practitioners who suffer calamity, and so
The members of the arts and entertainment industry have a great tradition for
generosity and the establishment of CCPFs would better
ensure that the
assistance was directed to those within the industry who would truly benefit
from assistance. It would be a notable
example of industry bodies taking care of
30.9. FUNDING THE CCPF
It is suggested that all societies be encouraged to allocate a specific
proportion of gross distributions to cultural purposes.
Further study needs to be done as to the exact percentages that would be
appropriate but it is suggested that contribution be divided
categories:
(i) a percentage of the distribution funds, and
(ii) a percentage of undistributable funds.
As to (i), each society should allocate between one and two percent of its
distribution fund to its CCPF. (This sum is clearly feasible
as both APRA and
CAL already achieve this.)
As to (ii), any society with undistributable funds should be required to
allocate fifty percent of such funds to its CCPF prior to
returning the residue
to the distribution pool. The latter percentage is high, but this merely
reflects the fact that the principal
reason that such money is not being paid
through to the relevant rights owners is that those persons cannot be found or
identified.
Thus the fifty percent allocation is equitable because:
(a) The persons who are most entitled to the undistributable moneys are more
likely to be non-members than members.
(b) Such a scheme will give all members of the industry sector access to
support, and yet
(c) would still permit members of the society to gain a windfall benefit in
addition to the income that their rights have actually
This system will further encourage societies to identify and locate owners
and will have the effect of answering the criticism that
societies with large
undistributed funds are acting from self-interest (and the interests of their
largest and most powerful members)
in maintaining such funds.
30.10 RECOMMENDATIONS
that all societies be encouraged to allocate a specific proportion
of gross distributions and the undistributable funds, to cultural
that Declared Societies be required to allocate a specific
proportion of gross distributions and the undistributable funds, to cultural
31. REVIEW OF THE
AS IT AFFECTS COLLECTING
EFFICIENCY OR EQUITY
31.1. ADDITIONAL STATUTORY LICENCES
31.1.1. Multi-Media Statutory Licence
31.1.2. Educational Copying Of Artistic Works
3.2. JURISDICTION OF THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
31.3. AMENDMENT TO SECTION 152 (8)
31.4. MATTERS RECOMMENDED FOR FURTHER
31.4.1. Extended Audio Visual Licence
31.4.2. Audio Home Taping Statutory Licence
31.4.3. Amendments In Relation To The Part VA
And Part Vb Schemes
31.4.4. Deeming Of Representation
31.4.5. Amendments In Relation To Literary
31.4.6. Amendments In Relation To Mechanical Licence Provisions
31.5. RECOMMENDATIONS
31.1. ADDITIONAL STATUTORY LICENCES
Consideration was given to the question of whether the introduction of any
additional statutory licences would assist a society (and
be in the interests of
licensees and/or general public).
Statutory licences are in direct conflict with the system of exclusive rights
dictated by the Berne Convention. There is little or
no doubt that Government
has the right to introduce compulsory licensing for the purpose of restricting
possible abuses of monopoly
power but "this would have to be the genuine purpose
behind the measure, and not simply the pretext for abridging rights which states
are obliged to protect under the Convention" (Ricketson,
The Berne Convention
for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works
, Kluwer, 1987, para
It is recommended
that the Government should not consider the
imposition of statutory licences where commercial voluntary licences,
collectively administered,
are effective.
For example, in APRA's case, there is no need for the creation of a statutory
public performance licence because there would be effectively
no difference
between the voluntary licence regime under which APRA presently operates. If
there were any evidence of widespread
inefficiency or corruption in the
collective administration of the rights, or a demonstrable failure to grant
licences to users who
were prepared to pay equitable remuneration for their
uses, there may be real reason to introduce a statutory right.
The introduction of statutory licences is a last resort and their
introduction is only necessary where the public interest demands
it. There is no
evidence of such public interest.
Moreover, before any statutory licences are introduced, experience shows that
statutory licences drafted without appropriate industry
consultation are often
unworkable and voluntary licences are required to replace them. For example, the
statutory mechanical reproduction
right administered by AMCOS has been largely
superseded by the negotiation of an industry agreement (the ARIA, AMPAL/AMCOS
Agreement).
The CAL statutory licence has been largely by-passed by negotiated
agreements between the collecting society and the representatives
relevant users (such as the AVCC).
31.1.1. Multi-Media Statutory Licence
It is not recommended
that a statutory right be introduced to grant
access to copyright material for the purpose of multi-media exploitations.
The producers of multi-media productions argue that it is too expensive and
administratively burdensome having to obtain individual
licences for each piece
of copyright material that they want to use in their own work. That may be so,
but it must be observed that
film makers have managed to do it for years. In any
event, it is too early in the development of the technology to do away with two
hundred years of development of the copyright regime simply because the pioneers
of multi-media are having difficulty working out
a commercially viable means of
structuring their new industry.
The other argument in favour of a statutory licence for multi-media is based
on the philosophical stance that there is a right of
access to and use of
information. Such a position is in direct conflict with traditional copyright
principles by which persons who
put information into a material form, enjoy
rights of control over the uses to which that form may be put. There would have
a very detailed and cogent argument presented before such a 'right of
access to and use of information' were accorded and that case
has certainly not
yet been made.
Moreover, there is no evidence that creating a statutory right is appropriate
or necessary at this stage of the industry's development.
If, one day, there is
sufficient need, it is likely that either
• one of the existing societies (such as AVCS) will take responsibility
for multi-media licensing, or
• the existing societies will set up a joint-venture society to
administer the rights on behalf of the relevant rights owners.
As the commercial need increases, existing societies will negotiate a
commercial resolution by which their members' rights can benefit
from that new
potential for income.
If the above recommendation against the introduction of a non-voluntary
licence for multi-media product is ignored,
it is most strongly recommended
, if such a licence was to be introduced, it should only apply to the
reproduction of underlying works that have already been licensed
incorporation into film.
The non-voluntary licence should not extend to
underlying works which have not been previously licensed for inclusion in film.
there has been no such prior licence, the permission of the rights-holder
in the underlying works should still be obtained for inclusion
multi-media product. In other words, the rights owner should maintain the
absolute and exclusive right to determine when,
how, by whom, and for how much,
the first synchronisation/multi-media exploitation will occur.
31.1.2. Educational Copying Of Artistic
It is recommended
section 135
ZM be amended so as to permit
CAL (or make it clear that it in fact has the right) to collect income in
respect of artistic works
at the same time as they are surveying educational
institutions in respect of their use of literary works.
There is no cogent
reason why the owners of copyright in artistic works should be treated any
differently from the owners of copyright
in the literary work.
It is further recommended
be amended so as
to provide educational institutions with a statutory right to reproduce artistic
works (other than those already
covered by "fair dealing") subject to the
payment of equitable remuneration to the copyright owner.
(See "Visual Arts
Collecting Society").
31.2. JURISDICTION OF THE COPYRIGHT
This Report recommends the expansion of the jurisdiction of the Copyright
Tribunal. It is discussed at length in the following Chapter.
31.3. AMENDMENT TO SECTION 152 (8)
As discussed earlier in this Report, there is no good reason to maintain a 1%
section 152
(8). The owners of the rights in sound recordings should
be able to negotiate with the broadcasters and in the event of inability
agree as to a rate, approach the Copyright Tribunal. This is a perfect example
of where two commercial groups of similar power
should be allowed to apply the
conditioning forces of the market, without the intervention of Government
through the imposition of
this false ceiling.
31.4. MATTERS RECOMMENDED FOR FURTHER
Each of the societies was asked what amendments they perceived would be
assist them to more effectively and efficiently administer
their relevant
rights. These are set out below. It is noted that Government is already aware of
most of these and indeed is presently
working on several of them.
The Inquiry was instructed to desist from making recommendations in respect
of the following issues. However, they are presented because
they are issues
perceived by the Societies as being of importance, and because they provide a
useful checklist for potential reform
and development. They are matters that
must be considered in the context of any future comprehensive review of the
and in light of the other copyright-related studies presently
before Government.
31.4.1. Extended Audio Visual Licence
The video cassette recorder has meant that audio-visual works can be easily
and inexpensively copied without the authority of copyright
There is little doubt that the use of video recorders for time shifting does
not easily permit of voluntary licensing. Not only are
there hundreds of
thousands of such video recorder users, the number of copyright owners in any
audio-visual product and the complexity
of the division of rights in these
products, is vast. It is certainly not in the public interest for domestic VCR
users to be in
breach of the
every time they use their equipment.
At the moment the statutory licence administered by AVCS permits only
educational taping.
Similarly, it is anomalous that CAL should have recently negotiated a licence
scheme with Government as to photocopying while similar
audio-visual copying
remains unlicensed and unlawful. This too should be the subject of further
inquiry. AVCS argues that this points
to a need for an additional compulsory
licence scheme if copyright owners are to be compensated for the use of their
work. It may
be so, but it would be advisable for a feasibility study to first
carried out to see if AVCS could obtain the necessary licensing
rights by way of
a joint venture with the other societies (AMCOS, APRA and PPCA) to perform the
function, thus avoiding the need
for a statutory licence.
31.4.2. Audio Home Taping Statutory
The statutory licence that needs to be introduced forthwith is the home audio
taping licence. This has been a subject of legislation
and High Court litigation
but the path is now reasonably clear. This is not the forum for further debate
of the need for the blank
tape levy/tax. There has been extensive industry
consultation and debate, the collecting society is already formed (as a Declared
Society) and the implementary legislation should be reintroduced without
31.4.3. Amendments In Relation To The Part VA And
Part Vb Schemes
Four years of experience in administering the Scheme indicates to CAL,
various amendments which would promote a more effective administration
(i) Repeal of Record-Keeping System
provides that an educational institution may elect to
participate in the scheme on the basis of either the record-keeping system
the sampling system. Currently there are twenty-six educational institutions
which participate in the record-keeping system, and
a change to record-keeping
is occasionally threatened in negotiations with educational authorities which
operate under sampling regimes.
Given the onerous nature of full record keeping requirements, record-keeping
can inherently lead to under reporting of broadcast copying
by an educational
institution. For this reason, it is not in the best interests of the owners of
the relevant copyright for educational
institutions to be able to elect to adopt
this system.
The record-keeping system was apparently included in the
accommodate the anticipated small number of institutions that copy only
infrequently. A sampling scheme can also accommodate
these institutions. The
sampling system as recently introduced into the university sector places
universities into groups depending
upon whether they are small, medium or large
copiers of broadcast material. This system could be made even more sophisticated
the introduction of zero-tariff licences for very infrequent copiers. Such
a system would obviate the need for institutions to forward
nil returns each
quarter. The Society is willing to offer zero-tariff licences, with appropriate
safeguards, should the record-keeping
system be repealed.
(ii) Profit-Making Educational
Institutions
An educational institution as defined in
excludes an institution that is conducted for the profit, direct or indirect, of
an individual or individuals. CAL wants the definition
of educational
institution be broadened for the purposes of
and VB of the
to include profit-making educational institutions. This is for the following
(a) it can be assumed that there is widespread copying of audio-visual items
from television and radio broadcasts by such institutions
for their educational
purposes. By virtue of the difficulty in identifying the correct rights holders,
it can be assumed that the
majority of such broadcast copies have been made
without the permission of the relevant copyright owner. Accordingly, members of
the Society and other relevant copyright owners are not being remunerated for
the use of their rights; and
(b) by having a statutory scheme which imposes the payment of equitable
remuneration upon educational institutions which fall within
the definition of
while ignoring profit-making educational institutions, it in effect
penalises traditional non-profit-making educational institutions
in financial
(iii) Removal of Technology-Based
Distinctions
Section 135E of the
enables an educational institution to make
a copy of a broadcast or any film, sound recording or work incorporated in the
without infringing copyright in the broadcast or other works or
subject matter included in it. The scope of the scheme is confined
by specific
references to methods of technology and means of delivery.
This general issue has been the subject of detailed examination by the
Convergence Committee and it is not the place of this Report
to traverse that
31.4.4. Deeming Of Representation
One of the submissions received, proposed that a deeming provision be
included in the
to extend the Copyright Tribunal's jurisdiction so
that, if a collecting society represents a substantial number of the owners
works will be used under a proposed licence and the collecting society has
obtained the Copyright Tribunal's approval of the scheme,
then that collecting
society would be deemed to represent all copyright owners for the purpose of
that licence agreement.
To introduce such a scheme would be the inverse of a statutory licensing
scheme. It is an important characteristic of voluntary licensing
schemes that
participation be voluntary. For example, there is a certain anger shown by some
owners of copyright in literary works
who believe, mistakenly, that CAL grants
licences in respect of the works of non-members. This demonstrates a
misunderstanding of
the existing system but also demonstrates that there would
be a section of relevant owners who would object most strongly to having
control of their exclusive rights appropriated by a collecting society.
31.4.5. Amendments In Relation To Literary
CAL proposes several amendments to the
to assist it in
administering the copyright rights of its members:
(i) Government Copying
The introduction of sampling provisions similar to the provisions for
education, into
. At present, Commonwealth government
departments notify copying to CAL. The Society argues that this is
administratively inefficient
and is likely to lead to significant
under-reporting of copying. AMCOS however, is concerned that the concept of
copying "for the
purposes of the Crown" needs careful consideration to ensure
that commercial activities such as the use of sheet music by police/military
bands, or recording of music, does not fall within the scope of the
(ii) Educational Copying
Until the educational institution forwards CAL a remuneration notice, CAL is
unable to carry out inspection to determine if copying
is taking place. This
means that the administration and supervision of the statutory licence is
dependent upon the decision to comply
by the institution rather than any power
of the Society. Further consideration needs to be given as to why this
protection for the
recalcitrant, should remain.
(iii) Library Copying
The Society believes that it is now timely to reconsider the free copying
provisions for libraries. Libraries have extensive free
copying privileges
which, in the context of high speed and digital copying technology, may no
longer be relevant.
Libraries are adopting a commercial approach to document delivery services
and their services compete directly with the services offered
both by the
to continue to use a statutory exception
to provide a business advantage is
surely not the purpose of the provisions.
If public policy requires that certain libraries continue to copy without
payment to copyright owners for the purpose of assisting
individuals in research
and study, then perhaps the UK approach of identifying "prescribed libraries"
should be considered. The UK
Act provides that the library copying provisions
apply to libraries and archives as prescribed by regulations made by the
of State. This approach allows for greater flexibility in determining
which libraries are entitled to copy without payment to copyright
owners and for
what purposes.
(iv) Copying for External Students
Distance Education courses, such as open learning, are becoming more and more
popular and will continue to rise in popularity. We
can no longer cling to our
image of children in the middle of the desert, Flying Doctor overhead, hunched
over their wireless sets,
doing their French lesson before hopping of their
horse to check the fences. Nowadays, the distance learning student is just as
to be living in the inner city. It often is more accurately described as
For example, universities currently offer open learning courses via
broadcasts from the ABC. Students enrolled in such courses are
sent a package of
photocopied materials to use as study and research aids. The view of the
educators is that any copyright material
included in such packages can be copied
under the fair dealing exemption, in s.40 of the Act. The wording of the section
is unclear,
but in any case this exemption needs reconsideration, particularly
as this type of copying will increase significantly when students
are provided
with their course materials electronically.
(iv) New Technologies
The introduction of new technologies will continue to have an enormous effect
on the use of CAL's members' works. It is important
that Government clarify the
extent to which electronic reproductions are included in existing statutory
licences (both remunerable
and non-remunerable) in the
end, the Report of the Convergence Committee must be awaited.
It was the view of the Copyright Law Review Committee in its draft Report on
Computer Software that these rights are not currently
included in the scope of
these licences, but that the licences should be extended to include them. The
CLRC appears to make no distinction
between remunerable licences (such as those
for education and government) and non-remunerable licences (such as for
libraries).
In principle, there should be an extension of the scope of
remunerable
licences in this way (provided that appropriate rates and definitions of
electronic use could be agreed with the licensee groups).
Given the inevitable
expansion of electronic copying and transmission, the extension of the scope of
non-remunerable
licences to include electronic copying would need to be
most persuasively argued. Such a development would act unfairly against rights
owners who have a proper expectation of receiving fair remuneration for the use
of their rights.
Software also exists which enables sheet music to be printed out from MIDI
files as well as technology which allows the scanning and
printing of sheet
music. These issues directly affect the rights of sheet music publishers and
highlight the need for further consideration
of the issues raised in Chapter 15
of the CLRC Draft Report on Computer Software Protection. The possibility of
extending the rights
of publishers to control the graphic reproduction of works
and editions in a digital environment must be further considered.
31.4.6. Amendments In Relation To Mechanical
Licence Provisions
(i) Abolition Of The Statutory
Some foreign countries have eliminated "non-voluntary" licences. The removal
of the statutory licence would mean copyright owners
would have the right to
deregulate the licence fee. For example, one might see a famous composer
demanding a high mechanical reproduction
fee for a "cover" while a less well
known composer demanded a smaller one.
Interestingly, AMCOS observes that there is little obvious practical
difference in the way licensing operates in countries with voluntary
systems and
those with compulsory licences. The Society points out that in the United
Kingdom where the system has changed to voluntary
licensing, there has been no
major change in practice nor in the royalty rate as the licensing of the
reproduction of musical works
into records has been centralised through MCPS.
The rate is referable to the Copyright Tribunal.
The significant difference between the United Kingdom situation and the
Australian, is that AMCOS does not conduct centralised licensing.
Without either
the statutory licence or centralised licensing, it would be very difficult for
small publishers to monitor and control
the licensing of their works into
records. Both publishers and composers would suffer.
At present the industry agreement is based on the statutory provisions.
Without that mechanism, certain Trade Practices problems would
surely arise. The
statutory licence is generally introduced to prevent companies from acquiring a
monopoly in any particular group
of rights or abusing that monopoly position.
The rationale has not changed.
(ii) Bootleg, pirate and counterfeit sound
AMCOS seeks amendment to
(1) to make it clear that the manufacture
of bootleg, pirate and counterfeit sound recordings is exempt from its ambit.
no public policy benefit in forcing the collecting society to grant a
licence for the mechanical reproduction of a musical work in
situations in which
it has a reasonable belief that the grant of licence will result in the sale of
bootleg, pirate or counterfeit
Similarly the Society seeks the extension of
(2) beyond its
present coverage of "adaptations" of the musical work. If adaptations of a work
can be prevented by the withholding
of a licence on the ground that it debases
the work, it should be open to the owner of the rights in that work to withhold
if it has a reasonable belief that the quality of the record embodying
the work will debase it.
For example, many of the bootleg, pirate and counterfeit records presently on
the market are of very inferior technical quality. In
an age when moral rights
is recognised as a significant issue, should not a composer have the right to
say, "I do not want my work
debased by being on this inferior recording"? The
Society argues that the discretion to determine whether a recording falls within
the exclusions should be granted to the copyright owner of the musical work,
along with an exception that the copyright owner or
its licensee cannot be held
in breach of
of the Trade Practices Act for exercising its discretion.
(As matters stand, there is a conflict between the obligations imposed
by the statutory licence and the Government and the societies' commitment to
fighting piracy.)
(iii) Definition of "record"
AMCOS argues that the
definition of "record" should be amended
so that it is clear which forms of new technology will be subject to the
statutory licence
section 55(1).
For example, some multi-media products
appear to fall under the definition of "record" but can also embody a
cinematograph work or
computer program, and this creates difficulties in
determining not only the rate but even the correct licensing body.
(iv) Extension Of Term Of Copyright Protection
The EEC has recently enacted a term of copyright protection for rights
holders with the EEC of life plus seventy years. So that Australian
holders are accorded equitable protection in foreign territories, AMCOS argues
that Australia must give urgent consideration
to an extension of the Australian
For example, AMCOS' equivalent collecting societies in the EEC only accord
protection on a reciprocal basis and therefore Australian
rights holders are
granted fifty years protection in the EEC and not seventy whereas AMCOS must
collect on behalf of European owners
for the longer period.
(v) Bulletin Board Responsibility
AMCOS is concerned that the recent explosion of Bulletin Boards and their
ability to provide access to copyright works without remuneration
to owners is
interfering with their ability to collect on behalf of rights owners. It argues
that further consideration should be
given by Government to amending the
so that Bulletin Board operators are made clearly liable for
authorising reproductions of unlicensed copyright material which is
down-loaded
by subscribers.
There are already numerous Bulletin Boards operating in Australia which
contain MIDI files, musical works and literary works that
are unlicensed.
Litigation has been instituted in the United States by music publishers and
AMCOS' equivalent society, The Harry
Fox Agency, against CompuServe, a Bulletin
Board operator, alleging authorisation of reproductions of unlicensed musical
works. Owing
to the nature of Bulletin Boards, which have been classified in
prior litigation in the United States as "electronic bookstores"
or "libraries",
there may be difficulties in showing authorisation. The relevant collecting
societies in Australia would be confronted
with the same difficulties if they
attempted to enforce their members' rights. As was decided by the plaintiffs in
the CompuServe
litigation, it would be impractical for AMCOS to pursue the
persons uploading the unlicensed musical works onto the Bulletin Board.
the person carrying out the upload function is directly responsible for the
breach of rights, he or she is usually difficult
to identify. On the other hand,
the commercial gatekeeper, such as CompuServe, is both identifiable and
accessible.
(vi) A Distribution Right
At the moment the
confers no exclusive distribution right.
AMCOS argues that the introduction of such a right, which includes an
importation right,
would assist collecting societies to protect the rights of
their members.
The very limited value of the sections which preceded
sections 37
highlighted in a submission by The Copyright Owners' Reproduction Society Ltd to
the Spicer Committee in 1959. In the Report
of the Copyright Law Review
Committee, 1959, the Committee recommended that the onus should be on the
importer, seller or dealer
to prove he did not have knowledge that the work
concerned was an infringement of copyright. This recommendation was not adopted
in the 1968 Act. AMCOS seeks that this issue be revisited and that consideration
be given to amending sections 37 and 38 so to incorporate
the recommendations of
the Copyright Law Review Committee, 1959.
Alternatively, AMCOS seeks that the Act be amended so as to grant an
exclusive distribution right (which includes an importation right).
mean that sections 37 and 38 could be reworded to allow rights holders and their
collecting societies, a more effective
means of enforcement. It argues that, at
the very least, the drafting error in section 38 should be amended. (In its
present state,
AMCOS may not succeed in an action against an unlicensed retailer
under section 38 because of the interpretation given to the section
International
Writing Institute Inc
Rimila Pty Limited &
(1993) AIPC 91-035 by Lockhart J. at 39,748-39,749.)
(vii) Customs Powers Under Section
AMCOS and PPCA seek wide ranging powers to be given to Customs to deal with
pirate, bootleg and
counterfeit sound recordings and audio-visual articles, which are imported into
In Europe, IFPI (International Federation of the Phonographic Industry) was
the first industry body to enter a Memorandum of Understanding
with the Customs
Co-operation Council, which contains guidelines on the relationship between the
two bodies, and to draft model legislation
granting Customs suitable powers to
aid the music industry in monitoring sound recording piracy. A similar
relationship between Customs
and the music industry is sought in Australia. When
legislation is drafted to implement TRIPs, there should be consultation with
industry bodies and AMCOS, along with MIPI, to take advantage of their knowledge
as to the system of importing copyright and trade
mark infringing sound
recordings.
31.5. RECOMMENDATIONS
• That Government should not consider the imposition of statutory
licences where commercial voluntary licences, collectively
administered, are
• That section 135 ZM be amended or repealed so as to permit CAL to
collect income in respect of artistic works at the same
time as they are
surveying educational institutions in respect of their use of literary works.
• That educational institutions be provided with a statutory right to
reproduce artistic works (other than those already covered
by "fair dealing")
subject to the payment of equitable remuneration to the copyright owner.
• That there be no statutory licence introduced to grant access to
• That further inquiry be made as to the matters raised by the
Societies as to how the
might be amended to improve their
effectiveness and efficiency.
• That the jurisdiction of the Copyright Tribunal be expanded. (See
following Chapter.)
32. JURISDICTION AND
ROLE OF THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
32.1. OMBUDSMAN OF COPYRIGHT COLLECTING SOCIETIES
32.2. JURISDICTION OVER ALL LICENSING SCHEMES
32.2.1. AN ALTERNATIVE AMENDMENT
32.3. JURISDICTION OVER ANCILLARY ASPECTS OF LICENSING SCHEMES
32.4. PROCEDURE OF THE TRIBUNAL
32.5. RECOMMENDATIONS
Consideration was given as to whether and in what ways the jurisdiction of
the Copyright Tribunal might be amended to benefit both
the members of the
societies and the interests of licensees and/or the general public. Inquiry was
made of the societies as to whether
the Copyright Tribunal should have control
over their:
• processes for dealing with licence applications;
• procedures for dealing with licensee inquiries;
• procedures for dealing with licensee complaints;
• procedures for dealing with licensor complaints;
• setting of licence fees;
• non-financial terms of agreements with licensors;
• use of undistributed funds;
• other matters not presently controlled by the Tribunal
32.1. OMBUDSMAN OF COPYRIGHT COLLECTING
All of the societies were concerned that if the Tribunal were to be invested
with a jurisdiction which covered licensee applications,
inquiries and
complaints generally, their time would forever be taken up with minor complaints
and administrative matters. Moreover,
it is highly doubtful that the Copyright
Tribunal itself would wish to become a consumer complaints tribunal.
That said, it is clear from this Inquiry that there have been complaints
Some of these are
well founded but many are a result of misunderstandings or lack of
understanding. Where they are well founded,
there is a need for an independent
body to which persons can go when their communications with the society have
been unrewarding.
If the Copyright Tribunal is not the right body to deal with otherwise
unresolved issues relating to processes and procedures for
dealing with -
* licence applications;
* licensor and licensee inquiries;
* licensor and licensee complaints;
then an appropriate body must be established.
It is recommended
that there be established a position of Ombudsman
Of Copyright Collecting Societies.
This role may be only part time and may
be best based within the Attorney General's Department. Alternatively, it may be
to position it as another arm of the Copyright Tribunal's (expanded)
Certainly it is a role that must be seen to be independent of the societies
themselves, so that both rights owners and users are assured
of its independent
stance. One cannot help but think that the recent controversy concerning PPCA
would have been better dealt with
by an early referral to such an entity so that
the complaints and accusations could be dealt with rapidly and without
unnecessary
rancour, to the benefit of all parties and the industry
The proposed Ombudsman's office could provide various resources including not
only a facility for independent investigation but also
alternate dispute
resolution facilities. Where the Ombudsman makes a determination, if there is to
be a right of appeal, it should
be to the Copyright Tribunal, not the general
The cost and funding of this role must be the subject of further and separate
investigation but it seems appropriate that collecting
societies contribute to
the cost of such function - perhaps in proportion to the number and size of the
references which concern
32.2. JURISDICTION OVER ALL LICENSING
All of the societies recognise the importance of having an independent body,
such as the Copyright Tribunal, which is able to review
collectively
administered licensing schemes and set fees in the absence of the parties
reaching their own agreement.
In principle, the Tribunal should have as wide a jurisdiction as possible
in respect of licences and licence tariffs.
This includes setting of licence
fees and any non-financial terms of agreements with licensors, (including the
equity or otherwise
of sampling schemes and other methods for the identification
of rights owners or quantification of payments). Similarly, the Copyright
Tribunal should have jurisdiction whether or not the licence is statutory and
whether or not it is a voluntary licence dealing with
the public performance of
literary, dramatic and musical works and sound recordings or in broadcasts and
diffusions services. Such
distinctions are of little value except to make the
Tribunal an expert venue to which too few have jurisdictional access.
The Copyright Tribunal should have jurisdiction over all collectively
administered licensing schemes.
That its jurisdiction should be limited by
the nature of the copyright material licensed, is specious.
It should be the appropriate forum for the variation, approval and
interpretation of all licensing schemes, proposed/negotiated by
It makes sense to allow as many aspects of the copyright
administration function as possible, to come before the expert tribunal
than the general court system.
For example, potential licensees and collecting societies may be unable to
reach agreement as to:
(i) royalty rates;
(ii) whether particular uses are remunerable or not; and
(iii) appropriateness of sampling methods.
Where the parties are unable to reach agreement, either the society or the
potential rights user, should have the right to approach
the Tribunal. That a
responsible body such as the Australian Council of Libraries and Information
Services ("ICLIS") does not have
that right in its dealings with CAL is
anomalous and cannot be in the public interest.
All collecting societies' licence fees and conditions should be open to
the potential scrutiny on the Tribunal simply because some
arbitration mechanism
is an essential requirement for the establishment of a working relationship
between the society and users of
its members' property.
The above principles apply regardless of whether the relevant rights are
administered under voluntary or statutory licence.
32.2.1. An Alternative Amendment
If Government choses not to extend the jurisdiction of the Tribunal as
suggested above, it should at least obtain a clarification
of the definition of
the term "licence". Owing to the definition of "licence" in
section 136(1)
arguable whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction over licensing schemes for :
(i) "music video", where the music video is produced for sale and not only
for broadcast; and
(ii) Production Music, because the licence granted by AMCOS is to reproduce
the sound recording, broadcast the sound recording
reproduce the
musical work and the latter right is not covered by part (a) of the
definition.
To overcome this uncertainty,
it is recommended
that the definition
of "licence" should be amended along the lines of section 116(3) of the
(UK) which defines "copyright licences"
in the following terms: "licences to do, or authorise the doing of, any of the
acts restricted
by copyright."
32.3. JURISDICTION OVER ANCILLARY ASPECTS OF
LICENSING SCHEMES
The Copyright Tribunal has the power under section 135J and section 135zw of
to make determinations relating to sampling. For example,
Section 135J (3) provides:
The extent of copying of broadcasts and any other matters that are
necessary or convenient to be assessed by use of a sampling system,
assessed by use of a sampling system determined by agreement between the
administering body and the collecting society or,
failing such agreement, by the
This jurisdiction is however restricted to copying performed in educational
institutions and thus really only relates to CAL and AVCS.
Even then, the Act
restricts the possible parties to the educational institution and the collecting
society. A rights owner does
not have the right to bring such a sampling
grievance before the Tribunal.
It is recommended
that the Copyright Tribunal have explicit
identification
of rights owners and quantification of royalty payments.
If the recommendation to establish an Ombudsman of Collecting Societies is
accepted, Government should consider making this jurisdiction
subject to such
grievance being first subjected to the alternate dispute resolution procedures
of the Ombudsman's office.
32.4. PROCEDURE OF THE TRIBUNAL
It was the view of most of the societies and other parties who made
submissions to the Inquiry, that proceedings before the Copyright
Tribunal are
expensive, slow and unnecessarily legalistic. As such they are only considered
as a last resort.
As it is, only APRA, which uses the Tribunal as an integral part of its
enforcement procedures and has considerable experience before
the Tribunal, was
satisfied with the present procedures.
For example, pursuant to
section 152A
the Copyright
Tribunal has the power, upon application, to determine the royalty payable by
record manufacturers for recording musical
works. It was the view of AMCOS that
if the cost of making application to the Tribunal could be minimised and a
strict time limit
for the making of orders adhered to, the option of making
application to the Copyright Tribunal for a determination on rates would
Of course, how to make any court process less costly and more expeditious is
a challenge and given the commercial significance of
the matters determined by
the Tribunal it is important that the procedures give each party an equal
opportunity to be fully heard.
32.5. RECOMMENDATIONS
• That there be established the position of Ombudsman Of Copyright
Collecting Societies.
• That the definition of "licence" in
section 136(1)
be amended.
• That the Tribunal have as wide a jurisdiction as possible in respect
of licences and licence tariffs including the variation,
approval and
interpretation of all licensing schemes whether the relevant rights are
administered under voluntary or statutory licence.
• That the Tribunal have the right to review determinations of the
• That the procedures of the Tribunal be examined to see how matters
might be dealt with, faster and more cheaply.
33. TRADE PRACTICES
ISSUES AND COLLECTING SOCIETIES
33.1. AUTHORISATION BY THE TRADE PRACTICES COMMISSION
33.1.1. APRA
33.1.2. AMCOS
33.1.3. PPCA
33.2. SECTION 51 (3) OF THE TRADE PRACTICES ACT
33.3. ABUSE OF A MONOPOLY
33.4. POTENTIAL FOR COMPETITION
33.5. SHOULD DECLARED SOCIETIES ENJOY A MONOPOLY?
33.6. RECOMMENDATION TO PROMOTE SOCIETY REFORM
33.6.1. Introduction Of Criteria For "Qualified Societies"
33.6.2. Effect Of Being A Qualified Society
33.6.3. Certification
33.7. RECOMMENDATIONS
There is a fascinating range of approaches and attitudes shown by the
collecting societies to any inquiry as to the effect of the
Trade Practices Act
upon their operations. As one might expect, each society vehemently argues that
they are not in breach of the
Trade Practices Act. Whether they are or not is a
matter that is outside the Terms of Reference and no view is expressed.
APRA has long argued that because it takes assignments, rather than licences
(and is thus the owner rather than a licensee), the Act
does not really affect
it as only s.46 (1) could even be relevant. In spite of this approach, in
certain cases brought by or against
APRA, the Association's opponents raise the
monopoly issue - even if it is only being used as a tactical tool.
All of the other societies are licensees and exercise various degrees of
control over various rights. (See Rights Administered; Legal
All societies argue that they have never attempted, nor would never attempt,
to prevent or hinder the entry of any person into any
market. They argue that
their whole purpose is to
the lawful use of the relevant
rights. As such, they supply a service to users which is cost efficient and
simple; promotes increased
competition in other markets; results in a supply of
information to users so they can make informed choices; and promotes industry
cost savings and ultimately lower prices. Their opponents argue that collecting
societies are by their nature, monopolistic bodies
that have the capacity to
abuse that monopolistic position particularly through the imposition of
restrictive licence terms or the
operation of blanket licence schemes.
[There are two excellent background papers on this topic: the Trade Practices
Commission's background paper entitled
Application of the Trade Practices Act
to Intellectual Property
dated July 1991; and an article by Shaun McVicar
Market Power,
Arts and Entertainment Law Review, number 2 of 1992, pages
1-10, and number 3 of 1992, pages 1-8.]
33.1. AUTHORISATION BY THE TRADE PRACTICES
One way of avoiding TPC problems is by obtaining an approval or
"authorisation".
33.1.1. APRA
The Association did, between 1975 and 1980, hold an interim authorisation
from the Trade Practices Commission but the Association
did not seek to obtain a
final clearance on the basis that its legal advice was to the effect that it
does not run the risk of breaching
33.1.2. AMCOS
In September 1975 AMPAL gave notice to the Trade Practices Commission for an
interim clearance of certain contracts, arrangements
or understandings to which
it was a party or proposed to enter into, pursuant to
Trade Practices Act 1974
No contracts have been submitted to the Commission since that date. Apart
from the blanket licences, AMCOS is a party to at least
fifty other agreements,
including industry agreements and one-off agreements with users. The Society was
of the view that it would
be obliged to pay $7,500 per form for which approval
was sought and that the cost of seeking approval would be simply prohibitive.
Advice from the TPC is that the approval would be as to an 'overall course of
conduct' rather than a particular form and that the
above fee would be a
one-time payment. In light of this the cost would in fact be quite
reasonable.
33.1.3. PPCA
The Company has obtained an authorisation in respect of the public
performance of records but was unsuccessful in its application
relating to music
33.2. SECTION 51 (3) OF THE TRADE PRACTICES
Exceptions to the anti-monopoly provisions of the
Trade Practices Act
treated with due caution but
Trade Practices Act
provides an exemption in respect of certain dealings in copyright and largely
relieves the societies of the need to seek
an authorisation from the Trade
Practices Commission.
The Hilmer Committee recently reviewed the
Trade Practices Act
particular, the scope of
and recommended that the provisions of
should apply to all bodies and societies and that the existing exemptions under
should be removed over a two to three year time span.
In respect of
Trade Practices Act
, the Hilmer Committee
stated that "It saw force in arguments to remove the current exemption ..."
Nevertheless, it was "not in a
position to make expert recommendations on the
matter and recommends that the current exemption be examined by relevant
in consultation with interested groups."
The core of
(3) is that it acknowledges that intellectual property
is a system based upon the ownership and control of exclusive rights and that
there are public benefits in such a regime. It also recognises that
(i) exclusive rights can be used in such a way as to abuse market power, and
(ii) such abuse would out-weigh the public benefits of exclusivity.
33.3. ABUSE OF A MONOPOLY
Certainly whenever a number of exclusive rights owners join together to form
a licensing system, there is a potential for abuse and
there is no doubt that
each of the five collecting societies do have a dominant position in the
market-place with respect to the
Trade Practices Act
does not forbid
misuse of power, it
proscribes the taking of advantage of power in a market for the purpose of:
(a) eliminating or damaging a competitor in that or any other
(b) preventing entry to that or any other markets; or
(c) deterring or preventing competitive conduct in that or any other
[section 46 (1)]
It is important to recognise that CAL, AVCS, AMCOS and PPCA all administer
(to varying degrees), statutory licences. In the majority
of their licensing
functions, they have no discretion to refuse a grant of a licence (except in the
limited circumstance of non-payment
of reasonable remuneration). After all,
statutory licences were introduced largely to prevent monopolistic practices
interfering
with public access to otherwise exclusive rights. Insofar as licence
schemes are statutory, the policy behind such schemes is compatible
intention of
section 46.
The Inquiry found no evidence of societies acting so as to eliminate or
damage a competitor. The only evidence of 'preventing entry
of a competitor to
any relevant market' was the use of exclusive licence arrangements rather than
non-exclusive ones. As the exclusive/non-exclusive
distinction is central to the
commercialisation of any intellectual property, it is hardly surprising or
indeed problematic, that
the owner of an exclusive right should exercise that
right to permit another to administer the right on an exclusive basis. In other
words, when a copyright owner exclusively licenses a society so as to allow
administration on a collective basis, that transaction
neither adds to nor
detracts from the essentially exclusive nature of the relevant right. In any
event, as all of the societies permit
a rights owner to withdraw from the scheme
upon certain notice, there is nothing preventing a competitor being established
and persuading
rights owners to serve the requisite notice and change
Accordingly, there is little Trade Practices significance in whether a
licence from an owner to a collecting society is exclusive
or non-exclusive.
Moreover, whether the licences are exclusive or non-exclusive, the important
competition factor is whether or not the practice of
the society interferes with
the ability of other companies to compete with the society by providing not the
services but services
of the same type
. It is illogical to
suggest that there is a Trade Practices problem inherent in preventing one
corporation accessing the same intellectual
property as another, but it
completely appropriate to cry "Trade Practices" if the activity of one
corporation is designed to prevent
others from entering the same field using
intellectual property rights over which it has acquired control.
33.4. POTENTIAL FOR COMPETITION
It is particularly interesting to note that CAL's "worship" licence receives
considerable competition from three licensing organisations
which offer
competitive licences (Word of Life International; Christian Copyright Licensing
International; and LicenSing).
The existence of these three competitors to the CAL licence demonstrates that
there is a very real opportunity for the supply of alternative
services within particular market niches. These competitive companies also
demonstrate that if their services are sufficiently
attuned to the market they
can charge considerably more for their services than that charged by the larger
collecting society.
In some instances, the exclusivity is sought by a society so that it can be
sure of getting a percentage from all permissions granted
in respect of a right,
not just the non-profitable ones. For example, it is a severe impediment to the
functioning of AMCOS that
the fifteen largest record companies account directly
to the publishers for mechanical income rather than through the collecting
society. This may be seen as a great plus for those who argue for the ability of
corporations to maximise their profits but it is
clearly a practice that means
that the overhead of running the collecting society must be borne by a diverse
range of only peripheral
licensing functions - ones that are not profitable to
handle in other than a collective manner.
For as long as corporations see the relevant collecting society merely as an
extension of their commercial operation, there will always
be potential for
conflict of interest, entrenchment of interests, the abuse of minority interests
and the abuse of monopoly positions.
33.5. SHOULD DECLARED SOCIETIES ENJOY A
There is certain controversy as to whether Declared Societies should be given
a monopoly over their relevant rights. The antagonism
seems to largely come from
rights owners who object to having a Declared Society licensing (or refusing to
license) their rights,
negotiating the terms of such licences, and collecting on
their behalf. An example of this was provided to the Inquiry by the Combined
Newspaper and Magazine Copyright Committee of Australia which represents "all
major newspaper and magazine publishers in Australia".
In contrast, none of the user organisations who made submissions saw the
monopoly of the Declared Societies to be a particular problem.
After all, these
groups have the benefit of dealing with only one agency when locating,
negotiating and acquiring rights.
A statutory licence is generally granted to provide access to certain rights
that the community (through the voice of Government)
believes should be made
available, without the normal commercial strictures. (That is not to say that
the exploitation should not
be on reasonable commercial terms, rather that there
be no right to deny access or control.) The statutory education licences are
perfect example of this. In such cases, where the interests of the user are
being placed above the interests of the rights owner,
it is consistent for
Government to demand that the statutory right be administered by one
organisation. This assists the users for
they have only the one organisation to
deal with - the one-stop shop. Accordingly, it is highly efficient and cost
effective for
the rights users.
Beyond the statutory licence regime, there is no reason why a society should
be given any monopolistic preference. If two or more
companies wish to compete
to attract rights owners and to set up the administration necessary to
administer those rights and interests,
they should be allowed to do so. It must
be added that the position of Government licences, is based on principles
different to those
which apply to the educational statutory licences. The
relationship between Government and a collecting society (such as CAL) is
derived from negotiation. If the Government chose, it could negotiate an
agreement with any collecting society for the use of its
members' rights. If it
so wished, it could adopt the rhetoric of competition and the free market rather
than the present rhetoric
of the natural monopoly. If it were to do so, it is
difficult to see what advantage it would gain, beyond a degree of ideological
purity. Being the supplier of licences to intellectual property is not the same
as being a supplier of chairs. Any supplier can tender
to furnish chairs to
Government provided that it is the cheapest tenderer that can fulfil the
functional requirements.
With intellectual property, the user needs permission in respect of a
particular work rather than a general species of work. For this
reason, it makes
sense for Government to adopt a system that is most convenient and efficient for
its own needs: namely, a system
by which it has to deal only with one
organisation in order to acquire the rights that it requires. Rather than
relying on competitive
organisations to regulate the sensibilities of price and
conditions, it is more efficient to ensure that the Copyright Tribunal has
right to determine such issues in the absence of agreement between the
The answer for rights owners who object to the Government-conferred monopoly,
is to recognise that such collecting societies are non-profit
distributing
companies and that, as members, they would be entitled to nominate
representatives for the board and that they would
be able to influence the
policies of the organisation in the same way as every other rights owner. That a
new collecting society
established by group representing "all major newspaper
and magazine publishers" would enhance competition and still assure the public
benefit of access for governmental and educational copying, has yet to be
established.
33.6. RECOMMENDATION TO PROMOTE SOCIETY
One approach is to say that no organisation (whether a collectively
administered collecting society or not) should be exempt from
the full rigour of
the market principles imposed by the
Trade Practices Act
. That approach demands
the phasing out of
(3) exemptions. The implications of doing this
involve interfering with the fundamental exclusive rights of intellectual
Even if it were thought desirable, it may well be in breach of
Australia's international treaty commitments under the Berne and Rome
Conventions.
The other, and more positive contribution by Government, would be to see how
it might persuade all societies to improve their structure,
procedures and
function so that they have an incentive for positive change, rather than
maintaining a defensive posture in relation
to Trade Practices issues. In other
words, it is suggested that the Act can be used as a very directed carrot rather
than a stick.
33.6.1. Introduction Of Criteria For "Qualified
It is recommended
that the existing limited exemption accorded to
collecting societies by
Trade Practices Act
remain (albeit
in amended form) PROVIDED THAT each society brings its structure, procedures,
functions and conduct within certain
guidelines which will work to ensure that
there is sufficient scrutiny of a society's conduct to protect its members,
potential users, and owners of the relevant copyright.
It is emphasised that the compliance with such guidelines must be voluntary.
After all, the societies are member-based organisations
and those members must
retain the decision as to whether they want to make changes and thus gain
benefits, or whether they prefer
to remain as they are. The choice must be
theirs. For example, when AMCOS was asked about its attitude to enjoying the
of being a declared collecting society, its view was that the
"monopoly problem" is more perceived than real and that the administrative
inconvenience of becoming and operating as a Qualified Society, would outweigh
any advantages.
The present Guidelines For Declared Collecting Societies provide an excellent
starting place for the new guidelines. Obviously they
would need to be altered
to make them relevant. The matters that should be taken into account to ensure
the good governance of societies
include the following:
(i) That the society be a non-profit company limited by guarantee;
(ii) That all relevant rights owners have access to membership of the company
(not just its services) and have equitable access to
board membership and
company control;
(iii) That the relevant rights owners be equitably represented on the board
of the society;
(iv) That the maximum term of board membership be limited so as to inhibit
entrenchment of interests;
(v) That the accounts of the company be annually audited;
(vi) That an Annual Report be provided to the Attorney General;
(vii) That Qualified status be able to be removed by the Attorney General,
either on his/her own motion or upon the recommendation
of the Ombudsman For
Collecting Societies;
(viii) That it notify and obtain the approval of the Attorney General as to
any intended rule changes;
(ix) That the society maintain a Cultural And Charitable Purposes Fund for
the benefit of relevant rights owners and members.
33.6.2. Effect Of Being A Qualified
It is recommended
that the TPA be amended so that societies which
are Qualified Societies, and thus subject to the regular scrutiny of government,
should be given the protection of
(3) thus, in effect, placing them
in the same position as they would have been if they had received authorisations
from the Trade
Practices Commission.
It is further recommended that
, a society's input agreement should
not be in breach of
if the society is Qualified and the output
agreement should not be in breach of
if it is either (a) statutory or
(b) approved by the Copyright Tribunal.
33.6.3. Certification
It is further recommended that it be provided that where there is a
purported abuse of a Qualified Society's monopoly power, no action
commenced in respect of that abuse, under heading of the TPA, without the prior
certificate of the Attorney General.
33.7. RECOMMENDATIONS
• That guidelines be drawn up and an approval mechanism instituted, by
which those collecting societies which can demonstrate
that their structures,
procedures, functions and conduct is within those guidelines, are accorded the
status of "Qualified Societies".
• That such guidelines be drawn up in consultation with the Trade
Practices Commission and the societies.
• That Qualified Societies retain the protection of
Trade Practices Act
• That a society's input agreement should not be in breach of
if the society is Qualified and the output agreement should not be in breach
if it is either (a) statutory or (b) approved by the Copyright
• That where there is a purported abuse of a Qualified Society's
monopoly power, the prior certificate of the Attorney General
be a pre-condition
(1) in legal proceedings.
34. A COPYRIGHT
COLLECTING SOCIETY FOR THE VISUAL ARTS
34.1 INTRODUCTION
34.2 THE NEED FOR AN AUSTRALIAN VISUAL ARTS COLLECTING SOCIETY
34.2.1. Income For Visual Artists And Craftspeople, And Enforcement Of Their
34.2.2. Understanding Of Legal Rights
34.2.3. Bargaining Power
34.2.4. Enforcement
34.2.5. Conclusion
34.3 VISCOPY
34.4 EFFICIENT COPYRIGHT CLEARANCES AND SERVICES FOR USERS OF COPYRIGHT
MATERIAL IN ARTISTIC WORKS
34.4.1. Services Required By Major Collecting Institutions
34.4.2. Educational Users Of Copyright Material
34.4.3. Conclusion
34.5 ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDER INTERESTS
34.5.1. Role Of A Collecting Society For Aboriginal And Torres Strait
Islander Art
34.6 THE IMPACT OF NEW TECHNOLOGIES
34.7 AUSTRALIA'S STANDING IN INTERNATIONAL COPYRIGHT PRACTICE: LAW, TRADE
AND CULTURAL AWARENESS
34.7.2 Arrangements With Overseas Copyright Collecting Societies
34.7.3. International Awareness Of Australian Culture
34.7.4. Conclusion
34.8 A SEPARATE COPYRIGHT COLLECTING AGENCY
34.9 THE FUNDING OF THE ESTABLISHMENT PERIOD
34.10 GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE
34.10.1. Introduction
34.10.2. VISCOPY's Place In The Cultural Strategy
34.11 SEED FUNDING FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
34.11.1. The Amount
34.11.2. Loan Or Cultural Investment?
34.12 STRUCTURE OF VISCOPY
4.13 RECOMMENDATIONS
34.1 INTRODUCTION
A centralised agency for the collection and distribution of copyright income
is justified when administration of and access to rights
is impracticable on an
individual level. This is presently the case for visual artists in Australia. In
the absence of a centralised,
properly resourced collecting society, the owners
of copyright in visual art are being deprived of income to which they are
and copyright users are being deprived of the opportunity to obtain
There has been concern at the inadequacies of copyright protection in the
Australian visual arts among the practitioners, administrators
and lawyers who
work in the cultural industry for over ten years. The legislative anomalies and
economic disadvantages which visual
artists suffer in comparison with their
colleagues in other practices (in particular authors of literary and musical
works) have
made it extremely difficult for visual artists to achieve a
satisfactory degree of professional independence.
That concern has resulted in a plethora of publications investigating and
reporting on the legal, economic and social circumstances
of the visual artist.
Since the late 1980s much of this work (which has variously been funded by the
Australia Council, the National
Association for the Visual Arts ("NAVA"), CAL
and State Arts Ministries) has advocated the establishment of a visual arts
collecting society.
Material Commissioned For The Establishment Of A Visual Arts Collecting
Commissioner
Report on Copyright Fees for Visual Artists Libby Baulch
Australian Copyright Council
Feasibility Study Colin Golvan
Feasibility Study John Byrne
Consultan Australia
NAVA/CAL Study on CAVAA: Copyright Agency for Australian
Visual Artists Natasha Serventy
Income Research for Proposed VISCOPY Collection Agency
HH Guldberg Economic Strategies Pty Ltd
Business Plan for VISCOPY Anna Ward, Barbara Allen
No one of these reports has provided an irresistible argument for introducing
a visual arts copyright collection society but for all
that, they have all
arrived at the same conclusion: Australia needs a collecting society for the
visual arts. No more reports need
to be written to establish to need and
viability of such a society.
34.2 THE NEED FOR AN AUSTRALIAN VISUAL ARTS
COLLECTING SOCIETY
34.2.1. Income For Visual Artists And Craftspeople,
And Enforcement Of Their Rights
The loss of income from and control over the exploitation of copyright that
flows from the disparate art practices, geographic decentralisation
income level of visual artists, together with the concealment of the practice of
condoned by the lack of any efficient
administration, are characteristic of the visual arts sector of the cultural
industry and market
in copyright works.
Organisations such as NAVA, Craft Australia, professional organisations, the
Australian Copyright Council, the Arts Law Centre of
Australia and Aboriginal
Arts Management Association ("AAMA") cannot meet the demand for the services
they already provide and have
no resources to extend these services to deal with
the complex and widespread problems which face visual artists in the
exploitation
and administration of their copyright. Nor is their charter to do
It has been clearly established that Australian visual artists comprise an
especially low-income earning group in the cultural sector
notwithstanding the
fact that they are also among the highest qualified groups of income
As a result of these severe economic disadvantages, visual artists In this
Report "visual artists" is used compendiously and includes
craftspeople,
designers, photographers, illustrators, black and white artists and fine
lack the resources to supervise their rights, or to pay for the enforcement
of them. Yet at the same time they are conscious of the
practice of infringement
of their works See Throsby and Mills
When are you going to get a real
Research indicates three fundamental problems which confront visual artists
in the exploitation of their copyright: lack of understanding
of legal rights,
weakness of bargaining position, and inadequate or ineffective enforcement
mechanisms Publications which note these
factors on the basis of research
conducted into the financial status of visual artists, include:
Throsby and Mills,
When Are You Going to Get a Real Job?
, Australia
Council (1989)
Report on Copyright Fees for Visual Artists
, Australian
Throsby and Thompson
Individual Artists' Survey
, Australia Council
1993 (to be published)
34.2.2. Understanding Of Legal Rights
Several national, government funded and professional organisations work to
redress the difficulties which visual artists and craftspeople
experience in
getting information about their rights. The Australian Copyright Council, the
Arts Law Centre of Australia and NAVA
have long-established educational programs
to facilitate professionalism and self reliance among practitioners in the
visual artists.
Federal and State Crafts Councils, and professional organisations provide
educational and advisory services to its members, and lobby
for legislative
change in their interests.
In respect of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander artists, who suffer
particular economic and cultural hardship at the unauthorised
exploitation of
their works, (as to which, see below) the Aboriginal Arts AAMA has been vigilant
in the education of its members
and the enforcement of their rights by providing
information and assistance to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander artists and
arts organisations in relation to matters such as contractual arrangements,
use of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander cultures.
However, notwithstanding all of their efforts, education on its own is not
enough. None of these organisations which educate, inform
and advise visual
artists and craftspeople can redress the financial and bargaining disadvantages
which visual artists and craftspeople
34.2.3. Bargaining Power
As has been noted above, visual artists and craftspeople fare far worse than
comparable income earning groups. Specifically in the
exploitation of their
their contracting partners in negotiation
who invariably enjoy far greater
commercial power both because they are likely to be far better resourced, and
because they are buyers
in a buyers' market. Further, and perhaps partly as a
result of this inequality of bargaining power, there is no industry standard,
minimum fee structure, for the reproduction of artistic works, as exists in
other countries (such as the United Kingdom, France
and Germany) where minimum
recommended licence fees are set by visual arts copyright collecting
Both the Australian Copyright Council and the Arts Law Centre of Australia
have extensive experience in the provision of national
legal services to the
arts community. The most recently published Annual Reports of both the
Australian Copyright Council and the
Arts Law Centre indicate that in the 1992
financial year a major proportion of the inquiries dealt with concerned the
visual arts
(21% in the case of the Australian Copyright Council and 42% in the
case of the Arts Law Centre of Australia); and that a large proportion
inquiries concerned copyright-related matters. These services play an important
role in addressing the imbalance but cannot
be expected to overcome the
commercial effect of economic disadvantage, namely a diminished ability to
negotiate a fair remuneration
from the reproduction of their creative work.
34.2.4. Enforcement
Whilst individual artists, have the legal authority to control the use that
is made of their works, they rarely have the economic
resources to commence
legal proceedings to enforce those rights. The
Johnny Bulun Bulun
(involving copyright infringements on t-shirts) sent a caution to infringers of
but infringement actions in the
visual arts are unusual because visual artists and craftspeople are a dispersed,
unmonied class,
have no means to conduct a test case, and an account of profits
in any single case is rarely likely to justify the expense of copyright
infringement proceedings.
34.2.5. Conclusion
The precise economic impact of the loss of income to which visual artists and
craftspeople are entitled, and of access to effective
enforcement procedures, is
impossible to calculate. However, the cultural industry statistics which are
available indicate that the
visual arts sector is a very substantial one Source:
The Arts: Some Australian Data
Australia Council, December 1991
. In 1990-91 Australian households spent $830 million on books, $680 million
on newspapers, $550 million on photographic materials,
services etc, $420
million on magazines and other printed material. All of this material includes
or involves the reproduction of
visual art work.
As the already significant visual arts industry develops culturally and
economically, on both a domestic and global level, artists'
responsible and effective agency to formulate minimum fees, set industry
standards, collect and distribute their copyright
income and foster a culture of
respect of their rights, intensifies. The experience of visual artists in other
countries, and the
opinions of lead organisations in both the copyright and
cultural sectors (funding bodies, progenitors of law reform, political
organisations
representing visual artists and visual artists themselves)
unanimously indicate that the most appropriate way of dealing with these
is by the establishment of a collecting society. In an age of mass reproduction,
it is not only inefficient, it is practicably
impossible, for artists to
administer the full extent of their rights without the benefit of collective
administration.
34.3 VISCOPY
To NAVA's credit, it has provided sustained support and pressure for the
introduction of a visual arts copyright collecting society.
It has established a
company limited by guarantee named VISCOPY for the purpose. It exists. It is
unfunded and unstaffed. For the
moment, it is a corporate shell which needs
slight restructuring and considerable funding.
34.4 EFFICIENT COPYRIGHT CLEARANCES AND SERVICES
FOR USERS OF COPYRIGHT MATERIAL IN ARTISTIC WORKS
"The most startling and to some extent unexpected result of the .. inquiry
was the widespread ignorance (among all participants in
the industry) of
Particularly where public bodies such as government departments and state
galleries are involved, it was disappointing to see some
practices being adopted
that were so clearly unfair to artists and contrary to the aim of promoting
artists' welfare. Tired arguments
such as that the use will "promote" the artist
and therefore should be free to the user were not uncommon. There was a
on the part of users to assess the value of the use to them as
licensees (rather than the perceived value of the use to the artist)."
Report On Copyright Fees for Visual Artists
, Australian Copyright
Council, November 1989, pp 1, 27
The wide geographical dispersal of visual arts practitioners and the very
individual nature of their work, suggests that it is difficult
for users to
identify, locate and contact the rights owners. Currently, not only is it easy
for irresponsible firms to break the
law; it also commercially impractical for
responsible industry participants to meet their legal obligations.
It is to the mutual benefit of copyright owners and users that copyright
users have access to a comprehensive repertoire of works
and an efficient
licensing administration which can be integrated into the commercial activities
of copyright users with minimum
disruption. Under these circumstances copyright
users can fulfil their legal obligations and adopt best copyright practice in
most efficient way.
34.4.1. Services Required By Major Collecting
Institutions
Notwithstanding the traditional antagonism expressed by some users of
material in
artistic works eagerly anticipate the establishment of a copyright collecting
agency which can administer copyright uses
and fees efficiently. Letters of
support were provided from several of these. The National Gallery of Australia
(Kevin Munn, Assistant
Director, Access and Marketing who was delegated by the
NGA Council in late 1993 to address its copyright policies) endorsed the
proposal saying that it
"will be more efficient to clear copyrights through a collecting society
which is situated in Australia.
To date the Gallery has assisted in the establishment of an Australian agency
by hosting a seminar for Gerhard Pfennig, Executive
Director of BILD-KUNST,
Bonn; and we are taking the initiative to facilitate a visit to Australia by
Rachel Duffield, Executive Director
of the Design and Artists Copyright Society
Ltd., London. In addition, an officer has been made available to liaise with
a Director of the Board."
Other strong letters of support were received from the Regional Galleries of
New South Wales and the Queensland Art Gallery. The latter
placed a rider on its
support saying that "... the State and National Galleries should seek to adopt a
uniform position on VISCOPY."
Accordingly, and very usefully, the Queensland Art
Gallery will be presenting a recommendation to the next meeting of the Council
of Australian Art Museum Directors. (Letters from Museums Australia and the
Museum of Contemporary Art are also foreshadowed.)
Besides the traditional image reproduction needs in collecting institutions,
the recent and continuing trend of Australian collecting
institutions to
increase their merchandising activity reflects similar overseas practice and
indicates a growing market in the exploitation
of copyright in artistic works.
In 1992 the gross merchandising sales of the five largest state galleries was
$9.5 million. Nett
merchandising activity of the seven largest state galleries
was $2.2 million, and of regional galleries approximately $0.6 million
Museums 1992: Art Museums and Public Galleries in Australia and New
, Research Paper No. 9 Australia Council July 1993
. These factors reveal the commercial imperative for collecting institutions
to have access to efficient copyright clearance.
As noted above, the National Gallery of Australia ("NGA") is developing a
formal in-house copyright policy. The NGA has expressed
its preference for
VISCOPY to operate as a centralised agency to assist it to implement that
In September 1993, NAVA commissioned a report into the feasibility of a
proposed visual arts collecting society Guldberg op.cit.
. The Report did not attempt a comprehensive survey of potential income
sources for such an agency, but made a comprehensive analysis
of selected market
segments to comprise a 'base case' of reproduction rights associated with
'mainstream' art, and Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander art and craft. In
summary, the projected collections
from art museums
were $30,000 in the
agency's first year of operation growing to $420,000 in its fifth year, and of
collections from reproduction
of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander artists
was $50,000 in year one growing to $400,000 in year 5.
34.4.2. Educational Users Of Copyright
As a separate 'scenario', Guldberg analysed the potential income from the
exploitation of reprographic rights by educational institutions
administered by CAL in respect of literary works) of artistic works. As is
discussed elsewhere in this Report, that potential
income is currently
constrained by s.135ZM of the
. Using a sample of photocopied text
provided by CAL, Guldberg found that more than 2% of the sample, yielded
illustrated pages (not
including graphs, diagrams, maps or line drawings). On
the assumptions that CAL were willing to agree to a distribution to VISCOPY
the minuscule amounts currently collected for visual material, and that s.135ZM
would be repealed in VISCOPY's fourth year, Guldberg
estimated projected
collections from this source of $200,000 in year 1 and $1.95 million in year
It has been recommended elsewhere in this Report that s.135ZM be repealed and
a statutory licence granted for educational copying.
This has the advantage of
making it clear that educational institutions have the right to copy and that
CAL, acting as the agent
of VISCOPY, would have the right to monitor and collect
in respect of those uses. (Although Guldberg anticipated that such legislative
amendments would not take place until VISCOPY's fourth year, such delay would
only have the effect of increasing the amount of grant
support that would be
required to maintain the new Society in its establishment period.)
Over its years of operation, CAL has developed sampling and collection
techniques which cause least disruption to educational institutions
their obligations with regard to reprographic use of copyright material. The
promoters of VISCOPY intend that the society
would co-operate with CAL in the
sampling and collection functions to deliver a cost effective service whereby
VISCOPY will distribute
to its members income from reprography which CAL logs
and collects from educational institutions. This is most sensible.
34.4.3. Conclusion
It is presently difficult for copyright users to identify and locate
the use of their work. It is hardly surprising that they are somewhat reluctant
to bother. With copyright owners insufficiently
resourced either to secure fair
remuneration by bargain, or to enforce their rights against infringement, there
has been little deterrent
against unauthorised use, nor incentive for users to
make the effort to meet their obligations.
The establishment of VISCOPY, will means that for some users, (in particular
those who have not been paying for their use of visual
art copyrights), their
costs will increase. Moreover, all users will also have to become familiar with
the new system for obtaining
clearances. These however are matters that are
justified in the interests of proper copyright administration and obtaining
appropriate
remuneration for copyright owners.
VISCOPY, particularly if it co-operates with the state and national
collecting institutions and with CAL and AVCS, will enable copyright
meet their obligations whilst at the same time ensuring that the rights owners
receive fair remuneration for and maintain
control over, the rights. It is a
classic example of circumstances in which collective administration is
34.5 ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDER
34.5.1. Role Of A Collecting Society For Aboriginal
And Torres Strait Islander Art
In its chapter on cultural integrity and copyright, the 1988
Committee of the Aboriginal Arts and Crafts Industry
("the Altman Report")
noted the following problems in enforcement of copyright in Aboriginal art:
Lack of consistency in, and poor documentation of, Aboriginal art,
particularly at the fine art level.
The Committee noted that such
documentation was of a poorer standard in exhibitions of Aboriginal art than
those of non-Aboriginal
art, that the importance of proper documentation
extended beyond collectors and students of Aboriginal art to the promotion of a
more informed understanding by the general public of visual artists' copyright,
and that adequate documentation could play a role
in establishing and
safeguarding visual artists' copyright.
Continuing practice of infringement of artists' copyright.
Committee noted that notwithstanding the fact that Aboriginal artists have the
same legal rights as other artists under Australian
law, Aboriginal artists'
rights have historically been more likely to be disregarded than the copyrights
of non-Aboriginal artists.
The Committee's view was that this was caused by
widespread ignorance of copyright on behalf of both artists and would-be users
Difficulties experienced by museums and art galleries in acquiring
reproduction licenses for the use of Aboriginal art.
Submissions made by
collecting institutions suggested streamlining of procedures for the
reproduction of artworks, particularly in
respect of non-commercial reproduction
for promotion of exhibitions, inclusion in catalogues and for educational
purposes. The Committee
noted that Aboriginal artists have suffered particular
disadvantage because of their often remote location so that even when potential
users of material wanted to obtain the artist's permission for use of their
work, where an artist could not be located the result
was either that their work
was not used, or that it was used without permission. The Committee regarded
either consequence as risking
offence to both personal and artistic integrity.
(This view was also supported by submissions made to the present Report.)
The lack of standard guidelines to assist with negotiations of
The lack of such guidelines resulted in complaints by copyright owners
of unconscionable underpayment; and by users of unreasonably
high demands.
The prohibitive cost to individual copyright owners of bringing
infringement actions.
The Committee noted the unsuccessful approaches which
had been made to Aboriginal legal aid services in Sydney and Melbourne on behalf
of Aboriginal artists, and the limited resources of these organisations.
With the exception of the funding of AAMA, little has been done to improve
the position of the Aboriginal artists as described in
the Altman Report. Since
then, the cases of
Johnny Bulun Bulun
, and other actions brought by
Aboriginal artists for infringement of their copyright by the manufacture of
t-shirts appropriating
their designs, have been possible through the limited
funding from North Australian Legal Aid Service, the Federal Government and
Australia Council to fund the odd case. Although these cases are important, they
are not the stuff of systemic reform.
The Altman Report was not convinced that a specialist Aboriginal copyright
collection agency was warranted notwithstanding the copyright
related issues
which impact specifically on the creative output of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander artists. There is no reason
to divide the interests of Aboriginal and
non-aboriginal artists. Both need such an organisation. Both can ensure that
their respective
interests are taken into account through a structure that
ensures that the interests of all of the relevant rights owners are
represented.
A visual arts collecting society will not compete with existing
organisations; it will complement and supplement them. In time it
may also be a
useful additional source of funding to support them. For example, AAMA
investigates copyright infringements and supports
action taken by other agencies
in test case infringement actions. It negotiates copyright clearances and fees
for the use of their
members' work. VISCOPY, by virtue its centralised nature,
could co-operate and build on both aspects of this work by working together
AAMA on educational programs, and administering the rights which Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander artists grant in consultation
with AAMA. There must be
consideration of the extremely complex religious, cultural and economic issues
which exist in the market
for the exploitation of Aboriginal art. It is
suggested that VISCOPY would not seek to usurp AAMA's role as the primary
educational
and advisory resource for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders,
but rather would rely on AAMA's unique expertise in an equitable
distribution of
is presently inadequately resourced
Discussions were held with AAMA. These indicated that the establishment of
VISCOPY is seen by their constituency as a positive contribution
to the problems
faced by aboriginal artists.
34.6 THE IMPACT OF NEW TECHNOLOGIES
Historically there has been a view that the major source of income for visual
artists has been the sale of their original work. If
this were once true, it is
no longer for the vast majority of arts practitioners. Whilst this is not the
place to give comprehensive
coverage to the concerns of visual arts copyright
owners with regard to the impact of new technologies, it is obvious that digital
technology in particular has dramatically changed both the creation, storage,
distribution, transmission, application and manipulation
of copyright material.
Now that technology such as CD-Rom can merge (converge) text and image without
discrimination as to class
of work or subject matter in which copyright
subsists, it is axiomatic that artistic works should be treated in the same way
as literary
and musical works.
34.7 AUSTRALIA'S STANDING IN INTERNATIONAL
Australia has a creditable record of commitment to international copyright
conventions, particularly by its memberships of the Berne
Convention, Universal
Whilst none of these conventions requires copyright administration by a
centralised agency, the lack of a visual arts collecting society
effectiveness of the enforcement of Australian visual arts copyright in the
international arena which has, since the late
1970s, increasingly operated as a
federation of national collecting societies.
34.7.1 GATT
Central to Australia's participation in the GATT is the improvement of its
standing in the international trade in intellectual property
works (from which
it is argued benefits will flow to copyright owners). Without a sufficiently
expert, efficient and comprehensive
and obligations which Australia assumes by virtue of its GATT membership, it
denies itself
the full benefit of its international participation, as well as
denying the flow-on benefits to copyright owners.
34.7.2 Arrangements With Overseas Copyright
Collecting Societies
There are visual arts collecting societies in over 30 countries. Each
develops national standards of industry practice in the licensing
of copyright
to users, and each negotiates reciprocal arrangements for the international
enforcement of their members' copyright.
There are, for instance, such agencies
in the United Kingdom, the United States, France, Germany, Canada, Japan,
Scandinavia, South
Africa and Eastern Europe. Each belongs to the Confederation
of International Societies of the Graphic and Plastic Arts and Photographers
(CIAGP), a subsidiary council of the Confederation of International Societies of
Authors and Composers (CISAC).
On 6 June 1994 CIAGP resolved to offer VISCOPY reciprocal agreements with
their societies as soon as it is operational. Moreover,
the Chief Executive of
the United Kingdom visual arts collecting society, DACS, has written to the
Chairman of NAVA that DACS will
hand over administration of the rights of
Australian visual arts copyright owners to VISCOPY once it is established.
Having the rights of Australians administered by a United Kingdom
representative is clearly unsatisfactory and cannot continue.
With this international standing VISCOPY would be assured of an operational
base and international presence, to which Australia is
already entitled by its
participation in the GATT. It is highly unlikely that an agency not exclusively
concerned with the interests
of copyright owners in artistic works would be
accepted into CIAGP.
Guldberg analysed information relating to 10 overseas visual art collecting
societies for 1988 to 1991. In summary, he found a trend
rate of growth amongst
them of 28.8% pa, and that the three largest activity areas were reproduction
rights, resale right and reprography.
Guldberg notes a "spectacular 70% jump" in
reprography rights in 1991 and growth in revenue from cable and broadcasting
rights. The
growth of collections in all areas significantly or greatly exceeded
the rate of inflation.
It is obviously impossible to apply overseas experience in any general or
direct way to the Australian legislative, economic and cultural
context, but the
economic review of these agencies highlights what work can be done by visual
arts collecting societies so long as
they achieve critical mass quickly and are
administered efficiently and by people with appropriate expertise.
The legal, cultural and economic benefits of CIAGP membership for VISCOPY
will include:
(i) Income for, and a policing service against unauthorised exploitation of
the works of, Australian artists internationally.
(ii) Promotion of responsible use of copyright internationally.
(iii) Practical recognition of Australia's status as a 'most favoured nation'
trading partner in the international visual arts copyright
(iv) Development of the international market for the use of Australian
All of these benefits are of particular importance to Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Island visual artists, for the reasons set out
34.7.3. International Awareness Of Australian
The arts sector sells Australia overseas both as exports of works of art and
as tourism. As has been noted above, inadequate enforcement
mechanisms provide a
tacit licence for the unscrupulous and unremunerated exploitation of copyright
material. On an international
level this has several consequences. First, it
obscures the cultural complexity of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Art;
it hampers the potential for visual artists to achieve international
recognition. On a national economic level it prevents Australia
from maximising
the economic potential of the cultural sector, because copyright users are prone
to exploit copyright work without
accreditation, or use other material
altogether if a copyright owner is too difficult to find. Both the artist and
Australia suffer.
34.7.4. Conclusion
At a time when participants in international affairs are increasingly
identified as bloc territories, it is crucially important that
Australia is
represented in the international forum to the same level as are other countries,
if only to guarantee its standing.
In the field of international intellectual
property law and practice the industry has increasingly organised itself around
the centralised
collecting agencies, whose charter and expertise are the
representation of the interests of the classes of copyright owners who are
members. Those agencies are anxious for the establishment of VISCOPY for the
mutual benefits they perceive this will provide
their members, and the
uniformity of copyright practice internationally. This view is consistent with
the rights and obligations
Australia has negotiated for itself at the level of
international law. It needs a complementary mechanism to give those rights and
obligations practical effect.
34.8 A SEPARATE COPYRIGHT COLLECTING
Given that a copyright society for the visual arts is necessary, the question
must be asked whether it needs to be a stand-alone society
or whether its
function could be undertaken by an existing society.
The recommendation of
this Report is that the society have a separate structure and management.
The reasons are as follows:
(i) Copyright collecting societies have traditionally represented the legal
and economic rights of copyright owners according to the
areas in which those
rights owners operate. Collecting societies achieve credibility with both rights
holders and rights users through
their expertise in representing their members'
interests. Each class of copyright owner has different interests, not always
compatible.
Accordingly, a collective administration must be owned and
administered by representatives of the relevant rights owners - the artists.
(ii) Copyright collecting societies are complex commercial and cultural
institutions. One of the primary objectives of any responsible
collecting agency is to minimise operating costs without jeopardising its
members' interests, and as this Report has discussed,
there are only limited
economies of scale which a collecting society can achieve by merging.
VISCOPY can benefit from many of the investments and progress which existing
agencies have made in their operations and thereby reduce
its establishment and
running costs, but existing agencies cannot afford to represent copyright owners
in artistic works without
either neglecting the administration of their members'
interests, or charging more for the services they provide. In other words,
are limited economies of scale across industries.
(iii) Distinct commercial practices exist in the cultural sector around
particular art forms. Accordingly, copyright collecting societies
provide services which are appropriate to the rights and practices of copyright
owners, and obligations and practices of
detailed information
those works, and calculate distribution to rights holders of fees collected
rights users. Therefore, whilst there can be scope for clear scale economies
industries (making it sensible to establish a single collection
agency within the visual arts), there is less scope for economies
industries, and therefore no economic justification for merging the activities
of a visual arts collecting society with those of
(iv) A separate visual arts collecting society would be well placed to
represent the interests of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
visual artists.
The Society would not only collect fees on behalf of such owners but would be
able to co-operate with existing organisations
and extend the educational work
they undertake to educate the owners and users of copyright in such works.
(v) Copyright collecting societies for the visual arts in other countries are
run independently from other copyright collecting societies
(for the reasons set
out above). They set national standards, fees and tariffs, and negotiate
international arrangements through
a federation of visual arts collecting
societies. Australia needs to be included in this federation in order to reap
the maximum
potential of international copyright protection for Australian
visual arts copyright owners. This could be jeopardised if a visual
collecting society were established within another collecting society in
34.9. THE FUNDING OF THE ESTABLISHMENT
As shown earlier in this Report, the traditional way for funding the
establishment of a collecting society is through the investment,
loan or gift of
moneys from leading corporate entities within the relevant industry sector. This
is not available to visual artists.
They lack an alliance with any commercial
organisation of financial substance. Unlike owners of copyright in books, sound
recordings,
musical works and literary works, by the nature of the practice of
visual arts, the visual arts has no equivalent to the Australian
Record Industry
Association ("ARIA") or the Australian Book Publishers Association and
Australian Society of Authors ("ABPA" and
"ASA" respectively).
CAL is the only collecting society that has a potential role in assisting
with the establishment of VISCOPY. It has already made a
loan of $30,000 to NAVA
to fund the consultancy which resulted in the Serventy Report. This loan has
been written off and is therefore
best viewed as a grant that the Society has
already made towards the establishment of the new Society. To expect CAL or AVCS
to contribute
by way of further major grants is unrealistic. They represent a
particular group of rights owners that may sometimes include, but
is certainly
not synonymous with, the rights owners represented by VISCOPY. Existing
(a) cannot be required or expected to fund (whether by way of loan or
otherwise) the establishment of any third party organisation,
let alone one that
has little to do with its own legal objects, and
(b) would be subject to considerable criticism from its own membership if it
were to spend large sums on the establishment of an organisation
that was not
for the benefit of its general membership.
The owners of copyright in artistic works in Australia therefore suffer under
a dual economic disadvantage in comparison with other
lack both a copyright collecting society and a potential industry investor in
In considering the following projections, it must be
taken into account that
they are predicated upon the repeal of s. 135ZM and the introduction of a
statutory educational licence.
Accordingly, any delay in introducing those
amendments will necessarily affect the projections and thus the financial
viability of
the society.
VISCOPY - Five year cash flow projection
Total collections
Payments to copyright owners
Operating income
Operating expenditure
(including set-up costs)
Profit (loss)
Source: HH Guldberg
Income Research for proposed VISCOPY Collection
Sydney 1993
One praiseworthy feature of the VISCOPY proposal which NAVA has submitted to
the Government is that its expenditure projections take
advantage of the scope
for co-operation with:
• sister collecting societies (for example access to CAL's database and
computer software; splitting administration of reprography
of artistic works
between CAL for its collection and VISCOPY for its distribution. CAL has agreed
to co-operate in this.),
• support organisations (AAMA with respect to arrangements for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander artists, the Arts Law Centre
of Australia,
NAVA and the Australian Copyright Council with regard to educational
• overseas societies and
• major collecting institutions.
But even with expenditure at the minimum required for viability, as Table 1
shows, the estimated funding requirement of VISCOPY is
$380,000 for the first
What overseas and Australian experience shows is that the success (which will
include self-funding status) of a copyright collecting
agency depends on
guaranteed resources and achieving critical mass in its early years. Guldberg's
analysis confirms that VISCOPY
can achieve the latter so long as it has the
The Federal Government is the only body with the resources to enable
VISCOPY to become properly established.
34.10 GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE
34.10.1. Introduction
In Australia, the Federal Government has made its contribution to the
establishment of copyright collecting societies principally
via the legislature,
for instance by enacting statutory licences for the administration by CAL and
AVCS which secured for those organisations
an immediate income flow. The
Government also in this way provided for access for copyright owners to the
its jurisdiction to set equitable remuneration for
particular exploitation of copyright.
Overseas, governments have made financial contribution to the establishment
of copyright collecting societies where appropriate. For
example, this has
happened in the visual arts in Germany and Canada. Both organisations are now
self-funding.
There is no reason in principle why governments should not fund copyright
collecting societies. The relevant questions for Government
establishing a need for such investment, the feasibility of the aims of the
society under consideration and proximity to
Government's policy concerns in the
relevant sector.
It is appropriate for the Government to contribute support to this
disadvantaged community sector on three levels: financial, legislative
34.10.2. VISCOPY's Place In The Cultural
In anticipation of the National Cultural Policy to be delivered later this
year, the most accessible expression of the Government's
focus is probably
contained in the objectives outlined by Senator McMullan when he was Minister
for the Arts, and the ALP's 1993
Federal Election policy. Those objectives
(i) Co-ordination of the cultural activities of different Federal
departments.
(ii) Encouragement of co-operation between organisations working in the same
(iii) Maximising the industry and economic benefits to be gained from
cultural activity.
(iv) Making the best use of the revolutions in communications and
technology.
(v) Acknowledging the pluralist nature of Australian society.
(vi) Improving access to cultural activity for participants and
(vii) Conservation of Australia's cultural heritage in all of its diversity,
and encouragement and assistance to what is distinctly
Australian.
VISCOPY gives the Government the opportunity to implement each of these
objectives.
34.11. SEED FUNDING FROM THE FEDERAL
The primary objective of a copyright collecting society is to secure maximum
income for its members on an equitable distribution.
Government allocation of
funds to a project which encourages financial independence for a comparatively
deprived community within
an important economic and cultural sector of industry
is an appropriate contribution for Government to make.
The objectives of VISCOPY are entirely consistent with the Federal
Government's objectives in its support for the arts. VISCOPY will
contribute to
the strengthening of financial independence of the visual arts sector, improve
artists' revenue, provide an orderly
framework for the exploitation of copyright
by users, protect works of cultural heritage and promote Australian visual arts
Experience in both Australia and overseas shows conclusively that the success
of a copyright collecting society depends very much
in its early years on having
sufficient financial support - and that this support must be patient. However,
as both CAL and AVCS
show, collecting societies can be self-funding given
sufficient early critical mass and financial security.
Unlike all other classes of copyright owner, the owners of visual art
funds, or security for funds, or the means to expect no return on investment,
for five years.
Accordingly,
it is recommended
that the Government provide seed
funding for the establishment of a collecting society for the visual arts.
The funds which VISCOPY needs are small and short term in comparison with the
long term significance of the project for the practice
of visual arts in
Australia, for the international awareness of Australia's culture, and for
Australia's standing in international
intellectual property law and
VISCOPY will not need open-ended funding. Its progress should be monitored,
and funding could be adjusted accordingly. The research
referred to in this
Report indicates that VISCOPY is an ultimately self-funding proposal.
As to the quantum or duration of Government support, under the present
legislative regime it would be irresponsible to suggest that
such support be
less than four years with $380,000 in year 1 (calendar year 1995) and up to $1.1
million over four years, as presently
sought by VISCOPY. However, Government can
minimise its financial contribution to the establishment of the society by
immediately
enacting the recommendations made herein for the repeal of
ZM and the introduction of a statutory licence for the reprographic use of
The prompt introduction of these legislative measures would enable Government
to reduce its financial support to just $700,000 over
the first two years of the
Society's existence (see Guldberg, Table 3.5, para 3.6).
34.11.1. The Amount
The confidential Business Plan prepared by NAVA in December 1993 is a useful
document in that it sets out the likely income and expenditure
of VISCOPY in its
initial years. Such projections can only be a matter of considered surmise but
the cost projections which are provided
in the business plan appear reasonable
as do the relevant explanatory notes. The plan anticipates expenditure in year
one of $403,000;
year two, $380,000; year three, $404,000; year four, $441,000;
and year five, $462,000.
If there is a criticism to be made of these projections, it is that there has
been insufficient moneys budgeted for the marketing
and promotion of the new
society. The present plan implies that it will be the responsibility of the CEO
to promote the society and
this is not necessarily the most effective approach.
The success of the society is going to be affected greatly by the success of
early marketing strategy and program. To this end, a further $40,000 per year
for the first two years should be budgeted towards
marketing expenses. Thus the
projected expenditure for year one would be $443,000 and year two, would be
Given the above, it is suggested that the Government support in year one
should be $400,000, and year two, $300,000. The greater amount
is recommended in
the first year to take into account the start-up capital costs and the fact that
little earned income can reasonably
be expected in the first year.
34.11.2. Loan Or Cultural Investment?
It is recommended
that Government not treat its contribution to
establishment costs as some species of loan.
To saddle the new organisation
with this size of debt would be to give it birth with one hand and cripple it
with the other. A preferable
strategy would be, at break-even point, to require
an amount equivalent to fifty percent of the Government's grant to be paid into
the Society's Cultural and Benevolent Fund and the remaining fifty percent to be
expended on informing the relevant rights owners
services. (One of the problems that this Report has highlighted in respect of
the existing societies, is
that many of their problems are perceived rather than
real and that much of the misinformation concerning them would be overcome
better targeted and more comprehensive programs to inform the relevant community
Government can help the
new Society get it right.)
34.12. STRUCTURE OF VISCOPY
To ensure full accountability,
it is recommended
that VISCOPY
should conform with the prescriptions and procedures of declared copyright
collecting societies and the criteria set
out in this Report for Qualified
In particular, it is strongly recommended that no organisation should have
the ongoing right to appoint members to the board of the
company. All members
must have the right to board membership and no one organisation should have an
automatic right to membership
or control.
In particular, although NAVA is to
be congratulated in taking the leading role in the campaign for a collecting
society for the visual
arts, it should have no entrenched place in the structure
of VISCOPY beyond the Society's first year of operation. It is a means
providing an equitable and transparent collective administration for all
relevant rights owners.
34.13. RECOMMENDATIONS
• That VISCOPY to be included in the National Cultural Strategy
• That s.135ZM of the
be immediately repealed.
• Amendment to
to provide a statutory
licence for the reprography by educational institutions of artistic works which
accompany text
• That the Government provide seed funding for the establishment of a
collecting society for the visual arts.
• Commitment to fully accountable seed funding for VISCOPY for a
minimum of seven hundred thousand dollars over two years and
a maximum $1.1
million over five years, depending on the speed with which s. 135ZM is repealed
and the statutory educational copying
right is introduced.
• That Government not treat its contribution to establishment costs as
some species of loan but rather require that at break-even
point, the Society be
required to pay an amount equivalent to fifty percent of the Government's grant
into the Society's Cultural
and Benevolent Fund and to spend the remaining fifty
percent on informing the relevant rights owners about the society and its
• Declaration of VISCOPY as a declared copyright collecting society to
administer the rights subject of statutory licence subject
only to appropriate
review of its Articles and Memorandum so as to ensure equity of membership,
control and accountability and its
compliance with the criteria set out in this
Report for Qualified Societies.
• That no organisation have the ongoing right to appoint members to the
board of the company. All members must have the right
to board membership and no
one organisation should have an automatic right to membership or control.
TECHNOLOGIES
35.1. AMCOS
It is in this area that there seems to be a need for further study.
There are currently over 20 million Internet users. 2.2 million computers are
connected to the 'net' which links 27000 networks in
70 countries. The number of
users is doubling annually. (Figures for growth rate vary widely.) [Source:
The Global Connection
, Draft ASTEC Report 1994]
In the USA all undergraduate students get a 'net' address and many are avid
users. Although there are "copyright" reminders on many
of the items available
on the net, the "ethics" on the net seem to be that everything is free and
should be made freely available
to all especially the socially and economically
disadvantaged and those in remote areas where access to information services is
As the price/performance of computers continues to improve the possibilities
for collecting, transmitting and receiving music of good
quality across the net
increase. In a news report on ABC television on 29th June, there was a report of
the first "record" company
(in the USA) who had decided to "publish" a work on
CompuServe, a commercial branch of the Internet, instead of cutting and
distributing
records. The sound quality, given the appropriate computer
equipment, is reported to be much better than that of the average CD.
On a home Macintosh computer costing less than $A4000 very good quality sound
can now be received and enjoyed. The ability to send
a 'file' containing sound
to all 20 million net users exists now, or to 'post' sound to a newsgroup from
which anyone who cares can
'take' a copy. American students are using the net to
'broadcast' new and original music because it is free and fun.
The net is currently more used for the dissemination of printed matter and
whole books, magazines and articles are being scanned in
for pick up by any net
member. As communications bandwidths improve sound and visual images will be
transmitted more frequently.
At the recent Copyright Convergence Conference, held in Sydney on 23rd June
1994, it was obvious that although many participants understood
possibilities, few understood the way in which copyright dues could be
Multi-media is another new emerging technology that is providing challenges
to copyright collecting agencies. With multi-media being
used in many teaching
and home productions, APPLE's multimedia software, Quick-time is free to all who
ask, it will be more difficult
to collect copyright dues than currently
envisaged. The extent to which Distance Education will use sound, book, film and
video clips
has not been quantified and is increasing rapidly. Also there is a
growing trend towards the delivery of "continuing" education and
education providers all of whom are heavily investing in multi-media techniques
for delivery.
The attitude of each of the Collecting Societies under review to new
technologies differs fairly widely.
It is strongly recommended
that, as a matter of urgency, further
study is made of the impact of new technologies on copyright collecting
societies and potential
new methods of collection.
35.1. AMCOS
The Chief Executive of AMCOS, is following the impact of new technologies on
his business very closely. He is experimenting with the
Internet personally in
an attempt to gain a further understanding of the facilities available.
APRA Executives appreciate many of the issues involved in collecting dues
under the new technological environment but, like many others,
are unsure of the
effect it will have on their business.
AVCS, like many enterprises, does not appear to appreciate the extent of
facilities for electronic interchange that are already provided
by the Internet.
The Chief Executive, believes that as the Internet is covered by copyright, a
way will soon be found to enable dues
to be collected.
Of all the collecting societies, CAL appears to have the best grasp of the
implications of new technologies on their business. CAL's
Chief Executive, has
followed the development of processes to collect copyright dues under the new
technologies. Whilst not yet having
all the answers, he is well informed of the
issues and overseas initiatives to find solutions.
The Executive Director of PPCA has a very good understanding of the impact of
new technology on the record industry. He participates
in several UK and
European industry forums and is actively trying to increase his personal
understanding of the use of technologies
such as the Internet.
RECOMMENDATION
• That, as a matter of urgency, further study is made of the impact of
new technologies on copyright collecting societies and
potential new methods of
collection.
APPENDIX ONE:
STRUCTURE OF INQUIRY MADE OF EACH SOCIETY
A. GENERAL OUTLINE:
• WHAT ARE COLLECTING SOCIETIES?
• WHAT DOES EACH DO?
• HOW DO THEY DO IT?
• FOR WHOM DO THEY DO IT?
• DO THEY DO IT FAIRLY?
• DO THEY DO IT EFFICIENTLY?
• WHAT LEGISLATIVE CHANGES WOULD ASSIST THE SOCIETIES?
• WHAT IS THE FUTURE OF THE SOCIETIES?
• DO THEY BENEFIT THE CULTURAL ECONOMY OF AUSTRALIA
B. QUESTIONS OUTLINE:
1. BACKGROUND
• historical background
• legal structure
• management plan
2. JURISDICTION
• geographical jurisdiction of the society
• offices and staff outside Australia
• supervision of the territory
3. RIGHTS ADMINISTERED
• the rights administered by the society
• legal relationship between society and rights owners
• whether the right administered is voluntary or non-voluntary
• degree of monopoly control by the society of the right
administered
• equity of treatment of members
• degree of control over the right that is retained by a member
• licensor indemnity
• effect of new technology on the rights administered
• "non-voluntary" versus "collective administration"
4. MEMBERSHIP
• classes of society membership
• number of members
• methods used to attract and enlist new members
• published information for copyright owners
• eligibility requirements
• fees and/or commission charged
• activeness of membership
• representativeness of membership
• services or benefits provided
• annual report
• communication with members
5. GOVERNING BOARD
• size of board
• means of election
• degree of member representation
• voting power between board members
• term of board membership
• remuneration of board members
• frequency of meetings
• attendance at meetings
• record keeping
• delegations to staff
6. ACCOUNTS
• ease of comprehension
• frequency of audit
• reporting requirements
7. COLLECTION OF REVENUE
• gross sum collected
• collection income received from overseas sources
• role of non-members
• number of licences granted each year
• number of individual works licensed each year
• description of licensees
• geographical location of licensees
8. OWNER IDENTIFICATION
• processes/techniques used to identify copyright owners
• processes/techniques review systems
• criticisms of the processes/techniques
• training of those who participate in the processes/techniques
• role of Copyright Tribunal in determining the
processes/techniques
• cost of the identification process, relative to the royalty it
• plans to change the identification processes/techniques
9. DISTRIBUTIONS
• processes/techniques used to quantify royalties
• frequency of distributions
• qualifications of recipients
• the distribution process
• proportion of gross income distributed to members
• use made of undistributed income not spent on direct
administration
• use of undistributed money where owner unidentified or located
• use of escrow or trust accounts
• amount distributed to overseas copyright owners
• quality of accounting for royalties collected by the society?
10. THE SETTING OF RATES FOR COPYRIGHT
• the process by which the society sets the rates of fee/royalty
• equity of the rate setting process
• recommendations as to how the rate setting process might be
• degree of government control over the licensing procedures
• relevance and effectiveness of the Copyright Tribunal
• published material available as to the rates and how those rates are
11. ENFORCEMENT
• policing of rights performed by the society
• maintenance of a fighting fund for dealing with infringement
• enforcement policy
• role in promoting law reform and government policy formulation
12. COMPUTER ADMINISTRATION
• computer hardware/software appropriateness and efficiency
• computer location
• ownership
• administration
13. ADMINISTRATIVE
EXPENDITURE
• technique for determining administrative deduction
• percentage of gross income spent for administrative purposes
• number function and location of staff
• cost effectiveness of overseas administrative expenses
• staff entertainment or amenities
• overseas travel
• awards night or like functions
• executive remuneration
• ownership value and indebtedness of premises
• sharing of administrative resources
• membership or affiliation fees
• loans to any other organisation or person
• co-operation or merger of societies
• declared collecting societies
14. EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES
• educational activities undertaken and planned
• target audience
• amount of funds contributed by society
• criteria used to select educational programs
• criteria are used to determine success
• reporting criteria
• international treaty or society rules
15. TAXATION
• tax status
• treatment of foreign copyright owners
• society as tax collector
16. FOREIGN SOCIETIES
• affiliation with international network of collecting societies
• reciprocal arrangements
• basis of distributions
• proportion of the society's income paid overseas
• proportion of the society's income received from overseas
• terms upon which overseas distributions are made and received
• efficiency of foreign societies in representation of local
• deductions by the local society prior to overseas remittance
• deductions by the overseas society prior to Australian remittance
• role of umbrella organisations
• standardisation of documentation with overseas societies
• use of electronic data transfer and processing between societies
17. TRADE PRACTICES ACT
• impact of the monopoly provisions of the TPA on society
• registration of agreements with the Trade Practices Commission
• amendments to TPA for the good governance of the society
18. COPYRIGHT ACT
• role of Copyright Tribunal
• jurisdiction of the Copyright Tribunal
• amendment to role or jurisdiction of Copyright Tribunal
• introduction of any additional statutory licences
• amendments to the
19. NEW TECHNOLOGIES:
• effect of emerging and new technologies
APPENDIX TWO:
At the outset, it was decided by the commissioners of the Report that
there was no need for public hearings or a formal process for
submissions. Instead, a number of organisations were identified as being key
users of collecting societies - whether as
These were written to and asked if they had views that they wished to put to
the Inquiry. Many simply didn't reply; others made initial
they would make a written submission - and didn't; others did make useful
submissions.
The following organisations were contacted, or having heard about the Inquiry
from other sources, made contact of their own initiative.
= no response;
= personal attendance/meeting;
= telephone response;
= written response;
= written response and submission.
Aboriginal Arts Management
Art Gallery of NSW
Art Gallery of South Australia
Art Gallery of Western Australia*
Arts Law Centre of Australia
Australia Council
Australian Book Publishers' Association
Australian Broadcasting Authority
Australian Council Of Libraries And Information
Australian Film Finance Corporation
Australian Museum
Australian Music Centre
Australian Music Managers Forum
Australian Society of Authors
Australian Vice Chancellors' Committee
Australian Writers' Guild
Central Australian Aboriginal Media Association
Coalition of Independent Recording Creators
Combined Newspaper and Magazine Copyright
Cmtee. of Aust
Communications Law Centre
Country Music Association
Dept For The Arts And Cultural Heritage (SA.)
Entertainment Industry Council
Entertainment Industry Employers Association
Federation of Australian Radio Broadcasters
Federation of Commercial Television Stations
Federation of Narrowcasting and Subscription
Fellowship of Australian Writers
Film Australia
Library & Information Management Services
Media Entertainment & Arts Alliance
Museum Of Applied Arts And Sciences
Museum of Victoria
Museum of West Australia
Musicians' Union of Australia
National Association For The Visual Arts
National Film And Sound Archives
National Gallery Of Australia
National Gallery of Victoria
National Library of Australia
National Maritime Museum
National Museum of Australia
Northern Territory Museum of Arts and Sciences
NSW Ministry Of The Arts
Producers And Directors Guild
Queensland Art Gallery
Queensland Museum
Queensland TAFE
Regional Galleries Association of NSW
Screen Production Association of Australia
Songwriters Composers and Lyricists Association
South Australian Museum
St John Ambulance Australia
Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery
Uniting Church Synod
Victorian Fitness Industry Association
Western Australian Museum
APPENDIX THREE:
ADDITIONAL COLLECTING SOCIETIES
The focus of this Report is the five major collecting societies. There are at
least three other licensing/collecting societies in
Australia. They are newly
established and the ambit of their operation is limited to the licensing of
religious music for use in
These organisations are:
Word Of Life Pty Limited
MediaCom Associates Inc (LicenSing)
Christian Copyright Licensing Pty Limited
Each of the above provided responses to the Inquiry questionnaire but the
commissioners decided that the focus of the Report should
be the five major
societies. Accordingly, the commissioners have been supplied with the above
responses in the supporting information
and materials which accompanies the
APPENDIX FOUR:
Australian Book Publishers Association
Australian Council of Libraries and Information
AEROS database
Australian Electronic Record Ordering
Australian Music Managers Forum
ANZ Music Copyright Agency
predecessor to AMCOS
Australian Record Industry Association
Australian Society of Authors
American Society of Composers , Authors and
transfer of ownership of rights
Attorney-General's Guidelines
Rules developed by the Attorney
General's Department by which the Declared Societies are required to
Australian Music Publishers Association Limited
Australian Vice-Chancellors' Committee
the international society of mechanical copyright
American music magazine
Blank Tape Levy:
Mechanism for rewarding the copyright owners whose
works are reproduced by home taping of records and broadcasts
blanket licence:
a licence relating to a species of copyright
material cf. a licence for an individual work or recording, usually permitting
such material for a set fee, irrespective of the which particular item
within the species is used. The royalty liability is not directly
related to the
number of works used.
Broadcast Music Inc
British Performing Right Society
Compositeur-Auteur-Editeur
the composers authors and
publishers register maintained by SUISA
An optical compact disc which is written at the factory and
can only be read - not altered by the viewer/listener
Confederation of International Societies of the Graphic and
Plastic Arts and Photographers , a subsidiary council of CISAC
Confederation of International Societies of Authors and
collective administration:
a system of copyright administration
whereby owners of rights authorise collective administration organisations to
administer their
rights, that is, to monitor the use of the works concerned,
negotiate with prospective users, give them licences against appropriate
and, under appropriate conditions, collect such fees and distribute them among
the owners of rights.
predecessor to AMPAL
Designers and Artists Copyright Society (U.K.)
cover recordings:
recording by a performer other than the composer
of the work
that lists all music in a program, the
order of performance, the time each performance rubs, the names of the work's
composers and
publishers and performing rights society affiliations
Declared Societies:
collecting societies which are formally
declared under the
and which operate pursuant to the Attorney
General's Guidelines
dormant repertoire:
works which are registered with the society but
which have not been reported as having been exploited for many years.
Electronic Data Interchange
fiches internationales:
international system of index cards
indicating details of a work, author, the author's number,
publisher/sub-publisher details, performing
right %s and mechanical rights
Grand Rights:
the right to perform or broadcast a dramatico-musical
work, an oratorio or long choral work, or a work in association with
Inter-Departmental Committee
the International Federation of Phonograph Producers
International Federation of Reproduction Rights
Organisations
Independent:
a record company that is not owned by one of the Major
Library recordings:
also known as Production Music
permission to use one of the rights which is within the
exclusive control of the copyright owner
One of the six largest record companies in the country: BMG,
Sony, EMI, Festival, Polygram and Warner Music
UK mechanical copyright society
mechanical royalty:
the royalty paid for the right to reproduce a
work in a recording
MIDI files:
discs of digitally sampled sounds which can be
manipulated
National Association for the Visual Arts
neighbouring rights:
non-profit companies limited by guarantee:
companies that do not
have a shareholding and in which persons become members by guaranteeing that in
the event that the company is
wound up and the liabilities of the company exceed
its assets, they will pay an agreed sum towards to deficit: usually $20. They
are "non-profit" in that any profits made by the company must be spent on the
objects of the company rather than paid out to the
Private Audio Copyright Collecting Society
Published Price to Dealers
Production Music:
library or mood music
Reproduction Rights Organisations
Record Industry Association of NZ
royalty rate advice
Small Rights
all performing rights that are not Grand
statutory or compulsory licence:
a licence granted by statute
whereby a person can use a copyright, irrespective of the owner's wishes,
provided that the user fulfils
the statutory pre-conditions for such use
statutory rate:
the term used to describe the fee set by the
the reproduction of a musical or literary work in a sound
the Swiss performance collecting society
synchronisation
the embodying of music in the sound-track of a
World Intellectual Property Rights Organisation
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.01 MB)
PDF format (1.12 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter