URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ACTCLRC/1993/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:29:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Victims of Crime [1993] ACTCLRC 6
Victims of Crime
Summary of Recommendations
Body of Report
INTRODUCTION
WHO IS A VICTIM OF CRIME?
VICTIMS, CRIME AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
VICTIM IMPACT STATEMENTS
VICTIM-OFFENDER PROCESS OF ATTEMPTED RECONCILIATION
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
OTHER MATTERS FOR CONSIDERATION
COORDINATION
IMPLEMENTATION
HEALING THE VICTIMS OF CRIME
'UNITED NATIONS DECLARATION OF BASIC PRINCIPLES OF JUSTICE FOR VICTIMS OF CRIME AND ABUSE OF POWER'
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, CANADA, VICTIM IMPACT STATEMENTS IN CANADA. VOLUME 7. SUMMARY OF FINDINGS, DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, TORONTO,
1990, PP. 3-9.
DAVID DAUBNEY, TAKING RESPONSIBILITY. REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND SOLICITOR GENERAL ON ITS REVIEW OF SENTENCING,
CONDITIONAL RELEASE AND RELATED ASPECTS OF CORRECTIONS, PRINTER FOR CANADA, TORONTO, AUGUST
1988, PP. 90-97
MARGARET CUNNEEN, 'PREPARING THE CHILD WITNESS', IN CHILDREN AS WITNESSES. PROCEEDINGS OF A CONFERENCE HELD 3-5 MAY 1988, AUSTRALIAN
INSTITUTE OF CRIMINOLOGY, CANBERRA,
1991, PP. 71-76
BIBLIOGRAPHY
TERMS OF REFERENCE
Victims of Crime
Report No 6 of the Community Law Reform Committee of the Australian Capital Territory.
This Report reflects the law as at June 1993.
Committee Reference: CLRC No 6.
The Community Law Reform Committee of the
Australian Capital Territory was established in June 1990. The purpose of the
is to assist the Government to identify areas in need of reform,
anticipate emerging social and legal issues and assess the practical
various proposals and laws on the people of the ACT. The Committee's Office and
Secretariat are at 3rd floor GIO Building,
City Walk, Canberra City ACT 2601
(Tel (06)2070546, fax (06)2070538).
Summary of Recommendations
In this chapter, the Committee sets out its recommendations and the views it
reached whilst examining the victims of crime issue.
In doing so, it hopes to
provide a point of easy reference for those reading the report. Detailed
discussion of the recommendations
appears in other chapters.
of 'Victims of Crime' for the Purposes of the Report
The Committee felt that in order to use the resources available to greatest
effect, the report should focus on those victims of crime
most in need. The
Committee acknowledges that victims not covered by the following definition are
also 'victims of crime', but believes
their concerns might better be dealt with
outside the scope of this report.
For the purpose of this report, 'victims of crime' are:
Persons who have suffered harm, including physical or mental injury; emotional
suffering including grief; economic loss and/or
substantial impairment of rights
accorded them by law
through acts or
omissions that are in violation of the criminal law operating in the Territory.
Without limiting the foregoing, the definition includes people who have
suffered such harm as a result of the death of a person upon
whom they are
financially or psychologically dependant and/or to whom they are closely
The definition includes people who are not financially and/or psychologically
dependent on the harmed person if they see or hear
the harm being done to the
person directly affected in circumstances where it is probable that they will
themselves suffer harm.
(See paras. 28-30)
of Victims to be met by the Criminal Justice System
The Committee isolated particular needs of victims of crime which a criminal
justice system that aims to deliver justice efficiently
and effectively should
The first of these needs was referral by an officer of the criminal justice
system to on-going counselling services when necessary.
The Committee takes
the view that where there is an emotional reaction to a crime, skilled help in
the form of counselling should
be readily available and, where necessary,
victims should be referred to a psychiatrist or consulting psychologist for
government as part of its victim assistance program. Care should be
ensure that resources are not wasted in counselling every victim of crime as
defined above. In order to ensure that counselling
and other services are
offered only to those in need, the Committee recommends that a case by case
assessment be made as to the support
offered and, if necessary, made available
to the victim of crime in question. (See para. 85)
The Committee considers that issues set out in this report concerning the
provision of information to victims of crime ought be addressed
officers and, eventually, by prosecuting officers. (See para. 86)
In cases where investigation has taken a long time it seems reasonable that
progress reports, which need not necessarily be detailed,
be made to the victim
by the relevant authorities. The standard for information provision is
addressed by the Committee in the Declaration
of Victims' Rights proposed in
this report. In matters where the alleged perpetrator of the offence is
quickly identified and charged,
it seems appropriate that the victim should be
advised of major developments such as arrest, applications for bail and the
of the charges to be preferred. (See para. 87)
The Committee believes all victims should have the opportunity to be present at
hearings and to observe that justice is done in their
case. It is usual for
victims to give their evidence early in the course of the hearing. That being
the case there is nothing to
prevent them from remaining in court although it
is to be noted that victims frequently seek leave to depart the court after
evidence. (See paras. 88)
The Committee recommends that victims who are to be witnesses should receive
information concerning what will be required of them,
but this information must
never amount to their being influenced in any way as to what they should say.
The Committee recommends
that a video be prepared about the process of
preparing oral evidence. It could act as an adjunct to a pamphlet similar to
Australian pamphlet 'Tell it like it is' which has been prepared to
assist children giving evidence but could readily be extended
to the wider
target group. (See para. 90)
Another important issue is that of victims having contact with the offender and
his or her family and friends in the court precinct.
The Committee is
satisfied that unnecessary distress is often caused victims of crime when they
are brought into contact with alleged
offenders at court. It appreciates that
this is usually accidental, but it considers that steps should be taken to
ensure that such
accidents do not occur. (See para. 91)
The Committee believes that when a victim has particular fears about the
release of the alleged offender on bail or parole, the court
determining
whether bail should be granted and the parole board should be informed of those
fears. As to the proposed release of
the offender on bail, the Committee
considers that victims may have 'special insights' or information related to
their fears which
ought to be considered. The Committee is of the opinion that
the following represents an appropriate provision in this regard:
Where a victim demonstrates or perceives a need for protection from physical
violence or harassment by an alleged offender he or
she should be entitled to
have that need placed before a court considering an application for bail. The
victim should be advised
of the outcome of all such bail applications and
particularly of any conditions of bail which are imposed with a view to the
of the victim (or potential witnesses for the prosecution). (See
The Committee also suggests that the victim has a right to express concerns
operate at two stages of
the proceedings, the first at the time of sentencing and the second when
release on parole is being considered.
The Committee believes that it would be appropriate for a victim who is
concerned about personal danger leading from the early release
of the offender
to set out those concerns and the reasons for them in a victim impact
statement. In this way the concerns could
then be properly considered by the
sentencing judge. (See para. 95)
At the time parole is considered, the Committee believes it is reasonable that
victims of violent crime should be advised of the
release date of the offender
so that they may be forewarned of the possibility of an encounter. (See para.
More generally, the Committee recommends the adoption of a declaration of
victims rights amended to meet some of the concerns identified
Committee. The Committee considers that the Declaration of Victims' Rights of
the Australian Capital Territory should be
enshrined in legislation to ensure
that those charged with the responsibility of putting the principles espoused
in the Declaration
into effect have clear guidelines. (See para. 105)
The Declaration of Victims' Rights should include the definition of victims of
crime proposed in this report, then state:
'Offence' means an offence against the law in force in the Territory: an act or
omission that is in violation of the criminal law
operative within the
'Crime' means offence.
The provisions of this Declaration will be applicable to all, without
discrimination on the grounds of race, colour, sex, age, language,
nationality, political or other opinion, cultural beliefs or practices,
property, birth or family status, ethnic or group
origin, disabilities, or any
other factor.
The victim of a crime shall have the right to:
(1) Be dealt with at all times in a sympathetic, constructive and reassuring
manner and with due regard to his or her personal situation,
(2) Information from time to time, and at reasonable intervals, (generally not
exceeding 1 month), as to the progress of police investigations,
except where
such disclosure might jeopardise investigation. (Where this exception operates
the victim is to be informed that it
is operating until such time as the need
for the exception no longer exists).
(3) Know all of the charges laid against the accused and of any modifications
to those charges.
(4) Make a comprehensive statement, which must include information regarding
the harm done and/or losses incurred as a consequence
of the commission of the
offence. The statement shall be taken at the time of the initial commission if
the victim is able to give
the information at that time, or at the time of the
initial investigation if the victim is able to give such information at such
time, or, if not, at the earliest time at which he or she might reasonably be
asked to provide that information. The information
in this statement shall be
updated before the offender is sentenced.
(5) An explanation of any decision to accept a plea of guilty to a lesser
charge or for accepting a guilty plea in return for recommended
leniency in
sentencing.
(6) An explanation of any decision not to proceed with a charge (called
nolle prosequi
(7) Have property held by the Crown for purposes of investigation or evidence
returned as promptly as possible. Inconvenience to
victims should be minimised
wherever possible, (For example, where photographs of stolen property could be
used as evidence instead
of the actual property they should be used and the
property returned to the victim).
(8) Information about the trial process and of the rights and responsibilities
of witnesses.
(9) To protection from unnecessary contact with the accused and defence
witnesses during the course of the trial.
(10) Have his/her residential address withheld unless disclosure is deemed by
the relevant court to be material to the defence.
(11) Relief from appearing at preliminary hearings and/or committal
proceedings, unless that appearance be deemed by the relevant
court to be
material to the defence.
(12) Have his/her need or perceived need for physical protection put by the
prosecution before an authority which is determining
an application for bail by
the accused person.
(13) Know the outcome of all bail applications and be informed of any
conditions of bail which are designed to protect the victim
from the accused.
(14) Have the full effects of the crime upon him or her made known to the
sentencing court either by the prosecution or by information
contained in a
victim impact statement. These effects shall include any financial, social,
psychological and physical harm done
to or suffered by the victim. Any other
information that may aid the court in sentencing, including the victim's need
for restitution
or compensation should also be put before the court by the
prosecutor.
(15) An explanation of the outcome of criminal proceedings, and to be fully
apprised of the sentence, when imposed, and its implications.
(16) Information on of the outcome of parole proceedings.
(17) Notification of the offender's impending release from custody.
(18) Restitution - Offenders or third parties responsible for their behaviour
should, where appropriate, make fair restitution to
victims, their families
and/or dependants. Such restitution could include the return of property or
payment for the harm or loss
suffered. It could also include reimbursement of
expenses incurred as a result of the victimisation, the provision of services
the restoration of rights.
(19) Financial Compensation - Where compensation is not fully available from
the offender or other sources, the Territory should
endeavour to provide
financial compensation up to the limit set by law, to victims who have
sustained significant bodily injury;
impairment of physical and/or mental
health; or deprivation of support as a result of serious offences.
(20) Assistance - Victims should receive necessary material, medical,
psychological and social assistance through governmental or
voluntary means.
(21) Professional and Equal Treatment - Police, justice, health, social
service and other personnel concerned with the treatment
of victims should
receive training to make them aware of the needs of victims. Guidelines should
be devised to ensure proper and
prompt aid to victims.
(22) Access/Redress - Victims are entitled to access to the criminal justice
system and to prompt redress (to the extent provided
for by Territory
legislation) for the harm they have suffered. The judicial and administrative
mechanisms designed to enable them
to obtain that redress should be accessible,
speedy, fair, cost-effective and sensitive. Victims should be informed of
their rights
to seek redress through such mechanisms. (See para. 107)
Impact Statements (VIS)
The Committee recommends a legislative framework for the preparation and use
of victim impact statements in the ACT. It notes and
supports the de facto use
of victim impact statements by the ACT Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions, but recommends that
certain changes be made to meet the concerns
of some ACT courts as well as issues identified in other jurisdictions. (See
The Committee recommends there be statutory provision for the tender of a
voluntary victim impact statement in all cases of indictable
offences against
the person or involving violation of a person's property whether by theft,
fraud, robbery or otherwise, punishable
by imprisonment for five years. It is
of the opinion that statements would not generally be appropriate in respect of
minor offences
even though those minor offences might have had serious impact
upon the victims. The Committee believes the decision to prepare
impact statement, even in respect of a serious offence, should be the victim's.
A failure or refusal to adopt the option
should give rise to no comment or
adverse inference. (See paras. 140-1, 144)
The Committee recommends that the VIS form (and, as a result, the associated
interview) be structured to the extent that necessary
information is obtained.
All victims preparing statements should be asked 'core questions'. The South
Australian document used for
this purpose should form a useful precedent. This
structure should not inhibit the victim from providing further information
the effects of the crime. (See para. 146)
The Committee has concluded, after some initial reluctance, that the initial
victim impact statement should be obtained by a police
officer engaged in the
investigation of the offence. If the officer's experience in the area is
insufficient, an officer experienced
in investigation of offences of the type
in question and who has also had experience or sufficient training in the
taking of victim
impact statements should prepare the statement. Preferably,
police should gather the victim impact information during an interview,
the victim refuses to participate in an interview, he or she should be given
the option of completing a mail-out form. The
interview should, as a general
rule, be held in the victim's home, although the Committee would not be
adverse to statements being
taken at a police station if the victim approves.
(See paras. 151, 156, 158)
The victim should be required to sign the document as being an accurate
reflection of his or her situation. (See para. 162)
The Committee takes the view that the appropriate time for taking information
relating to victim impact is as soon as possible after
the offence, and after
the victim has recovered sufficiently from the shock and injury inflicted
during the crime to be able to gather
his or her thoughts about the event. A
follow-up statement would be made just before trial, or if the trial is
expected to be a
long one, just before verdict. (See para. 160)
In line with the tendency in Australia to make available all the material in
the hands of the prosecution to the defendants, the
Committee believes victim
impact statements should also be furnished to both the prosecution and defence
as soon as a finding of
guilt is made or a plea of guilty entered, but only if
this is feasible. (See para. 165)
The court should be notified that the evidence being presented regarding the
effect of the crime on a victim is taken from a victim
impact statement.
Likewise, the victim should be notified at the time of taking the VIS of any
use of the VIS outside court (for
example, diversion, probation or parole).
Fairness to the accused should be an essential consideration at all times.
(See paras.
The Committee recommends that the defence Counsel be given the opportunity to
cross-examine a victim on his or her VIS as is done
with any other material
which could adversely affect the offender's interests. Given the supply of the
VIS to defence Counsel prior
to the hearing, the Committee expects that any
difficulties defence Counsel has with the material in the VIS would be resolved
to the VIS being presented to the court. This is likely to make
cross-examination of the victim unnecessary. However, the victim
given the opportunity at any time until tender of the VIS to withdraw it rather
than face the possibility of cross-examination
upon it. (See para. 178)
The Committee considers that the use of VISs (and their affects on sentences)
should be evaluated over a period of 12 months. If
that evaluation shows an
aberrant result, their further use should be reconsidered. (See para. 195)
Victim-Offender
Process of Attempted Reconciliation
The Committee recommends that there be established in the ACT a trial Process
of Attempted Reconciliation (PAR) project of 12 months.
The project should be
a court-referred diversionary scheme for juvenile offenders. The participation
of victims in the scheme would
be entirely voluntary, the victim being able to
withdraw at any stage. PAR should become a diversionary option open to the
once a young person has been charged and, after the receipt of
appropriate legal advice, has admitted guilt to or has been found
that charge. If the court considers, after receipt of advice from prosecuting
and defence Counsel, that the matter is
suitable for PAR, and if the young
offender agrees with the court's suggestion that he or she attend PAR, the
court will refer the
matter to the mediation/reconciliation service. (See
paras. 260-61)
The Committee believes, in the case of the pilot PAR project, best use would be
made of available resources by making use of an existing
alternative dispute
resolution service. Continued use of that service should be carefully
evaluated at the end of the trial project.
(See para. 248)
If the PAR fails, the matter should be returned to the court for formal
consideration. On the completion of PAR, its facilitators
will write a report
to the court outlining whether or not the process was successful and the
details of the agreement, if any. (See
paras. 265-6)
The Committee recommends that any agreement reached after PAR, and which has
been tested by the facilitator, should be lodged with
the court after a
'cooling-off' period of two weeks. It should have the status of a bond imposed
by a court. If the court is satisfied
that the agreement befits the crime, the
matter will continue to be adjourned pending fulfilment of the agreement.
Subject to the
satisfactory fulfilment of the agreement, the court will order a
full discharge of the matter. If the offender fails to fulfil the
the matter will return to court where it can be dealt with as though for a
breach of bond if the victim so wishes. If
the victim does not so wish, the
court can discharge or vary the agreement under s. 556D of the
(ACT). (See para. 252, 266-67)
Patterns of referrals of young offenders and their victims to PAR should be
monitored by the Community Advocates Office and the Victims
Coordinator. It will be the duty of those agencies to determine whether cases
which might be suitable for PAR are being
referred in a consistent manner and
to report any patterns of referral or non-referral to the responsible senior
officials of the
Magistrates Court and eventually to the agency responsible for
the evaluation of the trial project. (See para. 268)
The Committee is of the opinion that the wider statutory protection offered to
facilitators and participants by the
Community Justice Centres Act 1983
(NSW) would be advantageous, given the position of PAR within the criminal
justice system. (See para. 258)
The Committee envisages that, should the trial PAR project in the juvenile
justice sphere be a success, it might be expanded to include
adult offenders
and perhaps a wider range of offences. (See para. 269)
Injuries Compensation
The Committee's recommendations concerning criminal injuries compensation are
designed to ensure that criminal injuries compensation
applications are decided
quickly, cost-effectively and with the minimum possible trauma to the victim.
The Committee recommends that applications generally be dealt with in chambers
on the basis of written materials before the court.
The contents of the papers
before the court and the decision of the court would continue to be available
for scrutiny in a manner
consistent with current practice. (See para. 291)
The Committee also recommends that, in making an award under the Act, the
tribunal deciding the claim ought not be required to have
regard to the rules
of evidence, but ought be entitled and bound to inform himself or herself in
any way that he or she thinks fit,
and to proceed with as little formality as
possible. (See para. 292)
The Committee is of the view that the right to be represented when an
application for criminal injuries compensation is dealt with
should not be
routinely available to the government of the Territory. However, the
government of the Territory should receive a
copy of every application under
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
(as it presently does under
s. 34 of that Act). If the government has reasonable grounds to believe that
an application has been
falsely or fraudulently made or is exaggerated, or if
the application raises a question of law of general importance, it should have
the right to seek to be heard. If the court, having considered the petition by
the government, considers that there are grounds
for its opposition, the matter
should be transferred into open court, to be dealt with in much the same way,
mutatis mutandis, as
these applications are now dealt with. Section 34 of the
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
should be amended to reflect the
recommendations of the Committee contained in this paragraph. (See para 293)
The Committee recommends that the applicant need not appear before the tribunal
deciding his or her claim for criminal injuries compensation,
tribunal deems it necessary or the applicant wishes to do so. (See para.
The Committee considers that applications for criminal injuries compensation
should continue to be heard after any related criminal
hearings are completed.
The Committee is aware, however, that the delay caused by post-trial
compensation can cause some victims
hardship. It suggests that this problem
might be resolved by the greater use of the power of courts to make interim
awards. The
Committee recommends that the Victim Coordinator be required to
advise a victim that he or she should, if his or her circumstances
warrant such
an application, make an application for an interim award of compensation under
the Act before criminal proceedings against
the offender are completed. To
prevent the perception that a criminal verdict may have been corrupted, the
Committee recommends
that applications for interim awards should be heard in a
closed court (that is, with all members of the public being excluded) and
publicity until after the criminal proceedings against the offender have been
completed. (See paras. 301-2)
The Committee recommends that section 11 of the
Criminal Injuries
Compensation Act
(ACT) be amended to enable the Supreme Court,
including the Master and Registrar, and the Magistrates' Court, when faced with
a situation
of divided jurisdiction with regard to a single victim, to
negotiate that one tribunal relinquish jurisdiction to hear the application
criminal injuries compensation to the other, so that the injury done to the
victim by the separate incidents may be considered
in its totality by one
tribunal. (See para. 307)
Although it would wish to recommend an increase in the maximum amount payable
for compensation, in light of the financial constraints
on the Government, the
Committee recommends that the current maximum amount of criminal injuries
compensation of $50,000 be retained.
However, the amount of the award to that
maximum should be calculated as though the issues in question were those in a
civil action
for personal injuries. (See paras. 308, 309)
The Committee recommends that multiple awards in cases where injuries arise
out of similar, but not the same, circumstances as
gave rise to other injuries
be given a legislative footing in the ACT. Circumstances would not be the same
if they are 'so
separated in time and place that it can not be said that each
arose out of the same circumstances as the other'.
However, multiple awards of compensation
of this nature should not exceed $100,000 in total. (See para. 311)
The Committee recommends that applicants for criminal injuries compensation
should have their costs, including solicitor and client
costs, paid by the
Territory. Costs should not be awarded where the compensation awarded to an
applicant is less than $500. The
Committee recommends that a modest scale of
costs be prescribed after consultation with the Registrar of the Supreme Court
Registrar of the Magistrates Court. The same scale of costs should be
applicable in the Magistrates Court and the Supreme Court.
The Committee
recommends that disbursements should continue to be paid as at present. (See
The Committee also recommends that the scale of the amount of costs payable in
respect of applications to the Supreme Court and to
the Magistrates' Court
should be renewed annually by the Registrars of the Courts and should be varied
annually to accord with movements
in the cost of living. (See para. 314)
The Committee recommends that section 29A of the
Criminal Injuries Compensation
and the consequential section 29B be repealed so as to remove the right of
the Territory to obtain reimbursement from the offender
of the money paid by
the Territory to the victim in criminal injuries compensation. (See para.
Criminal Justice System and the Intellectually Impaired Victim
The Committee recommends that in all cases where a child victim who suffers
from an intellectual disability is to give evidence,
evidence should first be
given by an expert on the capacity of the child and the way in which his or her
mind works. This would
assist the Court or jury to more accurately judge the
truth of the evidence given and its weight. It also recommends that a suitably
qualified person should give evidence as a skilled facilitator, able, in
effect, to translate what the child is saying or attempting
to say and able to
transmit in a comprehensible way to the child questions being put to him or her
by the court, or by Counsel for
the prosecution or the defence. (See para.
Coordination
The Committee believes it is vital to the successful operation of the scheme
proposed in this report that a statutory office be created
responsibility for functions similar to those performed by the Victims Task
Force in New Zealand. This officer might be
called the 'Victims of Crime
Coordinator'. (See para. 347)
Implementation
Many of the recommendations in this report could be implemented by
administrative rather than legislative action, however, the Committee
that it would be preferable that some of the recommended measures be given a
legislative framework. These include:
- The creation of the statutory office of Victims of Crime Coordinator and
guidelines for the performance of the functions of that
office, including the
Declaration of Victims' Rights.
- Appropriate statutory protection for participants in the Process of Attempted
Reconciliation to ensure, for example, confidentiality,
privilege and indemnity
for mediators acting in good faith.
- Amendments consequential to the recommendations of this report, in particular
with regard to the completion and tender of VIS's
and the suggested changes to
the criminal injuries compensation scheme. (See para. 358-59)
Administrative and legislative change must be accompanied by education to
ensure a commitment on the part of officers of the criminal
justice system to
the principles of fair treatment of victims as outlined in this report. The
Committee recommends that the agencies
of the criminal justice system in
particular emphasise the importance of training for their officers in victims'
issues. (See para.
The Committee suggests that an educational video of the process should be made
in respect of PAR. The Committee also recommends
that a video be prepared in
respect of the process of giving oral evidence. (See para. 363)
The Committee believes it would be desirable for the proposals of this report
to be, as far as is possible, self-funding. Although
the Committee expects
that some of the recommendations will result in savings within the criminal
justice system, it recommends that
further funding could be obtained through
the adoption of a system of levies on fines, whether on-the-spot fines or fines
to be paid by a court. It considers that a suitable levy might be 3
per cent on top of existing fines. (See para. 365)
The Committee recommends that the Attorney-General appoint a non-statutory
Committee, called the Victims of Crime Evaluation Committee,
to monitor and
evaluate the implementation and operation of the scheme to assist victims of
crime, the component elements of which
have been recommended in this report.
(See para. 377-80)
The Committee makes one last point. A surprising number of people whose views
were sought expressed profound resentment at what
they considered a grossly
unfair advantage afforded a defendant who chooses to make an unsworn statement
rather than give evidence
which would be subjected to test by
cross-examination. The Committee has formed no concluded view on the subject
but recommends
that the question of unsworn statements should be made the
subject of an appropriate reference to it. (See para. 387)
of the Process
The Committee's vision of a criminal justice process more adequately designed
to deliver justice to victims of crime is set out in
a flowchart at Appendix
'A' to this report.
INTRODUCTION
Crime is not simply an incident which begins a contest between the State and
a defendant, between a prosecutor and a [defence]
attorney... Crime is first
of all an encounter between a victim and an offender. It is an unexpected personal
crisis in the
life of one person brought on by another, and it undermines the
victim's view of the world and other people. The state soon steps
wheels of the criminal justice system begin to turn. But crime is first an intensely
personal experience with far-reaching
consequences.
1. The 'reinstatement' of the victim into the criminal justice system has
received increasing attention in Australia and overseas.
Much of the momentum
for this change began in South Australia in the early- to mid- 1980s, largely
due to the work of Mr Chris Sumner,
the South Australian Attorney-General. New
South Wales, Victoria and Tasmania have also undertaken important work
regarding the
rights of victims.
2. The ACT has not been exempt from the increasing concern that justice could
be more effectively delivered to victims of crime.
In the Legislative
Assembly, that concern has been bipartisan. On 13 December 1990, the ACT
Community Law Reform Committee was
given a reference by the then
Attorney-General, Mr Bernard Collaery, to examine the role of victims within
the criminal justice system
and to report on what measures, if any, should be
adopted to improve the delivery of justice to victims of crime. That reference
was followed, on 13 March 1991, by the unanimous adoption by the Legislative
Assembly of a Declaration of Victims' Rights, on the
initiative of the then
Shadow Attorney-General, Mr Terry Connolly.
3. An issues paper was completed in March 1991. The Committee engaged in
extensive consultation with groups who work closely with
victim of crime, such
as Victims of Crime Assistance League (VOCAL) and the Rape Crisis Service, and
with victims and their families.
That consultation produced a broad range of
ideas, all of which were given careful consideration by the Committee in
formulating
its recommendations.
4. This report contains the Committee's recommendations for the improved
delivery of justice to victims of crime. Some of the measures
suggested will
require administrative implementation, others legislative action. The report
begins by considering the historical
and theoretical background to the
Committee's recommendations. It then considers the effects of criminal
victimisation and how those
effects influence what a victim needs from the
criminal justice system. The report then discusses important initiatives
to ensure that justice is delivered with greater efficacy to victims
of crime. Measures recommended include:
- the implementation of victim impact statements within the Territory;
- a victim-offender Process of Attempted Reconciliation program;
- the appointment of a Victims of Crime Coordinator; and
- an improved Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme.
of Victims' Rights
5. The criminal justice system that operates in the Western world, in which the
resolution of criminal conflicts is taken over by
the state to the subsequent
exclusion of the victim, has not always operated in that manner. The history
of the criminal law involved
the gradual alienation of the victim of crime from
the criminal process.
6. English criminal law, from which the Australian system has developed, has
experienced the steady replacement of a victim-centred
system with a system
in which the state is a main player. The Anglo-Saxon system of law provided
for monetary payments by offenders
to victims, or the victims' kin, as reparation
for injuries caused by crimes. Payment was according to a carefully drawn up
set of tariffs. The word
signified reparation paid to the
victim for damage or injury, whether criminal or tortious. It was used in conjunction
other words so that
was compensation for a victim
was a pecuniary compensation for any injury or the value
set on a victim's life, varying with his or her rank, under the Anglo-Saxon
was the price of homicide or other enormous offences,
paid partly to the Crown for the loss of the subject, partly to the lord
vassal he or she was, and partly to the party injured or the next-of-kin of
the party slain.
In the early middle
ages, besides the
paid to the victim, the offender also had
was a penalty paid by an
offender to the king or landlord who convened the court and helped bring about
a reconciliation between
the victim and offender.
In the twelfth century, the
was increased at the expense of the
until the king or
the landlord took the entire sum from the offender leaving the victim with nothing.
7. Although the system of monetary payment by the offender to the victim
continued under the Norman and Anjevin kings, the sums of
money demanded were
to all seeming enormously large, if we have regard to the economic position
of the great mass of Englishmen. ... Indeed there
is good reason to believe
that for a long time past the system of b�t and w�te had been
delusive, if not hypocritical. It outwardly
reconciled the stern facts of a
rough justice with a Christian reluctance to shed blood; it demanded money instead
but so much money that few were likely to pay it. Those who could not
pay were outlawed, or sold as slaves. ... At any rate to
ask the villanus of
Henry I's day to pay [[sterling]]5 as an atonement for his crime is to condemn
him to outlawry.
It follows that at least by the reign of Henry I the system of compensation
payable to a victim in respect of a crime was largely
illusory. In theory,
some regard was paid to the rights of victims of those crimes for which
reparation was ordered. Under that
theory, the victim who survived would
receive some compensation. If he or she was slain, his or her relatives should
have received
the compensation.
8. The late Anglo-Saxon, Norman, and Plantagenet Kings steadily encroached upon
the then existing legal system until they extended
their supreme jurisdiction
so that eventually it covered all crimes and all people in all places in the
realm and thus made the 'King's
peace' universal. It is enough to refer to two
statements which indicate the place which Roman Law had in the making of
Law and its impersonal effect.
9. Chesterton, in his
Short History of England
, put the matter
succinctly.
Henry of Anjou, who brought fresh French blood into the monarchy, brought
also a refreshment of the idea for which the French
have always stood: the idea
in the Roman Law of some things impersonal and omnipresent.
10. John Austin put the matter at greater length.
Civil Injuries and Crimes are distinguished by Blackstone and others in the
following manner. Civil Injuries are private wrongs
and concern individuals
only. Crimes are public wrongs and affect the whole community.
offences affect the community, and all offences affect individuals.
But though all affect individuals, some are not offences against
and are therefore, of necessity, pursued directly by the Sovereign, or by some
subordinate representing the Sovereign.
Where the offence is an offence against a right, it might be pursued (in all
cases) either by the injured party, or by those who
represent him. But, ...it
is often expedient that the pursuit of it should not be left to the discretion
of the injured party or
his representatives, but should be assumed by the
Sovereign, or by the subordinates of the Sovereign. In this difference of
and not in any distinction between the tendencies of the acts, lies
the distinction between Crimes and Civil Injuries. An offence
which is pursued
at the discretion of the injured party or his representative is a Civil Injury.
An offence which is pursued by the
Sovereign or by the subordinates of the
Sovereign, is a Crime.
In many cases (as in cases of Libels and Assaults) the same offence belongs
to both classes. That is to say, the injured has a
remedy which he applies or
not as he likes, and to the Sovereign reserves the power of visiting the offender
with punishment.
11. These remarks are designed to do no more than to give a very slight
jurisprudential and historical background to the question
of the rights of
victims. What is clear is that for many centuries the concern of central
authority has been with prosecution of
crimes rather than the welfare of the
victim. Only two exceptions exist to this general exclusion of victims. The
first exception
is a very limited class of cases of which libel and assault,
the latter being usually common assaults not occasioning bodily harm
great degree, are examples. These cases lie at the borderline between civil
and criminal law, because the victim is able
to personally pursue the criminal
matter. The second exception is where the victim acts as a witness.
Rights - the Debate
12. The interests of the offender have long been of critical, if not central,
concern within the criminal justice system. This has
been due in part to the
increasing importance of the study of criminology. Of greater significance in
placing the emphasis on the
offender is the concern that offenders be given a
fair trial according to the presumption of innocence and the need for the
prosecution
to prove a criminal offence beyond reasonable doubt. As states
took over the prosecution of offences, a growing concern also emerged
rights of the accused should be protected against the much greater power of the
13. Modern criminologists began to notice victims as a general class in the
1960s. Not only were the behaviour and motivation
of the offender studied, but
all the circumstances of and participants in the crime were examined. This shift
of focus gave
rise to the study of victimology. The concerns of victimology
are more victim orientated issues such as: victim characteristics
relationship to the causes of crime; fear of crime and crime prevention; the
impact of crime on victims; victims'
roles and responsibilities; and victims'
needs for protection, support and compensation.
The concern is beginning to approach that of the emphasis placed on the rights
of offenders.
14. The idea of 'victims' rights' is an alluring one. Henderson points out
that it involves the use of two powerful symbols. The
first is that of the victim,
who has been painted as being a non-provoking, innocent individual affected
by street crime over
which he or she had no control. The second is that of a
'right', which, Henderson notes, tends to raise suspicions of oppression
deprivation.
The term 'victims' rights',
she continues, has 'come to mean some undefined, yet irreducible right of crime
victims that 'trumps'
the rights of criminal defendants'.
She warns against accepting such an approach without question, as the very use
of such powerfully symbolic terms tends to quash
any criticism of the reforms
proposed under its name. Henderson asks - who could be anti-victim?
15. While it is important that proper attention be given to victims within the
criminal justice system, it is also important not
to inadvertently allow the
quest for victims' rights to adversely affect other legitimate rights,
interests and philosophies. Christopher
Corns, then a lecturer in criminal
justice at La Trobe University, encapsulates the debate concerning the question
of the balancing
of competing rights in an article, 'The Other Side of Victims'
From the early 1980s a number of Australian State governments, and to some
extent the Federal government, have addressed a range
of issues relating to the
rights of crime victims. ... In short it can be said that the 'victims
movement' is now firmly established
in Australia and rapidly expanding.
However, whether the debate surrounding this movement has been balanced is
another question. ...
16. Corns went on to say that Justice Vincent of the Victorian Supreme Court
had expressed a number of concerns about the way in
which issues relating to
the rights of crime victims had been developing in Australia and were perceived
by the community. He used
as an example the victims' movement's portrayal of
crime as a phenomenon involving only an offender on the one hand and a victim
on the other. His Honour stressed that such a portrayal failed to consider
the broader social, economic, and political context
in which crime takes place
and which contribute to criminal offending. His Honour was also concerned that
the victims' movement
is conducive to a more retributivist approach to criminal
justice in the form of heavier and more violent sentences as well as an
increased 'law and order' mentality leading to further state intervention.
17. Justice Vincent stated that he applauded the motivations which lay behind
the South Australian reforms and shared the concern
for the plight of crime
victims. He also pointed out that society must not lose sight of broader
structural questions, such as the
basic purposes of the criminal justice
system. The ultimate challenge facing policy makers, and indeed the whole
community, was
not, he said, so much how to redress perceived injustices for
crime victims but rather how that redress could occur without adversely
affecting the rights and position of accused persons and, in the end, the
community itself.
18. Commenting on the issues raised by Justice Vincent, Corns suggested that
the political response to victims' issues involved two
dimensions. The first
of these was that a number of reforms could be implemented which would not
affect the rights of the accused
or offender. He cited improved counselling or
welfare services for victims, a more co-operative and sympathetic attitude by
police or other authorities, improved court facilities such as separate
waiting areas and the provision of basic information relating
to the progress
or outcome of the case. Such reforms are relatively uncontroversial and the
major limitation on their implementation
is availability of funds and political
19. There is, however, a second group of reforms which
potential to affect adversely the rights and position of the accused. Corns
suggested that a victim impact statement could
result in a more severe sentence
than would have been imposed had the statement not been given. He considered
that a victim's submission
to a Parole Board could affect the date and
conditions of the release of an offender. Funding of increased compensation
might be by a levy on all offenders as occurs in South Australia.
20. Corns submitted that the second group of reforms raised the ideological
tensions referred to earlier. He said that these types
of reforms would
require that governments choose between competing social values, interests and
philosophies. Policy makers ought
to be required to defend and justify any
reform that would reduce the rights of offenders or result in a harsher
treatment of offenders.
Although the reform might improve the position of the
victim, this is not necessarily a sufficient justification for it.
21. This report concludes the discussion initiated by Mr Corns by quoting
directly from his article:-
There is no reason to believe that both criminal offenders and their victims
do not accept that crime is indeed a complex phenomena
[sic] and should be seen
within the broader socio-economic arrangements. However, victims are not particularly
interested in
exploring possible precipitating causes of criminal behaviour.
Their concern essentially relates to how the community and the
State respond
to their victimisation.
Current Legislative Position in the ACT
22. Within the past decade attempts have been made to deal more adequately with
assistance to victims of crime. The
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
is one such attempt. Financial constraints have often meant that the
amount of compensation recoverable by a victim seeking redress
under the Act is
much less than would be awarded after a successful action brought in civil
proceedings for the same damage.
23. Law and procedures already include features designed to assist victims of
crime. For example:
- A criminal injuries compensation scheme has operated for nearly 10 years
through the
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
. Amendments to the
Criminal Injuries
Compensation Act
were enacted in 1991 to increase the amount of compensation
available to victims of crime to $50,000.
In the ACT cumulative awards of compensation
have been made available by some courts, so that awards of more than $50,000
possible if there has been more than one prescribed injury arising out of
different circumstances.
- In 1986 the
Children's Services Act 1986
(ACT) removed the old law
which made it an offence committed 'by the child' for that child to be subject
to neglect or control (sections
52 and 55 of the
Children's Welfare
Ordinance 1957
(ACT)). This was replaced by victim orientated provisions
which protect children in need of care (sections 5, 139, 171 and Part
Children's Services Act
- Provision was made for reparation orders under
section 437
- Community service orders for juveniles can now be tailored in some cases
(i.e. where the matters have been swiftly dealt with)
to enable the offender to
repair the harm done to the victim
(section 47
Children's Services
In relation to crimes that mainly affect women:
- Rape laws were reformed in 1985 (Part IIA of the
- Domestic violence legislation (
Domestic Violence Act 1985
considered to be the most comprehensive in Australia, was introduced. This
legislation is an attempt to provide more options
and avenues of assistance to
the victims of these crimes. In particular, victims can seek protection orders
from the Magistrates'
Court. These orders, being a civil remedy, can be
obtained much more easily and quickly than criminal remedies and can be
to the particular conduct of the violent party. The 1990 'keep the
peace' amendments extend this type of protection to non-domestic
victims who
may seek this type of order (
Magistrates Court (Amendment) Act 1990
24. However, these laws and procedures do not operate within any overall,
coherent policy relating to victims. Rather, they represent
attempts by past
and present governments to address specific problems as they arose. They
demonstrate the range of issues affecting
the various and different types of
25. In addition to legislative measures designed to assist victims of crime,
community groups such as the Domestic Violence Crisis
Service, the Rape Crisis
Centre and VOCAL offer considerable support to victims of crime. A secondary
effect of their operations
has been the very important one of educating the
community more fully as to the needs of victims.
26. Many recent options for reform of the criminal justice process have been
developed (and in some jurisdictions, adopted) from
a victims' rights
perspective. A statement of victims' rights and an explanation of the
administrative and legal consequences of
those rights form an attempt to
integrate victims' experiences and needs into the criminal justice system. In
assessing the viability
of these options several factors need to be considered.
These include:
- the impact on others' rights, notably those of the alleged offender; and
- the extent to which the proposals actually respond to victims' needs and
expectations.
IS A VICTIM OF CRIME?
A Definition for the Purposes of this Report
27. It is important at the outset of this report to determine which victims of
crime in the ACT should be the focus of specific assistance
from the criminal
justice system. Precision is necessary because it is essential that the
resources available within the criminal
justice system be used to assist those
victims in greatest need. The formulation of a suitable definition in advance
of implementing
any reform is also worthwhile in order to remove much of the
discretion from individual officers as to when a victim of a crime requires
further assistance.
Against the Person
28. In attempting to establish a workable definition of 'victims of crime' it
is convenient to deal first with offences against the
person. Those offences
that cause death - murder, manslaughter and lesser crimes such as culpable
driving causing death - fall into
a special category. With the death of the
primary victim, his or her dependants or close relatives have obvious special
needs which
the criminal justice system ought to address. Various categories
of assault follow, ranging from attempt to murder to common assault,
including crimes such as assaults with a sexual element and assaults
occasioning grievous bodily harm and/or actual bodily harm.
Relating to Property
29. The second major category of offences relate to property. These can be
conveniently broken down to the hybrid offences of robbery,
direct offences
against property such as burglary and house breaking and offences which result
in the loss of money by the victim
such as fraud, be it individual or
corporate. It is true that a satisfactory definition of victims of crime could
deal with offences
against property in the relatively simple way that the
United Nations Declaration does. It seems important to the Committee, however,
to differentiate between offences against property that involve a physical
element such as violence against the victim or against
his or her physical
property and offences such as fraud that result only in the loss of money.
Members of the Committee are familiar
with many instances of people whose homes
have been burgled, or who have been robbed at gun or knife point who suffer
severe psychological
damage going well beyond the natural sadness and anger
that would be expected to follow loss of property, even very valuable property,
from a home or from one's person. Compensation alone is often not enough to
assuage that damage.
30. The next category of victims to be considered is the secondary victim. The
South Australian Victims of Crime Response Group
defined secondary victims as
'[p]ersons who are financially or psychologically dependent on the primary victim,
eg spouse, parent,
It is respectfully
suggested that this definition is too narrow. For the purposes of the ACT
Injuries Compensation Act
, the parent of an injured victim is regarded as being
a victim of the crime.
Not Coming Within the Scope of This Report
31. In the United Nations
Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for
Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power
, 'victims of crime' were defined as:
... persons who, individually or collectively, have suffered harm, including
physical or mental injury, emotional suffering, economic
loss or substantial
impairment of their fundamental rights, through acts or omissions that are in
violation of criminal laws
operating within member States, including those laws
proscribing criminal abuse of power.
This report will not deal with victims of the criminal abuse of power beyond
noting that it is conceivable that people could become
victims of abuse of
power if, for example, they are convicted of crime, and sentenced to
imprisonment, as a result of concocted evidence.
It is hoped that such cases
would be very rare indeed. The Committee considers they would best be dealt
with on an ad hoc basis
with appropriate counselling and with just and generous
compensation being made available with minimum delay and with as little
as possible to people victimised in this way.
32. The category of the 'associated victim' (for example a neighbour) is a
valid category. Its members may have needs that ought
to be addressed by any
criminal justice system which seeks to deal with the rights of victims of
33. However, it is plain that within the category of associated victim, there
are so many people who sustain some form of harm that
it would not generally be
reasonable for any law to address. This approach would seem to the Committee
to accord with the general
approach that the common law takes to questions of
'foreseeability' and 'proximity'.
34. A person not dependant financially or psychologically on the person
directly affected by those acts or omissions defined as crime
necessarily come within the scope of this report, even though he or she may
suffer harm when those acts or omissions come
to his or her attention.
35. The Committee believes the very broad category of income tax payers,
rate-payers, insurers, consumers, and the like should not
be considered to be
victims of crime for the purposes of this report. It accepts that not
accepting members of that category as
victims of crime might be seen by some to
lack logic. It believes, however, that those people are able to look after
themselves.
Governments can readily include in rates and taxes a component
designed to meet the losses caused to the public by fraud, theft
and the like.
This results in 'load sharing' as does payment by consumers of insurance
premiums. Admittedly, not all consumers adequately
insure against crime
against their property. Nevertheless, the availability of a method of load
sharing puts the general public
into a different position from those victims of
crimes caused physical damage the consequences of which it would be
unreasonable
to expect them to have insured against. Insurers, of course, are
in the business of attempting, for adequate consideration, to spread
of property losses over a wide spectrum of the community.
36. Other victims who do not come within the scope of this report are those
financially or psychologically dependant upon or closely
related to an offender
in prison and the offenders themselves. The Committee believes that the
provision to be made for such dependants
should be different from that made
available to victims of crime as already defined.
37. There is another category of victims of crime that, although not coming
within the scope of this report, should be considered.
This consists of people
introduced to addictive substances as a result of the criminal activities of
others. It is true that the
use of such substances is itself a crime, but even
though some people may engage in crime to feed their addictive habits, it seems
to be beyond doubt that they are truly victims of crime. It is suggested that
in due course consideration ought to be given to their
plight, noting that some
attempt has been made already in the Territory to deal with it by means of the
Drugs of Dependence Act 1989
The debate on use of
addictive substances continues and it appears the views of the wider community
have not yet crystallised.
38. Victims of Crime are, therefore, confined to those people covered by the
definition previously supplied in this report.
CRIME AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
Effect of Crime on its Victim
39. In mid-1989, Margaret Jarvis described in
Social Work Today
happens to a victim when a crime has occurred:
Being a victim of crime is destabilising. We depend on the goodness of strangers
and friends just to function in the world. A
crime, whether it is a burglary,
a mugging or violence is like a private earthquake. Can the ground which looks
so secure be
trusted? And how come everyone else doesn't notice the tremor?
40. The effect of crime on its victims, including the extent of psychological
impact, has only in recent years attracted much attention.
Yet it is the
effect of crime on victims that largely determines the needs of victims (which
society may or may not meet) and the
expectations victims may have of the
criminal justice system.
41. The nature and extent of destabilisation of the personality that occurs as
a result of crime has been the subject of much research
in recent years.
American experts Drs Fischer and Wertz, on the basis of phenomenological
analysis of crime victims' experiences,
Being criminally victimised is a disruption of daily routine. It is a
disruption that compels one, despite personal resistance,
to face one's fellow
as predator and oneself as prey, even though all the while anticipating
consequences, planning, acting, and
looking to others for assistance. These
efforts to little avail, one experiences vulnerability, separateness, and
the face of the callous, insensitive, often anonymous enemy.
Shock and disbelief give way to puzzlement, strangeness, and then to
the crime as perverse, unfair, undeserved. Whether or not expressed
immediately, the victim experiences a general inner
protest, anger or rage, and
a readiness for retaliation, for revenge against the violator.
As life goes on, the victim finds him/herself pervasively attuned to the
possibility of victimisation - through a continued sense
of reduced agency, of
the other as predatory, and of community as inadequately supportive. More
particularly, one continues to live
the victimisation through recollections of
the crime, imagination of even worse outcomes, vigilant suspiciousness of
others, sensitivity
to news of disorder and crime, criticalness of justice
system agents, and desire to make sense of it all.
But these reminders of vulnerability are simultaneously efforts toward recovery
of independence, safety, trust, order, and sense.
One begins to get back on
top of the situation through considering or taking precautions against crime,
usually by restricting one's
range of activities so as not to fall prey again.
During this process, the victim tries to understand not only how a criminal
have done and could again do such a thing, but also how he or she (the
victim) may have contributed to the criminal's action. Also,
intermittent readiness for retaliation provides a glimpse of one's own
potential for outrageous violence. The victim is thus
confronted with the
paradoxical and ambiguous character of social existence: the reversible
possibilities we all share, such as being
agent or object, same or different,
disciplined or disruptive, predator or prey. One may move from this encounter
to a more circumspect
attitude toward personal responsibility.
However, the person's efforts toward such an integration of the victimisation
are not sufficient. The environment must over time
demonstrate that the victim's
extreme vigilance is no longer necessary. And other persons must respond with
concern and respect
for the victim's full plight, including his or her efforts
toward sensemaking. All three components are essential for recovery
prior life as well as for development of a fuller sense of responsibility, reciprocity,
and community. But no component
is guaranteed. The absence of any of them eventuates
in a deepened victimisation of isolation, despair, bitterness, and resignation.
42. Drs Irene Frieze, Sharon Hymer and Martin Greenburg have considered this
issue at some length. They noted first how 'opportunity
plays a role in
victimisation. They referred to the Fischer and Wertz findings and went on to
state that researchers have attempted
to systematise the reactions of victims
following crime into phases, assigning each phase a name. They said that
although the exact
components vary, most researchers agree that reactions to
criminal victimisation follow a predictable sequence.
43. The first is the immediate reaction - the impact-disorganisation
phase - characterised by numbness or disorientation, denial and disbelief
with feelings of loneliness, depression, vulnerability and
elements of this stage have also been described as including an initial
reaction of shock, disbelief, temporary
paralysis and denial followed by a
second stage characterised by frozen fright in which the victims feels a
pseudo-calm detachment
from others and shows regressive behaviours. Amongst
the most immediate reactions to violence are anxiety, accompanied by sleep
disturbances and nightmares. Other physiological reactions include diarrhoea,
headaches, an increase in psycho-somatic symptoms
and aggravation of any
previous medical problems. Such immediate visceral responses may diminish with
time but if treatment is not
instituted, or if people supposed to be in
supportive roles are hostile or unavailable, the responses can become
long-term. This
stage can last from hours to days.
44. Researchers studying the reactions of victims of rape, burglary, domestic
violence, and robbery, as well as those of victims
of other traumatic events,
found surprising commonality in the reaction of all these types of victims.
45. The first stage is followed by a phase which has been labelled the 'recoil'
stage. Typically, this stage lasts from three to
eight months and during it
the victim may experience swings in feelings from fear to anger. Feelings may
also alternate between
sadness and elation and between self-pity and guilt.
Rape victims sometimes show shifts in feelings that range from feeling
victims sometimes have changing fears during this stage between
fear of the
rape itself to fears of future attacks.
46. Loss of identity and self-respect can also follow victimisation. Feelings
of loss, rejection by others and humiliation are also
common. Victims may
experience rage. In instances when the victim has incurred physical injury,
the victim experiences not only
rage but also grief and depression at the loss
of normal physical functioning. Severe depression is not uncommon in rape
47. Other behavioural reactions observed during this phase include insomnia,
uncontrollable crying, agitation and restlessness, increasing
use of drugs and
deterioration in personal relationships. Victims of both property crimes and
violence often express need for retaliation
soon after the crime has been
48. The victim re-experiences the traumatic event in the form of obsessions
and/or recurrent dreams and nightmares. These are often
accompanied by
feelings of numbness along with dissociation from the content of the thoughts.
The victim may show decreased interest
in social and/or sexual relations.
49. The major fears expressed by victims are fears of being alone or abandoned,
recurrence of the event, and death. Anger and
frustration assume the form of
blaming someone or blaming fate for the victimisation. Some victims also show
guilt and remorse
over their hostile thoughts or impulses. Many report feelings
of shame and disgust at being helpless and out of control. Krupnick
and Horonwitz
noted that the most prominent
themes expressed by victims of personal injury and by assault victims are fear
of repetition
of the event and feelings of responsibility, along with rage at
the source of the trauma.
50. Given these strong and sometimes conflicting reactions, the victim may be
especially responsive to social support during this
phase. Depending on the
person's coping skills and social support systems, a personal reorganisation
that is either adaptive or
maladaptive can occur. Most victims experience a
gradual dissipation of symptoms within six months of the traumatic event. For
other victims however, there is a latent period of days or weeks during which
the person seems normal, followed by a delayed post-traumatic
51. Although many crime victims are believed to resolve the trauma of
victimisation within six months to one year, other crime victims
chronic stress with reactions recognised as a general stress reaction, or
post-traumatic stress disorder. This disorder
has well known symptoms.
52. Long-term reactions occur during the final phase or stage known as the
'reorganisation' phase. As the anger and fear diminish
the victim enters that
stage and can resolve the trauma of the victimisation by establishing more
effective 'defensive-vigilant'
behaviours, and by revising his or her values
and attitudes to readjust to everyday life. Successfully coping with
victimisation
can promote growth in victims. However, long-term reactions can
also be problematic. After a year, rape victims were more depressed
reported less pleasure in their daily lives than women in a control group who
had not been victims. A sizeable number of rape
victims did not feel that they
had recovered from the attack four to six years after it had happened.
Decreased sexual activity,
flash-backs, physical pain during sex and difficulty
in experiencing orgasm were symptoms mentioned by victims several years after
being raped.
53. Those providing care and support to victims frequently mentioned low
self-esteem, depression, guilt, fear and relationship difficulties
as the most
common long-term problem experienced by those victims. It is, therefore, in
this final phase that the victim might blame
himself or herself for a lack of
attention to danger. There is evidence that most of the decrease in anxiety
and other fear reactions
occur in the first few months.
54. A number of explanations for these commonly experienced reactions to
victimisation are proposed in the literature. All the proposed
explanations
relate specifically to the stress of being criminally victimised. They differ,
however, in what they regard as being
the source of the stress. One theory is
that stressful reactions occur because the self is violated. Other
explanations focus on
feelings of inequity, vulnerability to additional
victimisation and of perceiving oneself as deviant.
55. It is said that victims react to the distress and anxiety of victimisation
in a similar way as they react to other forms of stress.
For example, younger
women experienced more immediate symptoms following victimisation. Female
burglary victims who had been separated
from their husbands by death or divorce
were especially likely to experience acute stress as a result of burglary of
their homes.
56. It has been noted that in crime victimisation, the central source of stress
is the violation of the victim's self. Rape and
murder or attempted murder
constitute the most serious violations, but violation of the security of the
extension of one's self, is also stressful.
Accepting what has been just said as correct, the Committee believes it is to
be expected
that the reactions of victims of rape, burglary, domestic violence,
robbery, and other traumatic events will show a high degree of
commonality.
57. Victims often feel a sense of inequity. What has happened to them is 'not
fair'. Not surprisingly, the victim believes that
the perpetrator simply
should not be allowed to act in the way they have. They tend to feel angry and
distressed and have a need
to improve their outcome, for example, by obtaining
an insurance payment, retrieving stolen property, or by some form of
compensation.
The counsellor appears to have a role to play in reducing
inequity by re-evaluating the victimising experience. This seems necessarily
to involve a reassessment that allows the victim to view the circumstances of
the victimising crime from a more detached and objective
58. Victims lose their sense of safety or invulnerability. But they also tend
to see themselves as attracting in some way the
crime to which they have been
subjected. They may attribute their being victimised to their failure to act
appropriately or
to factors arising from their own characters. In relating the
crime to these factors many victims tend to perceive themselves
as being different
from other people, a difference which may arise from self-blame. It can also
result in loss of self-esteem
as the victim begins identifying with other stigmatised
individuals to whom he or she would have reacted with aversion and pity
to the crime.
Victim in the Criminal Justice System
59. Again not surprisingly, the victim considers himself or herself to be the
focus of the investigation into the crime. But in
most cases the victim
eventually discovers that this is not so. The ACT criminal justice system has
followed the common law tradition
of giving the victim very little status.
After making the initial report and providing the police with information
regarding the
crime, the victim has no specific 'victim' role to play within
the criminal justice system as it moves towards its conclusion. Although
victim may be required by the prosecution to act as a witness, this role is not
specific to the victim. It accords him or her
no particular status within the
case. The drama shifts to another stage, indeed to a different theatre, where
the state becomes
the main actor vis-a-vis the alleged offender.
60. The lack of a precise role (or roles) for the victim, other than as a
prosecution witness, belies the victim's actual importance
to the criminal justice
system. Firstly, victims perform a vital gate-keeping function, determining
which matters, other than
crimes causing death, will be dealt with by the system.
Victims do not report all criminal acts to the police. In 1983, for example,
although the vast majority of car thefts were reported, only 43% of robberies,
34% of assaults and 25% of sexual assaults were
Victims who do not report crimes presumably
cut their losses or attempt to obtain a remedy by action taken personally, and
in doing so by-pass the criminal justice system altogether.
61. It is important to bear in mind that many crimes are not reported by victims
because of fear. This fear may be of physical
violence or of the court processes
involved in the prosecution of crimes. It may also be due to other factors,
more difficult
to identify. The psychological make-up of victims varies so much
that it would be impossible to define accurately the nature of
the fear that
governs inaction. Failure to report a crime might also be due to factors such
as family loyalty, readiness to
forgive no matter how serious the crimes, perceptions
that the crime is a private matter, that State-imposed punishment is inappropriate,
that the police can or will do nothing or, finally, because the victim has told
a person other than the police.
62. The victim is clearly important to the successful and efficient working of
the criminal justice system. When crimes are reported,
it is victim
information alone which leads to the majority of convictions, particularly for
crimes of violence. Advocates of victims'
rights argue that this efficiency
will only be maintained if the co-operation of victims is retained, but that
this will only occur
if victims feel that their needs and interests are
satisfactorily met by the system. The criminal justice system risks losing the
future co-operation of victims of crime, and that of their friends and
relatives, if these needs are not met.
Based Victims' Assistance Groups
63. Community based victims service organisations have been established in most
States of Australia. Most of these services have
been established by victims
of crime to remedy a lack of support and assistance they perceive within the
criminal justice system.
These groups offer a wide range of services to other
64. VOCAL was formed in 1988 by a group of people from the ACT and the
surrounding region who had suffered victimisation. The assistance
provides to victims of crime includes:
- Support from people who understand through experience the anguish criminal
victimisation can cause;
- Outreach service to victims who are unable or do not wish initially to attend
- Court support, in the form of information about the court process and support
during and after the hearing; and
- Provision of information to victims about individuals or organisation who can
provide counselling and legal services.
65. VOCAL also has taken a role in promoting public awareness of the plight of
victims as well as in assisting the authorities in
identifying and remedying
difficulties for victims in the criminal justice system of the ACT.
66. The Victims of Crime Assistance League in Victoria provides an information
centre for victims, a referral centre to relevant
professional services
(including counselling, legal and medical services), a 24 hour telephone
support service and volunteer training.
67. The Victims Of Crime Assistance League for the Hunter Region is the only
group operating in New South Wales. It is operates
solely on the basis of
donations and volunteer support. It provides general support services, gathers
information of concern to
victims of crime, promotes the consideration of
victims' issues within the community and promotes improving the criminal
68. The Victims of Crime Association (Queensland) provides an information
resource centre, a facility for self-help groups, a referral
centre for crime
victims, court support for crime victims, volunteer training and a 24 hour
telephone support service.
69. The Victims of Crime Service (South Australia), established in 1979, was
the first victim support group in Australia. VOCS provides
professional
counselling and support, information about victims' rights, support groups for
the victims of specific crimes, information
seminars, security advice and a
court companion service in Adelaide, Whyalla and the south-east of South
Australia. It also promotes
community understanding of crime and
victimisation.
70. The Western Australian Victim Support Service (VSS) is a recently expanded
service, replacing a pilot project in July 1992.
It has attracted a good deal
of political support. This has meant that VSS has been able to employ
professional staff, including
counsellors, an Administrative Officer, a Police
Liaison Officer and a Receptionist. Like VOCAL in the ACT, it provides
to victims and aims to increase community and political awareness of
victims' issues and deficiencies in the criminal justice system.
71. The Victim Support Groups in New Zealand consist of 54 groups throughout
the country. They form a crisis intervention service,
victims being contacted
within 24 to 48 hours of the crime being reported. To obtain details of
victims, the coordinator of each
group is given limited access to police
records. Volunteers are on call in most areas 24 hours a day, seven days a
week and police
Police provide the groups with 90% of all work, other victims being
referred by
the Housing Corporation, the Fire Service and St Johns Ambulance. Some victims
make contact themselves.
72. The victims' self-help groups provide an important support network for
those who have been victimised. This type of support
network should, however,
be supplementary to a supportive and understanding criminal justice system.
The role of victim assistance
groups should be to assist the victim of crime to
recover from the distress caused by the initial criminal act. These groups
not be forced to assist recovery from additional trauma caused by a
criminal justice system which does not adequately recognise and
respond to the
needs of victims of crime.
Theoretical
Foundations for the Provision of Victim Services
73. It has been postulated, by J.J.M. Van Dijk, that the decision to establish
particular types of services for victims of crime
is influenced by four
distinct ideologies. These are:
(a) the care ideology,
(b) the resocialisation or rehabilitation ideology,
(c) the retribution or criminal justice ideology, and
(d) the radical or anti-criminal justice ideology.
74. The care ideology is based on a view that the care of crime victims is
a welfare responsibility of the government, similar
to the care of the aged,
sick, unemployed and other disadvantaged groups. Emphasis is placed by service
providers on alleviating
injuries and hardship rather than on the failure of
the state to properly protect the victim from harm in the first instance.
75. The resocialisation or rehabilitation ideologies focus on offenders and
their rehabilitation, rather than on the victim. The
assistance given to victims
by these services are of secondary importance to the service providers. Restitution
and some mediation
programs (for example, the Family Group Conference in New
Zealand) are examples of services based on these ideologies. The main
justification
for the existence of these services is that they offer offenders the means to
reintegrate into society. Victims
are a means to this end: any benefit they
receive is a useful by-product of the program.
76. The retributive or criminal justice ideology is based on a view that the
victim should be compensated according to the seriousness
of the crime and that
the victim should be given a more prominent position in the criminal justice
system. Examples of services
based on these ideologies are criminal injuries
compensation and victim impact statements.
77. Proponents of the radical, or anti-criminal justice, ideology believe
that the needs of victims of crime can best be met,
not by modification of the
current criminal justice system, but by 'setting up an entirely different one,
based on civil law
principles'.
see the criminal justice system as being completely unsuited to the resolution
of 'interpersonal wrangles'.
of Victims to be met by the Criminal Justice System
78. A return to the victim-centred criminal justice system of Anglo-Saxon
England is clearly impracticable. The vast resources necessary
successful prosecution are almost always beyond the means of the victim and the
state quite properly carries that burden.
Justice demands, however, that the
powers of the state vis-a-vis the victim be exercised with sensitivity and that
every administrative
step should be taken to ensure that victims are treated
fairly and justly. Victims should be able to see that the preservation of
their dignity and their need for solace are genuinely important to officers of
the criminal justice system.
79. It is widely recognised that because the victim has no defined role or
status in the case, beyond that of the provision of information,
officials at
all levels of the criminal justice system have a tendency to forget the
victim's interests in fulfilling duties of a
higher official priority: the
capture of the offender, the formulation of the prosecution case, and the
speedy and efficient progress
of the case through the courts. The frequent
failure of justice officials to give appropriate priority to the interests of
can contribute to victim dissatisfaction.
80. The victims' interaction with the criminal justice system unavoidably
coincides with his or her most acute reactions to the offence.
Some argue that
because the criminal justice system does not accommodate the victim's
particularly vulnerable state at this time,
many victims, for a variety of
reasons, feel that the system penalises or victimises them. This failure to
accommodate is often a
result of lack of thought rather than intentional.
Factors leading to these victim perceptions include:
- failure to provide information to the victim concerning the process;
- insensitivity on the part of criminal justice officials;
- causing inconvenience to the victim in the conduct of further investigations
involving him or her;
- lengthy delays and waiting periods (for example, in courts and for the return
of property); and
- the traumatic and often humiliating experience of cross-examination with
little or no warning of what to expect.
81. Two prominent Canadian victimologists, Dr Irving Waller and Dr Micheline
Baril have identified five principal 'needs' required
of the criminal justice
system to allow victims 'to restore their sense of worth and get on with their
lives'. Waller and Baril
Information
victim's understanding and eventual acceptance of the crime.
from the community as well as from family and friends is crucial
to help the victim deal with feelings of isolation and vulnerability.
Community support can be shown through victim assistance and compensation
programs, as well as through the helpfulness and concern
of criminal justice
personnel whose actions can minimise the trauma of participation in the
criminal process itself.
Recognition of harm
. It is important to the victim that the criminal
justice system recognise the harm done through the imposition of an appropriate
penalty. It is also important that the offender recognise, and acknowledge,
the harm done to the victim. This is important to assist
the victim in coming
to terms with the fact of his or her victimisation.
Reparation for the harm
, which can include financial compensation or
other action by the offender designed to make redress, constitutes a concrete
acknowledgment
of the harm done, and may also be important to restore the
victim's sense of self-worth.
Effective protection
from re-victimisation or retaliation is crucial
to alleviate the victim's feelings of vulnerability. This is particularly important
where the victims know, or have a continuing relationship with, the offender.
Victims also express concerns about the protection
of other members of the community.
Fundamental
Principles of Victims' Rights - Fair Hearing and Unbiased Decision-making
82. Dr Waller has identified the two principles of natural justice generally
considered to be the most important principles applicable
to the personal
interests of victims in criminal procedures. Those principles are:
- The duty to give people specially affected by the decision a reasonable
opportunity to present their cases; and
- The duty to listen fairly to both sides and reach a decision untainted by
83. While it is acknowledged that the application of those principles is of
fundamental importance in judicial proceedings and
has been so for thousands
there are difficulties in
applying the principles to the resolution of proceedings in criminal courts.
The principal difficulty
arises because the proceedings are not simply a matter
between victim and offender. The State has a significant interest in them.
84. In the Committee's view, the principles must be applied as far as is possible.
It is this view which has led the Committee
to the conclusion that victim impact
statements should in all appropriate cases be made by a victim if he or she
to accept the burden of making such a statement or, as would generally
be the case, making two such statements, the one shortly
after the crime and
the other shortly before its resolution, namely at the sentencing stage, in
the appropriate court.
Equally the application
of the principles must give to an offender (by this time either convicted or
acknowledging his or her
guilt) the opportunity to cross- examine the maker
on the statement.
Counselling
85. It has already been noted that appropriate support and counselling is vital
in ensuring that a victim recovers as quickly as
possible from the effects of
victimisation. The Committee takes the view therefore that where an emotional
reaction to a crime takes
place, skilled help in the form of counselling should
be available and, where necessary, victims should be referred to a psychiatrist
or consulting psychologist for specialist help. However, care should be taken
to ensure that scarce resources are not wasted in
counselling everybody who is
a victim of crime (as already defined). Some victims, including those whose
characteristics might be
regarded as making them particularly vulnerable (for
example, the elderly), might actually require minimal assistance. Many victims
of crime would brush aside even quite serious crimes committed against them as
not being of particular emotional importance. For
example, one case that came
to the attention of a member of the Committee was that of an elderly couple,
both in their seventies,
who had had a building used as a workshop burgled
between 3 am and daylight. They had not detected anything unusual but awoke to
find that many thousands of dollars worth of machinery and hand tools had been
stolen. The burglary generated in them, as crime
seems to cause all victims, a
deep feeling of violation of their lives but they are sturdy individuals and
did not seek counselling
nor was any offered them. Fortunately, they were
insured and were thus able to meet the financial loss as well as the loss of
husband's principal activity. On the other hand, there are clearly cases
where a very minor criminal act may have grievous emotional
results. These
considerations suggest that it is appropriate that an assessment be made
concerning each criminal act reported as
to what support should be offered and,
if necessary, made available to the victim of the crime in question.
Information
86. There are some significant findings in relation to matters which must be
addressed if victims of crime are to be dealt with fairly
and justly. Perhaps
the most significant finding is that above all else victims require information
into the offences committed against
them and about the progress of the matter through the criminal justice system.
Provision of that
information places a substantial burden on police officers
and, to a lesser degree, on prosecuting authorities. The Victims of Crime
Issues Paper, prepared for the Committee by the ACT Government, dealt with
these issues as follows:
Australian and overseas studies have highlighted an alarmingly large percentage
of victims who are dissatisfied by the way in which
the police handle
complaints made to them by victims of crime. The 1987 Report of the New South
Wales Task Force on Services for
Victims of Crime found that 45.2% of victims
who responded to their survey were dissatisfied with police handling of their
complaints,
compared to a 33.2% satisfaction level. No equivalent ACT survey
has been done but such dissatisfaction elsewhere may indicate a
trend which
needs to be further examined in the ACT.
A 1987 report prepared by the South Australian police identified certain needs
of victims of crime which should be met by a police
force concerned with the
interests of those individuals. It identified the needs of the victim on the
day of the offence to be:
- ease of reporting the crime to the police (e.g. victims should know which
branch to call, the call should be promptly answered
by an experienced police
- prompt response by the police;
- sympathetic attitude of responding police, particularly in the case of
injury or sexual assault; and
- the ability of attending police to properly assist the victim (e.g. having
some knowledge of services required and where those
are available).
The report identified the needs of the victim post crime to include:
- continued sympathetic handling by the police;
- the provision of information with regard to the progress of the
investigation;
- information concerning what is expected of the victim;
- respect for the victim's privacy;
- involvement in the decision whether to proceed;
- consideration of the convenience of the victim in the conduct of further
investigations requiring the victim's assistance;
- prompt conduct of the investigation and hearing;
- the swift return of all property.
The report of the New South Wales Task Force on Services for Victims of Crime
nominated the attitudes of police and prosecutors and
the provision of
information as being important determinants of victim satisfaction. The report
later suggested that the victim should
be informed of:
- the results of the investigation of the complaint;
- the person/s proceeded against;
- particulars of the charge/s preferred against the alleged offenders;
- the bail determination;
- the details of court adjournment and hearing dates, excluding those
adjourned to a date for mention only; and
- the outcome of proceedings.
Such information is usually provided to victims only when they are required to
play a further part in the investigation or proceedings,
rather than as a
matter of routine.
The importance to the victim of being kept informed was also recently identified
in a study conducted by the South Australian
Office of Crime Statistics and
published in April 1990. This found that 87.1% of victims felt that any trauma
associated with
being reminded of the crime was outweighed by the perceived
benefits of being kept informed.
In response to the matters set out in those paragraphs, the Committee considers
that all these matters should be addressed by police
officers and, eventually,
by prosecuting officers.
87. In cases where investigation has taken a long time it seems reasonable that
progress reports, which need not necessarily be detailed,
be made to the victim
by the relevant authorities. The standard for information provision is
addressed by the Committee in the Declaration
of Victims' Rights proposed in
this report. In matters where the alleged perpetrator of the offence is
quickly identified and charged,
it seems appropriate that the victim should be
advised of major developments such as arrest, applications for bail and the
of the charges to be preferred.
88. The Committee believes all victims should have the opportunity to be
present at hearings and to observe that justice is done
in their case. It is
usual for victims to give evidence early in a hearing and, therefore, there is
nothing to prevent them from
remaining in court if they wish. It is to be
noted that victims frequently seek leave to depart the court after having given
as Witnesses
89. The Committee has also satisfied itself that it is appropriate and
necessary that victims who lack experience of the courts should
be advised of
their rights and responsibilities. Some time should be devoted to their role
as witnesses so that they can understand
what is required of them and so they
are prepared for what is to most people an alarming experience.
90. It is very frequently the case that witnesses in criminal cases have no
idea what is required of them when giving evidence and
thus do themselves less
than justice. The Committee recommends that victims who are to be witnesses
should receive information concerning
what will be required of them as
witnesses but such information should never amount to their being influenced in
any way as to what
they should say. The Committee recommends that a video be
prepared about the process of preparing oral evidence. It could act as
adjunct to a pamphlet similar to the South Australian pamphlet 'Tell it like it
is' which has been prepared to assist children
giving evidence but could
readily be extended to the wider target group.
with the Offender
91. The Committee is satisfied that unnecessary distress is often caused
victims of crime when they are brought into contact with
the alleged offender
at court. It appreciates that this generally comes about by accident but it
considers that steps should be
taken to ensure that such accidents do not
92. One of the most difficult questions which a court faces is whether or not
to grant bail to an alleged offender when the victim
of the crime in question,
or witnesses who may be expected to give evidence for the prosecution, have a
real fear that the alleged
offender may try to make contact with them or harass
or harm them in some way. The Committee considers that the responsibility for
granting bail lies with the court. Adequate provision is made in present
legislation and practice for a review by the Supreme Court
of bail granted by a
magistrate.
93. The South Australian Declaration of Victims' Rights, at paragraph 12,
refers to the entitlement of a victim to have his or her
need or perceived need
for physical protection put before an authority, to be advised of the outcome
of all bail applications and
to be informed of any conditions of bail which are
designed to protect the victim from the accused. Obviously there are many
in respect of which bail is sought where there is no possible risk of
injury to the victim or witnesses. But victims may have special
insights or
information as to their fears which ought to be considered. The Committee is
of the opinion that the following is an
appropriate provision in this regard:
Where a victim demonstrates or perceives a need for protection from physical
violence or harassment by an alleged offender he or
she should be entitled to
have that need placed before a court considering an application for bail. The
victim should be advised
of the outcome of all such bail applications and
particularly of any conditions of bail which are imposed with a view to the
of the victim (or potential witnesses for the prosecution).
94. The Committee is of the opinion that the victim should have the opportunity
to tell the court directly about the harm done him
or her and that this can
best be done by an appropriate victim impact statement (VIS) or statements
coupled with relevant evidence
(which the victim may already have given during
the course of the hearing).
95. The sentencing judge has a very good opportunity to assess any risk to the
victim arising from early or immediate release of
the offender. It seems
unlikely that if there were any immediate risk to the victim the offender would
be released forthwith on
sentencing. It seems to the Committee, however, that
it would be appropriate for a victim who is concerned about the danger to
or herself because of the early release of the offender, to set out
those concerns and the reasons for them in a victim impact statement
the concerns could be properly considered by the sentencing judge.
96. The Committee believes that there are any number of authoritative decisions
which set forth explicit criteria for sentencing
and the reasons for sentencing
and that, without exception, reasons for sentencing are handed down at the time
an offender is dealt
97. The Committee does not favour a system which would allow recourse by a
victim to an appellate court where he or she feels that
proper procedures are
not followed. It sees this only as unnecessarily increasing the complexity of
criminal proceedings. It also
sees no necessity for it even under the present
system having regard to the material taken into account on sentencing and
indeed, VISs are apparently sought fairly routinely by courts.
98. The question of the release on parole of offenders has been given
consideration by the Committee. Victims of violent crimes,
particularly where
the offender is a relative or was a near neighbour of the victim, expressed
concern for their safety should the
offender be released on parole. Obviously
the release of an offender on parole is governed by circumstances different
which existed shortly after the commission of the offence and before
trial. Parole boards tend to be faced with what often seems
an intractable
problem in balancing the rights of the victim against those of the offender
who, at the time the application of parole
comes to be considered, will have
completed a substantial part of the sentence imposed upon him or her.
99. The position was put that victims should be entitled to be made aware of
the date upon which the offender is to be released
from custody. The
rationale for this suggested requirement was to remove the risk of
psychological damage to the victim should he
or she come across the offender
during the course of his or her daily routine without having been warned that
such an encounter was
possible. The Committee considers that it is reasonable
that victims of violent crime should be advised of the release date of the
offender so that they may be forewarned of the possibility of such an
100. There are enough cases reported where a victim has been the subject of
further criminal behaviour on the release of an offender
to make understandable
the fear of many victims as to what might happen after that release.
101. The Committee has no statistics on the percentage of offenders who commit
offences against their victims after their release
but it is prepared to accept
that, except in domestic violence cases, only a small percentage commit these
second offences. However,
when they occur, they are likely to attract
considerable media attention, highlighting the view that the criminal justice
has failed. The Parole Board of the Australian Capital Territory has on
occasion received submissions from victims of crime at the
time the offender
might be released. It takes great care to address any fears expressed with a
view to establishing a suitable basis
for future relations between the victim
and offender. Due regard is given to the rights of the about-to-be-released
offender in
this process.
the Needs of Victims of Crime - An ACT Declaration of Victims' Rights
102. South Australia enacted its Declaration of Victims Rights in 1985. It was
used as a precedent for the United Nations Declaration.
The matter has been
before the Legislative Assembly, but the Committee respectively suggests that
the Declaration which finally
becomes the law of the Territory should accord
with the draft declaration set out in the summary of recommendations. It is
respectfully
suggested that the pioneer effort in South Australia would be
slightly improved if the Committee's draft were to be adopted.
103. The Committee considers that the Territory ought enact a declaration based
the South Australian declaration of victims' rights
but with certain
modifications. That declaration as so modified appears in full in the summary
of recommendations. The Committee
suggests that the Territory Government could
consider amending the Declaration of Victims Rights which was adopted in 1991
with the model suggested in this report and to become in due course
part of the law of the Territory.
104. Most of the matters set out in that declaration can be dealt with
administratively. Indeed the second reading speech of the
Attorney-General for
South Australia, the Hon. Chris Sumner, included the following:-
These principles will be forwarded to all relevant government departments
with instructions to ensure that practice and procedures
in departments comply
with the principles. [The Government Departments] will also be required to bring
to [the Attorney-General's]
attention any deficiencies of the law from their
standpoint.
105. However, the Committee considers that the Declaration of Victims Rights of
the Australian Capital Territory should be enshrined
in legislation to ensure
that those charged with the responsibility for putting the principles espoused
in the Declaration into effect
have clear guidelines. Any breach of the
guidelines which come to the attention of the Victims' Coordinator should be
reported to
Government and the relevant agency for appropriate action. Draft
legislation is appended to this report at Appendix 'F'.
VICTIM IMPACT STATEMENTS
What is a Victim Impact Statement?
106. A victim impact statement is a statement setting out the full effects -
physical, psychological, financial and social - suffered
by a victim as a
result of a crime. The statement is prepared for placement before the court
engaged in sentencing an offender for
the crime in question so that the court
may fully understand the effects of the crime on the victim.
Impact and Current Sentencing Procedures
107. Victim impact statements, at least in incomplete form, have long existed
in the criminal law. For example, when an accused
is convicted of assault
occasioning grievous bodily harm, the charge itself amounts to a victim impact
statement and evidence of
the harm caused may be used by the sentencing court
in assessing the appropriate penalty to be imposed. However, the material is
very limited and does not amount to a victim impact statement as the term is
presently understood.
108. A judge involved in sentencing has many matters to take into account. The
effect of the crime upon the victim is but one of
them, albeit a very important
one. At common law, the effect of a crime on a victim may be considered during
the sentencing process.
This usually means that the seriousness of a crime,
which is presumed to (and may) reflect the seriousness of the hurt to the
affects the seriousness of punishment.
109. Chief Justice King in
The learned sentencing judge properly took into account in determining the
sentence the effects of the crimes upon the victims and
in particular that they
had been deprived of the whole or part of their savings.
110. Justice O'Bryan in
R. v Mallinder
The consequences of a crime for the victim are a relevant circumstance to be
taken into consideration when sentencing the offender.
sections 16A(2)(d)
and (e), requires
a sentencer to have regard to the personal circumstances of any victim of an
offence, and any injury, loss or damage
resulting from an offence
respectively.
112. In a discussion on victim impact statements in the Victorian Law Institute
Journal for July 1988, reference is made to an article
by George E. Burns, who
commented that:
[On] one level the impact of the crime on the victim has always been a factor.
The specific facts of the crime determine both what
charges are brought and
what sentence is imposed. Thus, a robbery is not just a 'robbery' - it may
range from a relatively minor
purse snatching to a brutal assault and the
sentence imposed should reflect the particular effect of the crime.
Impact Statements - Criticisms
113. Concern has been expressed that use of victim impact statements could have
an adverse effect upon an accused if they resulted
in the imposition of heavier
penalties than might otherwise have been imposed.
114. It is said that the use of these statements might undermine the sentencing
Court's freedom from public pressure and could lead
to a possible increase in
sentencing disparity.
115. It is also argued that an offender must be given the right to challenge
material put forth in a victim impact statement and
this would expose the
victim to unpleasant cross-examination. Some people argue that the idea of a
victim impact statement reverts
to times past and revives an ancient notion of
revenge contrary to current moves towards a more enlightened sentencing
philosophy.
116. Some argue that victims are not in a good position to give a reasoned view
of the impact of the crime on them and that really
they are seeking revenge.
Punishment, they continue, is the reaction of the community through the courts
and the community has a
wider interest than the victim's revenge.
117. It is also asserted that a victim impact statement would add very little
information to that already available to the court
and that there would be a
danger to a victim's health or welfare in giving such a statement because its
presentation might arouse
expectations which could not be met or might force
the victim to relive the experience with cost of further harm to him or her.
118. The Tasmanian Inter-Departmental Committee on Victims of Crime, which
reported in 1989, enumerated the arguments against victim
impact statements as
- To allow the victim to become involved in the sentencing process would
undermine the fundamental principle of the criminal justice
system that the
processes of prosecution and punishment are the province of the State acting in
the public interest.
- There is concern about the possible effects the introduction of victim impact
statements might have upon established sentencing
principles. The use of
victim impact statements might result in the court according too much weight to
the effect upon the victim
and thus neglecting other considerations such as the
rehabilitation of the offender.
- The most significant objection against victim impact statements is that
they would give rise to immense procedural difficulties.
It is argued that if
such statements are to be placed before the court as evidence upon which it
might rely in determining
an appropriate sentence, an offender must be afforded
an opportunity to challenge material which they contain. In some cases this
would involve further cross-examination of the victim and of medical practitioners
and psychologists. Not only would this involve
additional trauma for the victim,
but it would considerably lengthen criminal trials and increase delays in an
already over-burdened
119. As will become evident from the discussion that follows, the Committee
considers that many of these criticisms of victim impact
statements have been
demonstrated as unfounded by schemes established in jurisdictions in Australia
and overseas. The establishment
of a suitable scheme in the ACT should
minimise potential problems that might otherwise result from the adoption of
victim impact
statements.
Submissions
Received by the Committee
120. The submissions received by the Committee on the issue of victim impact
statements indicated a divergence of views amongst those
interested in the
problem. One submission, made by an individual, supported victim impact
statements especially when there was a
plea of guilty, so that the victim was
not just a name on a piece of paper assumed to have been affected to a 'normal'
the crime. Whilst it is entirely appropriate that the Court consider
at the time of sentencing any information about the effect
the crime on the
victim, the Committee has no doubt that presentation of a victim impact
statement before conviction would be inappropriate
in all cases.
121. VOCAL supported the presentation of a victim impact statement which would
ensure that a sentencing judge or magistrate is informed
emotional harm, or any loss of or damage to property suffered by the victim
through or by means of the offence,
and any other effects of the offence on the
122. The ACT Adult Corrective Services supported the use of the victim impact
statement for a limited group of more serious crimes
so long as they contain no
victim's statement as to a proper sentence. They considered that it should be
voluntary, should not be
prepared by the police, should deal with the
financial, physical and emotional impact of the crime if the victim wished to
all these issues, must be under the control of the victim as much as
possible and must reflect the views of the victim.
123. On the other hand, the Domestic Violence Crisis Service, the Doris Women's
Refuge, the Canberra Rape Crisis Centre and Ms Katja
Mikhailovich opposed the
adoption of victim impact statements, particularly for crimes of rape, incest
and domestic violence.
Use of Victim Impact Statements in the ACT
124. The ACT Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions has, on an informal
basis, begun tendering victim impact statements in
some cases. This practice
was considered by the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia in
125. In the judgement of the Full Court, the judge at first instance was quoted
at some length concerning the course of events before
him. The accused had
pleaded guilty to the offences. The trial Judge said,
The Crown Prosecutor frankly admitted, when I questioned [her] about it, that
she had requested the impact statement from the girl
for the purposes of
putting some sort of statement together for the use [of] this Court. In my
opinion, the procurement of that
sort of evidence by the prosecuting authority
goes beyond that authority's role and gives the appearance, even if it not be
of an endeavour to exacerbate the consequences of the offences to the
detriment of the accused.
Evidence of the impact of offences is, of course, relevant. Its cogency,
however, may depend on how it was obtained. I would personally
discourage the
prosecuting authority from doing this sort of thing, especially when the
accused has pleaded guilty in the Magistrates
Court and has been committed for
sentence, and the evidence is obtained between committal for sentence and
appearance for sentence
in this Court. ...
The cogency of that sort of evidence, would, of course, be greatly increased if
it came from a treating psychiatrist or other psychological
expert, or from a
counsellor consulted by the child or some other responsible person. I express
my concern about that sort of evidence
being elicited by the Crown Prosecutor,
and I say now that the result of the Crown eliciting evidence in that way makes
it difficult
for this Court to assess the reliability of the documentary
evidence as expressions of the child's emotional trauma. They simply
cogency and they certainly lack spontaneity.
126. The Full Court said:-
There is no question that increasing public concern about the position of
victims of crime in the criminal justice system has been
accompanied by
repeated instances of judicial recognition that loss or damage suffered by a
victim is a factor to be taken into account
in the sentencing process: see
[1971] VicRp 16
[1971] V.R. 147
[1975] VicRp 75
[1975] V.R. 754
(1978) 19 S.A.S.R. 130.
However, because in our adversarial system of criminal justice the victim is
not directly represented and has no more right to be
heard in the sentencing
process than in the trial, a difficulty arises as to how information relating
to the effect on the victim
is to be gathered and presented to the court. That
reliable information of that nature should be presented is in the public
not only in the interest of the injured victim (or the accused, if
the victim has escaped relatively unharmed), since a proper sentence
be based on a misconception or ignorance of salient facts. There is not
necessarily any unfairness or impropriety in
the representative of the Crown
assisting in this regard. The prosecutor appears in the public interest and
has the role of assisting
the Court in reaching a fair decision rather than
exclusively advocating a particular interest: see
Whitehorn v. The Queen
[1983] HCA 42
(1983) 152 C.L.R. 657
The Queen v. Apostilides
[1984] HCA 38
(1984) 154 C.L.R.
On the other hand there are objections to the prosecution taking too active a
role in the matter of injury to the victim. They are
implicit in his Honour's
criticism in the present case. One is that where the prosecutorial function is
carried out by a Director
of Public Prosecutions, the powers of the authority
are limited to those conferred by statute and are perhaps not co-extensive with
the broad function traditionally accepted as that of the Crown in assisting the
Court in the administration of justice. The other
objection is that the
gathering and presentation of evidence of the effect of the crime on the victim
tends to undermine the actual
and perceived independence of Counsel for the
prosecution by identifying Counsel with the victims. These matters are
discussed in
a paper by the Hon. C.J. Sumner, '
Victim Participation in the
Criminal Justice System
(1987) 20 ANZJ Crim. 195
In order to overcome these difficulties, there have been proposals for and
discussion of the use of victim impact statements at the
sentencing stage. In
this country, as we understand it, it is only in South Australia that there has
been legislation requiring
such statements. ...
In the absence of statutory provisions for victim impact statements in the
Australian Capital Territory, we do not see any impropriety
in the Director of
Public Prosecutions, or the representatives of the Director, whether acting as
Counsel or as solicitor, ensuring
that the court has before it sufficient
material of a proper kind to enable it to proceed to sentence upon a realistic
of the injury to or loss suffered by a victim. It is essential,
however, that the material be presented in such a way that the prosecuting
authority will not only
be seen to be promoting the interests of the
victim at the expense of the interests of justice, but also the reality will be
otherwise. Vengeance is not to be equated with justice. And the
understandable feelings of a victim or a relative of a victim must
allowed to move the Court beyond the way of justice. For that reason it may be
appropriate for the material to be presented
other than in the form of direct
statements by the victim or persons closely connected with the victim. It
would be better that
the material be presented through the report of an
independent third party, with the caution that the third party must not assume
or be seen as assuming the role of an advocate either for or against the
victim. In that respect the South Australian procedure
whereby a victim impact
statement is prepared by the same person who prepares a pre-sentence report
might be an appropriate model.
However, it is not for this Court, nor perhaps
for the Supreme Court, to impose any procedural requirement of that kind for
reason that, apart from policy considerations, there are resource
implications.
127. The court concluded that the method of collection and presentation of the
material relating to the effect of the offence on
the child left it open to the
judge to reject that evidence for what he saw as its lack of cogency.
128. The significant features of the passage just quoted seem to the Committee
- the need for moderation in a victim impact statement;
- the need to ensure that it is not, and cannot be seen as, an attempt to seek
- the need for victim impact statements to be balanced. (The Committee does
not see this, however, as meaning that something less
than the true effects of
the crime upon the victim is to be put forward to the court.)
129. Given the developing practice of the DPP in tendering victim impact
statements and the comments of the Full Court on this practice,
the Committee
sees its role as recommending how this practice might best be formalised so as
to meet the concerns of the Court and
encourage its use in ACT courts.
Considerations for the Implementation of Victim Impact Statements
130. The wide-spread interest in and support of the introduction of victim
impact statements within Australia and elsewhere is significant.
victim impact statements has been considered in a number of jurisdictions in
Australia and overseas. In Australia, South
Australia has incorporated the
victim impact statement into the sentencing process. The Tasmanian
Inter-Departmental Committee on
Victims of Crime recommended their adoption, as
did the Victorian Law Institute. The New South Wales Task Force on Services
Victims of Crime recommended that the implementation of VISs in South
Australia be evaluated. VISs have been implemented in New
131. In formulating its recommendations, the Committee has given considerable
weight to the Canadian experience. Members of the
Committee familiar, at least
to some degree, with Canadian culture and particularly its legal culture (and
one member has very considerable
experience of those cultures) consider that
the Canadian and Australian cultures are comparable and that the results of the
research and views expressed are of considerable value to the inquiry
being undertaken by the Committee. There is, it is considered,
less similarity
between United States legal culture and the Australian. The Canadian research
into the implementation of victim
impact statements is the most comprehensive
yet done. Five separate models were tested and evaluated in different Canadian
between 1986 and 1990, the findings of those studies being
reported in 1990. Descriptions of the five completed projects and of
research methodology are contained in a long extract from Volume 7 of the Final
Report of the Task Force, annexed to this report
at Appendix 'C'.
purpose of Victim Impact Statements
132. In the Toronto project report it was argued that two sets of purposes
would be achieved by victim impact statements. The first
set, known as 'direct
purposes', were that the statements would
- provide an instrument for victims to give information regarding the physical,
financial, psychological and social impacts of the
offence on them and on their
- introduce this information to the court;
- provide direct input into the sentencing process by victims;
- assist the court to arrive at an 'appropriate' sentence by improving both the
accuracy and the justice of the sentencing decision.
133. The second set, known as 'indirect purposes', were that the statements
- offer victims a means of direct input about the effects of the offence;
- increase victims' willingness to co-operate with the criminal justice system,
especially by reporting crimes;
- increase victims' feelings of involvement in the criminal justice process;
- increase victims' satisfaction with the sentence handed down and with the
criminal justice system generally.
134. The Committee believes that the more important purposes to be served by
victim impact statements are the 'indirect purposes'
and feels that these
outcomes would have the greatest positive consequences for victims of crime. A
victim reasonably expects to
have his or her 'day in court' and this
expectation is not satisfied simply by being called to give evidence, which may
be a traumatic experience, adding to the victim's sense of injustice
and alienation from the criminal justice process. It seems
to the Committee
that the availability of such statements to the court would enable the victim
to give his or her version of the
effects of the crime in what would be a
reasoned and moderate way. Many victims might prefer not to take the
opportunity to make
such a statement. However, if they feel it appropriate to
do so the opportunity should be given to them unless such a statement
distort the criminal justice process and unjustly detract from the rights of an
of Victim Participation
135. Volume 7 of the Final Report of the Canadian Task Force sets out a number
of findings:
- Victims are more likely to complete victim impact statements if they are
personally interviewed rather than invited to complete
questionnaires sent to
them by post;
- It is unlikely that all victims will be contacted in an attempt to have them
submit a victim impact statement;
- The reasons victims gave for refusing to participate in the program generally
came within the following list:
(a) the victim regarded the offence as too minor to warrant a statement;
(b) the victim was too busy;
(c) the victim wanted to put the incident behind him or her; or
(d) the victim experienced language problems in completing the statement.
- It would be most unlikely that victims would have multiple reasons in common.
Women are more likely to complete a statement
than men as are those who are
better educated.
136. The victims' motives for completing a victim impact statement are varied
but the findings in that regard warrant quotation:
Using an open-ended questionnaire format, victims were also asked for their
reasons for completing a statement, or what they expected
to gain as a result
of the statement. Although a variety of reasons and expectations were given,
the responses were sufficiently
similar to be broadly grouped into three categories.
The responses captured in the first category expressed the view that victims
wanted to ensure 'justice is done': between 14 per cent to 42 percent of the
victims participated for this reason; they also
wanted to influence the sentence
given. The second category of views was more 'altruistic': between 17 per cent
to 47 per cent
of the victims indicated that they agreed to participate because
they thought that 'it seemed like a good idea and that it was
their civic duty'.
In the final category, responses were 'deterrence' oriented. Victims wanted
to impress upon the offender
that their acts were not victimless: between 20
per cent to 35 per cent felt that they should participate because they 'wanted
to communicate the impact of the crime to the offender.
which offences should Victim Impact Statements be used?
137. In theory it would be ideal for all victims to have the opportunity to
offer their views to the court. It was felt, however,
that in practice this
was not feasible. The Committee believes that the preparation of VISs for all
offences would not necessarily
be the most appropriate use of finite resources.
That being the case, it is necessary to determine for which offences VISs
be prepared.
138. The British Columbia (Victoria) report favoured a division according
to the seriousness of the offence.
there was a consensus among Crown Counsel that they were more appropriate for
major offences, there was less consensus
over whether specific offences (for
example minor assaults, theft of amounts under $1,000) were appropriate for
them. The report
recommended that, in selecting victims to make a victim impact
statement, it continued to be necessary to define appropriate offences.
this definition need not exclude minor offence categories, and flexibility and
discretion should be built into the
selection system.
139. On the other hand, the Toronto report noted that the major criterion
applied by police investigators was the impact on the
Most of them felt that the results of the
crime, not merely the type of offence, should be the overriding factor in using
victim impact statement. The term 'results of the crime' was interpreted as
physical consequences or, in some cases, emotional
and psychological impacts
on the victim. The officers interviewed considered that these impacts must be
assessed on an individual
basis and that, therefore, officer discretion in the
use of victim impact statements was most important. Very few police wanted
see criteria determined beforehand for the types of offences in which statements
should be given to victims.
140. The Committee is of the opinion that statements would not generally be
appropriate in respect of minor offences even though
those minor offences might
have had serious impact upon the victims. The Committee adopts this view
because of the resource implications
of having these statements in respect of
all crimes. For example, a particularly vulnerable person, the victim of a
minor offence,
might suffer grossly deleterious effects from the offence which
is in itself very slight as, for example, minor vandalism or trespass
intent to commit any serious offence. Yet it would seem inappropriate that the
effects of that offence should be incorporated
in a victim impact statement.
It would seem much more desirable that the criminal justice process or
administrative procedures connected
with it should make provision for some
suitable means of assisting such a victim. The Committee sees the matter as
one for the economical
use of available resources provided that use results in
assistance of all victims who are in need.
141. The Committee believes that the option to prepare a victim impact
statement even in respect of a serious offence, should be
the victim's. A
failure or refusal to adopt the option should give rise to no comment or
adverse inference.
142. It seems unlikely that young children would be able to present a statement
concerning the effects of a crime upon them. Yet
this inability ought not to
prevent the presentation to the Court of the effects of the crime on children.
It would seem that the
dilemma could be overcome by the evidence of experts
skilled in the field who could be relied upon to give accurate evidence of the
true state of mind of the child as a result of the offence. Further
consideration of this matter appears later in this report.
143. Consideration was given by the Committee to offences that occur between
close relations, including spousal assaults and some
sexual assaults. It was
said in the Toronto report that the fact of the relationship could deter many
victims in such cases from
giving to the court a statement detailing the
results of an offence. The Committee sees no serious difficulty in this area.
victim in such cases acts a gatekeeper. Once the gate is opened and the
offence is reported to the appropriate authorities, it seems
to the Committee
that it is a relatively small step for the victim to make a victim impact
statement, which is, in any case, voluntary.
144. The Committee recommends that there should be statutory provision for the
tender of a voluntary victim impact statement in all
cases of indictable
offences against the person, or involving violation of a person's property
whether by theft, fraud, robbery or
otherwise, which is punishable by
imprisonment for five years. The Committee recommends that statements be
voluntary and that victims
may choose not to take advantage of the right to
make such a statement. If experience were to demonstrate this approach to be
that problem should then be dealt with.
of Victim Impact Statements
145. The Toronto report raised issues about the format of the statement. They
included the possibility of duplicating information
obtained by the police
during investigation and, also, whether the statement should consist of a
series of very detailed categories
of questions. It offered as an alternative
that a victim could be asked to report the crimes' effects in his or her own
It also mentioned the possibility that statements could be accompanied
by medical records, receipts for repairs, etc. Where the
victim was asked to
report, or did report the effects in his or her own words under some very
general headings, it would be left
to the court to determine the appropriate
weight to be accorded the various factors.
146. The Committee recommends that the VIS be structured so that all necessary
information is obtained from the victim. All victims
preparing statements
should be asked 'core questions'. The South Australian document used for this
purpose should form a useful
precedent. The questions should not be 'leading
questions' and the structure ought not inhibit the victim from providing
information about the effects of the crime.
Preparation
of Victim Impact Statements
147. The Toronto report leaned towards police officers taking victim impact
statements. The report indicated that findings from
interviews with police
officers showed that they did not think that the victim impact statement
program was imposing a significant
burden on them in addition to their usual
obligations. Indeed, the officers suggested a number of positive benefits
accruing from
the program. These were that:-
- the program indicated to victims that the police were interested in, and
concerned about, the effects of the crime on them;
- it tended to overcome the complacency that police investigators sometimes
- the program also served to make police officers focus on victims' needs and
- it added to the investigators' understanding of the crime.
148. The interviews suggested that there were also a number of concerns held by
the officers concerning the program, outlined below.
- They were concerned that disclosure of the statements to the defence might
lead to cross-examination of victims regarding their
statements which would
further add to the ordeal faced by the victims.
- They also expressed concern at the 10 day time interval allowed for the
return of the completed victim impact statement as too
short to enable
inclusion of the full impact.
- They felt concern that the victim might not feel able to come to terms with
the effects of the crime within the time allotted in
order to complete the
statement accurately.
- Some officers were under the impression that Crown prosecutors were hesitant
to use the statements. For this reason they felt
the desirability of having
- Officers also were concerned that the statement could be an instrument for
retaliation on the part of some victims especially as
the victims were not
required to verify the statement's content on oath.
149. Alternative methods used for obtaining statements from victims were:-
- mailing the statement to victims for completion and return to the collection
point - this method was more likely to be used in
respect of property
- taking the statement from the victim over the telephone; and
- having it delivered by the police to the victim for completion at his or her
150. The British Columbia scheme also required police officers to prepare the
VIS. The officers held interviews with the victims
in order to collect the
required information, a measure which found favour with most victims:
Although a strong majority of victims interviewed during the evaluation expressed
a preference for personal interviews, 1 in 6
would have preferred a questionnaire.
This suggests a comprehensive service might better serve the public if victims
a choice between a mailed questionnaire and personal interview.
151. The Committee agrees with the report's recommendation that an interview
approach to the gathering of victim impact information
is preferable, but that
if a victim refused an interview he or she should be given the option of
completing mail-out VIS forms.
152. It was noted in British Columbia that the success of the implementation of
a police-based VIS scheme did depend on the training
received by the police
officers required to prepare the statements.
Analysis of the VISs and supporting documents indicates that the interviewing
constables made every effort to play an objective
and professional role in the
interviews. There were notable differences in the abilities of the interviewers
to probe victims
for clarifications of items, to organise the points made by
the victim, and to provide the context for many of the victims' remarks.
differences - which related strongly to the constables' previous experience
and in-service training - point to the importance
of adequate and specific training
of VIS interviewers in future projects.
153. The British Columbia report recommended that the training given to
officers responsible for the preparation of victim impact
statements might
include elements concerning the role of victims in the justice system, contact
procedures, interviewing skills,
writing skills, follow-up procedures, and
other issues, depending on the background of the trainees and the
administrative structure
of the program.
154. The report noted that three questions should be asked when deciding which
agency should be responsible for preparing statements:
- Which administrative body would be most objective?
- Which administrative body would be credible to all parties?
- Would staff in this administrative body be line staff or new staff specially
hired for the VIS project?
155. The British Columbia report recommended that, however the VIS be prepared,
the victim should be allowed to see and sign the
completed statement. It said
43% of victims who prepared statements for the pilot project said they would
prefer to have seen the
156. The Committee had some difficulty initially with the proposal that
preparation of victim impact statements should be done by
police officers.
Police officers who assisted in the consideration of the many issues involved
shared this difficulty. However,
consideration of all the material now
available, including the present attitude of the Australian Capital Territory
component of
the Australian Federal Police, has led to the conclusion that the
initial victim impact statement should be obtained by a police
officer engaged
in the investigation of the offence. If his or her experience in the area is
insufficient, an officer experienced
in investigation of offences of the type
in question and who has also had experience or sufficient training in the
taking of victim
impact statements should prepare the statement. The Committee
now considers that the initial taking of the victim impact statements
a police function.
for Collection
157. A related issue discussed in the British Columbia report was that of where
the victim impact statement should be taken. Sixty
percent of the victims in
the trial completed the interview at the police station, 35% at their home, and
the rest in other locations.
All the victims interviewed at home were
satisfied with the location, whereas 77% of those interviewed at the police
station were
satisfied. In 10% of the cases, another person (usually a family
member) was present at the interview.
158. The Committee recommends that as a general rule VIS should be taken at
at a police station if
the victim consents.
should Victim Impact Statements be completed?
159. It was noted that the completion of the statement immediately after the
crime was reported might be too early to enable the
inclusion of the full
impact of the offence on the victim. This point is pertinent when one has
regard to the probable psychological
effects on victims of crimes (See paras
41-61). Collection of the information long after the crime occurred may affect
the victim's
recall of the immediate effects of the crime. The Toronto report
points out that, if an offender has not been apprehended after
a reasonable
period, the statement should be provided by the victim at that stage and not
after the offender is caught, even though
this risks the unproductive (so far
as the Court is concerned) preparation of a report.
160. The Committee takes the view that the appropriate time for taking the
statement would be as soon as reasonably possible after
the offence, provided
the victim has recovered sufficiently from the shock and injury inflicted
during the crime to be able to gather
his or her thoughts about the event. A
follow-up statement would be made shortly before trial, or if the trial is
expected to be
a long one, shortly before the verdict.
Verification
of Victim Impact Statements
161. The fact that victims are not given the opportunity to acknowledge the
accuracy of victim impact statements presented to South
Australian Courts has
been criticised. In
The Queen v Nicholls
Justice Olsson
In this regard it is necessary to make some reference to the victim impact
statements tendered to the learned sentencing judge.
As is the custom these
had been prepared by a police officer. They reflected the situation prior to
reimbursement and are generally
expressed in terms which tend to reflect a
possible lack of understanding as to the likely net impact of the offences upon
the persons
in question. It must be said that a serious weakness in the
present system of victim impact statements is that they are not signed
acknowledged as accurate by the victims concerned, and, at best, reflect the
attitude and impression of the police officer
preparing them. It would be far
preferable for the future for the actual victim or victims to be required to
subscribe to such documents
as being an accurate reflection of their factual
situation. Be that as it may those statements do graphically reveal the
significant
emotional impact made by the offences upon the persons concerned
and, in some instances, a substantial degree of at least short-term
inflicted upon them by the conduct of the appellant.
162. The Committee agrees and recommends that the victim be required to sign
their VIS as being an accurate reflection of his or
her situation.
Distribution
of the Victim Impact Statements to Counsel
163. The Toronto Report opted for the VIS to be supplied to the Crown Attorney
long before sentencing so that he or she might use
it for the preparation of
the case, arguing against bail, pre-trial negotiations and examination of
164. The British Columbia report noted concern regarding the disclosure of the
contents of a VIS to defence Counsel. Although it
was difficult to determine
the extent or frequency of disclosure of statements to defence Counsel, it
appeared to the authors that
disclosure was not made, contrary to Ministry
policy, nor was it routine or systematic. The main reason for this was that a
often arrived in the Crown file after routine disclosure of case
particulars has been made to defence Counsel. The report noted
strong concerns
among judges and defence Counsel that the VIS should be disclosed to the
defence. The report recommended that the
disclosure to the defence Counsel of
VIS be made mandatory.
165. Whether the defence should have a statement at the earliest opportunity is
also a major issue in Australia. In line with the
tendency in Australia to
make available to defendants all the material in the hands of the prosecution,
the Committee believes victim
impact statements should be furnished to the
prosecution and defence in the first instance as soon as is reasonably
practical after
the first (preliminary) VIS is prepared. It is thought that to
make it so available would facilitate pre-trial negotiation, a decision
whether bail should be opposed or not sought and possible appropriate
plea-bargaining. In the second instance, the final VIS
should be made
available to the legal representatives of the parties as soon as a finding of
guilt is made or plea of guilty entered.
The Committee acknowledges that,
although it is preferable that the statements be made available to the defence
as soon as reasonably
possible after their preparation, this may not always be
feasible. In the second instance, for example, it may be that the victim
not wish it to be used, even though it has been prepared. This may come about
because the prospect of its use and possible
cross-examination on it might
cause the victim additional suffering.
Notification
to the Court of the Use of a Victim Impact Statement
166. Only one of the Canadian projects required the distribution of VISs to the
court and defence Counsel by the Crown prosecutor.
In that project, although
the procedures established should have resulted in all statements being
presented to the court after a
finding of guilt, only 43% of the statements
were distributed. Among the reasons for non-distribution was the refusal of
prosecutors
to introduce victim impact statements in spite of Departmental
policy dictating their introduction.
167. The British Columbia report revealed that in 66% of the cases where VISs
were used by Crown Counsel, the Court was not informed
that the source of
information being presented was a VIS. In the remaining 34% of cases, Crown
Counsel informed the Court the VIS
was the source of information, but the VIS
was not introduced as an exhibit. A majority of judges and defence Counsel
interviewed
felt that the Crown should automatically identify the existence of
a VIS, although it need not be filed as an exhibit. The report
recommended
that more overt use be made of the VIS, rather than it being used as an
unidentified piece of evidence.
168. The Committee agrees with the recommendation of the British Columbia
report that the court should be notified if evidence regarding
the effect of
the crime on a victim is taken from a victim impact statement.
of the Victim Impact Statement
169. In British Columbia, of the 187 cases of which records of usage were kept,
53 VISs (28%) were used. However, in most cases
the VIS was not used because
of factors beyond the control of the Crown, for example, because there was no
disposition or guilty
verdict, the VIS was not received in time, or the case
was still outstanding. Where the Crown Counsel could use the VIS during
sentencing,
they did so 58% of the time. Primary reasons for not using the VIS
when it was possible to do so included;
- the impact was insignificant; and
- oral evidence during the trial had already covered the same material.
170. The British Columbia report noted that during the pilot study Crown
Counsel used the VISs for two different purposes. The first
sentencing. The second, more minor, usage of the VIS was at points other than
sentencing. These included use at trial
(for example, for examining a victim),
for consideration when negotiating with the defence and at the time of bail
review. Crown
Counsel mentioned the latter two uses very rarely.
171. The Committee agrees with the conclusion of the British Columbia report
that the victim should be told about potential non-court
uses of the VIS (for
example, diversion, probation or parole) at the time of taking the VIS and that
fairness to the accused should
be an essential consideration at all times. The
Committee is of the opinion that the prosecuting Counsel be required to tender
VIS when it is possible to do so, unless the victim no longer wishes the
statement to be tendered.
Cross-Examination
on Victim Impact Statements
172. VOCAL advocates that VISs should not be introduced if the likely result
could include cross-examination of the victim by the
defendant or his or her
Counsel. VOCAL suggested as a kind of 'trade-off' that if cross-examination of
victims on their statements
were dispensed with, no attempt should then be made
to submit that a heavier sentence should be imposed.
173. The suggestion above at paragraph 136 that VISs might assist the court in
arriving at an 'appropriate' sentence by improving
both the accuracy and the
justice of the sentencing decisions carries with it an implication that
sentences may possibly be heavier
under a new system. Obviously a court might
from time to time be so influenced by the facts appearing in a VIS that it
would impose
a heavier sentence. It seems to the Committee that if there is
any possibility that a sentence might, because of the tender of a
heavier than would have been the case had none been tendered, the defendant
must have the right to cross-examine the maker
of the statement.
174. The Committee recommends that the defence Counsel be given the opportunity
to cross-examine a victim on his or her VIS as is
done with any other material
which might adversely affect the offender's interests. Given the supply of the
VIS to defence Counsel
prior to the hearing, the Committee expects that any
difficulties defence Counsel has with the material in the VIS could be resolved
prior to the VIS being presented to the court, as is frequently done now with
antecedents reports. This might then make that cross-examination
of the victim
unnecessary. However, the victim should be given the opportunity at any time
until tender of the VIS to withdraw it
rather than face the possibility of
cross-examination upon it.
175. It is understood that the South Australian experience has been that
victims are simply not cross-examined about their statements.
This is what one
would expect if the statements are made and used fairly. In any event, the
tariff (the range of penalties imposed
in equivalent circumstances) would, in
the opinion of the Committee, certainly not increase and the extent of any
increase in sentence
would be limited by the upper boundary of the tariff. If
there were any increase, justly imposed, in a particular case because of
damage done to the victim which may not have been noted by the court but for
the statement, the Committee does not see such an
increase as unjust or harsh.
It would simply make the sentence commensurate with the harm done to the victim
and the punishment that
ought be inflicted in respect of that harm.
Victim Impact Statements place too heavy a burden on the Criminal Justice
176. The demands placed on the criminal justice system by the collection of
victim impact statements would differ according to the
method of collection
177. The Toronto report considered (in what seems to be an unconvincing
argument) that a potential burden on the criminal justice
system might arise
from the added time Crown prosecutors would devote to dealing with the
statements while the case was being prepared.
The report noted that the most
frequently raised objection was that of the time lapses that could occur if
statements became a requirement
for sentencing. It was argued that when an
offender appears shortly after the offence and pleads guilty it might be
impossible to
obtain a victim impact statement from the victim unless the judge
held the sentencing over to another occasion. Given the backlog
of cases, this
could then cause a significant delay in the delivery of justice. This argument
takes little if any account of the
delay before sentence that usually follows
arrest for a relatively serious offence for which a plea of guilty is
178. In South Australia, it has been estimated that the preparation of each
victim impact statement takes about 1.24 hours of police
introduction of statements could conceivably involve extra work for other
agencies, such as VOCAL and other welfare and
counselling organisations.
However, the Committee does not think that the use of VISs would place too
great a burden on the criminal
justice system, particularly given the benefits
which both the victim and the system can achieve from their use.
Satisfaction
179. The Canadian research was concerned with the issue of the satisfaction
felt by victims with the program or with the criminal
justice system generally.
The research found no difference in satisfaction levels between victims whose
statements were used in court
and those whose statements were not used, even
when at least one group of participants knew with certainty that their
had not been used as no charges had been laid. It appeared that the
participants derived benefit from the program itself and not
necessarily from
the formal use of the statements. In three of the projects victims were asked
to comment on which aspects of the
program they considered to be most helpful.
They nominated:
- the ability to talk with somebody about the offence and its effects;
- the provision of useful information about the case;
- the opportunity to explain to the court the effects of the crime; and
- the opportunity to contact someone in the event of a problem arising.
180. It is significant that in all five projects the majority of victims said
that they would agree to participate in the program
should the opportunity present
itself again. This result also held true for those victims whose cases did not
go to court.
181. The level of satisfaction with the criminal justice process most
frequently centred on the way the police handled the case,
the treatment of the
defendant (that is, whether an arrest was made or an appropriate sentence
given) and the fairness and sensitivity
shown the victim. Generally, victims
who felt that their information needs had been met were more satisfied with the
overall handling
of their cases. This was true for those who made victim
impact statements and those who did not. It was also found that there
slight but consistent increase in positive attitudes toward other participants
in the criminal justice system (except defence
Counsel) amongst victim impact
statement participants. A major difference between those who participated and
those who did not was
in their attitude toward the police. Those who had taken
part in the statements had a more significant positive change of attitude
towards the police than those who did not. Those who participated indicated
that they would be more likely to report crime in the
future than did those who
had not participated. Involvement or non-involvement in the program tended to
make no difference to the
generally negative attitude of the victims towards
the sentences imposed.
182. Under the heading 'Impact Issues', the British Columbia report analysed
the effect of the implementation of VISs on the attitudes
of victims and
offenders. These results are significant enough to warrant edited quotation at
some length:
The broad objectives of the evaluation were to review the effect of the introduction
of the VISs on victim participation in the
criminal justice system, victim satisfaction
with the process, and on the administration of justice, especially on sentencing.
The Report said:
[T]he differences between baseline victim and VIS victim [were] statistically
significant for the following measures:
. in change of attitude towards police from before to after the case (VIS
victim change was more positive than baseline victim change);
. in change in belief that the criminal justice system would show an interest
in the effect of the crime on the victim (VIS victim
change was more positive
than baseline victim change);
. in change in belief that the Courts would punish offenders appropriately
(both groups of victims expressed overall negative changes,
but the VIS victim
responses were significantly less
. in change in willingness to report crime (VIS victim change was more positive
than baseline victim change).
Furthermore we found that:
. VIS victims expressed clear satisfaction with the VIS program itself, but a
significant minority of VIS victims felt that the program
was not helpful re
providing useful information on their case or in giving the victim someone to
their case;
. there appears to be potential for offender attitudinal change in
approximately one quarter of cases ;
. there were virtually no delays in court processes or extra costs borne by
the system other than the immediate costs of the project
Considering the results [set out in the previous paragraph], it is possible to
summarise the role and impact in this type VIS program
within the overall
criminal justice system [as follows]:
[T]he VIS does not alter the criminal justice system or the victim's attitude
towards it in any fundamental way. Rather, it helps
the victims feel that they
have been paid attention to, that the system cares a bit more about them. It
may moderate generally
negative feelings about sentence, and encourage more
willingness to report crime (although stated victim willingness to report
own victimisation was high in any event).
183. One comment made in the report was that: 'It is also interesting to note
the steady deterioration of victim knowledge about
their cases as it advances
through the court system'
184. It is also noted that victims of personal offences (assault of various
levels, sexual assaults, and robbery) had consistently
higher knowledge levels
than victims of property or other offences.
185. The report noted that
... the following patterns were strong across both VIS and baseline samples in
the following instances:
(1) Victims who have said that they had been kept adequately informed of their
case showed much higher levels of overall case satisfaction
and commensurately
lower levels of dissatisfaction than victims who said they had not been kept
adequately informed.
(2) Victims who felt the sentence was 'about right' showed much higher levels
of overall case satisfaction and commensurately
lower levels of dissatisfaction
than victims who felt the sentence was 'too light'.
186. The report also stated
Two patterns related to victim impact statements which emerged within the VIS
groups were:
(1) Victims whose purpose in giving a VIS was ' to help the program' expressed
considerably more overall case satisfaction and commensurately
dissatisfaction than victims whose purpose was punitive in nature.
(2) Victims who said they had fears about participating in the VIS program also
expressed lower levels of overall case satisfaction
and higher levels of
dissatisfaction than victims who said they had no fears.
In summary, the researchers felt that the victim impact statement did not
loom large in the victim's mind as the primary factor
relating to his or her
overall case satisfaction. Commenting on the search for other factors they considered
that it would
not be surprising that the victim's sense about the 'rightness
of the sentence' (not necessarily the sentence itself) appears
to be strongly
related to his or her overall case satisfaction. But how the victim feels about
the way he or she was treated
can be of major importance as well in relation
to satisfaction. Although the VIS itself was not specifically mentioned as a
factor in victims feeling sensitively treated, the program itself is at least
designed to hear the concerns of victims.
Victim Impact Statements unduly influence sentencing judges?
187. The suggestion in paragraph 136 that VISs might assist the court in arriving
at an 'appropriate' sentence by improving both
the accuracy and the justice of
the sentencing decisions, as has already been noted, carries with it an implication
that sentences
could become heavier as a result of the VIS system. If the rights
and position of the accused may be adversely affected, the introduction
a proposal would require justification, even if it would result in the improvement
in the position of the victim.
188. As has been earlier indicated in this report, consideration of at least
some of the effects of a crime upon the victim has for
a long time been an
integral part of the sentencing process. Sentence tariffs therefore include an
element to provide for the differing
effects of crime on victims. The
Committee thinks that even though, for example, the psychological effects of a
crime on a victim
may be more fully detailed than used be the case, it is not
to be expected that this will be reflected in a substantial, or any,
in sentences beyond the range of what might already be expected.
189. One might think that the court would impose heavier sentences when given
evidence about the full impact of the crime on the
victim. This is because a
court when sentencing will not, except in exceptional circumstances, take into
account unproven assertions
as to the effects of a crime on a victim. The US
experience, however, does not seem to bear this out. Some important observations
in relation to the impact of VISs on sentencing in the United States were made
by Dr Waller
In Minnesota, victims appear to have been largely ignored in the sentencing
guideline system [the so-called 'grid' system], which
was introduced in that
State to reduce disparity of prison sentences greater than one year. [It
appears that] victim impact statements
seem to have influenced judges to reduce
sentences but not to increase them. [This on the ground that] the severity of
the offence
is considered to have been taken into account in establishing the
'grid'. Victims are permitted to express an opinion as to the
appropriate
sentence and to speak at the hearing ...
A New York Crime Victim Board survey of other jurisdictions using victim impact
statements concluded that they led to an increase
in the use of restitution.
The use of victim impact statements in South Carolina seems to have increased
sentences where the victims are surviving family
members of slain victims and
decreased them where the victim and offender know each other. The dramatic increase
population in that State is considered to be attributable to a harsh
prosecutorial policy rather than to victim participation
in sentencing.
190. As has been noted, it now appears that victim impact statements are
tendered fairly frequently by the Director of Public Prosecutions
sentencing. Generally victims have expressed themselves as satisfied with the
opportunity to place their story before the
court and it is not considered that
there has been any demonstrable lengthening of sentences because of the tender
of the statement.
It should be pointed out, however, that some submissions
expressed concern that the sentences imposed by the Supreme Court were
191. Mr Justice King, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of South Australia has
expressed concern about the intrusion of vengeance:
A major problem confronting the courts in the decades ahead will be the maintenance
of a dispassionate and rational attitude to
the punishment of crime in the face
of prejudice and pressure from sections of the public, stimulated by inflammatory
of the subject in the media. There is a tendency on the part of the
media, when there is a sentence which is, on the face of it,
lenient, to feature
angry comments by the victim or members of the victim's family. In that way
public feeling is inflamed
against the courts and the judges. The victim of
a crime is, however, the worst possible judge of what is fair and just treatment
of the offender. A person can rarely be a just judge in his own cause. A judge,
in passing sentence, must take all factors
into account, not merely the need
for punishment and deterrence, but also the need for rehabilitation and for
a fair and, if
appropriate, merciful treatment of those who have transgressed.
192. The Committee takes the view that it would be a matter of deep concern
were this report to be used as an argument for increasing
sentences or to be
seen as advocating in any way that sentences ought to be revised upwards.
Undoubtedly there are cases where particular
victims consider that the
sentences are too lenient. When, however, the reasons for sentence in such
cases are analysed it is generally
found that the judges or magistrates in
question have proceeded to exercise their discretion as to sentence in
accordance with well-established
principles. The basic principle is protection
of the public. This is thought to be achieved by the consideration of the
requirements
for punishment, particular and general deterrence and
rehabilitation. The Committee considers that another principle should be
namely, that of healing. This report will develop the concept of
healing as essential in the criminal law later.
193. The Canadian experience is, however, that very few victims use VISs for
vengeful purposes. The British Columbia report noted
that the majority of
victims do not see the VIS as a tool of retribution, but more as an opportunity
to explain their story and/or
to achieve ancillary objects or information.
Although 97% of the statements contained information on emotional or
psychological impacts,
only 3 out of the 84 examined contained comments that
could be termed 'vengeful'. Preliminary research results from an evaluation
the Montreal pilot project showed very little evidence of revenge-seeking. Dr
Irving Waller noted that in California, where victim
impact statements have
been prepared since 1974, studies seem to suggest that:
- victims prefer to receive restitution rather than have the offender sentenced
to prison; and
- victims related to offenders tend to seek mitigated sentences.
194. What one Canadian victimologist expected to result from more widespread
use of victim impact statements was more orders restricting
certain offenders'
movements in areas frequented by their victims and more sanctions designed to
make amends for the harm done
by the commission of the crime.
195. Even if some victims were to attempt to use VISs for vengeful purposes,
the Committee thinks it unlikely that a statement
would have such an effect
as to increase the sentence
beyond what is presently considered to be an appropriate sentence. Judges are
used to dealing with
matters that require them to consider whether they might
not be too harsh or too lenient because of factors such as the skill
advocate appearing, the appearance of the parties, the ability of the victim
or witnesses called on his or her behalf
to give their evidence clearly and
articulately, or the circumstances of the offender. The Committee does not think
the emotional
appeal of a VIS would influence a judge unduly, if at all. Although
it does not see use of statements increasing sentences generally,
it acknowledges
that it has reached this conclusion partly from what appears to be a sound factual
basis but also from intuition
and experience. It considers, therefore, that
the use of VISs (and their affects on sentences) should be evaluated over a
of 12 months. If that evaluation shows an aberrant result, their use
should be reconsidered.
VICTIM-OFFENDER PROCESS OF ATTEMPTED RECONCILIATION
196. At a public meeting called to discuss issues raised in the reference, the
question of victim-offender reconciliation was raised
by a member of the
audience. It then seemed appropriate to call a special meeting to give
consideration to the subject. The meeting
was well attended. At least a
majority of those who attended that meeting were in favour of victim-offender
reconciliation in respect
of first offences.
Victim-Offender
Reconciliation in Canada
197. The modern concept of Victim-Offender Reconciliation owes much to
Canadian efforts. Its aims and general history are summarised
in a section of
the Report 'Taking Responsibility'. The findings outlined in that report
received a great deal of attention around
the world. In the report,
victim-offender reconciliation was described as:
[A] process whereby offenders and victims are brought together by a trained
(often volunteer) mediator to achieve a resolution to
the criminal event which
is satisfactory to both parties. Victim-offender reconciliation seeks to:
. effect reconciliation and understanding between victims and offenders;
. facilitate the reaching of agreements between victims and offenders regarding
restitution;
. assist offenders in directing payment of their 'debt to society' to their
. involve community people in work with problems that normally lead into the
criminal justice process; and
. identify crime that can be successfully dealt with in the community.
The Report also said:
Reconciliation helps break down the stereotyped images victims and offenders
have of one another by bringing them together. When
they meet face-to-face,
there can be a mutual understanding and agreement as to what can be done about
the offence. The assistance
of an objective third party is useful in facilitating
interaction at such meetings. These mediators do not impose settlements,
rather assist the victim and offender in arriving at their own settlement -
a settlement which is agreeable to both.
A description of the aims and history of the Victim-Offender Reconciliation
Program (usually abbreviated to the acronym VORP) is
to be found in the report
'Taking Responsibility'. A copy of that description is attached as Appendix
198. The Committee has some doubt as to whether that title might not be to
some degree self-defeating as its use could be seen
as necessarily involving
a reconciliation between victim and offender when it is more likely that some
less reciprocal accommodation
would be reached through a process akin to that
of mediation. The Committee therefore prefers the wider title - and concept
of - 'Process of Attempted Reconciliation using techniques available, including
mediation' (or PAR). The Committee uses this
term, rather than an established
term like 'mediation', 'reconciliation' or 'conciliation' because of concern
within it that
these terms could be misconstrued in the context. It acknowledges
that the phrase is not as mellifluous as it might be. By good
fortune, however,
its acronym, PAR, carries with it the connotation of restoration to the status
quo. It is discussed in more
detail later.
Attempted Reconciliation?
199. An important theme of this report is the alienation of the victim from the
criminal justice process and the problems that this
causes the victim
throughout the process and long after it has run its course.
200. This alienation from the system can be detrimental not only to the victim,
but also to the offender and to the community. The
distance between the crime
and the eventual penalty, both in time and relevance, can result in an offender
losing sight of the crime.
Many offenders regard the criminal justice system
as victimising them, rather than as punishing them for a crime committed.
David has noted that:
Punishment breeds resentment more often than learning and change. Punishment
so often leaves the offender free to resent the system
that imposed the punishment
rather than encouraging the offender to look at what he or she actually did
and its effect on the
201. Many offenders have experiences within the criminal justice system that,
rather than encouraging them not to reoffend, in fact
encourage bitterness and
resentment. The victim, the person most affected by the crime, is not
obviously present and the system
itself has become something to beat.
202. Further, there is evidence that offenders, in common with victims, feel
ignored by the criminal justice system. Many have
the impression that they are
given too little information about, and guidance through, the criminal justice
The Committee was told that
the speed with which criminal cases are processed in some courts allows offenders
little or no
opportunity to explain to the court their particular circumstances.
There is no time to gain an understanding about the effects
of the crime on
others, and no time to assess what is happening to them.
203. Victim impact statements are for the benefit of the victim and the
criminal justice system. Making the effects of the crime
known to the court
improves the ability of the system to deal with them. It does not mean that
the offender will gain an appreciation
of the hurt he or she has caused a
204. A process of discussion and negotiation between victim and offender can
personalise the criminal justice process for both parties.
It allows the
victim and offender to discuss the crime (and any other problems) directly
without the interference of lawyers, police,
the courts and corrective
services, but may, if the Family Group Conference Model is eventually used,
involve contributions from
the families of each. It allows the victim to tell
the offender about the effects of the crime on him or her as a person and to
gain an understanding of why the crime occurred. It requires the offender to
realise that a person suffered because of the crime,
and allows the offender to
apologise to that person and perhaps to make amends for the crime.
205. Further, unlike the adjudication process including the tender of a victim
impact statement, a process of discussion and negotiation
allows the parties
to deal with any underlying causes of the criminal act. Often, particularly
in the case of a crime that
occurs between people who know each other, a criminal
act occurs, not in isolation, but within the framework of a continuing dispute.
The adjudication system is able to focus only on the particular criminal act,
without gaining the adequate understanding of,
or insight into, the underlying
causes of the dispute that are necessary for its successful resolution. Indeed,
the criminal
justice process may exacerbate the ongoing dispute by labelling
one person as being 'wrong' and the other, therefore, as being
'right', when
the truth may well be somewhere between those extremes.
206. Another important theme of this Report is the importance of assisting
healing for the victim. There is evidence that an attempt
at reconciliation
with the offender can bring great healing to the victim, whether or not
reconciliation - as that term is understood
- is brought about. The controlled
discussion about the effects of the crime on the person who is most affected by
it can apparently
bring great relief to the victim.
is the Process of Attempted Reconciliation?
207. The Committee uses the term 'Process of Attempted Reconciliation' (PAR) to
describe a structure
for the process of resolving disputes similar to
that which is labelled as mediation in neighbourhood situations. For the
of this chapter, the Committee has examined discussions about
mediation which, it considers, provide many useful directions for the
formulation of a process of attempted reconciliation in the ACT. But the use of
the term "mediation" as a description of the process
would be likely to be
misleading due to other assumptions normally associated with the use of the
208. The Committee envisages PAR as a non-authoritarian process which uses
a neutral third party - a facilitator - to encourage
the parties to find their
own solution to the dispute. The facilitator encourages both sides to take responsibility
it emphasized, the victim to take any responsibility for the offence)
for their dispute and its solution.
209. The role of the facilitator is to ensure a fair hearing for each party,
adequate discussion of all relevant issues, exploration
of possible solutions
and to enable parties to adhere to any agreement reached.
210. Although mediation (and therefore PAR, using mediation-like techniques)
can result in an agreement, reconciliation, reparation,
etc, those ends are not
raison d'etre
. Mediation, in its pure form, focuses on the
facilitated discussion, not on any outcome that may or may not be reached by
the parties.
However, as is discussed below, the process of discussion which
forms the basis of mediation, and which would form the core of PAR,
versatile enough to enable its use for differing causes. Its outcome may vary
according to the cause or causes it is being used
to advance.
Theoretical
Basis for Employing a Process of Attempted Reconciliation
211. The use of discussion between victims and offenders to resolve the
conflict caused by crime is becoming increasingly popular
in Europe, North
America and now in Australia. A mediation program from the Beenleigh
Magistrates' Court is being used as a trial
by the Queensland Community Justice
Program. Similar programs are also the basis of trials in the juvenile justice
sphere in Frankston
and Geelong in Victoria. A Family Group Conference model
is being used in New Zealand and Wagga Wagga, New South Wales, to attempt
reconciliation between the offender, the victim and the community. But the
Family Group Conference Model clearly offers benefits
which might prove to be
of assistance to both victim and offender. Difficulties have arisen in New
Zealand in the operation of the
Family Group Conference Model. It has lead to
a perception by victims that it is too favourably disposed toward offenders and
has caused considerable dissatisfaction of victims. On the other hand, a
member of this Committee has observed this process in action
and has been
impressed by it. As used in Wagga Wagga, it appears to have been successful,
with 93% of agreements reached being completed.
But, it is possible that the
more favourable result in Wagga Wagga may be due to the efforts of the police
officer in charge of
the process and his dedicated team and it may not be as
favourably perceived if the personnel concerned with its operation change.
Committee, therefore, does not recommend its immediate use pending further
evaluation of it and a degree of comfortable satisfaction
that the problems
encountered in New Zealand can be overcome.
212. Some commentators see this trend as evidence of a change in the nature
of our criminal justice system from either a 'retributive'
system to a 'restorative'
system, or from a 'treatment' model to a 'justice' model. Both the retributive
system and the treatment
model focus on the offender and ignore the victim.
The core element of the retributive system of justice is the imposition of
punishment by the state on the offender to deter or prevent future crime. The
victim has no place within the system.
The treatment model sees every offender as
a person who needs some treatment because he or she is suffering from some illness
or aberration.
The victim, again, has
no role in such a system.
213. The restorative and justice models, on the other hand, see the victim
as able to play an important role in the criminal justice
process. Within a
restorative system, a crime is a violation of one person by another and reconciliation
between the parties
is a priority. It is important that offenders have the opportunity
to repair the damage done.
The basis of the justice model is the view
that people who breach commonly agreed laws should receive some form of punishment
and be given the opportunity to make amends. The victims' rights and needs are
as important as those of the offender and the
214. An influential paper by N. Christie, published in 1977, proposed that
conflicts be treated as property.
disputes out of the hands of those directly involved (as presently happens)
not only denies them the right to manage
their own disputes, but also precludes
the development of more constructive and imaginative responses to those disputes.
In other words, the state should be in the background, ready to give help and
propose solutions as need be, but generally the
parties should settle their
own disputes.
215. A recently developed paradigm of juvenile justice is Braithwaite's theory
of reintegrative shaming.
Braithwaite
argues that the criminal justice system enables an offender to erect shields
between himself or herself and the
shame of the wrongdoing. An important factor
in the erecting of such shield is the absence of the victim from the criminal
justice system. It is argued that the absence of the victim removes an important
reminder for the offender of the connection between
the crime and the eventual
outcome of the criminal justice system. It has been noted that, when faced with
the impersonal,
formalised anger of officialdom, the offender tends to forget
the victim of the crime and to recast himself or herself as a victim
216. A more effective criminal justice system would be one which requires
the offender to acknowledge the shame and take steps
to put an end to it. The
acknowledgment by the offender of the harm caused by the offence and attempts
to heal the harm done,
are the mechanisms by which the offender can put an end
to his or her shame and be reconciled to society.
of Attempted Reconciliation - Issues for Consideration
to be Achieved From the Process of Attempted Reconciliation
217. Many early schemes designed to facilitate victim-offender discussion and
attempted reconciliation were designed and run by probation
services for the
benefit of offenders (for example, for mitigation of their sentences or their
diversion from the criminal justice
system). However, projects such as the
Beenleigh scheme, some schemes in Britain, and the passage quoted above from
the report 'Taking
Responsibility' indicate that schemes aimed toward bringing
both victim and offender. The initial framework of a program of
victim-offender discussion largely dictates the benefits
that the program will
218. There are a number of identifiable benefits which a victim may expect to
gain from participation in the victim-offender discussion
process. Some of the
main potential benefits are:
- Finding out more about the offender and why the offence occurred;
- The ability to express his or her anger to the person responsible;
- Where there is a continuing relationship with the offender, the chance to
work towards a resolution of an underlying relationship
problem or to sort out
other repercussions of the crime;
- The receipt of an apology and possibly some further act of reparation;
- Showing the offender, in the most direct way possible, the effects of crime
on its victims, thereby possibly influencing the offender's
future behaviour
and reducing the risk of the victimisation of others; and
- Being involved in the aftermath of his or her own crime.
219. Studies have shown that many victims have obtaining reparation as their
primary motive for beginning a discussion or negotiation
process. However, after
participating, victims regard reparation as being less important than the process
of negotiation and
discussion. They think it more important to be able to receive
answers from the offender and to assist in the rehabilitation of
the offender
by revealing the human face of the crime.
220. The offender can also derive important benefits from the process of
victim-offender discussion and negotiation. It may enable
him or her:
- to see the victim as a real person;
- to explain what brought him or her to commit the crime and apologise for
- to make up for what has been done in a direct and personal way;
- to have an immediate role in the decisions about the consequences of the
criminal action and thus to ensure part ownership of those
decisions; and
- perhaps to be diverted from the court system or achieve an alleviation of
sentence (depending on the nature and objectives of the
221. Both victim and offender may gain a sense of achievement and increased
confidence in their ability to manage their own lives
by negotiating their own
settlement.
The judicial system, by
removing the resolution of the dispute from the control of the parties, does
not provide the parties
with this experience and confidence.
222. The community from which the victim and offender come can also benefit
from the use of a victim-offender discussion or negotiation
process. This type
of process can assist the effective reintegration of both victim and offender
into mainstream society. Being
a victim or an offender is very isolating. A
victim mentality - the fear of being re-victimised, questioning what the victim
did to cause the victimisation - often induces a victim to withdraw from relationships
and cease activities that he or she believes
include a risk of re-victimisation.
The over-concentration of the criminal justice system on control and punishment
often leaves
offenders feeling hostile toward the society that sanctioned his
or her 'victimisation' by that system.
The process of discussion and negotiation
may serve to empower both victim and offender giving both the means of reconnecting
with their community. Studies have shown that victims are less fearful of re-victimisation
after mediation/ reconciliation.
The offender is able to atone personally for
the crime in a socially recognised way without necessarily being punished in
or more of the usual ways.
223. The community also benefits from the lower recidivism rate that a process
of victim-offender discussion and negotiation apparently
produces. This lower
recidivism rate is most apparent in the case of mediation or reconciliation
schemes involving juvenile offenders,
but Marshall noted that, in the case of
one scheme he studied involving adult offenders with substantial criminal
records, it was
becoming apparent that the recidivism rate for offenders who
had taken part in the scheme was between 10% and 20% lower than for
224. There is an indirect benefit to the community when victims and offenders,
who have taken part in formalised discussion and
negotiation programs, begin
to see that the system has handled their case appropriately and fairly. Umbreit
and Coates found
that 83% of victims who had taken part in a negotiation with
their offenders felt that the processing of their case was fair,
as compared
to 62% of those not offered mediation. In the same study, 88% of juvenile offenders
who had negotiated with their
victims felt that the processing of their case
had been fair, as opposed to 75% of those not referred to mediation.
A higher perception of fairness by victims might result in those victims, their
families and acquaintances, being willing to
approach the criminal justice system
should they be victimised again.
225. Financial and social benefits are derived from the diversion of offenders
from the lengthy and costly criminal justice system,
and perhaps from
institutions.
Aim of the Process of Attempted Reconciliation
226. A process of discussion and negotiation envisaged by the Committee as the
basis of PAR could achieve diverse benefits for victim,
offender and community.
This diversity also means PAR is vulnerable to its 'hijacking' by interest
groups to pursue particular goals,
detrimental to its principal goals. It is
therefore important that the goals of PAR be defined in advance to forestall
any attempt
to use it to achieve too many objectives. An extract from a paper
prepared by J.K. Matthews for the Victorian Attorney-General's
illustrates the problem:
In some schemes in the US and UK there can be confusion or loss of direction
arising from conflicting or ill defined goals. For
example, if reconciliation
is a major concern of those running a scheme the process assumes primacy over
any product in terms
of an agreement. If rehabilitation of the offender is the
basic concern the scheme may concentrate on his characteristics and
needs rather
than those of the victim. ... Similarly, diversion from court may be pursued
to the detriment of other goals.
Programs often have more than one aim, but
they need to be carefully specified if the program is not to drift.
227. Gwynn Davis was particularly critical of British mediation schemes located
within probation services. Those services, he
maintained, were 'hamstrung' by
their attempt to pursue reparation and mitigation or diversion. He attributes
this alteration
in emphasis to a desire on the part of probation officers and
sentencers to find additional options which would permit them to
'mitigate the
destructive effects of a retributive system'.
The desire to achieve mitigation and diversion
while still paying lip service to reparation has resulted in the failure of
some schemes to achieve either properly. Those engaged in these schemes tended
to experience difficulties in getting referrals,
particularly from police who
felt that they should protect the victims' interests. Victims felt pressured
into helping the
persons offending against them and the offenders apparently
felt pressured into reaching an agreement (which was supposed to be
while leaving their victims in doubt about the sincerity of any offer or offers.
228. The focus of this report is the improvement of the position of victims of
crime. Therefore, the primary role of PAR, as envisaged
by the Committee, will
not be the mitigation of sentence or diversion of offenders from the criminal
justice system. The victim
cannot merely be put at the service of the offender
in this way. This is not to deny that many victims genuinely wish to help to
rehabilitate the offender for his or her own sake, or to prevent somebody else
being victimised. However, the interests of the victim
should not be prejudiced
simply to assist the offender.
229. The most important factor in encouraging the highest possible number of
victims to embark on negotiation with offenders is ensuring
they do not feel
compelled to participate. Most researchers have identified voluntary
participation by victims as being fundamental
to all mediation/reconciliation
schemes. The key factors in achieving voluntary attendance of victims are the
provision of sufficient
information about the PAR program and plenty of warning
that PAR may be an option for use in the case. Victims need information
the PAR program (how it works and the implications for them) well before the
court or referring authority refers the offender
to PAR. Also, victims need a
clear explanation that they have at least as much to gain from the process of
negotiation and discussion
as does the offender. Patient explanation and clear
emphasis on the nature of the process are essential.
230. Ms Ann-Margaret O'Donnell, the co-ordinator of the mediation program in
Beenleigh, Queensland, emphasised that notifying victims
early in the process
that mediation is possible and providing advice on the benefits are important.
She has found that victims who
are informed of mediation only at the time of
the referral by the court, when sentencing is close, feel that they are being
into participating in a scheme for the benefit of the offender.
Understandably, they are less likely to be willing to participate
231. In the past, victim-offender discussion/reconciliation schemes were established
by corrections agencies with the obvious
intention of improving the position
of the offender (that is, to reduce the sentence handed down or divert the case
criminal justice system altogether). Although many victims do get satisfaction
from assisting in offender reforming
, it ought to be made clear to them from
the beginning of the criminal justice process that PAR has 'something' in it
and that the system is genuinely concerned that they should benefit
from that 'something'.
232. It may be that the benefits that PAR can offer both parties should be
emphasised by having the referral come from a non-aligned
third party. Some of
the most successful schemes are those in which magistrates are responsible for
referrals of offenders to attempted
reconciliation. But the decision to
prosecute is not that of the court but of the Director of Public Prosecutions,
the court's role
being to exercise its power of mitigation in sentencing or,
perhaps, if it takes a different view about reference from that of the
order referral contrary to the DPP's submission.
233. In contrast with victims, offenders' voluntarily participation in discussion/reconciliation
programs seems to have a lesser
influence on the quality of the process. Indeed,
some level of persuasion seems to result in a higher level of compliance with
agreements. Davis expressed concerns that 'coercing' the offender would affect
the quality of any apology or reparation.
However, Matthews suggests that coercion at these stages of the system can promote
a greater level of compliance with agreements
made during mediation.
The Family Group Conference on trail in
Wagga Wagga, New South Wales requires offenders to attend. This does not seem
to have affected
the overall success of that program. Indeed, Matthews' suggestion
concerning compliance with agreements would seem to be borne out
in Wagga where
offenders have paid 93% of agreed compensation.
234. Gwenn Murray, the author of the discussion paper that laid the groundwork
for the Beenleigh victim-offender pilot project,
expressed particular concern
appearing before
court or to alleviate the coming sentence. These offenders,
she maintained, should be excluded from the mediation program, because
may not invest the required goodwill into the program.
235. Ms Murray's conclusions do not match those of the Committee on this issue.
Ann-Margaret O'Donnell and the mediators consulted
by the Committee believe
that, even if the original motivation of the offender to approach the program
was a perception that it was
a soft option, the process of discussion and
negotiation is so emotionally powerful as to be able to overcome any lack of
in the offender.
236. In any event, negotiation with the victim can be far more difficult for
the offender than a brief appearance in court. Court
requires little personal
involvement or personal assumption of one's own responsibility for the causing
of harm. Appearing before
an apparently remote Judge or Magistrate is far
easier than meeting the person hurt by one's actions and then apologising for
of Participants
237. Many victim-offender mediation and reconciliation schemes target 'minor offences'
such as property offences and perhaps lesser
assaults. This is not because victims
of and offenders in serious offences are incapable of discussion and negotiation.
(In Genesee
County, New York, the victims and offenders of very serious offences
have been found to negotiate successfully.
). Instead, it is due to a fear that a recommendation
of a non-custodial sentence for a serious offence would cause the scheme to
credibility. Such a fear, Davis felt, is due to the false link drawn in many people's
minds between diversion and reparation
- that reparation is only worthwhile if
it can secure diversion from prosecution.
Unless the sole reason for the scheme is
to divert offenders from the criminal justice system, the formalised discussion
and negotiation
process need not constitute the entire consequence of the crime
for the offender. In the case of pre-sentencing schemes, as in Beenleigh,
participation of the offender in the program is simply a factor to be taken into
account in sentencing and further sanctions
can be imposed. The use of a discussion
and negotiation process in this framework means that the process may be suitable
in which there is also a risk of incarceration or other serious consequence.
238. A case that came to the notice of the Committee involved the very successful
process of negotiation and attempted reconciliation
between an incest victim
and her father. The negotiation had taken place after her father's conviction
and imprisonment and
was as a result of her initiative. She wished to put the
whole deeply traumatic affair behind her and to get on with the business
living. She chose what was clearly a difficult path but it led to reconciliation
and healing.
It seems therefore important
that the victim-offender PAR be available to all victims and offenders who may
benefit from it,
so as not to exclude, by the arbitrary application of pre-set
criteria, those who may gain great help and healing.
239. On the other hand, Davis did note that some British schemes purposely
excluded first-time minor offenders from mediation or
reconciliation programs
to prevent those offenders moving more rapidly up the tariff scale than they
would otherwise have done.
The organisers of these schemes argued that a
warning was often sufficient to prevent first-time offenders from re-offending
allowed the authorities to keep the negotiation process 'up the sleeve' of
the justice system for those who did re-offend but for
whom diversion remained
240. Many schemes specifically limit alternative dispute resolution programs
to cases involving juvenile offenders. Davis notes
that this is probably because
the concern of most of the schemes has been with offenders rather than with
victims. There is
a perception that the process of discussion and negotiation
with the victim is more likely to motivate juveniles than adults not
to re-offend.
However, he also points out that it may be in victims' interests to negotiate
with adults rather than with juveniles,
as victims are more likely to obtain
reparation from adults.
This point is
particularly important in regard to victim participation - it is important that
victims feel that their needs
are, at least, of equal concern in the scheme
as those of the offender.
241. However, it is arguable that PAR would be most successful if it is used in
a flexible manner. Trials have shown that processes
of attempted
reconciliation can work effectively at different stages of the criminal justice
system. The most appropriate point
for the use of PAR will depend on the
nature of the case and the parties. Similarly, PAR should not be permanently
limited to any
particular range of offences. All offences might be suitable so
long as there is an identifiable victim. Maximum flexibility allows
parties who might benefit from the process to take it up.
Should the Process of Attempted Reconciliation Occur?
242. The Committee believes that a diversionary (pre-conviction) PAR scheme is
the most appropriate model to trial in the ACT. Such
a model would, the
Committee thinks, bring greatest benefits to victims (who have not at that
stage been rendered invisible to the
offender by the criminal justice system),
juvenile and adult offenders (the latter possibly diverted by the court) and
the community
(lower costs and a lower possibility of recidivism). If it is
concluded that a PAR scheme involving early intervention is most
appropriate
for the ACT criminal justice system, cases that could be suitable for PAR
should be processed and brought before the
court quickly, having regard, of
course, to the procedures of the court in which the matter is being heard.
243. Suitable cases should be referred for PAR once an offender has indicated
to the court that he or she intends to plead guilty.
Most schemes do require
there to be an admission or acceptance of a finding of guilt by the offender
before a process of mediation
or reconciliation becomes an option. This,
presumably, is done on the basis that an offender will not have the proper
attitude for
a successful PAR if he or she has refused to acknowledge guilt.
The Committee believes that acknowledgment of guilt is essential
to the success
of the process.
244. The Committee recommends that the suitability of a case for PAR be decided
by the court after receipt of information from the
prosecuting and defending
245. The Committee has adopted this approach for trial because a scheme in
which intervention for the purposes of PAR occurs at an
advanced stage of the
criminal justice process (for example as a sentencing option) could mean
intervention occurs so long after
the crime that victims are no longer
interested in following it up. Late intervention could also mean that the
offender has ceased
to focus on the crime and its effect, and instead is
concentrating on defeating the criminal justice system. It must not be
that late intervention has proved successful overseas and that a
great number of interviews may be required to bring about the best
result. So, too, it must not be forgotten that pressure for a speedy
conclusion of PAR may result in its miscarrying, with
both victim and offender
dissatisfied and being denied its benefits. Therefore, the Committee believes
that PAR should be considered
for use at a later stage in the criminal justice
process only if it proves successful during the time of trial recommended in
Should Facilitate the Process of Attempted Reconciliation?
246. The Beenleigh and Frankston schemes, and the more successful of the
British schemes reviewed by Gwynn Davis, use facilitators
from already
established conflict resolution services. These facilitators have the
advantage of being enthusiastic about the potential
of a process of discussion,
negotiation and attempted reconciliation, experience in other mediation/
reconciliation situations and,
perhaps most importantly, separation from
probation and victim services. This separation from both 'sides of the fence'
a facilitating service to gain the trust - and therefore attendance at
discussion and negotiation sessions - of both victims and
offenders. It also
removes that process from the influence of the probation and victim services
and any tendency to shift the balance
either way. An independent facilitating
service would not have this potential conflict of interest, and could pursue
PAR for the
benefits which it, in itself, is capable of bringing.
247. On the other hand, an established service might bring to PAR
pre-conceptions developed through other conflict resolution work,
particularly
its ideas regarding the power balance between the parties and the desirable end
products of the formal discussion process.
Those services might also be wedded
to a particular model of the dispute resolution process which is not suited to
the distinct
aspects of the victim-offender relationship as opposed to, for
example, the relationship between neighbours.
248. The Committee considers that, at least for the pilot PAR project discussed
below, best use would be made of available resources
by making use of an
existing alternative dispute resolution service. Continued use of that service
should be carefully evaluated
at the end of the trial.
the Agreements be Legally Enforceable?
249. Whether agreements reached by means of PAR should be legally enforceable
is a difficult issue to determine. Most schemes do
not provide for legal
enforcement of agreements made in mediation or reconciliation. In Beenleigh,
this is for two reasons: first,
no legislative instrument has been passed to
give such agreements legal status; secondly, the matter returns to court where
any monetary
agreement can be incorporated into a court order.
250. There are persuasive arguments for and against making agreements arrived
at during PAR legally enforceable. Central to agreements
must be the
investigation and verification, by the mediator, of the offenders' capacity to
perform what he or she is prepared to
promise. This verified capacity is
necessary so that:
- the agreement can be monitored and enforced in the same manner as any other
court order;
and because:
- the failure of the offender to fulfil an agreement made during PAR combined
with an inability to compel fulfilment can add to the
stress already suffered
by the victim;
- the legal status of the agreement could prevent the 'double punishment'
of offenders who abided by agreements which had been
accepted by the court as
sufficiently meeting the aims of sentencing in the particular case;
- the authority of the court who referred the offender to PAR may be seen as
being flouted if the offender refuses to abide by an
agreement reached.
251. Reasons advanced against enforcing agreements reached during PAR
- legal enforceability would place too great an emphasis on the ends to be
achieved by PAR rather than on the process of discussion;
- the intervention of the authorities to enforce an agreement removes the
element of voluntariness which is essential to proper negotiation
discussion: the essence of PAR as envisaged by the Committee is the voluntary
nature of participation and all decisions;
- the promised enforceability of any agreements might create an expectation
that those agreements will be reached, meaning that offenders
who do not reach
agreement could then be penalised for not doing so;
- the irreversible altering of rights and interests of the parties in the
perhaps heated atmosphere of the discussion and negotiation
might be unfair to
one or both parties (although a cooling off period between the PAR session and
the agreement's becoming legally
binding should ensure that parties genuinely
wish to stand behind the agreement); and
- the more legalistic the end result of PAR, the more legalistic must be the
process of reaching that end - legalism and formality
may stifle PAR, as it has
arguably stifled arbitration.
252. The reasons against enforcing agreements do not seem convincing. An
offender engaged in PAR is to be entirely free to make
up his or her mind as to
what he or she can do in reparation. The facilitator must be required to
verify capacity. If, then, the
offender makes a sensible offer within capacity
why should he or she not be legally bound to perform the promise made? The
is then in no different situation than a party in a civil suit who,
after 'without prejudice' negotiation, reaches a binding agreement
court will enforce. Therefore, the Committee recommends that an agreement
reached after PAR, which has been tested by the
facilitator, should have the
status of a bond entered into as a result of a sentence imposed by a court.
However, the Committee recommends
that there should be a 'cooling-off' period
between the making of an agreement and that agreement becoming legally
enforceable.
This would enable both offender and victim to consult with legal
advisers and other people affected, and ensure that they are not
something promised in the 'heat of the moment' to be regretted later. Two
weeks should be enough.
253. The Committee believes that, in any event, there should be a degree of
flexibility which might lead, in appropriate circumstances,
to the waiver of
the offender's obligation under the agreement.
Recognition of the Process of Attempted Reconciliation
254. The Committee recommends that PAR be accorded statutory recognition and protection.
The Community Justice Centres in New South Wales and the Dispute Resolution Centres
in Queensland have the support of legislation,
the benefits of which Jenny David
said 'could not be over-stressed'.
particular relevance to victim-offender PAR, both the
Community Justice Centres
(NSW) and the
Disputes Resolution Centres Act 1990
(Qld) provide
- statements made and evidence given during mediation are not to be admissible
in court without all participants' permission;
- participation in mediation is to be entirely voluntary;
- the privilege with respect to defamation that applies during court hearings
also applies to mediation sessions;
- parties are protected from all court proceedings arising out of the
- mediators are protected from any liability so long as they act in good faith;
- a member of the police force or other officer or person is not liable to be
proceeded against for failing to arrest or charge or
offer evidence against a
person if he or she reasonably referred a dispute to mediation.
255. The Victorian
Evidence Act 1958
(Divisions 7 and 8) provides a
lower level of protection to Dispute Settlement Centres in that State. It
provides that:
- mediation sessions will be subject to a requirement of confidentiality;
- evidence of anything said or of any admission or agreement made at, or of any
document prepared for the purpose of, a mediation
session is not admissible in
court, except with the consent of all persons present at the conference; and
- anything done in good faith for the purpose of a mediation session by a
mediator or anyone working for a mediation agency does
not subject the person
to any liability or action.
256. These significant protections are invaluable for the participants of
victim-offender mediation/reconciliation sessions who wish
to pursue a full and
frank discussion of the important issues without fear of later disclosure or
court cases. The benefits of assured
confidentiality were spelt out in a
Discussion Paper prepared for the New South Wales Law Reform Commission:
Where a mediation is voluntary, a mediator's promise of confidentiality encourages
its use. It reassures disputants of the neutrality
of the mediator, and fosters
an atmosphere of trust in which all parties are willing to fully explore issues
openly and honestly
so that the potential for agreement is maximised. It is
argued that the disputants' choice of a private forum should be respected.
integrity of the private process of mediation should be recognised by conferring
on it a privilege which separates it and
protects it from public adjudication.
257. The Committee is of the opinion that the wider protection offered by the
New South Wales
Community Justice Centres Act
would be preferable, given
the position of victim-offender PAR within the criminal justice system.
258. The Committee understands that statutory protection of participants in all
and that a proposal is to be put to government before the end of 1993. The
Committee considers that statutory protection
for the participants in PAR could
be incorporated in that broader based proposal.
Process of Attempted Reconciliation Project
259. The Committee recommends that there be established in the ACT a trial PAR
project for a period of 12 months. The project should
be a court-referred
diversionary scheme for juvenile offenders who have admitted to the elements of
an offence against property or
common assault or an assault occasioning actual
bodily harm or been found guilty of such an offence. The Committee recommends
the trial project incorporate this range of offences to enable a
determination to be made as to those offences in respect of which
mediation would be most effective. The offence of assault occasioning actual
bodily harm (that is, injuries of a relatively
superficial nature) has been
included after consultation with the AFP, members of which suggested that a
proper sample of assault
cases would not be obtained by using cases of minor
assault, or common assault. These minor assault charges are rarely proceeded
with by the victim, who may, at his or her option, drop the charge. This does
not apply to assault occasioning actual bodily harm.
260. It has been shown that the victim's awareness that mediation/
reconciliation may be an option long before he or she is approached
mediation organisation is an important condition precedent to successful
victim-offender mediation/ reconciliation. Therefore,
the victim of an offence
against property, or common assault, or an assault occasioning actual bodily
harm, should be informed of
the possibility that PAR may be used and of the
details of the PAR process.
261. PAR should become a diversionary option open to the court once a young
person has been charged and, after the receipt of
appropriate legal advice,
has admitted guilt to that charge. It could be suggested as an option by the
prosecuting Counsel,
defence Counsel or the court itself. It is probable that
many of the cases for which PAR is suitable would fall within the Voluntary
Agreement to Attend Court (VATAC) scheme in the Magistrates Court and so would
be scheduled for a court hearing within a short
time after the commission of
262. If the court considers that the matter is suitable for PAR and the young
person agrees with the court's suggestion that he or
she attend PAR, the
hearing should be adjourned by the court and the matter referred to the
facilitating service. A worker at the
facilitating service should ensure that
the young person willing to participate in PAR, is made aware of his or her
rights and other
available options and seems capable of carrying out any
agreement that he or she might reasonably be expected to reach. If the young
person ceases to be willing to participate in PAR, the matter would return to
the court for action as if PAR had not been an option.
263. The worker at the facilitating service should then contact the victim to
suggest PAR. If the victim is not willing to mediate,
the matter will return
to the court.
264. After the victim is contacted, there should be a 'cooling-off' period of
30 days to ensure that both the victim and the young
person are willing to
continue with PAR. If either of the parties decide not to continue the PAR,
the matter should return to the
265. After 30 days (or sooner if the victim and young person so desire), the
PAR would occur under this system. Any agreement would
be verified by the
facilitator to ensure that both parties are willing and able to perform the
elements of the agreement. If no
agreement is reached through PAR, the matter
would return to court for a resumption of the hearing.
266. On the completion of PAR, the mediators would write a report to the court,
outlining whether or not the PAR was successful and
the details of the
agreement, if any. The agreement would then be formalised and, after a
'cooling-off' period of two weeks, lodged
with the court, where it would have
the status of a condition imposed as part of its sentence. If the court is
satisfied that the
agreement befits the crime, the matter would continue to be
adjourned pending fulfilment of the agreement. Subject to a satisfactory
fulfilment of the agreement, the court would order a full discharge of the
matter. If the offender fails to fulfil the agreement,
the matter should
wishes. If the victim does not so wish,
the court can discharge or vary the
agreement under s. 556D of the
267. If the agreement is not fulfilled because of a refusal by the victim, the
matter would return to the court, where the willingness
of the offender to
participate in PAR and his or her intention to fulfil any agreement should be
taken into account by the court
in its further consideration of the matter.
268. Referrals to PAR should be monitored by an independent official or agency.
Suitable officials might be the Community Advocate
and the Victims of Crime
Coordinator. The reason for such monitoring would be to determine if
inappropriate patterns of referrals
emerge (ie that cases that were eligible
for referral to PAR are routinely not being referred or that cases where PAR
was less likely
to be successful are routinely referred) and report on the
existence of those patterns to appropriate senior officers of the Magistrates
Court for examination and suitable action. Such patterns would, of course,
also eventually be reported to the agency responsible
for evaluating the pilot
269. Such a trial PAR program should not, initially, have a legislative
framework. Its use for a period of 12 months could determine
what changes
might be necessary to improve its efficacy and impact. A survey of
participants could be done immediately before and
after the PAR, and again at
the end of the 12 month period. Comparisons could be made with those who did
not participate in the
PAR program. Once a trial of the process has been
successful at this stage of the criminal justice system, the Committee
that it should gradually become available to all victims and
offenders who would benefit from it, no matter where a case is within
criminal justice system or how serious a crime is involved.
270. Apart from the requirement of any funding of the facilitating service, the
implementation of PAR might have some impact on those
agencies which have been
established to provide support to victims and young people. PAR might result
in such services having to
'resource' (that is, provide support and information
as to rights and other options) the parties to a victim-offender PAR. The
recommends that the Juvenile Justice Consultative Group (which
consists of representatives of a number of these agencies, both governmental
and community-based) monitor the impact of the implementation of
victim-offender PAR on these groups and report to the evaluating
body at the
end of the trial period.
271. The trial should be accompanied by a process of community education as to
the benefits of PAR in general, and of PAR on a wider
basis than is proposed
for trial in particular. The Committee also recommends that an educational
video of the process be prepared.
A video of the process of a victim-offender
reconciliation program was prepared some years ago in British Columbia. It was
illuminating
and a copy is being sought. It would need to be adapted to
Australian technical requirements.
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
Introduction
272. The principle of compensating victims of a crime has a long history. As
outlined earlier in this report, offenders payments
to victims were integral to
the criminal justice system in early Anglo-Saxon society. Its reintroduction
into the criminal justice
system was promoted in the 1950s by the British
magistrate and social reformer, Margery Fry. New Zealand introduced pioneering
legislation
in 1963. New South Wales was the first Australian jurisdiction to
introduce a criminal injuries compensation scheme, in 1967, all
other States
and Territories eventually following suit. In 1983, the
Criminal Injuries
Compensation Act
(ACT) came into operation.
Theoretical
Justifications of Criminal Injuries Compensation
273. Victimologists have proposed many theoretical justifications for the
payment of criminal injuries compensation by the State,
- a 'contract' between State and individual whereby in consideration of the
victim's relinquishing rights over any criminal dispute,
the State promises to
compensate him or her if he or she sustains injury as a result of a crime;
- welfare-type intervention to alleviate financial hardship caused by criminal
- compensation for the failure by the State in its duty to protect its citizens
from harm; and
- distribution of the losses caused by criminal violence.
274. An alternative rationale was provided by Glenn Bartley. In a speech
delivered to the Institute of Criminology entitled 'Criminal
Compensation: Quo Vadis?', he stated that in his opinion, criminal injuries
compensation serves as:
1. A formal acknowledgment of the injury and suffering occasioned by a crime.
2. A formal acknowledgment on behalf of the community that the injury and
suffering were unjustly inflicted.
3. An expression of support and concern by the community and government
authorities.
Awards of criminal injuries compensation belatedly give some justice to victims
of violent crime, and also usually have the therapeutic
effect of alleviating
various kinds of psychological injury and engendering a more optimistic and
positive approach to the
275. Whatever the justification used, there is no doubt that criminal injuries
compensation is now regarded as an integral part of
the criminal justice
system. Article 12 of the United Nations
Declaration of Basic Principles of
Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power
stipulates that States
should endeavour to provide compensation for victims of violence and the
families of those who have died as
a result of a criminal act.
Injuries Compensation in the ACT - the Theory
276. The payment of criminal injuries compensation is provided for by the
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
. The Act allows claims for compensation for
certain 'prescribed' injuries sustained by:
(i) injured victims;
(ii) any person responsible for the maintenance of the injured victim who has
suffered pecuniary loss or has incurred expenses as
a consequence of the
(iii) (a) any person who, immediately before the death due to a prescribed
injury of an injured victim, was responsible for the maintenance
of that victim
and who has suffered pecuniary loss or incurred expenses as a consequence of
the injury or death;
(b) any dependant of an injured victim or, if there be no such dependant,
any person who has incurred expense as a consequence
of the death.
277. Section 2 of the Act provides a wide range of prescribed injuries, including
damage to 'spectacles, a contact lens, a hearing
aid, artificial teeth, an artificial
limb or other artificial substitute, or a medical, surgical or other similar
aid or appliance'.
This range is wider than that in any comparable Australian
legislation.
278. A prescribed injury now means, by and large, an injury sustained by a
person as a result of an act or omission that constitutes,
or is an element
of, an offence against a law in force in the Territory or one sustained while
assisting a police officer in
the exercise of his or her power to arrest a person,
or to take action to prevent the commission of an offence by a person.
Compensation will not be paid if the amount that would have been awarded is
less than $100.
279. Section 2 also provides for compensation for property damage sustained
by a person assisting a police officer in the circumstances
described above.
There is no lower limit to the amount which may be recovered in respect of property
280. The victim must, within 12 months of the date of the prescribed injury
or property damage, or within such further time as
the Court having jurisdiction
to hear the application allows, lodge in writing in the prescribed form an application
Registrar of the Supreme Court who, if the Magistrates Court has jurisdiction
to hear the application, is to forward the application
to the Registrar of that
281. Depending on which Court has jurisdiction under s. 11(1) or s. 11(2)
of the Act, the application is generally heard by the
Master of the Supreme
Court or a Magistrate after the related criminal hearing. If no criminal proceedings
have been instituted
in respect of the relevant offence, the Registrar of the
Supreme Court has the power to determine the application. An interim
compensation before the hearing may be made.
The applicant may act on his or her own behalf
or may be represented by a barrister or solicitor (whose fees may not be included
in any award).
The Territory Government
has a right of appearance and customarily exercises that right.
Injuries Compensation in the ACT - the Practice
282. The Magistrates Court, the Registrar and the Master are all subject to the
requirements of the
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
when determining
criminal injuries compensation claims. However, the procedures developed in
the separate forums are markedly different.
The Magistrates' Court has
developed an administrative-type procedure to determine applications for
compensation. Determinations
are largely made on the basis of affidavits and
other documentation before the court, although the applicant is required to
before the court.
283. In the Supreme Court, a more formal, adversarial procedure has been
adopted. This is due, now, in part, to the decision in,
and interpretation of,
a Federal Court decision in
Pillifeant's Case
. The Federal Court
We are of opinion that it is proper to infer, notwithstanding the absence
of express provisions concerning the various matters
mentioned above, that the
legislature envisaged that such an officer would, in determining an application
for compensation,
adopt procedures akin to those appropriate to a judicial proceeding.
284. Chief Justice Miles, in
The Matter of an application by Joan Mary
Anne O'Brien
, interpreted the case mentioned above, as requiring a hearing
before the Registrar and any re-hearing on appeal by the Supreme
Court 'to be
treated much like an assessment of damages in an action for damages for personal
The rules of evidence are to
be applied and the court has no power to inform itself as it sees fit. But the
adversarial procedure
stems, it would seem, in large part from what is believed
to have been the invariable exercise by the Territory Government and
its predecessor,
the Commonwealth Government, of their right to appear at the hearing of the
application.
In fairness it should be noted that the
Government's legal representative often has taken little, or a perfunctory,
the proceedings but his or her presence during the course of the hearing
has served, it is thought, to emphasise the adversarial
nature of the proceedings
and to have lent a formal air to them, in line with that envisaged by the Federal
Pillifeant's case
285. The victim can suffer financially and psychologically from the adoption of
an adversarial approach by the Territory Government.
An adversarial approach
is to the victim's financial detriment because it generally necessitates legal
representation (with its
costs not now recoverable) to ensure that the victim's
interests are protected and promoted in the face of legally trained
opposition.
286. For some victims, the psychological trauma caused by opposition to their
claim can outweigh any benefits from the recognition
of their plight inherent
in the payment of compensation. In the aftermath of the trial, many victims
find the prospect of further
cross-examination terrifying, so that some refuse
to pursue claims for compensation. Generally, the need for the victim to be
cross-examined again at the compensation hearing is questionable.
The Magistrates Court is able to determine
the proper amount of an award in most cases without cross-examination of the
on his or her evidence.
Criminal Injuries Compensation
need of Reform?
287. In general terms the operation of the ACT criminal injuries compensation
scheme has been successful. Once applications are
listed, there is little
delay before they are heard, although there can be long delays between the
offence and the determination
of compensation for injury arising out of it.
There have been few appeals from determinations. However, claims have been
the formality of procedures has added to the distress of victims who
seek compensation. It is said that the following factors contribute
- the formality of Supreme Court hearings including the application of the
rules of evidence,
- the adversarial approach taken by representatives of the government including
the exercise of the right to cross-examine,
- the need for the victim to appear in Court for the hearing,
- delay in determination of claims, and
- the cost of bringing a claim.
288. Applications under the
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
have not led to
overloading of court lists. For various reasons - including that a judge who
deals with an application has probably
already dealt with the criminal
proceedings giving rise to the claim for compensation - they are dealt with
speedily and generally
with little formality. However, the Committee does
think that they can be made even less formal. Chief Justice Miles, in
Matter of an application by Joan Mary Anne O'Brien
Whilst it may be that in other parts of Australia criminal compensation proceedings
are intended to be informal, quick and cheap
and able to be determined without
an application of the rules of evidence, this is not the result in the Australian
Territory. Applications for criminal compensation take up considerable
time of the Registrar and of the Court. The Registrar and
the court are bound
by the terms of the Act and of the decision in
Pillifeant's case
it is not open to streamline proceedings any further without legislative action.
Whether such action should take place
is a matter that might be considered by
the ACT Law Reform Commission (sic).
289. The Committee considers that the formality of the Supreme Court hearings
has, but only on very rare occasions, caused additional
unnecessary distress to
an applicant and it may be that, on a proper view, additional distress was
confined to one case only. In
that case, over which the Chairperson of the
Committee presided, the applicant was subjected to cross-examination which,
perfectly fair, was nevertheless of a kind which the Chairperson would
describe as 'enthusiastic'. In the event it made no difference
to the result
because the applicant was plainly honest.
290. The Committee considers that there is generally no need for the
adversarial approach. The vast majority of cases are routine
in the sense that
the injuries sustained are consistent with the nature of the offence and with
what might be expected to result
from that offence. There may be cases where
the applicant is seeking to exaggerate his or her claim or is seeking to put
one that is not properly based. If that be the case, the government
would certainly be entitled and should be able to appear to
put its case by
Counsel or solicitor.
291. The Committee takes the view that the proceedings should be in the words
of Chief Justice Miles, 'informal, quick, cheap
and able to be determined without
the application of the rules of evidence'.
Generally it sees no reason why the application
could not be dealt with in chambers on the papers. The contents of the papers
before the court and the decision of the court would continue to be available
for scrutiny in a manner consistent with current
292. The Committee also recommends that in making an award under the Act the
court not be required to have regard to the rules of
evidence but be entitled
and bound to inform itself in any way that it thinks fit and to proceed with as
little formality as possible.
by the Territory
293. The Committee is of the view that the right to be represented when an
application for criminal injuries compensation is dealt
with should not be
routinely available to the government of the Territory. However, the
government of the Territory should receive
a copy of every application under
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
(as it presently does under
s. 34 of that Act). If the government considers, on reasonable grounds, that
an application has been
falsely or fraudulently made, or is exaggerated, or if
the application raises a question of law of general importance, it should
the right to seek to be heard in respect of the application. If the court,
having considered the application by the government,
considers that there are
such grounds for its opposition, the matter should be transferred into open
court, there to be dealt with
in much the same way as such applications are
presently dealt with. Section 34 of the
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
should be amended to reflect the recommendations of the Committee contained
in this paragraph. The government should be entitled
as a right to appear when
it proposes to seek reimbursement from the offender in respect of any order for
compensation which it might
be ordered to pay under the Act.
by the Victim
294. The requirement that the victim appear at the determination of his or her
application for compensation does cause some victims
unnecessary distress. The
formality of the atmosphere of the court and the open discussion of an event which
might be both painful
and embarrassing can, and do, combine to make appearance
difficult for some victims. Victims who might be required to recount the
episode during a compensation hearing may be unable to put that event behind them
and begin recovery. On the other hand,
it has been pointed out that appearance
might not be to the financial detriment of the victim - his or her plight might
obvious when he or she is physically present. The magnitude of this impact
might explain the difference in one year between the
average award in the ACT
and the average award in Western Australia, where victims rarely appear before
the Tribunal. In 1989-90,
the average ACT award was $8474; the average Western
Australian award was $6763.
The right of appearance also has the advantage
of giving many victims their first real 'say' about the effect of the crime, an
advantage which some victims find beneficial.
295. The Committee recommends that the applicant need not appear before the
tribunal deciding his or her claim for criminal injuries
compensation, unless
the tribunal deems it necessary or if the applicant wishes to do so.
296. Many compensation claims determined by the Magistrates Court, the Master
and the Registrar in 1991-92 stemmed from incidents
which occurred prior to
1991. Some of the claims determined were first lodged in 1986. Delays in the
hearing of criminal injuries
compensation claims in the ACT are not the result
of a fault in the criminal injuries compensation scheme as such, as claims are
dealt with quickly once they are listed, but are due to the fact that the
courts do not usually hear claims until related criminal
hearings have been
completed. The Committee considers that it is appropriate that compensation
claims continue to be heard after
the completion of the related criminal
hearing. This will enable all evidence, including the victim impact statement,
presented, to be dealt with by the Court. More importantly,
post-trial compensation will preserve the integrity of the final verdict
ensuring that it is not corrupted because an award of compensation could be
seen as a statement about the culpability of the accused
person, although this
is certainly not necessarily so either in fact or in law.
297. Although delay is unavoidable, it does result in hardship to some victims
and their families. Bills have to be paid and suppliers
are not necessarily
impressed by the 'law's delay'.
has raised the issue of financial difficulties caused by the payment of funeral
costs by a deceased victim's family,
using borrowed money. Some families are
unable to repay loans taken out to pay these costs until an award of compensation
made. In the meantime, interest continues to accrue or friends become anxious
for the return of their generously lent money. Other
expenses which must be
borne by victims until an award of compensation can be made include medical
costs not covered by Medicare
or a medical fund, the cost of the preparation
of appropriate reports by medical practitioners (which frequently have to be
paid at or before the time of consultation); and other expenses stemming directly
from the crime.
298. It must not be forgotten, however, that a prescribed injury may be
compensated if it is sustained as a result of the criminal
conduct of another
person and that criminal conduct is narrowly defined by section 2 of the
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
to mean an act which constitutes, or is, an
element of an offence. It seems to follow, therefore, that a trial in respect
may deal with much wider issues than mere criminal conduct as that
phrase is defined by section 2. As well, the onus of proof which
an applicant
for compensation bears is much less than that borne by the Crown in a criminal
trial - proof of an element of an offence
on a balance of probabilities against
proof beyond reasonable doubt of all the elements of the offence. This
lessens, it would seem,
to a great degree the risk of corruption of a verdict
in respect of an offence. Also, the determination of who is guilty of the
offence or whether the offence is technically established is not a necessary
pre-requisite for compensation.
299. The Committee considers that a reasonably satisfactory solution for the
problem of delay already exists in the Act. Section
16(1) provides that where
the court is satisfied that an award of compensation should be made to an
applicant but does not have sufficient
information before it to enable it to
determine finally the amount of compensation to be awarded it may, if it thinks
just, by order,
make an interim award of compensation to the applicant pending
the making of a full award. An interim award can be made at any time
application for compensation is made, including before the related criminal
trial. Such an interim award ceases to have
an effect when an order is made
under s. 5 in relation to that applicant. It would seem that the words 'ceases
to have effect' appearing
in s. 16(2) indicate that an interim award may be of
a periodical nature as well as of a lump sum. In appropriate circumstances,
therefore, it seems that the court should be able to make an award not only for
lump sums to deal with expenses incurred but also
for periodical payments in
the nature of damages for loss of earnings due to the criminal conduct in
300. An important element in insuring that victims of crime whose financial
situation necessitates an interim award is information
the legislation. The Committee understands that some crime victims are unaware
that they are entitled
to claim criminal injuries compensation. It seems reasonable
to assume that an even greater number are unaware of the availability
awards in some circumstances. The Committee is of the opinion that the presence
of a source of information dissemination,
namely the Victims' Coordinator
and the publication by the Magistrates Court of brochures informing victims
of the availability of criminal injuries compensation
will address the problem
of lack of knowledge. The Committee recommends that the Victim Coordinator
be required to advise a victim of a crime
as soon as may be reasonable after the commission of that crime of the provisions
of section 16 of the
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
and to advise
that victim that he or she should, if his or her circumstances warrant such
an application, make an application
for an interim award of compensation under
the Act before criminal proceedings against the offender are completed.
301. To minimise or even obviate the risk that an interim award might seem to
prejudge the issue before the court, it would seem
desirable to provide that
applications for interim awards should be made
and that there
should be no publicity of any kind concerning the outcome of those
applications. If a Magistrate hears such an application
he or she would, it is
thought, be disqualified from dealing with the criminal proceedings in respect
of the conduct in question.
The same consideration would not appear
necessarily to apply to a Judge of the Supreme Court separated from the accused
she would be by the jury deciding the truth although one would expect
a judge to advise the accused that he or she had dealt with
the earlier
application. It would appear to be entirely a matter for that Judge to decide
whether he or she should preside over
a trial of the offence in question.
302. The Committee's view that applications for compensation should be dealt
with usually after the related criminal proceedings
have been completed,
accords with the general proposition that criminal proceedings ought to be
completed before a civil suit arising
out of the same facts is dealt with
unless unusual delay in bringing the alleged offender to trial has occurred.
There is also another
practical reason why criminal proceedings should be
disposed of before a claim for compensation is finalised. Giving evidence
the criminal proceedings may either stir up old feelings of depression
or other psychological conditions, or may give rise to them
for the first time.
It may well be that until those proceedings are completed the victim will not
be in a position to give evidence
with accuracy as to the full extent of the
damage sustained as a result of the criminal act in question. This is the
delay in preparation of the second VIS until plea of guilty or
verdict of guilty or until very late in the trial.
303. The Committee considered whether a specialist Criminal Injuries
Compensation Tribunal should be established in the ACT. It
does not think this
is necessary. It has no doubt that the courts, including, of course, the
Master and the Registrar, deal adequately
and quickly with applications when
finally they come before them. The Committee is of the opinion that greater
efficiency results
from criminal injuries compensation applications being heard
within the same court which heard the related criminal matter. In this
it is useful to note the report of the Tasmanian Inter-Departmental Committee
on Victims of Crime which includes the following:-
The Committee is of the view that the criminal injuries compensation system as
exists in this State works very well. It can be described
accessible, cost effective, sensitive and fair.
On lodging an application for compensation a victim can expect that the hearing
of the application will be heard within a matter
The Master [of the Supreme Court who alone has jurisdiction to deal with such
applications] on receiving applications refers them
to the Director of Public
Prosecutions. With rare exceptions, the Director of Public Prosecutions always
concedes criminal conduct
and a lack of an adequate civil remedy. The attitude
of the Director of Public Prosecutions to these applications is one of the
major reasons why the system works so well in this State.
The hearing time for the application is usually from 10 to 15 minutes. Applications
are informal and the victim rarely has to
recount his or her experiences before
the Master. As a result, the applications are dealt with in a sensitive fashion
as little discomfort to the victim as possible.
304. The Tasmanian compensation scheme is evidence that an administrative
tribunal need not be established in order to ensure that
compensation hearings
are informal, quick and non-adversarial. Existing officers within the criminal
justice system, such as the
Master in Tasmania, are able to ensure that
hearings are not traumatic for victims or costly to the government.
305. The Committee is satisfied that there is not the slightest need for a
separate compensation tribunal to be established. Amendments
to the Act in
line with the suggestions made above would, it is thought, resolve any
difficulties which applicants might have in
respect of delay. There is no
suggestion that applicants have been dealt with unfairly or without
sensitivity. The Committee believes
that the establishment of a specialist
tribunal would be an example of proliferation of unnecessary tribunals and
consequent greater
and unnecessary expense. Funds spent on such a tribunal
would, it is thought, be more appropriately spent in direct assistance to
victims of crime.
306. However, two cases have been brought to the attention of the Committee in
which applications for criminal injuries compensation
brought by one victim are
heard within different courts. In one case, one perpetrator was a juvenile and
the other an adult. This
meant that criminal hearings were held in the Supreme
Court and the Children's Court. The second case involved two distinct
acts, the effect on the victim of the second victimisation compounding
that of the first. The perpetrators of the first crime were
found and dealt
with in the Supreme Court; those of the second crime were not caught. Section
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
divides jurisdiction in criminal
injuries compensation matters in an exclusive manner according to which court
has heard or will
hear the related criminal matter and whether the perpetrator
of the crime has been caught:
11. (1) The Supreme Court has jurisdiction to determine an application in
respect of a prescribed injury or prescribed property
damage where, in respect
of the relevant offence--
(a) an indictment was presented in that court; or
(b) a person was committed for trial or sentence in that court.
(2) The Magistrates Court has jurisdiction to determine an application in
respect of a prescribed injury or prescribed property
damage where, in respect
of the relevant offence, an information was laid in that court and the Supreme
Court does not have jurisdiction
under subsection (1).
(3) The Registrar of the Supreme Court has power to determine an application
in respect of a prescribed injury or prescribed property
damage where, in
respect of the relevant offence, an indictment has not been presented or an
information laid.
(4) In the application of this section in relation to an application in
respect of a prescribed injury or prescribed property damage
sustained as a
result of the criminal conduct of each of 2 or more persons acting together--
(a) the reference in subsection (1), (2) or (3) to the relevant offence shall
be read as a reference to any of the relevant offences;
(b) the second reference in subsection (2) to jurisdiction shall be read as
a reference to jurisdiction by reason of any of the
relevant offences.
Master Hogan of the ACT Supreme Court urged reform of this aspect of the
legislation in both of these cases. He argued that in cases
where the total
injury results from separate criminal activities and the total picture needs to
be considered by one tribunal, some
arrangement should be devised to enable
such consideration by a single tribunal.
307. The Committee recommends that section 11 of the
Criminal Injuries
Compensation Act
be amended to enable the Supreme Court, including the Master
or Registrar, and the Magistrates' Court, when faced with a situation
divided jurisdiction with regard to a single victim, to negotiate that one
tribunal relinquish jurisdiction to hear the application
for criminal injuries
compensation to the other so that the injury done to the victim by the separate
incidents may be considered
by one tribunal in its totality.
of Compensation
308. The maximum amount of compensation which may be awarded under the Act is
$50,000. In most cases this amount is well beyond
that ordered to be paid.
There are cases, however, also when the injuries sustained by an applicant are
so severe that that amount
is inadequate compensation. The Committee would
normally consider it reasonable that victims of crime be awarded compensation
would be no less than that awarded a litigant in a civil suit for damages
for personal injury. But it accepts that there are financial
constraints on
the government. It appreciates also that $50,000 is the maximum payable
throughout the various jurisdictions in the
Commonwealth for compensation for
criminal injuries. In the circumstances, although it would wish to recommend
an increase in the
maximum amount payable for compensation, it finds itself
unable to do so within the constraints of logic, precedent and common sense.
309. However, the Committee recommends that the Act be amended to provide
that awards of compensation to the maximum available
be made as though the issues
in question were those in a civil action for personal injuries arising out of
a tort. The Committee
makes this recommendation because it considers that this
accords with the general intent of the statute
and because to proceed in the way recommended
would provide a measure of consistency and near certainty for those who are
to advise on amounts recoverable under the Act.
310. A matter which has been brought to the attention of the Committee is
that of multiple awards of compensation for injuries
arising out of similar,
but not the same, circumstances. In at least two cases in the ACT, a case of
and one of domestic violence
, awards of compensation have been made which
exceeded the maximum amount of compensation then available. In those cases,
single application for compensation made by the victim was treated as if
a separate application had been brought for each of the
separate incidents.
The Committee understands that Government Solicitors Office of the ACT Attorney-General's
Department is
of the opinion that such awards are incorrect in law, but the
Territory has not challenged the awards because of considerations
of a political
311. The Committee recommends that multiple awards in cases where the injuries
arose out of similar, but not the same, circumstances
as gave rise to other
injuries, be given a legislative footing in the ACT. Circumstances would not
be the same if they are
'so separated in time and place that it can not be said
that each arose out of the same circumstances as the other'.
However, multiple awards of compensation
of this nature should not exceed $100,000 in total.
Publication
of details of an award
312. A question was raised as to whether the names of applicants for criminal
injuries compensation should be published in the ordinary
way. It was noted by
one member of the Committee that orders to suppress the name of the victim or
any factors that might identify
the victim are often not made. Instead the
media are required to self-censor its reports on awards. The Committee wishes
this issue for consideration by the courts and the media rather than
recommend an approach which should be adopted by them in all
313. The Committee is concerned that a substantial amount of the victim's
compensation may be taken in legal costs. The Committee
well understands that
there is no fund, such as a third party insurance fund, from which awards under
the Act and costs of applications
may be recouped. But, having regard to the
amounts of compensation that may be paid, it sees the rule against the payment
costs as imposing a heavy burden on applicants. It considers that the
procedure that it proposes for simplified hearings of applications
will lessen
considerably the amount of costs which would ordinarily be incurred in respect
of an application. It recommends, therefore,
that applicants for criminal
injuries compensation should have their costs, including solicitor and client
costs, paid by the Territory.
Costs should not be awarded where the
compensation awarded to an applicant is less than $500. The Committee
recommends that a modest
scale of costs be prescribed after consultation with
the Registrar of the Supreme Court and the Registrar of the Magistrates Court.
The same scale of costs should be applicable in the Magistrates Court and the
Supreme Court. The Committee recommends that expenses
incurred in bringing a
claim (for example, to obtain medical assessments) should continue to be paid
as at present.
314. The Committee also recommends that the scale of the amount of costs
payable in respect of applications to the Supreme Court
and to the Magistrates
Court should be reviewed annually by the Registrars of the Courts concerned and
should be varied annually
to accord with movements in the cost of living.
Representation of the Offender
315. Under s. 29A of the
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
the Territory has
the ability to obtain from the offender an amount equivalent to compensation
paid by the Territory to a victim.
This gives rise to an argument that the
offender or his or her legal representative should be given the opportunity to
cross-examine
the victim on his or her claim during the compensation hearing.
316. The Committee is of the opinion that an important application of the
principle of due process is that a person who may become
liable to pay an
amount of money to the Territory by order of a court should be entitled to
question the bases of the claim for that
317. On the other hand, the Committee recognises that to require victims of
crime to undergo further cross-examination by the offender
or the offender's
legal representative could nullify some of the healing the victim has received
as a benefit from the payment of
criminal injuries compensation or from other
victim oriented legislation. Further, it would seem inappropriate that the
be given standing to cross-examine the witness when the Territory may
not have an automatic right to appear at criminal injuries
compensation
determinations. A relevant consideration is the fact that an offender required
to reimburse the Territory for compensation
paid to the victim would face a far
heavier penalty than a person who had committed the same offence but who was
not required to
reimburse the Territory.
318. The aim of this report is to improve the delivery of justice to victims of
crime. This includes the minimisation of the trauma
caused the victim by the
criminal justice system. The Committee cannot support the increased
traumatisation of the victim on the
grounds that the Territory might take
action to recover from the offender compensation paid to the victim. It should
be noted that,
to date, the Territory has recovered no money from offenders as
reimbursement for money paid to victims in compensation.
319. The Committee is of the opinion that the only way in which the conflict
between the interests of the offender in being able
to cross-examine the victim
on a claim for criminal injuries compensation for which the offender may
eventually be liable and the
interests of the victim in not being further
traumatised by cross-examination on a claim for compensation would be to repeal
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
. It is believed that the
Territory has as yet been able to recover no money through use of the section,
so that it would be in no
worse financial position if denied the right to
recover. The Committee perceives the exercise of that right to be a real
source of injustice to a dependent who would pay for his or her crime
an amount which may not be able to be calculated and which
in effect forms a
consistency of sentencing would be most
difficult to apply in these
circumstances. The Committee therefore recommends that section 29A of the
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
and the consequential section 29B be
repealed. If this recommendation were rejected, the Committee would recommend
that, in any
case, where the government seeks reimbursement, it should be
required by appropriate rules of court to seek that reimbursement at
the application for compensation is made by a simplified form of third party
proceedings so that the traumatic effect of
any cross-examination would be
reduced to a minimum.
320. There could, however, be one instance where justice would require that the
offender be given an opportunity to further cross-examine
the victim. If the
victim, dissatisfied with the award of compensation under the
Criminal Injuries
Compensation Act
, were to seek damages in a civil action, it would seem just
that the government should be entitled to be reimbursed money it has
compensation from any judgment in the civil action in favour of the victim.
But the amount of damages which the victim would
seek would plainly be a matter
of vital interest to the offender and it would be in his or her interest to
attempt to cut down the
amount of those damages by cross-examination in the
321. The Committee recommends a compromise solution. If an applicant, having
received an award of compensation under the
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
brings an action for damages in respect of the same injury for which he or she
was awarded compensation, he or she puts himself
or herself at risk of
cross-examination in the usual way. But the Committee recommends that the
government does not take advantage
of the right of subrogation given it by s.
29 of the Act unless the victim himself or herself commences action for damages.
MATTERS FOR CONSIDERATION
322. While all that has been said can in general terms be taken to apply to
child victims of crime, the principal problem that
arises in relation to
children as victims has to do with child abuse, sexual or otherwise. So that
this abuse can be dealt with
fully and satisfactorily, it is usually necessary
for the child subject of the abuse, give evidence concerning the events said to
constitute the abuse. The Committee is therefore primarily concerned when
considering the child as a victim of crime with the child
as witness, first as
a complainant and secondly as a witness before a court.
323. In a paper entitled 'T.V. or not T.V. - the Question of the Use of Technology
in Courts Where Children are Witnesses', Ron
Cahill, Chief Magistrate, and Mark
O'Neill, then Senior Deputy Clerk of the ACT Magistrates Court, pointed out
the need to
balance the conflicting interests of those involved in a case where
a child has complained of abuse and the complaint has ended
up before the court.
They said three basic factors needed to be considered. They are:
- The need to protect the child from trauma caused by the legal process;
- The rights of persons affected by allegations of child abuse; and
- The need to enforce the criminal law and maintain social standards.
The authors then said:
It is difficult to assess with accuracy the degree to which children are affected
by the obligation to give evidence, particularly
where the person who is placed
in jeopardy by that evidence is a close relative or a person who has had a long-standing
association
with the child. It is clear that the effect on some is profound
and immediate. The courts have frequently encountered the spectacle
of children
called to give evidence being unable to utter a word. It is generally believed
that this results from the child's
sense of fear and intimidation at the task
which they are called upon to perform rather than from a reluctance to make
324. An accused person has a right to confront his accuser. Justice Murphy
The fact that the complainant is a witness satisfies one of the most important
rights of an accused which is, that in the absence
of satisfactory cause such
as death or incapacity, the accused is to be given the opportunity of testing
evidence against him.
This right of confrontation is 'one of the fundamental
guarantees of life and liberty ... long deemed to be essential to the protection
of life and liberty'.
325. Cahill and O'Neill went on to discuss the question of hearsay and its
general inadmissibility. However, the rule against
hearsay evidence is no longer
to be considered as sacrosanct. It has been considered at great length by the
Australian Law
Reform Commission. The question of hearsay evidence is also discussed
at some length in two papers presented to the Conference
by Ms Kate Warner and
Mr Stephen Mason.
Messrs Cahill and
O'Neill put succinctly the problems in prosecuting offenders. They state:
There is nothing new in the revelation that the present rules of criminal
procedure and evidence make it extremely difficult to
prosecute child abusers.
Briefly, the problems are these: Firstly (sic), the child victim, however young,
is expected (like
an adult) to tell the embarrassing tale in an open court in
front of a judge, jury, court officials, barristers and the alleged
and be submitted to a possibly bullying cross-examination. This is a terrifying
ordeal for older children, and in
the case of very young children, it is impracticable
even to consider it. Secondly, if the child can be induced to tell the story
to the court, there can usually be no conviction on this evidence without 'corroboration',
which is a highly technical and
restrictive legal concept. And thirdly, what
the child told parents, doctor, social worker or the police about the incident
is usually inadmissible in evidence because it amounts in law to 'hearsay'.
326. The authors see two approaches as being necessary for prosecutions for
child abuse. They are:
- a special set of rules for children in court for their protection; and
- a multi-disciplinary approach to avoid a multiplicity of interviews, not only
for the protection of the child but to protect and
preserve evidence and its
evidentiary weight.
327. They quote from J.R. Spencer's article entitled 'Child Witnesses, Video
Technology and the Law of Evidence':
How [can] any rule or tradition sensibly be dignified with the title of a
basic principle of British criminal justice unless it
furthers one of the following
three objects: (i) the conviction of the guilty; (ii) the acquittal of the innocent
the conduct of the trial in a humane fashion which inflicts no greater
pain or indignity on the participants than the seriousness
of the case makes
necessary. Any so-called basic principle which does not further one of these
objects is bogus ... seeking
to turn the serious business of criminal justice
into an artificial game, amusing and enriching lawyers, but detrimental to the
general public for whose help and protection criminal justice supposedly exists.
328. The same conference heard a paper presented by Sergeant George Vickers of
the Child Exploitation Unit of the Victoria Police,
who suggested that there
were certain basic measures which had to be adopted before a statement from a
child could be taken. These
- the interview should take place in surroundings in which the child feels at
ease. Ideally this would be at the child's own home
and may even extend to the
child's own room;
- the interviewers should be dressed in a casual manner so as not to intimidate
- the interviewer must obtain the child's confidence at the outset. This can
be done by playing a game with the child or having
the child tell a story;
- clear simple language should be used when speaking to the child, not jargon
such as 'offender' or 'perpetrator'. It is also vital
to ascertain from the
parents of the child what names the child uses for the male and female
genitals. It is imperative that the
words used by the child are recorded
accurately by the interviewer. If the child calls his penis his 'doodle', then
this must be
used and not replaced by the word 'penis' because the interviewer
thinks it more appropriate;
- the interview should take place at a reasonable hour. It is of little value
trying to talk to a child that is falling asleep;
- it is usually advisable that the interview take place in the absence of
the parents. Experience has shown that victims can talk
more easily about the
event when the parent is not present. It also prevents the parent from answering
questions on the child's
329. Sergeant Vickers also considered that, in most cases, the victim would
probably require some sort of counselling from a psychologist,
paediatrician or
social worker. The degree of counselling would vary, he said, from child to
child , but the investigator should
ensure that the parents are made aware of
what counselling services are available. He also said that it should be
remembered that
counselling services can be of benefit to the investigator. It
may well be that the child has blocked out the events of the molestation
his or her mind and it would only be after counselling by qualified persons
that the child would be able to relate to the investigator
the details of what
occurred. He recommends further that the counsellor and parents should prepare
the child for the subsequent
court case, stating that the child must be made
aware of the procedure that will take place and of the questions that are
to be asked. He recommended that the child should be taken to the
courtroom before the hearing so that he or she might be shown
what actually
happens inside. He declares it imperative that a conference between the
counsellor, parents, child and prosecutor
take place before the hearing. At
the hearing he recommends that when a child does finally give evidence, the
parent or the counsellor
should be present in the court to give support.
330. In another paper given at the Conference on Children as Witnesses,
referred to above (see footnote 117), Margaret Cunneen, a
Senior Principal
Solicitor for the Child Sexual Assault Unit in the Office of the Solicitor for
Public Prosecution in Sydney, set
out a detailed protocol for preparing a
child, specifically a child victim of sexual abuse, for her or his appearance
in court to
give evidence against an alleged offender. A copy of the paper,
which the Committee considers it would be difficult to improve,
Appendix 'E' to this report by kind permission of Ms Cunneen. The Committee
recommends that it be used as a basic protocol
in the preparation of child
witnesses in appropriate cases.
Evidence (Closed Circuit Television) Act 1989
(ACT)(and its
successor the
Evidence (Closed-Circuit Television) Act 1991
provide in substance that the Magistrates Court may at any stage in criminal
proceedings, proceedings under Part V of the
Children's Services Act
proceedings under the
Domestic Violence Act
proceedings in the Coroners Court order that a child who is to give or is
giving evidence may give all or part of that
evidence from a place other than
the courtroom. The general object of the Acts is to ensure that, if it is
likely that a child would
suffer mental or emotional harm if required to give
evidence in the ordinary way or that the facts will be better ascertained if
the child's evidence were given in accordance with such an order, the child
should be physically separated from the courtroom where
the defendant is
332. As part of the Australian Law Reform Commission's project on children's
evidence, a research paper on the use of Closed-Circuit
Television for child
witnesses in the ACT was prepared by Dr Judy Cashmore with the assistance of
Nicola De Haas. It was published
in October 1992. The final report has now
been published. The Committee respectfully agrees with its recommendations.
333. The Committee makes no further recommendations concerning children as
victims of crime at this stage. It already has a reference
on mandatory
reporting of child abuse which is well advanced and deals, of course, more
specifically with the question of the child
as victim. Additionally, the
Australian Law Reform Commission report on evidence is yet to be debated in the
Parliament of the Commonwealth
but it seems that many of the problems which
face prosecutors dealing with alleged abuse of a child could be dealt with if
the appropriate
sections of the legislation recommended as a result of the
Australian Law Reform Commission Report were brought into effect in the
Territory. It should be noted that this legislation has been the subject of
detailed consideration some years ago by the Criminal
Law Consultative
Committee of the Australian Capital Territory and that the evidence legislation
in the Territory was to be reviewed
as long ago as 1971 when the Evidence
Ordinance came into being following the disallowance of certain provisions of
the law relating
to evidence then operative in the Territory.
334. The Committee thinks that a good deal of the problems associated with
victims of crime and, in particular, child victims of
crime, could be dealt
with, at least with substantial success if the recommended legislation were
brought into effect.
Criminal Justice System and the Intellectually Disadvantaged Victim
335. During the course of the inquiry into victims, the Committee was made
aware of the problems faced by child victims of crime
who are intellectually
disadvantaged. The Committee does not use this expression in any pejorative
way, but is unable to express
the concept better. Staff of the Woden School
which deals with these children (who may, in fact, be young adults of 20 years)
become aware of a case where one of the children attending the school had
been allegedly the victim of a sexual assault. Police
officers from the Sexual
Assault Unit who interviewed the child were convinced that there was a strong
case to be answered by the
person accused of the assault. One of the staff
members from the school took on the role of the child's friend in court. But
interviews lasting most of the day, the case was dropped because it was
felt that the child was not a competent witness. The categorisation
child as an incompetent witness was made against the advice of the staff
member, who believed, from her knowledge, that the
child did have communication
skills which would have been sufficient for the giving of evidence given
appropriately framed and properly
constructed questions.
336. Members of the staff of the school were concerned particularly because
they felt that children were subjected to 'system abuse'
in which a child is
moved in a disorganised fashion between services because each feels that
another would be more appropriate to
deal with the abuse of an intellectually
disadvantaged child. They were concerned at the apparent lack of coordination
between the
various services which allowed this type of movement to occur.
337. The recommended solution was that there should be a 'facilitator'
appointed to protect the interests of the child. Such a facilitator
as a friend at court, and could help the prosecution and defence to question
the child, in particular by assisting in the
formulation of questions which the
child could understand. The staff of the school pointed out that there is no
'one' way in which
a child with intellectual disabilities should be spoken to
so that what is said to her or him might be understood. It is necessary
the questioner to understand the child's environment and the way in which the
child 'operates'. This means that a facilitator
assigned to assist in the case
of a child who has been the subject of abuse should be able to spend some time
with the child and
to be briefed by people who know the child well. Then, and
only then, would the facilitator be in a position to pinpoint the issues
are of importance in the case. Legal and welfare experts would be able to
assist by putting forward general propositions applicable
in all such cases but
they would need the assistance of the facilitator to ensure that the child
understands the questions asked
and can thus assist reliably in the conduct of
338. The staff of the school pointed out that intellectually disadvantaged
children tell things 'as they are', for they have no guile
and no desire to
impress. They do not embroider the evidence they give and their perceived
'incompetence' is because of the questions
asked. Simple questions leading the
child along the path of the evidence which she or he can give would be enough
to keep the narrative
going without any impression of coaching. Thus the
emphasis would be on telling the story rather than upon the answering of
If an intellectually disadvantaged child answers questions only
half understood in a strange environment with little or no support,
be, in the opinion of the staff of the school, a matter for little surprise
that the child would give incorrect answers,
and that she or he may be
influenced by the expression on the questioner's face to alter answers or to
assume that questions re-asked
meant that the first answer given was wrong. It
would follow that repetition of questions in cross-examination could easily
lead to a situation where the cross-examiner could point to
discrepancies in answers to the same question repeated a number of times.
would seem necessary, therefore, that a suitably qualified child psychologist
should give evidence concerning the way in which
the mind of an intellectually
disadvantaged child works so that the tribunal of fact can assess the value of
the child's evidence
in the matrix of the child's mental capacity and the way
in which she or he 'operates'. When the child actually gives evidence,
facilitator, effectively an interpreter, who is familiar with the child, should
be available to assist in the understanding of
his or her evidence.
339. The Committee recommends, therefore, that in all cases where a child
victim who suffers from an intellectual disability is to
give evidence,
evidence should first be given by an expert on the capacity of the child and
the way in which his or her mind works
so that the tribunal of fact can more
accurately judge the truth of the evidence given and the weight which should be
afforded it.
It recommends also that a suitably qualified person should give
evidence as a skilled facilitator, able, in effect to translate
what the child
is saying or attempting to say and able to transmit in a way comprehensible to
the child questions being put to him
or her by the court, or by Counsel for the
prosecution or the defence.
340. The Committee is engaged in a parallel inquiry into domestic violence and
because of that ongoing inquiry considers it inappropriate
to deal further with
the subject beyond noting its concern and emphasising that domestic violence is
criminal behaviour and ought
to be treated as such. Victims of domestic
violence, therefore, should be accorded the same measures of protection,
discussed in
this report, as apply to any other crimes.
COORDINATION
341. There are already established in the ACT several services which provide
assistance to victims of crime. They have earned the
goodwill of victims who
have turned to them and the respect of other agencies. The problem faced by
the ACT is not the lack of appropriate
services, but the lack of coordination
of those resources devoted to helping victims of crime. As the welfare dollar
is limited,
it is vital that all available funds are used to greatest effect:
that services are not duplicated to an unnecessary extent and that
the needs of
victims are heeded.
342. It is important that any problem with the coordination of services is not
compounded by the implementation of any of the recommendations
contained in
this report. The recommendations of the Committee are designed to improve the
delivery of justice to victims rather
than make that delivery more complex.
Coordination is a vital element in achieving that objective.
343. An important factor in achieving the objectives of schemes, such as those
proposed in this report, is the development of implementation
strategies,
including the integration of proposed measures into the existing criminal
justice system. The contrasting circumstances
in South Australia and New
Zealand following the release of recommendations designed to improve the
delivery of justice to victims
of crime illustrate the point.
344. In South Australia, the Committee of Inquiry on Victims of Crime released
its final report at the beginning of 1981. The recommendations
Committee of Inquiry were well conceived and well received by agencies within
the criminal justice system and by the community.
However, a lack of funding
and coordination for the implementation of the suggested reforms meant that
coherent implementation of
the proposals of the Committee did not occur until
some time later.
345. Section 12 of New Zealand's Victims of Offences Act
provided for the establishment of a Victims Task Force. Section 13 of that
Act set out its functions:
13. Functions of Victims Task Force - The functions of the Victims Task Force
shall be as follows:
(a) As a matter of priority, to work with Judges, Registrars, prosecutors,
Government departments, and community organisations involved
with victims in
order to develop guidelines to promote the principles set out in sections 3 to
11 of this Act;
(b) To assess the adequacy of existing services available to victims and to
identify any shortcomings;
(c) To co-ordinate and promote the distribution of comprehensive information
(d) To consider whether further measures are needed to assist victims;
(e) To receive requests for financial assistance from community organisations
working to assist victims and to make recommendations
on those requests to the
Secretary for Justice;
(g) To consider any other matter relating to victims referred to it by the
minister of Justice;
(h) To make recommendations to the Minister of justice, as it sees fit, on
matters relating to victims.
The Task Force is also responsible for evaluation of the victims of crime
scheme established by the Victims of Offences Act. Its
role in this area is
discussed in greater detail in the chapter dealing with evaluation.
346. The Task Force has wholly accomplished its aim to achieve acceptance of
the principles set out in the Act by governmental departments
agencies. The criminal justice system in New Zealand has become far more
victim conscious than when the Act was first
passed. Departments and agencies
no longer require supervision to ensure that they take into account the needs
of victims of crime.
347. The Committee consider that it is vital to the successful operation of the
scheme proposed in this report that a statutory office
be created with the
responsibility for functions similar to those performed by the Victims Task
Force in New Zealand. This officer
might be called the 'Victims of Crime
Coordinator'. The Committee thinks that the appointment of such a Coordinator
would be an
important factor in ensuring a complete implementation of the
recommendations of this report, in particular by:
- Formally recognising the important position of victims in the criminal
justice system;
- Ensuring that individual victims are given the advice and assistance they
need to participate in the criminal justice process;
- Promoting the necessary attitudinal changes within the criminal justice
- Giving a formal voice to victims within the criminal justice system;
- Coordinating existing and proposed services and resources.
348. It is essential that the person nominated to the position of Victims of
Crime Coordinator have an intimate knowledge of the
workings of the criminal
justice system and the various needs of victims of crime.
349. The Committee believes that, unlike the New Zealand Victims Task Force,
the Coordinator would have a permanent role. Some of
the tasks that the
Victims of Crime Coordinator might perform are:
- Ensuring that a victim is adequately informed concerning the progress of the
criminal proceedings in which he or she is involved;
- Ensuring that victim impact statements are made when appropriate;
- The creation of a central register of services which can provide assistance
to victims of crime;
- The coordination of services provided to victims to ensure their effective
and efficient delivery;
- The education of officers within the criminal justice system to ensure
adequate recognition of victims and their needs;
- Acting as a central contact point for victims of crime (for example for the
provision of general information and as contact officer
for more specific
details about the progress of a particular case);
- Identifying those situations where necessary information is not reaching
victims and relatives and develop protocols for the provision
of information;
- Ensuring as far as is possible that victims of crime with special needs have
those needs met;
- Ensuring as far as is possible that those victims who should have been
offered the opportunity to complete a victim impact statement
have in fact been
offered this opportunity; and
- 'Vetting' certain victim impact statements to ensure generally that they
accurately reflect the effects of the crime experienced
by the victims.
350. It is important that from the outset victims be directed toward the
services best suited to their particular needs. This will
only be possible
after the identification and listing of the range of services available. The
cataloguing of victims' services will
enable the service-providers and the
government to identify which services are available, whether there is any
duplication of services
and whether there are any victims whose needs are not
being met by existing services. Obtaining this information would allow the
development of effective and cost-efficient network of services for victims.
351. The Committee has identified as being essential to the development of a
more victim-oriented criminal justice system the education
of officers of the
criminal justice system and, more generally, the community, about victims of
crime and their needs. The Coordinator
will occupy an ideal position from
which to promote this education on a continuing basis. For example, the
Coordinator might assist
in the development of education programs for officers
within or entering the criminal justice system and, perhaps, more generally,
programs suitable for school children and community groups.
352. This report has identified the adequate provision of information as being
the most important factor in determining whether victims
are satisfied with the
operation of the criminal justice system. The Committee believes the
Coordinator will have two important
functions in ensuring that victims receive
adequate information. As well as being ideally placed to provide victims with
information about the operation of the criminal justice system and
where a victim might obtain appropriate assistance, the Coordinator
an important role in helping organisations such as the Australian Federal
Police and the Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions identify those
victims or relatives who should be informed of the progress of a particular
case but who currently do
not receive this information.
353. The Committee believes the Coordinator might play a role in the
identification of victims who might have special or additional
identified by the officers of the criminal justice system. An example might be
the families of murder victims or victims
of serious assault who might need
access to outreach services (such as that provided by VOCAL) or counselling
354. As stated earlier in this report, the Committee recognises that it is not
practical to offer all victims the option of preparing
a victim impact
statement. The Coordinator will play a role in ensuring that victims who
should be offered the opportunity to prepare
statements are given that
opportunity, both by assisting in the preparation of guidelines and in
conducting 'spot checks'.
355. The Victims of Crime Coordinator should be an independent officer within
the criminal justice system. However, because the
role of the Coordinator will
be dependant on close connections with the Australian Federal Police, the
Committee recommend that the
Coordinator be allocated an easily accessible
office within the City Station of the Australian Federal Police. This
arrangement
operates very successfully in New Zealand, allowing the
coordinators of the victim outreach services easy access to police officers
police records. It also encourages police officers to remember the existence
of a victims' coordinator.
356. The Coordinator should develop protocols with the Australian Federal
Police and the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
for the exchange
of information. It is particularly important that the Coordinator be given
access to crime reports of the AFP to
enable the identification of victims who
might need special consideration or assistance. The New Zealand coordinator
to the crime reports from the previous 24 hours. That system
appears to be working well.
IMPLEMENTATION
Legislative
Change Required
357. While many of the recommendations in this report can be implemented by
administrative rather than legislative action, the Committee
considers that it
would be preferable that some of the recommended measures be given a
legislative framework.
358. The first of these proposed legislative changes is the creation of the
position of the Victims of Crime Coordinator, as a statutory
office, with
suitable guidelines for the operation of that office. The Committee recommends
that these guidelines include the Declaration
of Victims' Rights, described in
detail earlier in this report. The placement of the Declaration within a
legislative framework
will ensure that victims have, and are seen by relevant
agencies to have, actionable rights within the criminal justice system.
this respect, the Committee therefore is of the opinion that the ACT should
follow New Zealand, where the Declaration of Victims
Rights were included in
the Victims of Offences Act, rather than South Australia, where the victim's
right to complete a victim impact
statement and to have put before the bail
authority his or her need for protection are the only provisions that have been
given legislative
359. As detailed earlier, the Committee is of the opinion that statutory
recognition ought to be given to victim-offender PAR. The
Committee is of the
opinion that such legislation should be modelled upon that of New South
360. Some amendments to ACT legislation consequential upon the recommendations
of the Committee will be required. These are set
out in the legislation
attached to this report at Appendix 'F'.
361. The effective and efficient delivery of justice to victims of crime cannot
be completely achieved by legislative change alone.
Nor will administrative
changes alone be sufficient to ensure that victims are treated fairly. The
most important single factor
in ensuring that victims of crime are given the
treatment they deserve is attitudinal change by the officers within the
justice system. Victim-orientated action would become more a matter
of course for officers who hold victim-orientated views.
362. Of course, the types of administrative changes suggested in this report
would provide the framework for officers to cater to
a greater extent for the
needs of victims of crime. Education of officers is important to ensure that
they become committed to working
within this framework. Victims need to feel
that officers of the criminal justice system are genuinely interested in the
their welfare.
The Committee therefore recommends that the agencies of the
criminal justice system in particular emphasis the importance of education
their officers in victims' issues.
363. There are a number of options the government could consider to provide
funding of the proposals in this report. The Committee
considers that it would
be desirable for the proposals of this report to be, as far as is possible,
self-funding. It expects PAR,
in particular, to be able to save the costs of
bringing certain young offenders to court and, perhaps, the follow-up costs of
supervision
and attendance orders. It realises, however, that these savings
cannot be directly retrieved and used to pay the costs of, for example,
victims of crime coordinator and increased costs to the Australian Federal
Police of collecting victim impact statements.
364. The Committee recommends that the government consider the adoption of a
system of levies on fines, whether on-the-spot fines
or fines ordered to be
paid by a court. It considers that a suitable levy might be three per cent on
top of existing fines. Therefore,
if a person is fined $300, the fine he or
she would actually pay into the Treasury would be $309. The nine dollar levy
directed into a fund specifically for use in the victims' programs
suggested in this report. The non-payment of the levy should
not, however,
result in imprisonment.
365. Evaluation of the operation of any new proposal or policy is essential in
determining whether that proposal is meeting its goals
effectively and
efficiently. Therefore, evaluation of whenever proposals are implemented will
be required to determine:
- whether the stated goals are being met;
- what improvements, if any, might be made.
366. The implementation of the recommendations of this report would result in
significant changes to the operation criminal justice
system with regard to its
delivery of justice to victims. The recommendations are designed to improve
the delivery of justice and
related services to victims of crime. In addition,
they are intended to help the victim to be healed of the effects of
victimisation.
367. If all the recommendations of this report are implemented, several related
components will require evaluation, monitoring and,
particularly in the case of
PAR, expected expansion of the proposals to broader applications. Several
options for evaluation and/or
monitoring are possible.
evaluation required by legislation
368. In New Zealand when a comprehensive package of reforms, akin to those
proposed by Committee, were implemented, several provisions
of the relevant
legislation (Victims of Offences Act 1987) dealt specifically with evaluation.
Sections 12-15 established the Victims
Task Force and detailed its functions.
The Task Force comprises the Secretary for Justice (or nominee), the
Commissioner of Police
(or nominee) and up to 4 other people appointed by the
Minister of Justice. The functions of the Task Force are:
(a) As a matter of priority, to work with Judges, Registrars, prosecutors,
Government departments, and community organisations involved
with victims in
order to develop guidelines to promote the principles set out in sections 3 to
11 of this Act;
(b) To assess the adequacy of existing services available to victims and to
identify any shortcomings;
(c) To co-ordinate and promote the distribution of comprehensive information
(d) To consider whether further measures are needed to assist victims;
(e) To receive requests for financial assistance from community organisations
working to assist victims and to make recommendations
on those requests to the
Secretary for Justice;
(f) To consider whether provision should be made in law, in cases where an
offender is sentenced to make reparation pursuant to section
22 of the Criminal
Justice Act 1985, for the Crown to make an immediate advance to the victim of
part of the sum ordered to be paid
by the offender;
(g) To consider any other matter relating to victims referred to it by the
minister of Justice;
(h) To make recommendations to the Minister of justice, as it sees fit, on
matters relating to victims.
369. The Task Force is funded by a 1 percent levy on all fines and was to
cease to exist on 1 March 1993.
370. The Victims Task Force appears to have been very successful in ensuring
the effective implementation and acceptance of the measures
of the Victims of
Offences Act. VOCAL, in one of its submissions to the Committee, argued that
this is an appropriate and successful
model for evaluation of any measures
introduced in the ACT. However, many of the functions of the Task Force are
those that are
recommended in this report as suitable to be dealt with by the
Victims of Crime Coordinator. Indeed, function (c) of the Task Force
specifically to coordination. This is probably because the New Zealand
legislation is very much a 'framework' law around
which administrative measures
(which had not been developed at the time of enactment) would be developed. In
the case of the ACT,
many of these administrative matters have been developed
and other protocols, such as the day-to-day working relationship between
Victims of Crime Coordinator and the Police , are properly a matter for the
Coordinator and Police to determine.
371. Given therefore that the role needed in the ACT is strictly limited to
evaluation and monitoring, it may not be necessary to
establish a body as
formal and comprehensive as the Victims Task Force.
by Victims of Crime Coordinator
372. The Victims of Crime Coordinator would be required to report to Government
(through the Attorney-General) in an annual report.
In many ways the
Coordinator would be in an ideal position to offer an opinion as to whether the
goals of the proposed measures
were being met. That annual report would be one
important part of the evaluation and monitoring process. However, that report
not be sufficient alone. A key indicator of the proposed reforms is the
usefulness of the Office of the Victims of Crime Coordinator.
Evaluation,
therefore, at arms length from that Office would be necessary to gain a
complete picture of how the reforms are performing.
Similar arguments would
apply to any suggestion that any single agency (such as the AFP, DPP or, even,
VOCAL) should undertake sole
responsibility for evaluation and monitoring.
by a consultant
373. This option would be most suitable for a one-off study of those measures
implemented. This type of study could examine factors
such as victim
'satisfaction' with the new measures (for example, by questionnaire). A report
on the findings would then be made
to Government. This type of study could
also include 'audits' of the efficiency of the agencies involved in
administering the measures.
Due to the cost involved in hiring suitable
consultants, this option is not suitable for continuing monitoring. The
should be capable of carrying out a scientific evaluation and should
be, for preference, a trained criminologist with statistical
by a non-statutory committee
374. This option should involve features of, particularly, the two options
outlined above. The committee should include representatives
of the agencies
responsible for administering the proposals (AFP, DPP, Corrective Services,
Victims of Crime Coordinator, etc), the
Attorney-General's Department, Treasury
and victims' representatives. This type of Committee would be indispensable
for continuing
liaison and monitoring functions and would be an expected
feature of the administrative arrangements to be developed by the agencies.
Such a committee could, if also appointed by the Attorney-General, formally
evaluate the reforms at specified times. That evaluation
would have the
benefit of the continuing insights and experiences of the relevant agencies, as
well as input from victims' groups
and other interested parties. This option
could work well at a relatively low cost, although it may be appropriate, at
the first formal evaluation, to have the assistance of an independent
adviser/assessor to establish suitable and independent methodologies
evaluation.
375. The Committee has not made a specific recommendation concerning complaints
or administering any of
the proposed reforms. Avenues already exist for formal complaints to be made
in respect to obligations under
legislation or arising from inappropriate
behaviour. The Committee does not expect any need for a, separate complaints
Similarly, the Committee does not see a role for the evaluation
committee to be involved as a complaints forum (although, no doubt,
presence of complaints, would be a relevant factor in evaluating the
Recommendation
376. The Committee recommends that the Attorney-General appoint a non-statutory
Committee, called the Victims of Crime Evaluation
Committee, to monitor and
evaluate the implementation and operation of the scheme to assist victims of
crime, the component elements
of which have been recommended in this report.
377. The Victims of Crime Evaluation Committee should comprise senior
representatives of the following agencies:
- Victims of Crime Coordinator;
- Australian Federal Police (ACT Region);
- Director of Public Prosecutions (ACT);
- ACT Corrective Services;
- Community Advocates Office;
- Juvenile Justice Section of the Department of Housing and Community
- Attorney-General's Department;
- ACT Treasury;
- ACT Supreme Court;
- ACT Magistrates Court;
- Mediation Service; and
- Victims of Crime Assistance League.
378. The Victims of Crime Evaluation Committee should initially meet six months
after the tabling of this report. An independent
Chairperson might be drawn
from interested staff of the Law Schools of the Australian National University
or the University of Canberra.
If the Chairperson is to be a member of the
Committee, he or she might be nominated by Committee at its first meeting. It
meet monthly thereafter until the completion of the PAR pilot project.
It should present its report to the Attorney-General within
one calendar month
of its final meeting. Secretariat facilities should be provided by the
Attorney-General's Department.
379. As part of its monitoring and evaluation function, the Committee would
particularly consider:
- The suitability of the form of victim impact statement being used;
- Whether victims who would particularly benefit from making a victim impact
statement are generally being given the opportunity
to do so and, if not, the
desirability of extending the coverage of victim impact statements in the light
of availability of funds;
- The reports of the Juvenile Justice Consultative Group concerning the impact
the implementation of PAR on those agencies which
support young people in
particular;
- The reports of the Community Advocate and the Victims of Crime Coordinator
regarding patterns of referral to PAR; and
- The desirability of extending the PAR project to other offenders and offences
on the completion of the pilot project.
It could also consider any other matter arising from this report it considered
THE VICTIMS OF CRIME
380. Enough has been said in this report to show that many victims of crime are
gravely or seriously injured by the crimes committed
against them. Still
others are moderately or slightly injured. Some emerge from the experience
unscathed, others do not. For the
injured there must be healing. The
Committee recognises that its proposals will not effect healing in many cases
but it considers
that the implementation of those proposals will go some
distance towards healing all victims and will go a much greater distance
healing a considerable percentage of them.
381. While considering the reference, a Committee member utilised a
'brainstorming' session involving a Community Counselling graduate
class at the University of Canberra. Most of the class were women with
experience in many community fields. A very short
session produced a large
number of proposals which are either reflected in this report, or are at least
similar to many of its recommendations.
382. The Committee also used a 'brainstorming' session to get reactions from
the Conflict Resolution Service. It is satisfied that
it obtained similarly
useful results which might be borne in mind as useful guidelines.
383. The Committee considers that if its recommendations are put into effect
much healing will be effected. If all victims are accorded
the full measure of
dignity to which they are entitled, if appropriate resources are made available
to meet their needs, if some
practical measure of compensation is awarded them,
if they are made aware by adequate information of the separate steps in the
process as it concerns them and if they are enabled to contribute
their views to that process at appropriate stages, it is the strongly
of the Committee that victims of crime in the Territory will receive much
effective healing. If they are treated with
unfailing courtesy at all stages
of the process, the criminal law will be an instrument of healing and not an
instrument of vengeance
or retribution, both of which have failed in the past
and will fail in the future to help victims of crime in any way or to
rehabilitate
the offender.
384. The Committee sees PAR as a particularly powerful tool to bring about
reconciliation between victim, offender and the community.
It does not suggest,
for it would be impertinent to do so, that victims must accord forgiveness to
offenders, but many might,
and some certainly will, find themselves able to
do so whether at an early stage of the prosecution process or after conviction
when sentence has been served. As the incest victim referred to earlier
put it: after her father had completed his sentence, she wanted to get the whole
business behind her so that she could get
on with the business of living.
385. The Committee felt it was involved in a worldwide movement aimed at more
justly dealing with victims of crime. It sees this
as an opportune time to
join in that movement and the Committee is grateful to have had the opportunity
to make some contribution
NATIONS DECLARATION OF BASIC PRINCIPLES OF JUSTICE FOR VICTIMS OF CRIME AND
ABUSE OF POWER'
Victims of Crime
1. "Victims" means persons who, individually or collectively, have suffered
harm, including physical or mental injury, emotional
suffering, economic loss
of substantial impairment of their fundamental rights, through acts or
omissions that are in violation of
criminal laws operative within Member
States, including those laws proscribing criminal abuse of power.
2. A person may be considered a victim, under this Declaration, regardless of
whether the perpetrator is identified, apprehended,
prosecuted or convicted and
regardless of the familial relationship between the perpetrator and the victim.
The term "victim" also
includes, where appropriate, the immediate family or
dependants of the direct victim and persons who have suffered harm in
intervening
to assist victims in distress or to prevent victimisation.
3. The provisions contained herein shall be applicable to all, without
distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, age, language,
nationality, political or other opinion, cultural beliefs or practices,
property, birth or family status, ethnic or group
origin, and disability.
to justice and fair treatment
4. Victims should be treated with compassion and respect for their dignity.
They are entitled to access to the mechanisms of justice
and to prompt redress,
as provided for by national legislation, for the harm that they have
5. Judicial and administrative mechanisms should be established and
strengthened where necessary to enable victims to obtain redress
through formal
or informal procedures that are expeditious, fair, inexpensive and accessible.
Victims should be informed of their
rights in seeking redress through such
mechanisms.
6. The responsiveness of judicial and administrative processes to the needs of
victims should be facilitated by:
(a) Informing victims of their role and the scope, timing and progress of the
proceedings and of the disposition of their cases,
especially where serious
crimes are involved and where they have requested such information;
(b) Allowing the views and concerns of victims to be presented and considered
at appropriate stages of the proceedings where their
personal interests are
affected, without prejudice to the accused and consistent with the relevant
national criminal justice system;
(c) Providing proper assistance to victims throughout the legal process;
(d) Taking measures to minimise inconvenience to victims, protect their
as that of their
families and witnesses on their behalf, from intimidation and retaliation;
(e) Avoiding unnecessary delay in the disposition of cases and the execution of
orders or decrees granting awards to victims.
7. Informal mechanisms for the resolution of disputes, including mediation,
arbitration and customary justice or indigenous practices,
should be utilised
where appropriate to facilitate conciliation and redress for victims.
Restitution
8. Offenders or third parties responsible for their behaviour should, where
appropriate, make fair restitution to victims, their
families or dependants.
Such restitution should include the return of property or payment for the harm
or loss suffered, reimbursement
of expenses incurred as a result of the
victimisation, the provision of services and the restoration of rights.
9. Governments should review their practices, regulations and laws to consider
restitution as an available sentencing option in criminal
cases, in addition to
other criminal sanctions.
10. In cases of substantial harm to the environment, restitution, if ordered,
should include, as far as possible, restoration of
the environment,
reconstruction of the infrastructure, replacement of community facilities and
reimbursement of the expenses of relocation,
whenever such harm results in the
dislocation of a community.
11. Where public officials or other agents acting in an official or
quasi-official capacity have violated national criminal laws,
the victims
should receive restitution from the State whose officials or agents were
responsible for the harm inflicted. In cases
where the Government under whose
authority the victimising act or omission occurred is no longer in existence,
the State or Government
successor in title should provide restitution to the
Compensation
12. When compensation is not fully available from the offender or other
sources, States should endeavour to provide financial compensation
(a) Victims who have sustained significant bodily injury or impairment of
physical or mental health as a result of serious crimes;
(b) The family, in particular dependants of persons who have died or become
physically or mentally incapacitated as a result of such
victimisation.
13. The establishment, strengthening and expansion of national funds for
compensation to victims should be encouraged. Where appropriate,
other funds
may also be established for this purpose, including those cases where the State
of which the victim is a national is
not in a position to compensate the victim
for the harm.
14. Victims should receive the necessary material, medical, psychological and
social assistance through governmental, voluntary,
community-based and
indigenous means.
15. Victims should be informed of the availability of health and social
services and other relevant assistance and be readily afforded
16. Police, justice, health, social service and other personnel concerned
should receive training to sensitise them to the needs
of victims, and
guidelines to ensure proper and prompt aid.
17. In providing services and assistance to victims, attention should be given
to those who have special needs because of the nature
of the harm inflicted or
because of factors such as those mentioned in paragraph 3 above.
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, CANADA, VICTIM IMPACT STATEMENTS IN CANADA.
VOLUME 7. SUMMARY OF FINDINGS, DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, TORONTO,
'DESCRIPTIONS
OF THE FIVE COMPLETED PROJECTS'
The Victoria Police Department Project targeted victims of eight primary
categories of crime, provided that a charge had been laid:
sexual assault,
nonsexual assault, robbery, residential breaking and entering, theft under
$1000, Theft over $1000, impaired driving
cases where a victim had been
identified, and homicide. Other minor categories such as wilful
damage/mischief were added if they
seemed significant and/or if they were
included with one of the above targeted offences.
In the Victoria project, a police constable, supported by a clerk, had overall
responsibility for contacting the victim and arranging
for the preparation of
the statement. Each morning the constable received a copy of the "Arrest and
Court Docket Sheet". The constable
identified those charges falling into the
categories targeted by the program, obtained the relevant file from the records
and opened a victim impact statement file. The constable then
statement. (If the individual was a victim of a sexual assault or spouse
abuse, a female constable would contact the
victim and conduct any subsequent
interviews.)
If the victim agreed to participate, an appointment was made for a personal
interview. Following the interview, the constable prepared
a victim impact
statement based on the notes taken during the interview. Unless an update of
the statement was completed, victims
usually did not see or sign the prepared
statement. This statement was then delivered by the court liaison officer to
office, and its use became a decision for the crown counsel handling
The North Battleford Victim Impact Statement Project was staffed by a civilian
coordinator and clerk who were employed specifically
for their positions. They
were based at RCMP quarters with direct access to police files. Eight broad
categories of offences were
targeted for inclusion in the project. Because the
number of offences occurring in the eight categories exceeded the capacity of
one coordinator, not all offences could be included in the program. As a
result, the coordinator systematically selected a sample
of incidents from each
of the offence categories. The offences and their respective sample size were
as follows:
1) assault -- every third assault occurrence (excluding spousal, sexual and
child assaults) for which a victim could be identified;
2) spousal assault -- all spousal assault incidents;
3) child assault -- all child abuse incidents;
4) sexual assault -- all sexual assault incidents;
5) robbery -- all robberies for which a victim could be identified;
6) breaking and entering -- every third break and enter;
7) theft over $1000 -- all offences in this category for which a victim could
be identified;
8) motor vehicle theft -- every third motor vehicle theft for which a victim
could be identified.
Victims in the above eight categories were asked to participate in the program,
regardless of whether charges were laid in their
Each morning the victim impact statement coordinator received a copy of the
"Police Information Retrieval System" printout. The
coordinator screened the
offences and identified those eligible for inclusion in the program. The
coordinator attempted to contact
the victim and set up an interview as soon as
possible by telephone or by personal visit. Interviews were conducted by the
coordinator
at the victims home with the aid of an "offence-specific" victim
impact statement questionnaire. Unlike all the other projects,
which used only
one statement form, the North Battleford project developed five different forms
to be used for various offences.
Following the interview, the victim was asked
to sign the statement. The coordinator prepared a narrative summary, which was
to the statement questionnaire, and both documents were then forwarded
to the RCMP Court Liaison Officer or Youth Liaison Office
and the Crown
Prosecution Unit. Use or nonuse of the statement then became a decision for
the prosecutor handling the case.
In cases where victims completed statements but the offenders were never
apprehended, the statements remained on the program files
and were closed only
when the police files on the incidents were closed.
The Winnipeg Victim Impact Statement Project commenced in 1986 and was housed
adjacent to the Criminal Prosecutions Division of the
Manitoba Attorney
General's Department. The project was staffed by one full-time victim impact
worker, who relied on the Winnipeg
Police Department Court Unit staff to
isolate and forward eligible cases. Victims were eligible for inclusion in the
the following criteria were met:
1) The offence was one of assault causing bodily harm, assault with a weapon,
aggravated assault, sexual assault, or robbery (noncommercial).
2) The offender had been arrested and charged.
3) The offence took place in one of three of Winnipeg's six police districts.
4) The victim was at least 14 years of age and the offender was an adult.
Once eligible victims were identified, the worker attempted to contact each one
to make an appointment to complete a statement.
Interviews using an
unstructured questionnaire were undertaken. At the conclusion of the
interview, the victim was asked to read
the worker's notes for accuracy, sign
and date the questionnaire.
Following the interview, the worker prepared a concise narrative based on the
questionnaire notes, to serve as the actual victim
impact statement. Unlike
all the other projects, where the victim impact statement was given to the
crown attorney (i.e., entered
into the system) as soon as it was completed, the
Winnipeg project introduced the statement only after a disposition of guilt and
just prior to sentencing. More importantly, copies of the statement were given
not only to the prosecutor but also to the defence
counsel and the judge. This
difference represents a departure from the philosophy of the other projects.
In Winnipeg, the statement
was considered to be the property of the victim. At
all of the other sites, statements were the property of the court and used at
the discretion of the crown attorney. Thus, if the crown attorney did not use
the statement, the judge and defence counsel were
unaware of its existence. In
Winnipeg, the crown attorney still used discretion when deciding whether to
refer to the statement
during submission to sentence; however, in all cases the
defence attorney and judge were aware of the existence of a statement at
time of sentencing.
For those cases where sentencing occurred as a continuation of the trial, the
worker relied on the crown attorney to request the
statement that was delivered
immediately for distribution.
The Calgary Victim Impact Statement Project commenced in February 1986 and
operated out of the Calgary Police Department, Community
Services Section. The
project was staffed by a full-time civilian coordinator and featured a
mail-out/mail-back system that required
victims to complete the statements
themselves with no personal assistance from project staff.
Victims of the following categories of offences were eligible for inclusion in
the program:
1) Assault -- in spousal assault cases telephone contact was made and agreement
from the victim obtained before the statement was
mailed out.
2) Homicides -- relatives of homicide victims and victims of attempted homicide
were sent a statement.
3) Noncommercial robberies.
4) Residential break and enter.
5) Sexual assault -- if the victim was a minor, statements were sent to the
parent or guardian. In the case of a sexual offence
where a sexual assault had
taken place, an investigating officer from the sex crimes unit was contacted
for advice on whether to
mail out a victim impact statement. In about 30 per
cent of these cases, officers decided against having a questionnaire mailed
out. In 10 per cent of the cases, investigating officers personally took the
statement forms to the victim; statement forms were
mailed in the remaining 60
per cent of cases.
6) Child abuse cases -- a member of the child abuse unit was consulted to
determine the advisability of requesting a statement from
a nonoffending parent
or the child victim. If the officer suggested a statement be sent, the
coordinator did so.
The Calgary Police Department computerised information system was programmed to
automatically route copies of the targeted offence
categories to the project
office. On receipt of this information the coordinator mailed to victims a
victim impact statement questionnaire
and a form letter explaining the purpose
of the program, regardless of whether charges had been laid. At the request of
police officers
of crown prosecutors, victim impact questionnaires were also
sent to victims of other offences, such as traffic and vehicle fatalities.
On the return of a completed and signed statement, a file was opened and case
information obtained. where charges had been laid
and a court date
established, the statement was sent to the crown attorney's office.
Prosecutors were then free to us the statements
at their own discretion.
In January 1987, the Metropolitan Toronto Police Force introduced its Victim
Impact Statement Program. The victim impact statement
was collected by means
of a four-page form that was given by the investigating officer to victims of
serious crimes. Completed forms
were then returned to the officer. The
distribution of victim impact statements was at the officers' discretion; they
were instructed
to make these forms available to selected victims of crimes.
The police force standing order specified that if a crime has had a
significant
impact on a victim, the victim should be given the opportunity to complete a
statement. Victims were informed that their
participation was voluntary and
that the form should be returned to the investigating officer at the Police
Department within 10
days of receiving it.
Once returned, the victim impact statement was placed in a crown envelope
containing the prosecutor's brief and was sent to the prosecutor's
office to be
introduced at the discretion of the prosecutor.
METHODOLOGY
The evaluation of each project covered three main areas:
1) An examination of the program operation and success in meeting its main
objective (i.e., the preparation and presentation of the
statements to
2) An examination of the effects of participation, in a victim impact statement
program, on victims' satisfaction with the criminal
justice process.
3) An examination of the effects of victim impact statements on the justice
system (i.e., the effects on the administration of justice).
As previously indicated, each victim impact statement program had very
different program objectives and each project evaluation was
designed to
address these specific objectives. Nonetheless, each site evaluation also
included an examination of the problems and
other issues that emerged as a
result of the experimental nature of each project. The methodology and
analysis, for components addressing
problems and issues concerning the use of
victim impact statements, were comparable across all sites.
In Victoria, the research design relied on a comparative control group
using interviews with persons victimised prior to inception
of the program. In
Calgary, the evaluator developed a design that involved a comparison of cases
within the total population of
eligible victims. The Winnipeg project
evaluation was based on a quasi-experimental analysis design, whereas the
evaluation in North
Battleford was a comparison of randomly selected victims of
crime who may or may not have experienced the program intervention, or
a victim impact statement. Because of logistical problems in completing the
criminal justice system research in Toronto.
(there are more than twelve Police
Divisions across Metropolitan Toronto) the study was a program review rather
than an evaluation;
thus a control group design was inappropriate.
Many of the evaluation data did not exist in program documents. In
addition to collecting information from police and court files,
obtained primarily from interviews with victims, prosecutors, and other justice
officials. To this end, interview schedules
were developed for victims who
participated in the program, victims who were eligible but failed to respond to
the program, and victims
in the control/comparison preprogram group. All
research designs involved either face-to-face interviews (North Battleford) or
interviews (all other sites) with victims. As well, in all sites,
criminal justice officials with victims impact statement experience
interviewed in person.
Interviews with victims were designed to capture information on their views and
perceptions of the program with respect to the following:
- reasons for participating or not participating in the program;
- purpose of the program;
- type and accuracy of the information collected;
- extent to which victims felt that statements conveyed the actual impact of
the crime to justice personnel;
- extent to which they derived some benefit from the program;
- extent to which the program may have exacerbated their victimisation.
Interviews with victims also solicited demographic data and information on
previous victimisation.
The following indicators of victim perceptions on involvement with the
processing of their case were also obtained:
- degree of contact with various members of the justice system;
- awareness of criminal injuries compensation program;
- knowledge of charges laid;
- knowledge of case progress;
- attitudes towards various justice system members;
- satisfaction and dissatisfaction with process; and
- knowledge and degree of satisfaction of sentence or outcome of case.
In an effort to obtain more reliable information on the use of the victim
impact statement by crown attorneys, a checklist was developed
that required
crown attorneys to indicate their use of the victim impact statement as cases
progressed through the court.
Its main purpose was to capture limited data on the use of the victim impact
statements prior to sentencing, and more detailed data
on usage during
sentencing. For ease of completion, the checklist was usually appended to all
victim impact statement forms that
were sent to crown attorneys.
Justice personnel interviews and the crown attorney checklist were intended to
provide information on the extent to which:
- victim statements were used;
- victim impact statements contained new and useful information (e.g.,
similarity and/or difference in relation to police and presentence
information);
- victims were consulted;
- victims were cross-examined;
- victim impact statements were challenged;
- information in the victim impact statement was useful in recommending
- victim impact statements were used at other stages of court processing;
- justice personnel explained their support of victim impact statements;
- patterns or trends may have developed as a result of their usage;
- the means of introducing victim impact statements into the system could be
DAUBNEY, TAKING RESPONSIBILITY. REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE
AND SOLICITOR GENERAL ON ITS REVIEW OF SENTENCING,
CONDITIONAL RELEASE AND
RELATED ASPECTS OF CORRECTIONS, PRINTER FOR CANADA, TORONTO, AUGUST 1988, PP.
'VICTIM-OFFENDER
RECONCILIATION PROGRAMS'
i. What is Victim-Offender Reconciliation?
Victim-offender reconciliation is a process whereby offenders and victims are
brought together by a trained (often volunteer) mediator
to achieve a
resolution to the criminal event which is satisfactory to both parties.
Victim-offender reconciliation seeks to:
- effect reconciliation and understanding between victims and offenders;
- facilitate the reaching of agreements between victims and offenders
regarding restitution;
- assist offenders in directing payment of their "debt to society" to their
- involve community people in work with problems that normally lead into
the criminal justice process; and
- identify crime that can be successfully dealt with in the community.
Reconciliation has been used effectively in many North American communities
since the birth of the concept in Kitchener/Waterloo,
Ontario in 1974. The
Committee heard from representatives of programs operating in Ontario,
Manitoba, Saskatchewan and British Columbia.
Generally, such programs deal
with minor offences (eg., property offences, assault and causing a disturbance,
etc.), particularly
where the parties know one another; but victim-offender
reconciliation can be used in more serious cases. (This is further discussed
later in this chapter.) Many victim-offender reconciliation programs also
handle dispute resolutions where no criminal charges have
arisen or are likely
ii. How it Works
Reconciliation helps break down the stereotyped images victims and offenders
have of one another by bringing them together. When
they meet face-to-face,
there can be a mutual understanding and agreement as to what can be done about
the offence. The assistance
of an objective third party is useful in
facilitating interaction at such meetings. These mediators do not impose
settlements, but
rather assist the victim and offender in arriving at their own
settlement - a settlement which is agreeable to both.
Victim-offender reconciliation techniques:
- help victims face painful emotions and to feel personally empowered by
gaining control of their lives again;
- help offenders feel empowered by taking responsibility for their
- help victims, offenders and others learn effective conflict resolution
strategies which can be used in other situations.
iii. Benefits of Victim-Offender Reconciliation
First, and most important,
benefit through reconciliation by:
participating throughout the process; receiving restitution and reparation
(losses may be restored
through cash or service); receiving information about
the crime itself (motive/method/background), about the offender (stereotypes
dissolve) and about the criminal justice system and its processes; and
peacemaking. Access to information allays fears, anxiety,
frustration and a
sense of alienation, and positively affects attitudes toward the system.
Because victims and offenders are often
neighbours or members of the same
community, mediation facilitates the finding of common-sense solutions today
which enable living
together peacefully tomorrow.
Equally important, offenders benefit by: gaining an awareness of the harm
suffered by victims (the human cost and its consequences);
participating in a
process that allows for "making it right"; receiving information (especially
down stereotypes); receiving a sentence
which is an alternative to incarceration (victim-offender reconciliation can
provide an escape
from the damaging effects of incarceration without providing
an escape from responsibility); and participation (which yields ownership
and commitment to, the agreement, resulting in high contract-fulfilment
In addition, reconciliation provides the following benefits to the
justice system
- appropriate alternative sanctions are available to judges;
- low cost;
- provision of a mechanism for the establishment of losses;
- effective means of intervention in cases that resist or defy solution in the
traditional criminal justice process;
- increased understanding about the criminal justice system (community
education);
- assistance to victims, thereby reducing the hostility many project upon the
system itself;
- empowerment: Community members are provided with an opportunity to develop
skills which they can apply to the resolution of the
conflicts which arise in
the community;
- reduction of levels of conflict within a community; and
- deterrence from further irresponsibility: While more research will be
required to demonstrate this conclusively, offenders who
meet their victims
face-to-face in this manner are believed to be less likely to re-offend.
iv. Evaluation of Mediation Services and Other Reconciliation
The Mediation Services program in Winnipeg was recently evaluated by the
Attorney-General of Manitoba. Highlights of this evaluation
were included in
its brief to the Committee: 90 percent of 500 cases resulted in agreements; 90
percent of participants rated the
service as either good or excellent; and 80
percent would mediate again if the need arose (Brief, p.2).
Four Indiana reconciliation sites were evaluated in 1984. Following are
highlights from their evaluation report:
- 83 percent of the offenders and 59 percent of the victims expressed
satisfaction with the process (another 30 percent of victims
were "somewhat
satisfied");
- 97 percent of the victims reported that they would choose to participate if
they had to do it over again and that they would recommend
it to other
- both victims and offenders saw "being responded to as persons" as the
greatest strength of the program;
- most of the offenders interviewed by the evaluators seemed to have a better
sense, than did a matched sample of offenders who
had not been referred, that
what they did hurt people and required a response;
- for those who participated in face-to-face meetings, completion of
restitution was quite high;
- offenders experienced reconciliation as punishment and many victims viewed
it as a form of legitimate punishment in which they
had an opportunity to
participate; and
- victim-offender reconciliation may be used along with incarceration as a
means of reducing reliance on incarceration.
Oklahoma Post-Conviction Mediation Program
Mediation hearings held in Oklahoma prisons may be conducted to reach an
agreement between the victim and offender which may then
form the basis of
recommended sentence modifications which are taken back to the judge. (The
mediation service may also be used
as part of case pre-sentence investigation
to propose an appropriate punishment prior to sentencing.) Both violent and
non-violent
cases are handled, although larceny-related crimes are the most
Mediation facilitators inform the parties of the limits and the parameters of
the hearing (which are established by the judge, prosecuting
attorney and
Department of Corrections, with a view to maintaining overall consistency).
The sentencing judge and prosecutors are
meeting so that their concerns, as well as the victim's, can be addressed.
Mediation agreements
generally address: length of incarceration/supervision,
community service, rehabilitative programs for either the victim or offender,
and restitution.
The process encourages and facilitates the sharing of the victim's feelings and
emotions about the criminal incident and its impact.
Offender accountability
and responsibility is emphasized; it results in a structured plan going beyond
incarceration.
In the first 18 months of the program, 1400 victims provided direct input into
sentencing plans. Seventy-two percent of those victims
wished to meet the
offender(s) to mediate; 97 percent of the mediation meetings resulted in
agreements which were satisfactory to
the victims. These agreement generated
$20 000 for the state Crime Victims' Compensation Fund, 50 000 hours of
community service
(valued at $165 000), and $650 000 for restitution. Mediated
offenders are reportedly "model" probationers while under supervision
than eight percent failed to carry out their mediated agreements or were
involved in new crimes.
Genesee Justice - Dealing with Violence
Almost all witnesses before the Committee who talked of victim-offender
reconciliation referred to the Genesee County, New York model
when queried
committed crimes involving violence. Initially,
the Committee was sceptical
fact, a few witnesses
themselves agreed.)
The Committee heard from Doug Call who, when Sheriff of Genesee County, in 1983
introduced victim-offender reconciliation for violent
offences as part of his
program of victim assistance services, and from Dennis Whitman, Coordinator of
the Genesee County Community
Service and Victim Assistance Programs. They
described examples of various "violent" cases in which their victim assistance
contributed to community-based sanctions.
The first 13 offenders referred into their reconciliation program were
convicted of the following offences:
3 criminally negligent homicide
2 armed robbery
1 criminal possession of a deadly weapon
1 assault and battery
1 reckless endangerment
1 attempted manslaughter
1 grand larceny
1 unspecified misdemeanour.
Genesee County claims to have matched justice with fairness for victims,
offenders and their communities. Its services consist of
adult and juvenile
community service, intensive victim assistance, victim-directed sentencing,
victim-offender reconciliation conferences,
victim-orientated pre-sentence
conferences, affirmative agreements, intensive felony and second felony
offender diversion, felony
reparations, and uniform cemetery and school
vandalism sentencing guidelines.
The Sheriff's Department urges victims to "fight back" by reporting crime and
demanding their rights and privileges under the law.
By supporting victims in
a comprehensive and ongoing way, the Sheriff's Department encourages victims to
use their pain as motivation
to go through the court process. The Department
has dramatically increased services and support to victims, decreased the jail
(both regular and weekend sentenced days), obligated offenders to
community in the criminal justice system.
This innovative criminal justice initiative has been developed for several
reasons. Primarily, there is a need for significant and
serious change in our
criminal justice system to provide a human and personal dimension for the
victim as well as the offender.
Humanising the system brings a far more
direct accountability between the offender and the victim.
Victims are included at every stage of the process and offenders are made
accountable to them, as well as to society. With the cooperation
of chiefs of
police and judges, this central focus serves to "integrate" the criminal
justice system. The Genesee County Community
Service/Victim Assistance Program
has shown that reconciliation between victims and offenders can take place even
in cases of the
most serious crimes and is especially important in these
Preparation of both victims and offenders must be done carefully and
systematically; it can involve many different kinds of third
parties. The
victim is the key person as to whether or not victim-offender reconciliation
takes place. It is not an easy decision
for a victim or surviving family
member to make. The victim is visited immediately, or at least within two to
three days, after
the offence occurs and is kept fully informed of the
situation and the process with at least a monthly report. After charges have
been laid, the victim meets with the prosecutors and a victim impact statement
is prepared. The victim is visited by members of
a victims' group as well as
by victim assistance officers of the policy force who are specially trained in
mediation, with a view
to reducing trauma and anxiety. Program staff meet
separately with the victim and the offender prior to the reconciliation meeting
to build a bond of trust between the mediator and each party. (It is not
uncommon for the program staff to hold up to 90 meetings
with the victim.) The
offender is prepared for a meeting with the victim between conviction and
The meeting between victim and offender can be a cause of great relief to the
victim: an emotional burden is lifted, victims gain
confidence in the system,
and they begin to see the offender as a human being rather than as an evil
monster. In Genesee County,
judges increasingly order victim-offender meetings
and they consider the effect of the crime on the victim in determining the
Victims' suggestions, when constructive, may be incorporated in the
MARGARET CUNNEEN, 'PREPARING THE CHILD WITNESS', IN CHILDREN AS WITNESSES.
PROCEEDINGS OF A CONFERENCE HELD 3-5 MAY 1988, AUSTRALIAN
INSTITUTE OF
CRIMINOLOGY, CANBERRA, 1991, PP. 71-76
THE CHILD WITNESS'
A child witness in a criminal court is usually the principal witness - the
victim of a personal assault. A child who has been abused
invariably feels
damaged and in many instances is treated differently by members of the family
or community who may view the child
with curiosity, hostility, pity or disgust.
An almost universal response, in the child victim of sexual assault, is guilt.
The response
is multifaceted and arises from feelings of responsibility of the
sexual activity, the disclosure of the 'secret' and the disruption
to the lives
of those involved and their families, particularly where the activity is
incestuous. Victims of abuse frequently fear
further abuse and retribution
from offenders or their families and they are often depressed and sad that a
trusted person hurt them
and that other trusted people, for example a
non-offending parent, failed to protect them from harm.
Child victims are usually extremely angry over what has taken place, even if
their anger has been repressed to such a degree that
it is not evident.
Children who have been abused tend to have a low self-esteem, feeling that they
must be of little worth to have
been treated as they have. They are also
likely to have difficult trusting new people in their lives, this often being
of broken promises by offenders for example 'I won't do this to you
The initial approach to the prospective child witness must accommodate these
feelings and, during the course of preparing the child,
allowances need
constantly be made. It should be borne in mind, however, that some of these
responses, notably anger, can be utilised
to great advantage in achieving the
result of a strong, credible and fully prepared child witness.
Preparing the Child for Court
A professional preparing a child for court should concentrate on three key
- informing the child;
- instilling confidence; and
- giving the child a friend in court.
Informing the Child
of personnel
It is essential that the child be informed of the professionals' particular
roles in the process of child protection intervention.
Many child victims, and
their families, gain the impression that the people to whom they have
previously related their story, perhaps
police, social workers and/or doctors
have failed them by not conveying details of the complaint to the other people
who need to
know. They feel they should be spared the trauma of repeating
their story to yet another stranger.
Certainly it is desirable that the number of people tho whom a child must
relate their complaint be kept to a minimum. This is both
in the interests of
reducing trauma to the child and from an evidentiary point of view, so that
discrepancies in the various versions
are not used by the defence to prejudice
the prosecution. However, it is important that the child understand that there
may be five
or six key people who each have a different role in helping them.
Some of these people will be concerned with the substance of the
complaint and others, whose role is more of a counselling nature, will not.
Professionals should explain their role in the helping process: the police
officer should explain their investigative role, the
counsellor their
informative and supportive role, the doctor their medical role and the
prosecuting solicitor their role in court.
The child should also be informed
what stage in the process has been reached and what other helpers will be
involved at a later
Having been given this information, children and families are more inclined to
cooperate because they appreciate that the mosaic
of personnel involved is in
the business of helping rather than harassing them.
court process
The court process is mystifying to many non-legal professionals and is much
more so for the victims of crime, particularly where
they are children.
Although child victims may be involved in Children's Court proceedings (which
are concerned with the protection of the child) and/or
Family Court proceedings
(in cases where the parents are disputing custody and access) they are rarely
subjected to cross-examination
in these courts. For this reason, court
preparation is usually directed towards giving evidence in criminal courts.
The child should be told that the criminal case is against the accused person
and that it is likely to be heard twice, once in a
local court before a
magistrate, who will decide whether there is enough evidence to go further, and
once in a higher court before
judge and jury, who will decide whether or not
the accused is guilty.
In cases where committal proceedings will take place by way of tendering of
statements without witnesses having to be called to give
evidence (paper
committal), the child witness should be told when and why this will take place
and prepared for a single appearance
at a trial court.
Where committal proceedings will entail the calling of all witnesses the child
should be told from the outset that they are likely
to be required to give
evidence twice. If the child is not made aware of this eventuality before
committal proceedings they will
feel tricked, lose faith in the people who
should have advised them and be reluctant to give evidence at trial for fear
not be the last time they have to give evidence.
When a child is required to give evidence at committal as well as trial, the
news can be conveyed in an advantageous way. The child
can be told that the
first time is a case to be sent to trial, the child's testimony is a good
practice run for the harder part of
convincing the jury that the accused is
The child can be told, quite truthfully, after committal that giving evidence
at trial is likely to be easier for them because they
will have had a practice
run and be aware of all the issues which will be raised by the defence (some of
which will not be pursued
a second time). The child can be reassured that the
defence is not likely to be nasty (or as nasty, if committal has been less than
pleasant) to the child with a jury present.
Before trial the child should be told that, if there is a verdict of not guilty
this does not mean that people did not believe them,
but only that the evidence
was not enough to pass the very hard test that courts impose before they find
someone guilty of a crime.
The child should be told that there will be three people in court who will ask
them questions.
The first will be the magistrate or judge who will ask the child a series of
questions designed to ascertain whether they are of
sufficient maturity and
intelligence to understand the duty to tell the truth. Depending on the age
and background of the child,
the presiding judicial officer may also wish to
discover whether the child has the capacity to swear an oath.
The magistrate or judge is likely to ask the child where they attend school,
what class they are in and (notwithstanding the diminution
of the notion that a
lie on oath will send a perjurer straight to Hell), whether they have attended
any religion or Scripture lessons,
or whether they know about God or the
It is sometimes useful, particularly for a prosecutor, to have a discussion
with the child about these things and to prepare the
child to answer simple
questions about the difference between the truth and a lie.
As a general guide, high school age children are often required to swear an
oath if they indicated knowledge of the Bible (for example
it is a book about
God) whereas younger children will usually only be required to promise (in the
form prescribed by the relevant
Oaths Act) to tell the truth provided they have
been able to give an appreciation of it (for example if shown a book, answering
the negative when asked: 'Would it be the truth if I said this was a
football?').
The second person who will ask the child questions in court will be the
prosecutor who, ideally, will be known to the child before
the hearing and who
will have taken at least some part in the child's court preparation. This part
of the evidence is where the
child gives their story, prompted (where
necessary) by non-leading questions (for example 'What happened then?'; 'How
long did this
continue?'). The child should also be prepared to have to
identify the accused (if the circumstances of the case require it) and
reassured that a casual hand gesture in the direction of the accused, without
eye contact, should be all that is required.
The child should then be told that the final person to ask them questions will
be the defence lawyer who is being paid to a job for
the accused person. The
child should be frankly informed that the defence will probably suggest to them
that they are lying, making
up the story, or imagining it. A child witness
will often be asked whether they have ever told a lie and it is wise to
prepare the
child that a truthful answer to this question will not harm the
case and that an explanation of why this is a different matter (for
because it is very serious or because I have promised to tell the truth) is
quite appropriate.
There is no reason why a child should not have access to their police statement
at any time prior to hearing. Some children are
concerned that reading their
statements shortly before court may be construed as a form of cheating. When
questioned by the defence
they look at support persons for guidance in deciding
whether to admit that they looked over the statement shortly before court.
Children should be prepared to state plainly: 'yes, I did look at my
statement', and to give the reasons for example 'I had not forgotten
in the statement - I was just reminding myself of the actual words I had
Children should of course be informed that just because something is contained
in their statements does not mean they do not have
to mention it in their
evidence. It is important that everything is described fully in court.
court layout and personnel
The child victim will doubtlessly have never seen a courtroom before. In fact
the child may never have heard of a court and the
impressions the child
receives from the professional will be their first impressions. (In this event
the classic negative ideas
Ideally arrangements should be made for the child to see the court in which the
proceedings will take place. If this is not possible,
any other court will
suffice, the layout tending to be uniform. Failing this a diagram can be
drawn. The child should be shown
that the judge or magistrate sits at the
front of the court behind a raised bench. The jury (if it is a trial) sits
usually along
one side, the lawyers representing the prosecution and the
defence sit at a table facing the judge or magistrate. The accused person
either behind their counsel or in a dock area. There is a court constable or
officer somewhere in the body of the court and
a court reporter or monitor sits
close to and in front of the judge or magistrate. The child should be
permitted to sit in the witness
box and given an indication of where their
support person will be sitting and what direction to face so that the accused
their line of vision. The child can be reassured that there will be
no 'audience' as it is usual that the court is closed if not
for the entire
proceedings, then at least for the duration of the child's evidence.
Instilling Confidence
Any witness of whatever age and whether civilian or expert is likely to be
extremely apprehensive about the prospect of giving evidence
in court. The
younger the witness the more frightening the ordeal. Children frequently lack
confidence when facing the ordeal of
verbal confrontation with adults, a breed
of person they have been brought up to respect and defer to. The child victim
added stress of being at least the principal, and in most cases the
only, witness. They are mindful of the fact that if they fail
to come up to
proof the prosecution will not succeed.
It is essential then that the child witness be given the court survival skills
to fortify them for the experience of giving evidence.
child victim is the most important person in court
In the majority of cases of assault upon children there is no corroborative
eyewitness. This means that, in defended matters, only
two people in the
courtroom know what really happened during the incident in question and only
one of these is prepared truthfully
to relate the course of events. This of
course is the child victim. The court wants and needs to know what this vital
witness has
The child victim is the most important person in court and should know it.
child victim is the boss
The most important person in court also has the privilege of being 'the boss'.
They can, during their evidence, ask for questions
to be repeated, unfamiliar
words or expressions to be explained or for counsel to slow down. They can ask
to be excused if upset
or in need of the toilet. They can pause to take a
drink of water. They can write down any word or phrase they do not wish to
questions in court
The child should be advised, honestly that they will be asked hard and perhaps
confusing questions in court. They should pause and
think carefully about the
questions and, if their meanings are clear, answer clearly and without going
into unnecessary detail.
The child should be reminded that they should answer all questions honestly and
cannot possibly get into any difficulty if this rule
is observed.
The child's confidence should be boosted by reminding the child that whatever
the defence counsel's attitude to their evidence (they
may scoff, or doubt, or
cut them short) the court really wants to know what they as 'most important
witness' have to say.
Therefore it is important that the child knows they can give a detailed answer
or an explanation even if the defence counsel attempts
to confine them to a
'yes' or 'no'. They should be encouraged to be persistent in giving the answer
they want to give and not just
choosing between two answers suggested ;by the
defence. The child can be told that, far from annoying anybody (except perhaps
defence,) the court will be impressed that they are taking the matter
seriously enough to ensure that the correct answer is recorded.
The child should be reminded that they are there to tell the truth about what
happened because they were there. The defence counsel
was not. The judge,
magistrate and jury were not. this will assist the child with the inevitable
cross-examination questions designed
to confuse or water down the evidence (for
example "What you really meant to say was, I suggest that happened on a school
not in the holidays . . . ').
Preparation should also address the invariable defence practice of suggesting
to the witness that the evidence (or part of it) is
a lie, story, fantasy or
dream. This is always an intimidating experience for a child witness, who
would not realise that all witnesses
are put to their proof in this fashion.
The child should be reassured that a question of this nature does not mean that
in trouble or that anyone disbelieves them, it is merely the defence
counsel doing a job which they have been paid to do.
The child should be told that if they are asked a question to which they do not
know, or cannot remember, the answer, it is perfectly
acceptable to say so
rather than merely to agree with a suggested answer of which they are not sure.
In such circumstances the truthful
answer is 'I don't know' or 'I can't
remember' and that is the response which should be given.
The corollary of this advice is that the child should be encouraged, if they
are quite sure of something, or cannot remember something
vividly, to say so.
The child can be advised, in such a case, to answer a question such as 'But
you're not sure of that?' With a
firm, loud and confident 'Yes, I am' or 'I am
certain of that'. The child, of course, was there, the defence counsel was
It is useful to remind the child that the defence counsel has no right to cut a
witness' answers short and that even if the lawyer
looks annoyed, they should
complete their answer. If the answer is going outside the court's interest,
the judge will stop the witness.
The important thing is to build the child's confidence so that by reason of
their superior knowledge of the evidence, they feel at
least something of a
match for the defence counsel and are sufficiently self-assured to answer
questions confidently, consistently
and persistently.
Giving the Child a Friend in Court
Most Australian jurisdictions have provision for an exception to be made to an
order closing a court for certain evidence. The exception
permits a person to
be present to support a child victim of assault for the duration of the
Where the support person is seated is generally a matter for the discretion of
the presiding officer but may be next to the child
in the witness box or in the
child's line of sight. This person's presence is often of fundamental
importance to the child and can
make the difference between a good witness and
a mute one.
Better than one friend in court is, of course, two. The prosecuting officer
should have taken the time to participate in the child's
court preparation and
to have built a rapport with the child. This is not only of great benefit to
the child, but assists the prosecution
to elucidated confusing matters arising
from any idiosyncratic speech patterns which are common in children.
The child can be encouraged to look only at their friend(s) in court and not to
make eye contact with the accused, something which
could only result in them
becoming more nervous and confused.
A child witness cannot be expected to be confident or self-assured if they do
not have sufficient knowledge of the court process
and the skills to employ
while under cross-examination.
It is important for a professional involved in court preparation to endeavour
to redress the imbalance between the victim's age,
level of confidence and
knowledge of 'The System' and the defence counsel's experience and maturity.
Although there is a school of thought which considers that it is
counter-productive for children to endure the trauma of the court
process, I am
of the view that a well-prepared child witness derives therapeutic value from
breaking down the secrecy involved in
the assault and publicly stating how the
accused has hurt them.
A child's age and frustration can be harnessed an alleviated by the experience
and, even in cases where the accused is found not
guilty, they did everything
they could do in the interests of justice.
A well-prepared child is not only a better, more confident witness but is also
more likely to find the experience of giving evidence
in court a positive step
towards regaining their control and self-esteem.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Austin on Jurisprudence
, (Student's Edition), John Murray, London,13th
Impression, 1920.
Chesterton,
History of England
, Chatto and Windus, London, 1917.
Committee of Inquiry on Victims of Crime,
Report of the Committee of Inquiry
on Victims of Crime
, Adelaide, January 1981.
David Daubney,
Taking Responsibility. Report of the Standing Committee on
Justice and Solicitor General on its Review of Sentencing, Conditional
and Related Aspects of Corrections
. Printer for Canada, Toronto, August
Gwynn Davis,
Making Amends
Mediation and Reparation in Criminal
, Rutledge, London, 1992.
Department of Justice, Tasmania,
Report of the Inter-Departmental Committee
on Victims of Crime
, Government of Tasmania, December 1989.
Tom Fisher, Pat O'Malley and Anne Leigh,
Alternative Dispute Resolution
Strategies for Dealing with Young Offenders. A Report on Existing Models and
community Receptiveness
to Them in the Preston Area
, La Trobe University,
Melbourne, 1992.
Earl Jowitt,
The Dictionary of English Law
1st edition, Sweet
& Maxwell Ltd, London 1959.
J.K. Matthews,
Alternative Dispute Resolution in Victim Offender Cases,
Attorney-General's Department, Victoria, 1990.
Satyanshu Mukherjee, Debbie Neuhaus and John Walker,
Crime and Justice in
- Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra 1990.
Gwenn Murray,
Mediation and Reparation Within the Criminal Justice System.
A Discussion Paper which explores issues surrounding Victim-Offender
and Reparation
, Department of the Attorney-General, Queensland, 1991.
New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Alternative Dispute Resolution:
Training and Accreditation of Mediators,
DP 21, New South Wales Law Reform
Commission, Sydney 1989.
Office of Crime Statistics, Research Report,
Victims of Crime
Overview of Research and Policy
, Series C, No. 3 South Australian
Attorney-General's Department, November 1988.
Pollock and Maitland,
History of English Law
, Bk. II, First edition,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1895.
Daniel W. Van Ness,
Crime and its Victims
, InterVarsity Press, Downer
Grove, Illinois, 1986.
S. Walklate,
Victimology. The Victim and the Criminal Justice Process
Unwin Hyman, London, 1989.
Western Australia Department of Corrective Services,
The Role of Community
Based Corrections in Restorative Justice
, unpublished, 1992.
John Braithwaite, "Los Angeles and the pathologies of Criminal Justice?",
Criminology Australia
, April/May 1992, pp. 2-5.
Nils Christie, 'Conflicts as Property',
British Journal of Criminology
vol. 17, 1977, pp. 1-15.
Christopher Corns, 'The Other Side of Victims' Rights',
10, no. 3, Aug/Sept 1987.
Jenny David, "Mediation: A Viable Alternative",
Criminal Law Journal
vol. 9, 1985, pp. 86-97.
A.M.E. Duckworth, "Restitution, an Analysis of the Victim-Offender
Relationship: Towards a Working Model in Australia", (1980) 13
Journal of Criminology
, vol. 13, 1980, pp.227-240.
Wendy Faulkes, "Pursuing the Best Ends by the Best Means",
Australian Law
, vol. 59, 1985, pp. 457-462
Drs Fischer and Wertz "Empirical Phenomenological Analyses of Being Criminally
Victimized", in A. Giorgi, R. Knowles and D.L. Smith
Studies in Phenomenological Psychology
, vol. 3, Duquesne University Press,
Pittsburg, pp. 135-158.
Lynne N. Henderson, "The Wrongs of Victims' Rights",
Stanford Law
, vol. 37, 1985, pp. 937-1021.
Margaret Jarvis, " Wading in the Deep End with a Verbal Hug",
Social Work
, Vol 20, No. 47, 3 August 1989, D Hagland (Ed.),
Macmillan Ltd 1989 London pp 16&17.
Robert Ludbrook, "Juvenile Justice - New Zealand's Family Oriented Approach",
Children Australia
, v. 17 no. 4, p.p. 7-10.
Gabrielle Maxwell and Allison Morris, The Family Group Conference: A New
Paradigm for Making Decisions About Children and Young People",
, v. 17 no. 4, 1992, pp. 11-15.
Gabrielle Maxwell and Allison Morris, "Family Participation Cultural Diversity
and Victim Involvement in Youth Justice: A New Zealand
Experiment",
unpublished, 1992.
Allison Morris and Gabrielle M Maxwell, "Juvenile Justice in New Zealand: A New
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology
no. 1, March 1993, pp. 72- 90.
Terry O'Connell and David Moore, "Wagga Juvenile Cautioning Process: The
General Applicability of Family Group conferences for Juvenile
Offenders and
their Victims",
Rural Society
, vol. 2, no. 2, 1992, pp. 16-23.
Mark S. Umbreit, "Violent Offenders and their Victims", in Martin Wright and
Burt Galaway (eds),
Mediation and Criminal Justice. Victims, Offenders and
the Community
, Sage Publications, London, 1989, pp.101-112.
J.J.M. Van Dijk, "Victims Rights: a Right to Better Services or a Right to
Active Participation", in J Van Dijk et al. (Eds.)
Criminal Law in
, Kluwer Law and Taxation Publishers, Netherlands, 1988.
Glenn Bartley, 'Criminal Injuries Compensation: Quo Vadis?', in
Evaluating the New Initiatives. Proceedings of a Seminar on Victims
August 1987, University of Sydney, Sydney, pp. 41-51.
Ron Cahill and Mark O'Neill, 'T.V. or not T.V. - The Question of the Use
of Technology in court Where Children Are Witnesses', in
Children as
. Proceedings of a Conference held 3-5 May 1988, Australian
Institute of Criminology, Canberra, 1991, pp. 101-106.
Margaret Cunneen, 'Preparing Child Witnesses', in
Children as Witnesses
Proceedings of a Conference held 3-5 May 1988, Australian Institute of
Criminology, Canberra, 1991, pp. 71-6
D.B. Moore, 'Facing the Consequences. Conferences and Juvenile Justice', paper
delivered to National Conference on Juvenile Justice,
September 1992.
Satyanshu Mukherjee, paper delivered to Victims of Crime: Reforming the System
Conference, 9-10 July 1992.
Peter Severin, "Victim-Offender Mediation Programs in Germany and the Work of
Christian Pfeiffer", paper delivered to Crime Reparation
Project Advisory
Committee, May 1982.
Statutes Amendment (Victims of Crime) Bill, Second Reading
, speech delivered in the Legislative Council of South Australian
Parliament on Tuesday 29 October 1985.
Jeff Sutton, Roseanne Bonney and Alix Goodwin, 'Victims as a Policy
Issue',paper delivered at a seminar "Victims - Evaluation of
Initiatives", August 1987, Institute of Criminology, University of Sydney,
Convenor Jenny David, Chairperson, Sir Laurence
Street, Proceedings (No. 73) pp
J.J. Taylor, 'Victim Support Movement in New Zealand', Paper delivered to
'Victims of Crime: Reforming the System' Conference,',
9-10 July 1992.
George Vickers, The Child as a Witness - The Use of Aids', in
Children as
. Proceedings of a Conference held 3-5 May 1988, Australian
Institute of Criminology, Canberra, 1991, pp. 27-32.
Commonwealth of Australia v. Pillifeant
[1990] FCA 179
(1990) 93 ALR 641
Mount Isa Mines Ltd v. Pusey
[1970] HCA 60
(1973) 125 CLR 383
R v Nicholls,
8 May 1991, (No. 744 of 1990, unreported) the Supreme
Court of South Australia.
The Matter of an application by Joan Mary Anne O'Brien
, ACT Supreme
Court, SCA 54 of 1991, 24 June 1992
Whitehorn v. The Queen
[1983] HCA 42
(1983) 152 CLR 657
Criminal Injuries Compensation (Amendment) Act 1991
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 1983
Victims of Offences Act 1987
Evidence Act
Community Justice Centres Act
Disputes Resolution Centres Act
"Victim-Offender Mediation Brainstorming", Conflict Resolution Service (ACT),
25 August 1992
This report reflects the law as at 30 June 1993. It should be cited as
Committee Reference: CLRC No 6.
The ACT established the Community Law Reform Committee in July 1990. The
purpose of the Committee is to:
. help the Government to identify areas in need of reform;
. anticipate emerging social and legal issues; and
. assess the practical impact of various proposals and laws on the people of
The Committee's Office and Secretariat are at 3rd floor GIO Building, City
Walk, Canberra City ACT 2601 (Tel (06) 2070546 fax (06)
Mr John Kelly, the Chairperson of the Committee, was the principal author of
this report. The Committee acknowledges the significant
contribution to this
report of Mary Davis, a member of the Law Reform Unit. It also wishes to thank
those who, having become victims
of crime, were nonetheless still willing to
undergo the pain involved in reviving bitter memories in order to give the
the benefit of their experiences.
Information
(c) Australian Capital Territory, Canberra 1993
ISBN 1036-5567
need for permission being sought. However, acknowledgment
of the source should
OF REFERENCE
I, BERNARD COLLAERY, Attorney-General of the Australian Capital Territory,
REFER the following matter to the Community Law Reform
Committee as provided
for in the constitution of the Committee:
TO REVIEW the role of the victim of crime in the Territory's criminal justice
system and to REPORT
(a) whether the current system adequately deals with the needs of victims;
(b) whether the Territory should adopt the use of victim impact statements such
as in South Australia;
(c) on the need for any further measures or legislation to improve the delivery
of justice to victims of crime; and,
on any other relevant matter the Committee wishes to take into consideration.
In making its review, the Committee may wish to consider the following:
(a) the South Australian model in relation to the use of victim impact
statements;
(b) the relationship between the victim, the offender and the State; and,
(c) Court ordered rehabilitative or therapeutic measures.
In making its review and report the committee is to have regard to
(a) the Declaration of Principles of Justice Relating to Victims of Crime
adopted by the United Nations in 1985; and
(b) any views of government agencies or the community on this matter.
SIGNED THIS THIRTEENTH DAY OF DECEMBER 1990
BERNARD COLLAERY
ATTORNEY-GENERAL
Participants
Chairperson
The Honourable Mr John Kelly, QC
Deputy Chairpersons
Ms Jennifer Kitchin
Chief Magistrate Mr Ron Cahill
Committee Members
Ms Robin Burnett
Mr Rod Campbell
Professor Duncan Chappell
Ms Sanora Dell
Mr Rainer Frisch
Mr Ross Gengos
Ms Judy Harrison
Mr Peter Hohnen
Ms Vivienne Joice
Ms Veronica Laletin
Ms Annmarie Lumsden
Mr Graeme Lunney
Mrs Bettie McNee
Mr Nick Seddon
Mr Peter Sutherland
Professor Roman Tomasic
Sub-Committee
in Charge of Reference
Mr John Kelly
Prof Duncan Chappell
Mr Ron Cahill
Ms Jennifer Kitchin
Ms Judy Harrison (resigned December 1991)
Ms Tracy Reid (until Feb 1993)
Ms Mary Davis
Mr David Snowden (July 1991-December 1991)
A difficulty arises concerning the United
Nations Declaration definition where it refers to impairment of fundamental
seems to the Committee that there is considerable difficulty
involved in defining fundamental rights and that an expression such
accorded by law' would meet the spirit and intendment of the United Nations
definition.
Application 69 of 1989 under the
Criminal Injuries
Compensation Act 1983
, 4 March 1991, p. 12.
Daniel W. Van Ness,
Crime and its
, InterVarsity Press, Downer Grove, Illinois, 1986, p. 3.
Earl Jowitt,
The Dictionary of English Law,
1st edition,
Sweet & Maxwell Ltd, London ,1959, p.1865 .
A.M.E. Duckworth, 'Restitution, an Analysis of the
Victim-Offender Relationship: Towards a Working Model in Australia', (1980)
Aust & NZ Journal of Criminology
, vol. 13, 1980, pp. 227-240, at
Pollock and Maitland,
History of English Law
, Bk. II, First
edition, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1895, pp. 458-59.
G K Chesterton,
A Short History of England,
Windus, London, edition used - New Phoenix Library - first issue 1951, pp
Austin on Jurisprudence
(Students Edition) John Murray,
London, 13th Impression, 1920, pp. 196-197.
Office of Crime Statistics, Research Report,
Victims of Crime.
An Overview of Research and Policy
, Series C, No. 3 South Australian
Attorney-General's Department, November 1988, p. 3.
Lynne N. Henderson, 'The Wrongs of Victims' Rights',
, vol. 37, 1985, pp. 937-1021, p. 952.
Christopher Corns, 'The Other Side of Victims' Rights',
, Vol. 10, No. 3, Aug/Sept 1987, Victorian Association for the Care
and Re-settlement of Offenders (VACRO), Pasco Vale South, pp1&2.
Criminal Injuries Compensation (Amendment) Act 1991
Victims of Crime Response Group,
Statutes Amendment (Victims
of Crime) Act 1986 and The Rights of Victims Bill: Recommendations Towards
Implementation in the South
Australian Department of Correctional Services
Adelaide, July 1986, p. 8.
See Appendix 'B' for the full text of the United Nations
Declaration.
Jarvis, M, "Wading In at the Deep End with a Verbal Hug"
Social Work Today,
D Hagland (Ed.) Vol 20, No. 47, 3 August 1989, BASW,
Macmillan Ltd, London 1989, p16.
Drs Fischer and Wertz, 'Empirical Phenomenological analyses of
being criminally victimized', in A. Giorgi, R. Knowles and D.L. Smith
Duquesne Studies in Phenomenological Psychology
, Pittsburg: Duquesne
University Press, 1979
,Vol. 3, pp. 135-58 at p. 149 quoted by Drs.
Frieze, Hymer and Greenburg in " Describing the Crime Victim: Psychological
Victimization" -
Professional Psychology: Research and
, N Abels (Ed),Vol 18, No. 4 , August 1987, American
Psychologicists Association, Washington DC, at p. 300.
V Krupnick and M Horonwitz, referred to in Freize, Hymer and
Greenburg "Sress Response Sydrome Recurrent Themes" - Archives of General
Psychiatry 38,428 - 435.
Paras 43 - 58 inclusive, Freize, Hymer and Greenburg, pp 300
Satyanshu Mukherjee, Debbie Neuhaus and John Walker,
Justice in Australia
, Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra 1990,
Dr Satyanshu Mukherjee, Unpublished speech given to the "Victims
of Crime: Reforming the System" Conference, Brisbane, 9 July 1992.
J.J.M. Van Dijk, "Research and the Victim Movement in Europe",
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Criminological Research Conference Council
Europe, Strasburg , France, 1984.
Jeff Sutton, Roseanne Bonney and Alix Goodwin, in 'Victims as a
Policy Issue', Paper delivered at a seminar "Victims - Evaluation
Initiatives", August 1987. Institute of Criminology, University of Sydney,
Convenor Jenny David, Chairperson, Sir Laurence
Street. Proceedings (No 73)
pp 25-40 at 26.
' Ibid pp26-27.
David Daubney,
Taking Responsibility: Report of the Standing
Committee on Justice and Solicitor General on its Review of Sentencing,
Conditional
Release and Related Aspects of Corrections
, Queens's Printer
for Canada, Toronto, August 1988, pp. 13-4.
See, for example, Deuteronomy, Ch. 1 vv. 16 and 17 where it is
said, 'You must give your brother a fair hearing and see justice
done between
one person and his brother or the foreigner living with him. You must be
impartial in judgement and give an equal hearing
to small and great alike.'
See below, paras. 118, 134.
Department of Justice and Community Services,
Crime. Issues for Consideration by the ACT Community Law Reform Committee
Australian Capital Territory Government, Canberra, March 1991, pp. 22-24.
C.J. Sumner,
Statutes Amendment (Victims of Crime) Bill,
Second Reading Speech
, Legislative Council (SA), 29 October 1985, p. 2.
C.C.A. No. 13 of 1988, 143 LS [SA] J.S.
(1986) 23 A Crim R 179
Department of Justice, Tasmania,
Report of the
Inter-Departmental Committee on Victims of Crime
, Department of Justice,
Hobart, December 1989, p. 34.
Justices Burchett, Miles and O'Loughlin. Decision handed down
on 16 December 1992 (ACT G51 of 1992) as yet unreported.
Campbell Research Associates,
Victim Impact Statements in
Canada. Volume 5. Evaluation of the Toronto Project
, Department of
Justice Canada, Toronto, 1990, p. 6.
Department of Justice Canada,
Victim Impact Statements in
Canada. Volume 7. Summary of Findings
, Department of Justice, Toronto,
Ibid, p. 14.
Focus Consultants,
Victim Impact Statements in Canada. Volume
1. Evaluation of the Victoria Project
, Department of Justice Canada,
Toronto, 1990.
Campbell Research Associates, op cit, p. 131.
Focus Consultants, op cit, p. xx.
Ibid, pp. xx-xxi.
Ibid, p. 189.
8 May 1991, (No. 744 of 1990, as yet unreported) the Supreme
Court of South Australia (King C.J., Olsson and Debelle JJ.)
Department of Justice Canada,
Victim Impact Statements in
Canada. Volume 7. Summary of Findings
, Department of Justice, Toronto,
1990, p. 17.
Focus Consultants, op. cit. p. 179.
Ibid p. 180.
Ibid pp. 180-81.
Ibid p. 147.
Ibid p. 155.
Ibid p. 156.
Corns, 'The Other Side of Victims' Rights',
Vol. 10, No. 3, Aug/Sept, 1987,Victorian Association for the Care and
Re-settlement of Offenders (VACRO), Pasco Vale South, p.1.
David Daubney, op. cit. p. 16.
Ibid, pp. 15-16.
Australian Crime Prevention Journal, March/May 1988, p. 15.
David Daubney, op. cit. p. 16.
Ibid, p. 18.
'Judge' is to be taken to mean any judicial officer charged with
the duty of sentencing.
Ibid p. 90.
See para. 207 and following.
Jenny David, 'Mediation: A Viable Alternative',
Criminal Law
, vol 9, 1985, pp. 86-97, at p. 89.
Gwenn Murray,
Mediation and Reparation Within the Criminal
Justice System. A Discussion Paper which explores issues surrounding
Victim-Offender
Mediation and Reparation
, Department of the
Attorney-General, Queensland, 1991, p. 13.
Jenny David, op cit. p 86-87.
Ibid. p. 88.
J.K. Matthews,
Alternative Dispute Resolution in Victim
Offender Cases,
Attorney-General's Department, Victoria, 1990, p. 1.
Gwenn Murray,op cit. p 13.
Peter Severin,
Victim-Offender Mediation Programs in Germany
and the Work of Christian Pfeiffer
, Crime Reparation Project Advisory
Committee, May 1982, p. 5.
Gwenn Murray, op cit. p 13
Peter Severin, op cit. p. 5.
Nils Christie, 'Conflicts as Property',
British Journal of
Criminology
, vol. 17, 1977, pp. 1-15.
S Walklate,
Victimology. The Victim and the Criminal Justice
, Unwin Hyman, London, 1989, pp.118-19.
John Braithwaite, "Los Angeles and the pathologies of Criminal
Criminology Australia
, April/May 1992, p.p. 2 - 5, p. 4.
D.B. Moore, "Facing the Consequences. Conferences and Juvenile
Justice", speech given at the National Conference on Juvenile Justice,
Adelaide, September 1992.
Terry O'Connell and David Moore, 'Wagga Juvenile Cautioning
Process: The General Applicability of Family Group conferences for Juvenile
Offenders and their Victims',
Rural Society
, Vol. 2, No. 2, 1992, p.16
Umbreit and Coates, p. 5.
Wendy Faulkes, "Pursuing the Best Ends by the Best Means",
Australian Law Journal
, vol. 59, 1985, pp. 457-462, at pp. 457, 462.
Gwenn Murray, op cit p. 15.
Umbreit and Coates, op cit. p. 5.
J.K. Matthews, op cit. p. 6.
Gwynn Davis,
Making Amends
Mediation and Reparation
in Criminal Justice
, Rutledge, London, 1992, pp. 23-24.
Ibid, pp. 47-48.
Ibid, pp. 54-59.
J.K. Matthews, op cit. p. 7.
Terry O'Connell and David Moore, op cit. p. 5.
Gwenn Murray, op cit. pp. 46, 51.
David Daubney, op. cit. pp. 94-97.
Gwynn Davis, op cit. p. 13.
A copy of a taped interview is held by the Committee and may be
heard by anyone showing good reason for doing so.
Gwynn Davis, op cit. pp. 10-11
Gwynn Davis, op cit. p. 52, gives an example of a young man who
pleaded guilty to offences of burglary at a school and the arson
of a car in a
lock up garage. He agreed to mend a broken goal post and make toys for the
school's parent-teacher association, and
to pay [[sterling]]10 per week toward
a replacement car. He nonetheless was sentenced to a 12 month custody
sentence. It is profoundly
to be hoped that the experience, skills and sound
commonsense of those involved in the process in the ACT would prevent such a
although this is not to say that, when an agreement is made following
mediation, the sentencing court is necessarily precluded from
the exercise of
its sentencing options.
While the Committee is of the view that it may be desirable that
all mediation in the Territory should be afforded such statutory
recognition,
of course it limits its recommendation in this area to the issue of
victim-offender mediation.
Jenny David, op cit. p. 93.
New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Alternative Dispute
Resolution: Training and Accrediation of Mediators,
DP 21, New South Wales
Law Reform Commission, Sydney, 1989, p. 49.
In the Voluntary Agreement to Attend Court scheme which has been
trialled in the ACT Magistrates Court, an alleged offender agrees
to appear in
court to answer relevant charges on a given date, so that a hearing need not
wait for the preparation and service of
a formal summons. During the trial
period, it was estimated that matters took seventeen days to come before court,
rather than the
usual eight to nine months. Ninety-eight percent of
appearances resulted in a guilty plea.
Glenn Bartley, 'Criminal Injuries
Compensation: Quo Vadis?', in
Victims, Evaluating the New Initiatives.
Proceedings of a Seminar on Victims
, 19 August 1987, University of Sydney,
Sydney, pp. 41-51, at pp. 44-45.
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
1983 (ACT), s. 5
Ibid. s. 2.
Ibid. s. 2.
Ibid. s. 9(2).
Ibid. s. 9(3).
Ibid. s. 10.
Ibid.s. 16. (Only three interim awards were made in the year
Ibid. s. 5(4).
Commonwealth of Australia v. Pillifeant
[1990] FCA 179
(1990) 93 ALR 641
The Matter of an application by Joan Mary Anne O'Brien
ACT Supreme Court, SCA 54 of 1991, 24 June 1992, p. 2.
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act
There may be one exception to this, to be discussed below.
The Matter of an application by Joan Mary Anne O'Brien
It should be noted, however, that the WA legislation does not
impose a lower limit on claims, as does that of the ACT, although
limits in both jurisdictions were equal at that time.
William Shakespeare,
, Act III, scene i, line 72.
See paras. 347-50.
See paras. 347-50.
Department of Justice, Tasmania,
Report of the
Inter-Departmental Committee on Victims of Crime
, Department of Justice,
Hobart, December 1989, p 10.
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 1983
Pillifeant's Case
Application 69 of 1989 Under the
Criminal Injuries Compensation
, Master Hogan, Supreme Court of the ACT, 4/3/91, unreported.
Application 28 of 1990 Under the
Criminal Injuries Compensation
, Magistrate Ward. ACT Magistrates Court, 15/5/91, unreported.
Application 69 of 1989 Under the
Criminal Injuries Compensation
, op cit. p. 12.
Ron Cahill and Mark O'Neill, 'T.V. or not T.V. - The Question of
the Use of Technology in court Where Children Are Witnesses', in
Children as
. Proceedings of a Conference held 3-5 May 1988, Australian
Institute of Criminology, Canberra, 1991, pp. 101-106.
Ibid. p. 101.
Whitehorn v. The Queen
[1983] HCA 42
(1983) 152 CLR 657
Kate Warner, 'Child Witnesses: Evidentiary Reforms',
As Witnesses. Proceedigns of a Conference held 3-5 May 1988
, Australian
Institute of Criminology, Canberra, 1991, pp. 169 - 79; Stephen Mason,
'Evidentiary Aspects; Improvements and Reforms',
Children As Witnesses
Conference 3-5 May 1988, pp. 181 - 88.
Cahill and O'Neill, op cit. p. 103.
J.R. Spencer, 'Child Witnesses, Video Technology and the Law of
Criminal Law Review
George Vickers, 'The Child as a Witness - The Use of Aids',
Children As Witnesses. Proceedings of a Conference held 3-5 May 1988
Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra, 1991, pp. 27 - 32, p. 28
Victims of Offences Act 1987(NZ), s. 13.
See para. 238.
Appointed 28 November 1991, resigned mid-1992
Resigned late-1992
Resigned 19 December 1991
Appointed 28 November 1991
Appointed 28 November 1991
Appointed 28 November 1991
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter