URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCDP/1997/38.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:35:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Contribution between Persons Liable for the Same Damage - Discussion Paper [1997] NSWLRCDP 38
Discussion Paper 38 (1997) - Contribution Between Persons Liable for the Same
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of proposals
Abbreviations
1. INTRODUCTION
THE COMMISSION’S REFERENCE
THE PURPOSE OF THIS DISCUSSION PAPER
BACKGROUND TO THE CURRENT LAW OF CONTRIBUTION
Joint and several wrongdoers at common law
Joint wrongdoers
Several wrongdoers
Statutory variation of the common law
GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
2. SOLIDARY LIABILITY
THE MOVEMENT AWAY FROM SOLIDARY LIABILITY
INTERIM REPORT ON SOLIDARY LIABILITY
The general rule of solidary liability
Arguments in favour of solidary liability
Arguments against solidary liability
Arguments against proportionate liability
The Commission’s conclusions in the Interim Report
Proportionate liability for non-economic loss in personal injury cases
THE DAVIS REPORT
Basis for the principal recommendation
Options considered
Evaluation of the Davis Report
THE COMMISSION’S VIEW
3. RATIONALE FOR CONTRIBUTION
THE RATIONALE FOR NO RIGHTS TO CONTRIBUTION
The traditional argument against a right to claim contribution
The effect of the principle of solidary liability
Law and economics perspective
THE RATIONALE FOR RIGHTS TO CONTRIBUTION
Solidary liability and arbitrariness as to which defendant is liable
Unjust enrichment
Proportionality
CONCLUSIONS OF OTHER LAW REFORM AGENCIES
4. CONTRIBUTION BETWEEN CONCURRENT TORTFEASORS
TORTS TO WHICH CONTRIBUTION APPLIES
Torts that are crimes
Intentional torts
Torts of strict liability
Statutory regimes
All tortfeasors may claim contribution
D1’S CLAIM FOR CONTRIBUTION
Where P obtains judgment against D1
Finality of a finding that D1 is liable to P
Consent judgments obtained by fraud or collusion
Where D1 and P settle without judgment
Full settlements
Partial settlements
Where P fails in an action against D2
Where D2 successfully defends an action “on the merits”
Where P’s action against D2 is time barred
Where P fails for want of prosecution
Where D2 is found not liable in third party proceedings
BASIS OF APPORTIONMENT OF LIABILITY
Valuing goods and services
5. CONTRIBUTION AND ANALOGOUS RIGHTS BETWEEN WRONGDOERS OTHER THAN TORTFEASORS
RIGHTS OF CONTRIBUTION ARISING OUT OF STATUTORY
LIABILITY TO PAY DAMAGES
Statutory provision for contribution
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Statutes which do not provide for contribution
Trade practices legislation
Motor Accidents Act 1988
RIGHTS OF INDEMNITY
EQUITABLE RIGHTS OF CONTRIBUTION
6. CONTRIBUTION BETWEEN MIXED CONCURRENT WRONGDOERS
DIFFICULTIES IN EXTENDING THE RIGHT TO CONTRIBUTION
The effect of concurrent liability on rights to claim contribution
Expansion of the tort of negligence
The plaintiff’s choice of action
Different nature of liability in tort and in contract
Intrusion of tortfeasors into private contractual arrangements
Apportionment of liability
Adding to the complexity of the law
ARGUMENTS IN FAVOUR OF EXTENSION
Where D2 and P have contracted to limit liability
P bears D2’s liability
D1’s right to contribution limited by contract between D2 and P
Determining the contributable sum
VIEWS OF OTHER LAW REFORM AGENCIES
THE COMMISSION’S PROVISIONAL VIEW
Balancing the rights of the parties
Breaches of trust and other fiduciary duties
Legislative provisions
Application of the legislative scheme
7. PROCEDURAL MATTERS
PROCEDURES FOR CLAIMING CONTRIBUTION
Joinder of actions
Initiating a claim for contribution
The Ontario approach
The Irish approach
The Commission’s view
SANCTION IN COSTS
SANCTION IN DAMAGES
THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN JOINT WRONGDOERS AND SEVERAL WRONGDOERS
The judgment bar rule
The settlement bar rule
Single judgment rule
LIMITATION PERIODS
Limitation period relevant to the primary cause of action
Limitation period for contribution actions
Table of Legislation
Table of Cases
Select Bibliography
Discussion Paper 38 (1997) - Contribution Between Persons Liable for the Same Damage
Terms of Reference, Participants and Submissions
History of this Reference (Digest)
Terms of Reference
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
, the then Attorney General, the Hon T W Sheahan BA LLB MP, referred by letter dated 12 August 1985, the following matter to the Law
Reform Commission.
To inquire into and report on:
the law governing rights of contribution between two or more persons responsible for the same damage; and
any incidental matter.
Participants
The Law Reform Commission is constituted by the
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
(NSW). For the purpose of this reference, the Chairman, in accordance with the Act, created a Division comprising the following members
of the Commission:
Professor Jack Goldring
Justice David Hodgson
Mr Craig Kelly
Professor Michael Tilbury*
(* denotes Commissioner-in-Charge)
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Research and Writing
Mr Joseph Waugh
Mr Angus Corbett
Ms Beverley Caska
Desktop Publishing
Ms Julie Freeman
Ms Leanne Nowakowski
Administrative Assistance
Ms Suzanna Mishhawi
Submissions
The Commission invites submissions on the issues raised in this Discussion Paper. Submissions and comments must reach the Commission
14 November 1997
. Suggestions for further issues which should be considered are welcome.
All enquiries and submissions should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
GPO Box 5199
SYDNEY NSW 2001
[DX 1227 SYDNEY]
Phone: (02) 9228 8230
Fax: (02) 9228 8225
Current contact details for the Law Reform Commission
Who can make a submission?
Anyone can make a submission or comment. If you have an opinion on the matters under review or personal experiences of the issues
involved, the commission would like to hear from you. You do not need legal qualifications to make a submission, although the Commission
welcomes input from the legal community.
Use of submissions and confidentiality
Submissions may be used by the Commission in two ways:
1. Because the law reform process is a public one, copies of submissions are normally made available by the Commission on request
to other persons or organisations. If you would like your submission to be treated as confidential, please indicate this on your
written submission or oral comments. Any request for a copy of a submission marked “confidential” will be determined
in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
2. In preparing its Report, the Commission will make reference to submissions made in response to this Discussion Paper. However,
a request for confidentiality will be respect by the Commission in relation to the publication of submissions.
Thus, if you would like your submission treated as confidential, please indicate this on your written submission or when making oral
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of proposals
Abbreviations
Table of Legislation
Table of Cases
Select Bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 38 (1997) - Contribution Between Persons Liable for the Same Damage
Summary of Proposals
History of this Reference (Digest)
This Discussion Paper contains 18 proposals for reform of the law relating to contribution between persons liable for the same damage.
These reflect the Commission’s tentative conclusions. Submissions and comments are sought on these proposals. In addition,
at the end of each chapter there are a series of questions. Some of these questions relate to the proposals, but others raise further
issues. The Commission also invites responses to these questions. Set out below is a summary of the proposals.
Rights of contribution between tortfeasors should apply to all tortfeasors.
In contribution proceedings brought by D1 against D2, following a judgment (whether on the merits or by consent) against D1 in favour
of P, it should be no defence for D2 to establish that D1 was not liable to P. D2 may, however, contest any issue relevant to D2’s
liability to P, even if that issue was decided in favour of P in P’s action against D1, and may also argue that the level of
damages awarded in the judgment given against D1 was excessive.
A settlement between D1 and P which is a final determination of P’s rights in relation to that damage should be the basis of
D1’s right to claim contribution from D2. Where D2 is liable to P, D2 should not be entitled to resist the claim for contribution
on the ground that D1 was never liable to P.
In contribution proceedings, the sum agreed to between D1 and P in settlement of P’s claim should have the benefit of a presumption
of reasonableness. D2 may challenge a claim for contribution on the ground that the quantum of the award was unreasonable and the
court may order D2 to pay a sum which the court considers appropriate in the circumstances.
The Commission proposes that, in the case of a partial settlement between D2 and P, D1 should have a right of contribution from D2;
D2 should have a right of contribution from D1; and P should be entitled to bring an action against D1 in order to obtain full compensation.
In circumstances where a release and indemnity is given by P to D2, the rights of contribution between D1 and D2, should be the same
as in the case of partial settlements.
In an action brought by P against the contributor (D2), any judgment in favour of D2, following a hearing on the merits, should be
conclusive evidence that D2 is not “liable” to P for the purposes of D1’s claim for contribution against D2, except
1. P’s action against D2 fails for want of prosecution;
2. D1 is appealing from a decision in favour of D2 where both D1 and D2 are parties to the action brought by P and where both are
joined as third parties; and
3. P’s action against D2 fails because the action has become statute barred.
Where the value of goods and services can be ascertained, they should be included as a means of discharging D2’s liability for
the purposes of a contribution claim.
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) should be amended to provide for rights of contribution between concurrent wrongdoers.
Proposal 10
Motor Accidents Act 1988
(NSW) should be amended to provide for rights of contribution between concurrent wrongdoers. The rights of contribution provided
Motor Accidents Act 1988
(NSW) should follow the principles set out in the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Proposal 11
Rights of contribution should be extended to include mixed concurrent wrongdoers. Rights of contribution to mixed concurrent wrongdoers
liable in tort and contract should explicitly provide that a plaintiff’s right to full compensation be protected and that any
defendant whose liability to the plaintiff in contract is limited by a clause limiting or exempting liability to the plaintiff should
have the full benefit of those contractual terms.
Proposal 12
The proposed legislation defining rights of contribution should supersede all other rights of contribution except equitable rights
of contribution. There should also be a provision allowing that statutory rights of contribution may be modified by express contractual
Proposal 13
The sanction in costs should apply to all plaintiffs pursuing successive actions in relation to the same damage.
Proposal 14
The “sanction in damages” rule should be abolished for all concurrent wrongdoers.
Proposal 15
The judgment bar rule should be abolished for all wrongdoers.
Proposal 16
The settlement bar rule should be abolished for all joint wrongdoers. The effect of a settlement between a plaintiff and one of a
number of joint wrongdoers should depend on the intention of the plaintiff.
Proposal 17
There should be explicit recognition that abolition of the judgment bar rule for all joint wrongdoers will have the effect of abolishing
the single judgment rule.
Proposal 18
Limitation Act 1969
(NSW) should be amended to cover rights of contribution between all concurrent wrongdoers.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of proposals
Abbreviations
Table of Legislation
Table of Cases
Select Bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 38 (1997) - Contribution Between Persons Liable for the Same Damage
Abbreviations
History of this Reference (Digest)
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations have been used throughout this Discussion Paper:
the defendant claiming contribution (from D2).
the person from whom contribution is sought (by D1).
the plaintiff.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of proposals
Abbreviations
Table of Legislation
Table of Cases
Select Bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 38 (1997) - Contribution Between Persons Liable for the Same Damage
1. Introduction
History of this Reference (Digest)
THE COMMISSION’S REFERENCE
1.1 On 12 August 1985 the Commission was given a reference to inquire into and report on:
1. the law governing rights to contribution between two or more persons responsible for the same damage; and
2. any incidental matter.
The reference, made under the Commission’s Community Law Reform Program, was prompted by a letter from Justice Clarke of the
Supreme Court which suggested that the current joint tortfeasor legislation be amended to permit rights of contribution between a
tortfeasor and a person in breach of contract and between persons in breach of separate contracts. Justice Clarke pointed out that,
in the case of the current legislation, that is the
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW), a real problem arises where a plaintiff’s claim against one or more of the defendants is properly classified as one
for breach of contract only, for:
If the plaintiff’s claim is for damages for breach of contract against one or both of the two defendants then there is simply
no allowing for contribution between them. An example which occurs fairly regularly is a claim by an entrant against an occupier
for breach of its contractual duty. It seems quite absurd that the court is able to apportion liability where an action is framed
in tort but deprived of such jurisdiction where, despite the tortious nature of the claim, the action is categorised as one for breach
of contract.
1.2 In 1990 the Commission released an Interim Report on solidary liability.
This Report (“LRC 65”) was produced after a request by the then Attorney General who was conducting a review of the general
law of tort liability in New South Wales.
Since one of the issues being considered in the review was reform of the doctrine of solidary liability,
it was decided that the Commission should prepare a report on this principle which is the “starting point for any consideration
of the law of contribution”.
This Discussion Paper will revisit LRC 65 in light of some recent developments
and then canvass the issues relevant to the remainder of the contribution reference.
THE PURPOSE OF THIS DISCUSSION PAPER
1.3 The purpose of this Discussion Paper is to put forward a series of proposals for the reform of the law of contribution between
concurrent wrongdoers and to generate debate about the issue among interested persons, especially those with a working knowledge
of the operation of the law in this area. The proposals are tentative, the Commission not having finalised its views on these issues.
Matters raised in consultations and submissions will be taken into account in finalising a report on the reference to the Attorney
General. This report may include draft legislation. To assist in the preparation of responses to this Discussion Paper, we have summarised
at the end of each chapter the questions which have been discussed in that chapter and on which we particularly seek responses.
BACKGROUND TO THE CURRENT LAW OF CONTRIBUTION
1.4 The present state of the law is such that concurrent wrongdoers are each liable for the whole of the damage which an injured party
has suffered (the principle of “solidary liability”), and the satisfaction of that liability by one of the wrongdoers
will discharge all the wrongdoers.
The injured party may choose to take action against any or all of the wrongdoers. This may be achieved by one action or in several.
Where a court holds one of the wrongdoers responsible for the damage, or where one of the wrongdoers satisfies a judgment for more
than his or her “proper share”, that wrongdoer may in some cases seek assistance or recompense from the other wrongdoer(s)
in meeting the plaintiff’s claim. Such claims are known as contribution claims.
1.5 Where two or more concurrent wrongdoers are responsible for the same damage, it is not necessarily always the case that they will
be liable in tort. It may be that liability is founded on breach of contract, breach of some equitable obligation or breach of statute.
For example, two suppliers, in breach of contract, may each fail to supply goods to a manufacturer causing loss to the manufacturer
which could have been avoided if either supplier had performed its contract. It may also be the case that one concurrent wrongdoer
will be liable to the plaintiff for the same damage on a different basis from that of another concurrent wrongdoer. For example,
a builder may enter a contract which contains a term the effect of which is to ground the builder’s liability exclusively in
contract. The builder may then erect a house on foundations which fail to comply with the standards specified in the contract and
which are inadequate; the local authority may be negligent in not identifying this inadequacy. When the defect in the house becomes
manifest, the builder is liable to the owner in contract and the local authority is liable in tort. The wrongdoers are, in such an
instance, referred to collectively as “mixed concurrent wrongdoers”. The
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW) provides only for contribution between joint tortfeasors and does not deal with the rights of mixed concurrent wrongdoers,
or wrongdoers who are other than tortfeasors.
1.6 Contribution between concurrent wrongdoers forms merely one part of a wider law of contribution which spans many areas of traditional
legal classification (such as torts, contract, equity and restitution) and which is concerned with the circumstances in which a person
(D1) who has made, or is liable to make, a payment to a third person (TP) in discharge of a liability owed to TP can claim from another
person or persons (D2) the whole or part of that payment because the payment discharges a common liability of D1 and D2 to TP. This
wider body of law not only encompasses contribution claims between co-obligors (such as co-sureties and insurers) but also claims
for general average contribution in maritime law.
This wider law of contribution, however, falls outside the Commission’s terms of reference: D1 and D2 are not necessarily “wrongdoers”;
nor are they responsible for the same damage.
1.7 For the purposes of this reference, contribution can be formally defined as the right of one defendant (D1) to claim contribution
from another defendant (D2) where both D1 and D2 are wrongdoers liable for causing the same damage to the plaintiff (P). The most
common example of such a claim for contribution arises where D1 claims contribution from D2 where D1 has paid P’s damages in
1.8 In order to understand the current law relating to contribution between concurrent wrongdoers in New South Wales, it is necessary
to consider the position with respect to joint and several wrongdoers (particularly tortfeasors) at common law, and the changes effected
in relation to tortfeasors by the
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
Joint and several wrongdoers at common law
1.9 There is, at common law, a distinction between tortfeasors who are joint wrongdoers and those who are several wrongdoers.
The effects of this distinction, which are outlined below, have been rendered all but irrelevant with respect to tortfeasors by alterations
to the law contained in the
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
Joint wrongdoers
1.10 Joint wrongdoers are those who can be said to be responsible for the same wrongful act.
Situations in which joint wrongdoers are most commonly found are agency, vicarious liability and common action.
Joint tortfeasors were jointly and severally liable for the whole of the damage suffered by an injured party, that is, they could
be sued individually for the full amount of the injured party’s loss and could be sued jointly in the same action. This gave
rise to a number of consequences:
1. a judgment against a number of joint tortfeasors could be executed in full against any one of them;
2. the judgment bar rule was said to have effect so that judgment against one tortfeasor released all the others;
3. the release of one tortfeasor, by deed or accord and satisfaction, released all the others (the settlement bar rule).
Joint tortfeasors were also subject to the rule in
Merryweather v
which precluded tortfeasors who paid more than their proportionate share of the damages from seeking contribution from their fellow
tortfeasors.
Several wrongdoers
1.11 “Several wrongdoers” are responsible for separate wrongful acts which, however, contribute to the same damage. A
simple illustration involves the situation where a passenger in a motor vehicle suffers personal injury in an accident, caused both
by the negligence of the driver of the vehicle and that of the driver of another vehicle. They are severally liable for the full
amount of the damage suffered by the injured party, but are not jointly liable for the same wrongful act. The judgment bar rule was
presumed not to apply in the case of several wrongdoers, so that the release of one wrongdoer would not necessarily release the others.
Statutory variation of the common law
1.12 Statutory exceptions to the rule in
Merryweather v Nixan
were first enacted in England to allow apportionment of liability for misrepresentations in company prospectuses in s 3, 4 and 5
Directors Liability Act 1890
and concerning collisions between certain ships in s 3 of the
Maritime Conventions Act 1911
1.13 Changes to the law regarding tortfeasors generally were introduced in 1935 in England by the
Law Reform (Married Women and Tortfeasors) Act 1935
In New South Wales these changes were reproduced virtually verbatim in the
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW). Section 5 of the New South Wales Act essentially abolishes the effects of the distinction between tortfeasors as joint wrongdoers
and tortfeasors as several wrongdoers.
1.14 The judgment bar rule is abolished by
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW) so that a judgment recovered against one tortfeasor shall not be a bar to an action against another tortfeasor who would, if
sued, have been liable as a joint tortfeasor. This puts joint tortfeasors in the same position as several tortfeasors.
1.15 While the judgment bar rule has been expressly abrogated by the
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW), the rule that the release of one joint wrongdoer releases all other joint wrongdoers has not been expressly abrogated.
The High Court, interpreting the Australian Capital Territory equivalent of
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
has held that the unity of a cause of action against joint tortfeasors has been effectively severed. This means that there is no
conceptual basis for the rule concerning the release of joint wrongdoers and that it has, therefore, been abrogated.
Section 5(1)(b)
places a limit on the sums recoverable under judgments given where more than one action is brought so that the sums recoverable cannot,
in the aggregate, exceed the amount of the damages awarded by the first judgment. The actions are described as being brought against
tortfeasors liable in respect of the damage “whether as joint tortfeasors or otherwise”.
1.17 Finally,
allows contribution to be recovered by any tortfeasor from any other tortfeasor who would, if sued, have been liable in respect of
the same damage “whether as a joint tortfeasor or otherwise”. This has the effect of abolishing the rule in
Merryweather v Nixan.
GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
1.18 Contribution is a very technical area of the law. The following glossary is provided to assist the reader:
Civil wrong
a wrong other than a crime.
Concurrent liability
occurs where a defendant’s liability to a plaintiff can be placed, at least potentially, on more than one of the bases of tort,
breach of contract, breach of an equitable obligation or breach of a statutory obligation.
Concurrent wrongdoer:
one of two or more wrongdoers (joint wrongdoers and/or several wrongdoers) whose acts concur to produce a single damage to a plaintiff
under the same head of liability.
the defendant claiming contribution (from D2).
the person from whom contribution is sought (by D1).
Joint wrongdoers
one of two or more wrongdoers who produce, by what is taken by law to be the same act, a single damage to a plaintiff.
Joint and several liability
a synonym for “solidary liability”.
Mixed concurrent wrongdoer:
one of two or more wrongdoers (joint wrongdoers and/or several wrongdoers) whose acts concur to produce a single damage to a plaintiff
under more than one head of liability.
the plaintiff.
Several wrongdoers
one of two or more wrongdoers who produce, by independent acts, a single damage to a plaintiff.
Solidary liability
describes a situation where, of two or more concurrent wrongdoers, each is liable severally and all are liable jointly to an injured
person and that injured person may choose to sue each wrongdoer separately or any number jointly and also may choose to recover full
compensation from any one of the wrongdoers against whom judgment is entered.
a civil wrong usually resulting in a defendant’s liability in damages.
Tortfeasor:
a wrongdoer whose liability is grounded in tort; the perpetrator of a tort.
a crime, tort, breach of contract, breach of trust or other equitable obligation, or breach of statutory obligation.
a person who commits a wrong.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of proposals
Abbreviations
Table of Legislation
Table of Cases
Select Bibliography
Table of contents
. Justice Clarke,
(18 April 1984).
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contribution Among Wrongdoers: Interim Report on Solidary Liability
(Report 65, 1990) (“LRC 65”).
. New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department,
Tort Liability in New South Wales
(Legislation and Policy Division, Issues Paper, 1989); New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department,
Tort Liability in New South Wales
(Legislation and Policy Division, Discussion Paper, 1990).
. New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department,
Tort Liability in New South Wales
(Legislation and Policy Division, Discussion Paper, 1990) at para 4.4.
. LRC 65 at para 6.
. See paras 2.17-2.19 and 2.29-2.42.
. On satisfaction see G L Williams,
Joint Torts and Contributory Negligence
(Stevens & Sons, London, 1951) at para 9.
. See generally R Goff and G Jones,
The Law of Restitution
(4th ed, Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1993) Chapters 12-14.
. A third category of wrongdoers, namely those who have committed different wrongful acts and are responsible for different damage
to the plaintiff, is not relevant to this discussion: see B M E McMahon and W Binchy,
Irish Law of Torts
(Professional Books, Abingdon, 1981) at 87.
[1924] P 140.
. J W Salmond,
Salmond’s Law of Torts
(8th ed, Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1934) at 79-80.
Brinsmead v Harrison
(1871) LR 7 CP 547.
Cocke v Jennor
[1792] EngR 516
; (1614) Hob 66;
[1799] EngR 669
(1799) 8 TR 186
101 ER 1337.
. J W Salmond,
Salmond’s Law of Torts
(8th ed, Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1934) at 82. See also
[1924] P 140
and J F Clerk,
Clerk & Lindsell on Torts
(8th ed, Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1929) at 60.
. Later s 84(4) of the
Companies (Consolidation) Act 1908
(Eng) and then s 37(3) of the
Companies Act 1929
Navigation Act 1912
(Cth) deal with collisions between ships outside of Australian territorial waters. In New South Wales apportionment applies to all
claims including those for collisions by vessels inside territorial waters: see J G Fleming,
The Law of Torts
(8th ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1992) at 271.
. A brief history of the introduction of rights to contribution among tortfeasors in Canada may be found in University of Alberta,
Institute of Law Research and Reform,
Contributory Negligence and Concurrent Wrongdoers
(Report 31, 1979) at 2-3. See also D Cheifetz,
Apportionment of Fault in Tort
(Canada Law Books, Aurora, 1981) at 5-11.
. The Tasmanian legislation expressly abrogates the rule:
Tortfeasors and Contributory Negligence Act 1954
(Tas) s 3(3).
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1955
(ACT) s 11.
Thompson v Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd
[1996] HCA 38
(1996) 71 ALJR 131
at 134-135 per Brennan CJ, Dawson and Toohey JJ, at 138 per Gaudron J, and at 151-152 per Gummow J.
Castellan v Electric Power Transmission Pty Ltd
(1967) 69 SR (NSW) 159
at 180 per Asprey JA. The terminology, which is in common use, probably originates in Williams (1951) at para 1.
Discussion Paper 38 (1997) - Contribution Between Persons Liable for the Same Damage
2. Solidary Liability
History of this Reference (Digest)
2.1 Solidary liability, also known as liability in solidum
and joint and several liability, occurs in situations where each of two or more concurrent wrongdoers is liable severally and all
are liable jointly for the damage caused; the injured person may choose to sue each wrongdoer individually or any number jointly,
and also may choose to recover full compensation from any one of the wrongdoers against whom judgment is entered. Proportionate liability
is an opposing form of liability which involves a wrongdoer being liable only for that portion of the damage for which he or she
is judged to be responsible. Under proportionate liability an injured party can only recover from a particular wrongdoer that proportion
of the full compensation which represents the wrongdoer’s liability.
2.2 Since LRC 65 was released in 1990, a further inquiry into the law of solidary liability was instituted by Commonwealth and State
Attorneys General and reported by Professor Jim Davis of the Australian National University. The inquiry was completed in 1995
and recommended the introduction of proportionate liability in certain defined contexts.
2.3 Any change in the law relating to solidary liability necessarily affects rights of contribution, since it is the capacity of the
plaintiff to hold each particular defendant liable for the single damage caused that creates the need for a law of contribution.
If that capacity is removed, there would no longer be a need for defendants to claim contribution. It follows that, if the Davis
Report recommendation for proportionate liability were to be introduced into the law of New South Wales in defined contexts, the
need for a law of contribution in those contexts would disappear altogether. It is therefore necessary to revisit the Commission’s
conclusions relating to solidary liability.
2.4 The conclusions of LRC 65 and the Davis Report will be reviewed after a brief history of the movement away from solidary liability.
THE MOVEMENT AWAY FROM SOLIDARY LIABILITY
2.5 The most influential proposal to vary the application of the doctrine of solidary liability was put by Professor Glanville Williams
in his 1951 publication,
Joint Torts and Contributory Negligence
Williams’ view was that the doctrine should be relaxed in cases where the plaintiff is contributorily negligent or there are
three or more defendants. The aim is to spread the risk arising from an insolvent, or otherwise unavailable, defendant so that the
whole burden would not fall either entirely on the remaining defendant(s), as would be the case if the solidary liability were wholly
retained, or entirely on the plaintiff, as would be the case if the doctrine were abolished.
The relaxation of the doctrine would be achieved by giving P (who was contributorily negligent) a primary judgment against D1 and
D2 severally, leaving P the option, should D2 prove unable to meet the whole of D2’s liability, of applying to the court for
a secondary, or conditional, judgment which would divide liability for so much of D2’s share as remained unpaid between P and
2.6 Williams’ proposals were adopted by the
Civil Liability Act 1961
(Ireland), s 38 of which provides:
(1) Where an action is brought against one or more of concurrent wrongdoers by an injured person who is found in such action to have
been guilty of contributory negligence and it is held to be just and equitable that the plaintiff’s damages should be reduced
under subsection (1) of section 34 having regard to his contributory negligence, the judgment against one wrongdoer shall not be
for the whole of the plaintiff’s recoverable damages but the court shall determine the respective degrees of fault of the plaintiff
and of all the defendants to the plaintiff’s claim at the time of judgment, leaving out of account the degrees of fault of
persons who are not such defendants, and shall give the plaintiff a several judgment against each defendant for such apportioned
part of his total damages as the court thinks just and equitable having regard to that defendant’s degree of fault determined
as aforesaid.
(2) The plaintiff, at any time within the period limited by law for the enforcement of judgments and upon proof that, after taking
reasonable steps, he has failed to obtain satisfaction of any judgment in whole or in part, shall have liberty to apply for secondary
judgments having the effect of distributing the deficiency among the other defendants in such proportions as may be just and equitable.
2.7 Proportionate liability has been found to exist in circumstances where a plaintiff is contributorily negligent in British Columbia,
according to the British Columbia Court of Appeal’s interpretation of its
Negligence Act
2.8 Recent proposals for reform of the law of solidary liability in New South Wales have been made against a backdrop of general concern
amongst professional groups about the increasing costs of liability insurance.
This has been particularly so in the case of accountants and auditors.
Similar concerns have been expressed in other jurisdictions, such as in England, with attacks on solidary liability there being led
by accountants and the building industry.
In South Australia, Victoria and the Northern Territory, legislation has removed solidary liability from cases involving variously
defined building works.
Some judicial dicta in New South Wales have also drawn attention to the potential for injustice in the current system of solidary
INTERIM REPORT ON SOLIDARY LIABILITY
2.9 In July 1990 the Commission produced an interim report, LRC 65,
on solidary liability as part of this reference. The principal conclusions made concerning solidary liability were:
that the existing general rule of solidary liability should be maintained; and
that a system of proportionate liability limited to awards for non-economic loss in personal injury cases should not be adopted.
The general rule of solidary liability
2.10 In recommending that the general rule of solidary liability should be maintained, the Commission considered a number of arguments
for and against a system of solidary liability as well as those for and against the alternative system of proportionate liability.
Arguments in favour of solidary liability
2.11 The arguments in favour of solidary liability tend to focus on the idea of fairness to the plaintiff in an action for damages:
First, solidary liability aims to ensure, as much as possible, full compensation for a plaintiff.
Secondly, solidary liability has the effect of putting the burden of complex legal proceedings on the defendants, who are often more
able to bear it, rather than the plaintiff.
Thirdly, each wrongdoer has caused indivisible damage to the plaintiff, therefore it is just that each wrongdoer is fully liable for
that damage. The fact of the liability of other wrongdoers should not prejudice a plaintiff’s chance of full recovery.
Arguments against solidary liability
Unfairness to defendants.
The principal argument against a system of solidary liability is that it can be unfair to defendants. The system encourages plaintiffs
to target defendants on the basis of their ability to pay rather than their degree of fault or responsibility. The result is that
a defendant may be called upon to pay more than his or her proportionate share of the plaintiff’s damages because of the inability
of other concurrent wrongdoers to pay what would otherwise be their proportionate shares. The Commission was not persuaded by this
argument in as much as, in the vast majority of cases, each wrongdoer is causally responsible for the whole of the loss to the plaintiff.
The issue of the division of responsibility was seen as best arising between the tortfeasors themselves rather than between the plaintiff
and individual wrongdoers. Given that contribution proceedings are available it is considered desirable, especially when the plaintiff
has not contributed to his or her own loss, that the procedural inconvenience involved in pursuing all concurrent wrongdoers should
be shifted to the defendant against whom the action is taken.
The move to apportionment for contributory negligence.
This argument suggests that revision of the doctrine of solidary liability is required because of the move to apportionment for contributory
negligence.
It is argued that, because solidary liability arose at a time when only plaintiffs who were not contributorily negligent could recover
damages, a concurrent tortfeasor should not now be in a position of having to bear full responsibility for compensation when a plaintiff,
who is partly to blame for his or her own loss, can still receive a proportion of the damages which would otherwise have been due.
However, in many cases a plaintiff’s fault is different in kind to that of a defendant. For example, it may be unfair to equate
a plaintiff’s failure to take adequate care to safeguard his or her own interests with that of a negligent defendant, who may
still be taken to be responsible for the whole of the plaintiff’s loss, or at least the loss after a reduction for contributory
negligence.
The Commission further concluded that the right of a plaintiff to full recovery, even when contributorily negligent, should not be
jeopardised by the removal of the doctrine of solidary liability.
Effect on risk minimisation.
The doctrine of solidary liability is said to have a detrimental effect on risk minimisation in that solidary liability encourages
plaintiffs to take action against well-resourced defendants no matter what their level of responsibility. This will, it is argued,
do little towards encouraging well resourced defendants to engage in risk minimisation. The Commission was not convinced by this
argument, first, because it does not take into account the existence of a system of contribution between tortfeasors and, secondly,
because the argument concentrates on the incentive to minimise comparative fault rather than the more fundamental concern to avoid
negligence altogether.
The liability insurance crisis.
The doctrine of solidary liability has also been seen as contributing to the growing costs of insurance, in particular in the liability
insurance market. These criticisms have arisen largely as a result of the experience in America. The Commission identified a fundamental
division of opinion in America as to whether the problems in the liability insurance market are the result of the tort liability
system or the practices of the insurance industry itself.
The Commission also observed that there was no firm empirical evidence to assess the impact of the abolition of the doctrine of solidary
liability in those States which had done so as opposed to those which had not. It was noted that it was by no means clear what is
the cause of any perceived problems in the Australian insurance market. The Commission concluded:
While there is anecdotal evidence of an increase in cost of insurance in certain areas, particularly relating to local government
authorities, the Commission is not satisfied that these problems are sufficiently acute to justify a general abolition of solidary
liability. Moreover, it is by no means clear what impact modification of solidary liability would have on these costs in any case.
2.16 Other law reform bodies have reached similar conclusions.
The Ontario Law Reform Commission considered the arguments concerning the liability insurance crisis, including claims that there
is only anecdotal evidence of a crisis with much of the necessary reliable evidence being in the hands of the insurance industry
itself, and concluded that such claims were an unsatisfactory basis on which to alter the present rule of solidary liability.
In New South Wales the Attorney General’s review of tort liability was “prompted by reports of the cost of insurance,
claims of excessive awards of damages and an expansion of findings of liability” but noted in its discussion paper that the
review had been “somewhat hampered by the absence of firm statistical data on many of the issues raised” and relied on
anecdotal evidence from the various submissions received.
2.17 Since the publication of LRC 65 attempts have been made in New South Wales to alleviate the “insurance crisis”, not
by introducing proportionate liability, but by limiting the liability of professionals. The
Professional Standards Act 1994
(NSW), which took effect on 1 May 1995, sets out its objects in
(a) to enable the creation of schemes to limit the civil liability of professionals and others;
(b) to facilitate the improvement of occupational standards of professionals and others;
(c) to protect the consumers of the services provided by professionals and others;
(d) to constitute the Professional Standards Council to supervise the preparation and application of schemes and to assist in the
improvement of occupational standards and protection of consumers.
The Act excludes situations which involve death or personal injury, breach of trust, or fraud and dishonesty.
A scheme under the Act may apply to any class or classes of an occupational association, or to all members of the association.
2.18 The liability to damages of a member of such an occupational association may be limited by either a “monetary ceiling”
or a “limitation amount”. In the case of a monetary ceiling, where specified as part of a scheme, the limitation has
effect for a person who can satisfy the court that he or she has occupational liability insurance cover up to the amount specified
in the monetary ceiling,
or can satisfy the court that he or she holds business assets alone or business assets and insurance coverage amounting to a sum
not less than the monetary ceiling.
A limitation amount, however, is different from a simple monetary ceiling in that it is defined as:
a reasonable charge for the services provided by the person or which the person failed to provide and to which the cause of action
relates, multiplied by the multiple specified in the scheme in relation to the person at the time at which the cause of action arose.
In the case of a limitation amount, where specified as part of a scheme, the limitation operates for a person who can satisfy the
court that occupational liability insurance cover up to the amount specified has been effected,
or that he or she hold business assets or a combination of business assets and insurance sufficient to cover a sum not less than
the limitation amount.
2.19 As at 31 December 1996 three schemes have been approved by the Professional Standards Council:
the scheme administered by the College of Investigators and Remedial Consulting Engineers of Australia which has set a limitation
amount calculated on a multiple of single engagement fees for service;
the scheme administered by the Institution of Engineers Australia and the Association of Consulting Engineers Australia which has
set a limitation amount calculated on a multiple of single engagement fees for service; and
the scheme administered by the Law Society of New South Wales which has set a limitation amount calculated on a multiple of principals
Arguments against proportionate liability
Effect on conduct of proceedings.
LRC 65 identified a number of practical difficulties involved in setting up a system of proportionate liability as an alternative
to solidary liability. The first of these is the question of the manner in which the proportionate share of each concurrent wrongdoer
is to be determined.
It was observed that there would be a problem where all the concurrent wrongdoers were represented in the action, in that the plaintiff
would have an interest in the determination of proportionate liability for each defendant. It would, for example, be in the plaintiff’s
interest to argue for a greater proportionate liability to attach to the defendants who are most able to pay. Where all the concurrent
wrongdoers are not represented in the action, the question arises as to how far a plaintiff should go in taking action against all
those who might conceivably be liable in some degree in case one of the other defendants raises those others’ liability in
order to minimise their own. Adverse impacts on the cost and efficiency of litigation were foreseen, especially in cases where defendants
were subject to winding up proceedings or a petition in bankruptcy.
Plaintiffs may be undercompensated.
It was also suggested that a plaintiff might be undercompensated in some cases, where an initial determination of liability between
the plaintiff and a defendant was different from the proportion determined at a later trial of liability with respect to another
2.22 Options for getting around the difficulties alluded to above included restricting the assignment of shares of liability solely
to the parties to a particular action together with the implementation of a procedure whereby a defendant may join other defendants
to the plaintiff’s claim. This option was still seen by the Commission as expanding the scope and complexity of litigation.
Effect on settlements.
It was also thought that the introduction into litigation of complicated questions of proportionate liability would have the undesirable
effect of hindering parties entering into settlements. The resultant uncertainty in litigation was seen as being more likely to benefit
defendants, in particular those supported by insurers who are generally in a better position to bear the risk of an adverse finding
or protracted proceedings.
2.24 The Ontario Law Reform Commission identified opposing arguments in this area. On one side it was argued that, if solidary liability
were abolished, a defendant’s liability would be lower, easily predicted and settlements would become easier, whereas on the
other side it was argued that a reduction of risk at trial might reduce the incentive to settle. Again, the Ontario Law Reform Commission
concluded that no reliable conclusion could be drawn from these arguments to warrant a change in the current law.
Inappropriate in particular instances.
The Commission also recognised that proportionate liability should not be applied in particular cases, the most obvious being in circumstances
where one defendant is vicariously liable for the negligence of another defendant. It was considered that the application of proportionate
liability in such cases would not be consistent with the principle of vicarious liability and the policy behind it. It was suggested
that close consideration should be given to all cases where one party assumes responsibility for another.
The Commission’s conclusions in the Interim Report
2.26 Balancing the arguments concerning the claims to fairness of both plaintiffs and tortfeasors, the Commission came down in favour
of the retention of solidary liability as opposed to a system of proportionate liability:
It is the Commission’s opinion that the existing system of solidary liability coupled with rights of contribution between tortfeasors
best reflects the substantive rights and responsibilities of a plaintiff on the one hand and of tortfeasors on the other.
Proportionate liability for non-economic loss in personal injury cases
2.27 The possible introduction in New South Wales of a system of proportionate liability in respect of damages for non-economic loss
in actions in negligence for personal injury became an issue because its introduction was favoured in a Discussion Paper released
by the Attorney General’s Department in 1990.
2.28 In addition to the general objections to a system of proportionate liability discussed above, the Commission had the additional
concern about the practical difficulties which would be created by distinguishing between economic and non-economic loss, whereby
a plaintiff seeking full recovery for injuries received would have to proceed under two different regimes: one with respect to non-economic
loss and the other with respect to economic loss.
THE DAVIS REPORT
2.29 In February 1994, the Commonwealth Attorney-General and the Attorney General of New South Wales announced an inquiry into the
law concerning joint and several liability. The reference given to the inquiry was:
To consider whether it is desirable and feasible to alter the present rules on joint and several liability, having regard to:
legislation on proportional liability in Australian and comparable overseas jurisdictions;
reports recommending for or against an alteration of the rules on liability; and
any other relevant matters.
The inquiry is to consider in particular the issue of professional liability and is not to examine the operation of the rules on joint
and several liability in relation to personal injury claims.
Other areas specifically not considered by the inquiry were the setting of monetary limits on liability for purely economic loss and
the range of persons to whom a professional might be liable.
2.30 A Report on Stage One of the inquiry, which sought comments on the various options for reform, was released in July 1994.
The Report on Stage Two (the “Davis Report”), which made specific recommendations for reform, was completed in January
Draft legislation to implement the recommendations of the Inquiry was published in July 1996.
2.31 The Davis Report made a number of recommendations with respect to the limited introduction of a system of proportionate liability.
The principal recommendation was that “joint and several liability be abolished, and replaced by a scheme of proportionate
liability, in all actions in the tort of negligence in which the plaintiff’s claim is for property damage or purely economic
Three other recommendations followed upon this. The first was that “joint and several liability for negligence which causes
only property damage or economic loss be replaced by liability which apportions fault, in all circumstances, among those responsible
for the damage or loss”.
The second recommended that proportionate liability be made available, instead of joint and several liability, for contraventions
of s 995 of the
Corporations Law
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) and equivalent State provisions.
The final recommendation arose from concerns expressed in LRC 65 about the application of proportionate liability in cases of vicarious
liability and proposed that “any change to the present rules on joint and several liability should be expressed not to apply
to instances of vicarious liability”.
Basis for the principal recommendation
2.32 A number of considerations informed the final recommendations of the Inquiry into the Law of Joint and Several Liability.
2.33 First, it was suggested that the major reason advanced in favour of retaining joint and several liability, namely, that the principal
aim of the law of torts is to provide, wherever possible, full compensation to the injured party, was not in doubt with respect to
instances of personal injury. However, this aim did not apply with the same force with respect to cases involving only property damage
and purely economic loss. The Report doubted “whether the interest in financial security should always be completely protected
2.34 The Report went on to suggest that building legislation in Victoria,
South Australia
and the Northern Territory,
which instituted a regime of proportionate liability, showed that there were instances involving damage to property and economic
loss where it was appropriate to subordinate the aim of full compensation to the plaintiff.
2.35 The potential for unfairness in the system of joint and several liability was also noted in circumstances where there is only
one defendant against whom the plaintiff cannot recover. It was suggested that the plaintiff would then do everything to fix even
a small measure of damage on a solvent defendant. This would be unfair in that one who was only marginally at fault would bear the
entire responsibility for compensating the plaintiff.
2.36 The Report dismissed concerns raised about practical problems which were foreseen if a system of proportionate liability were
introduced as “more apparent than real”,
and stated that there was no evidence of problems in the Republic of Ireland where the
Civil Liability Act 1961
has been in force for over 30 years, in British Columbia where a system of proportionate liability has been in place for 10 years,
or in various jurisdictions in the United States. In fact, it was stated, British Columbia has demonstrated that all parties need
not be joined for settlement negotiations to take place.
2.37 The argument that it is becoming difficult to maintain adequate levels of insurance was also raised, it being stated that the
cost of liability insurance for professionals has reached unacceptable levels.
2.38 The Report concluded that the arguments raised in support of the retention of joint and several liability were not appropriate
when one focuses on the liability of professionals and others for damage to property and purely economic loss.
Options considered
2.39 In deciding to adopt a system of proportionate liability in all circumstances with respect to property damage and purely economic
loss, the Inquiry had regard to other options set out in the following paragraphs.
Proportionate liability when the plaintiff is partly at fault.
This option allowed proportionate liability only in circumstances where the plaintiff was contributorily negligent. The Report argued
that, in instances of purely economic loss and property damage, “it is less easy to distinguish between contributing to the
damage suffered and contributing to the breach of duty”,
so that arguments concerning the different nature of a defendant’s liability as opposed to a plaintiff’s could not be
so easily maintained. However, it was argued that the effect of such a system was arbitrary where the extent of the liability of
a defendant, however marginal, depended on the fault of the plaintiff, however marginal. The option, therefore, was not as fair and
just as the recommended option.
Proportionate division of an insolvent defendant’s share.
This scheme allows for a system of proportionate liability only where the plaintiff is contributorily negligent, but also allows that,
when a defendant is untraceable or insolvent, that defendant’s share is divided rateably among the remaining defendants and
the plaintiff. This is the scheme adopted by the
Civil Liability Act 1961
(Ireland) and supported by Glanville Williams. This scheme was not favoured for the reasons already discussed in relation to the first
rejected option, but also because it would require a plaintiff to face court proceedings a second time. It was suggested that the
costs of the adjudication to allocate the defendant’s share was regarded by some as outweighing the fairness of the ultimate
Proportionate liability and the defendant’s degree of fault.
This describes a system whereby a defendant will be proportionately liable so long as the defendant’s share of responsibility
is less than a specified percentage. It would, therefore, help those defendants whose degree of fault was relatively minor. However,
it was considered that whatever percentage was arrived at as the threshold, it would be an arbitrary distinction, with no rationale
for preferring one particular cut-off point over another.
Evaluation of the Davis Report
2.43 It cannot be said that the aim of full compensation applies more to personal harm than to injury to property or purely economic
There are some significant legislative schemes in New South Wales which seek to limit liability with respect to personal injury,
notwithstanding the apparent concern that personal injury victims receive full compensation.
Instances can also be envisaged where loss of property or financial security could be absolutely devastating for those concerned.
Consider the position of a family whose house, certainly their largest if not only asset, is rendered uninhabitable because of the
negligence of a professional. Some plaintiffs might fare better with the loss of, say, an arm than they would if their means of livelihood,
and consequently even physical and mental well-being, was destroyed.
Building Act 1993
(Vic), while it does institute a regime of proportionate liability, also recognises the need to ensure the defendants are able to
pay and, consequently, that plaintiffs are fully compensated by providing for the power to make regulations which:
(a) require building practitioners in specified classes of building practitioners to be covered by professional indemnity insurance,
a performance bond or other liability insurance or insurance scheme; and
(b) specify the kinds and amount of insurance by which building practitioners in each specified class are required to be covered.
Such a provision will ensure that a system which would otherwise be potentially unfair to a plaintiff will, in some cases, protect
plaintiffs by requiring that professionals carry insurance to protect against possible insolvency.
2.45 The systems in Ireland and British Colombia apply proportionate liability in limited instances, such as where the plaintiff is
contributorily negligent. They do not involve a complete abrogation of the system of solidary liability and as such they are subjected
to criticism in other parts of the Davis Report.
In British Columbia, the effect of certain sections in the
Negligence Act
was not fully realised until a decision of the Court of Appeal of British Columbia
interpreted them as providing that, where a plaintiff is found to be contributorily negligent, the liability of the tortfeasors is
not solidary but several.
The British Columbia Law Reform Commission in its 1986 report accordingly recommended that the doctrine of solidary liability not
be abrogated where a plaintiff is found to be contributorily negligent. However, it did seek to mitigate the harsh effect of the
doctrine by recommending that any uncollectible amount be apportioned between the remaining defendants.
2.46 The Davis Report does not provide any evidence that the system of proportionate liability works in Ireland. Since there is no
evidence one way or the other to support a claim about the success, or otherwise, of such a system, the burden of proof must rest
on those who propose so major a change to the law, a burden which has not been discharged.
2.47 The Commission also considers that the following practical difficulties have not been addressed by the Davis Report:
Problems of extent to which the action between P and D1 creates an estoppel in respect of claims between D2 (D3, D4, etc) and D1.
Problems of apportionment: How does a judge apportion in the absence of some defendants, or even all but one defendant? Are other
defendants then bound by that apportionment?
The potential for unwanted complexity which arises from having two sets of rules; one of which applies where economic loss is involved
and the other where it is not,
as well as the complications involved in having cases which only partly involve damage to property or purely economic loss.
2.48 The Commission further sees no necessary reason why arguments in support of the retention of solidary liability are not appropriate
when dealing with the liability of professionals and others for damage to property and purely economic loss. Other law reform agencies
have agreed either impliedly or expressly that solidary liability should not be abrogated.
THE COMMISSION’S VIEW
2.49 We, therefore, restate our opposition to the introduction of a system of proportionate liability and remain unconvinced by the
arguments put forward in the Davis Report. Our support for solidary liability is, of course, dependent on the existence, in principle,
of rights of contribution between joint and several wrongdoers. The rationale for this is examined in the next chapter.
QUESTIONS ARISING IN CHAPTER 2
2.1 Should the existing general rule of solidary liability remain?
2.2 If not, should a system of proportionate liability be adopted?
2.3 Should full compensation to a plaintiff be the first aim of a system of apportioning liability in tort?
2.4 Does the doctrine of solidary liability have a detrimental effect on risk minimisation?
2.5 Is there evidence linking solidary liability with the liability insurance crisis?
2.6 Is limiting the liability of professionals, by legislation such as the
Professional Standards Act 1994
(NSW), preferable to the introduction of a system of proportionate liability?
2.7 Should the apportionment of damages for personal injury be approached on a different basis from the apportionment of damages for
property damage or purely economic loss?
2.8 Should the apportionment of damages for non-economic loss in personal injury cases be approached on a different basis from the
apportionment of damages for economic loss in personal injury cases?
2.9 Should tort law give financial well-being the same protection as physical well-being?
2.10 Should proportionate liability be available only where the plaintiff is contributorily negligent?
2.11 Should the share of an insolvent defendant or one who is otherwise not amenable to the court’s jurisdiction be divided
rateably among the remaining defendants and the plaintiff, either generally or where the plaintiff is contributorily negligent?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of proposals
Abbreviations
Table of Legislation
Table of Cases
Select Bibliography
Table of contents
has been adopted by the New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at para 25 and Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 31.
. J L R Davis,
Inquiry Into the Law of Joint and Several Liability: Report of Stage Two
(Commonwealth of Australia, 1995); and J L R Davis,
Inquiry Into the Law of Joint and Several Liability: Report of Stage One
(Commonwealth of Australia, 1994).
Draft Model Provisions to Implement the Recommendations of the Inquiry into the Law of Joint and Several Liability
(July 1996) have also been released by the New South Wales and Commonwealth Governments.
. See paras 2.29-2.42.
. G L Williams,
Joint Torts and Contributory Negligence
(Stevens & Sons, London, 1951).
. Williams (1951) at 403.
. Williams (1951) at 404. See also Williams at 171-172 concerning cases where at least one of three or more defendants is insolvent
or otherwise unable to meet his or her share of the liability.
. RSBC 1979 c 298,
Leischner v West Kootenay Power and Light Co Ltd
(1986) 24 DLR (4th) 641
at 665-667; and paras 2.36 and 2.45.
. See J L R Davis,
Inquiry Into the Law of Joint and Several Liability: Report of Stage Two
(Commonwealth of Australia, 1995) at 11; New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department,
Tort Liability in New South Wales
(Legislation and Policy Division, Discussion Paper, 1990) at paras 4.4.1-4.4.9.
. See, eg, J Burrows, “Going for Broke”
(22 October 1992) at 23; and “Joint and Several Liability-CLA Proposals” (1997) 11(1)
Commercial Law Quarterly
. See England and Wales, Law Commission, Common Law Team,
Feasibility Investigation of Joint and Several Liability
(Department of Trade and Industry, HMSO, London, 1996) at paras 3.1-3.4. The Common Law Team also noted moves by accountants in Canada:
at para 6.10.
Development Act 1993
Building Act 1993
(Vic) s 131 and 132;
Building Act 1993
(NT) s 155 and 156.
AWA Ltd v Daniels
(1992) 7 ACSR 759
at 877 per Rogers CJ Comm D. But see the comments of Clarke and Sheller JJA (with whom Powell JA agreed) in
Daniels v Anderson
(1995) 37 NSWLR 438
at 572-573.
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Contribution Among Wrongdoers: Interim Report on Solidary Liability
(Report 65, 1990).
. LRC 65 at paras 11 and 44. See also Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 33; New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at para 168; University of Alberta, Institute of Law Research and Reform,
Contributory Negligence and Concurrent Wrongdoers
(Report 31, 1979) at 31.
. LRC 65 at para 16.
. LRC 65 at paras 14-15. See also Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 34.
. Achieved in New South Wales by
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1965
There are conceptual links between the law relating to contributory negligence and the law relating to contribution. Both are concerned
with fairly apportioning responsibility and both become relevant only when the plaintiff has established all the elements of a cause
of action against at least one defendant. However, they also raise quite different and separate issues. The principles for apportioning
liability between wrongdoers will often be different from those which apply to apportioning liability between plaintiffs and wrongdoers.
Some law reform agencies have reviewed both contributory negligence and contribution together: eg, Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) at
; Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at Chapter 10; New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) esp at paras 55-67, 113-128 and 188-195. See also Williams (1951) at
. See also Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 35. In Ontario a conventional figure is often applied in accounting for a plaintiff’s failure to take care notwithstanding
the defendants’ gross negligence.
. The Ontario Law Reform Commission, while acknowledging that arguments in this area are theoretical and speculative, suggested that
potential deep pocket defendants may, in particular, be motivated to implement optimal safety schemes, even those which might otherwise
be considered uneconomic: Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 39.
. LRC 65 at para 32.
. LRC 65 at para 36.
. University of Alberta, Institute of Law Research and Reform,
Contributory Negligence and Concurrent Wrongdoers
(Report 31, 1979) at 33; New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at para 167;
paras 84-89.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 38.
. New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department,
Tort Liability in New South Wales
(Legislation and Policy Division, Discussion Paper, 1990) at paras 3.1-3.2.
Professional Standards Act 1994
Professional Standards Act 1994
Professional Standards Act 1994
Professional Standards Act 1994
Professional Standards Act 1994
s 23(1)(a)(ii).
Professional Standards Act 1994
s 23(1)(a).
Professional Standards Act 1994
s 23(1)(b).
. New South Wales, Professional Standards Council,
Annual Report 1996
. LRC 65 at para 38.
. See also Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 40.
. LRC 65 at para 40.
. LRC 65 at para 42.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 40.
. LRC 65 at para 43.
. LRC 65 at para 45.
. New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department,
Tort Liability in New South Wales
(Legislation and Policy Division, Discussion Paper, April 1990) at para 4.4.
. LRC 65 at para 47.
. J L R Davis,
Inquiry into the Law of Joint and Several Liability: Report of Stage One
(Commonwealth of Australia, 1994).
. J L R Davis,
Inquiry into the Law of Joint and Several Liability: Report of Stage Two
(Commonwealth of Australia, 1995) (“Davis Report”).
Draft Model Provisions to Implement the Recommendations of the Inquiry into the Law of Joint and Several Liability
(July 1996).
. Davis Report at 34.
. Davis Report at 36.
. Davis Report at 39.
. Davis Report at 41.
. Davis Report at 32.
Building Act 1993
(Vic) s 131 and 132.
Development Act 1993
Building Act 1993
(NT) s 155 and 156.
. Davis Report at 33.
. For a history of the provision, which was in force, but its effect not appreciated, before 1986, see para 2.45.
. Davis Report at 36.
. But this is not a problem with contributory negligence.
. An example of an argument in favour of separate treatment of instances of injury to property or purely economic loss may be found
in the Attorney General’s 1990 review of tort liability where it was argued that “[t]here is no interference with a plaintiff’s
physical ability to work and earn money and therefore no compensation for the loss of this capacity. The plaintiff will not be forced
to rely on the social welfare system and will not require ongoing medical and other care”: New South Wales, Attorney General’s
Department,
Tort Liability in New South Wales
(Legislation and Policy Division, Discussion Paper, 1990) at para 4.45.
Motor Accidents Act 1988
Workers Compensation Act 1987
See also J Swanton and B McDonald, “Reforms to the Law of Joint and Several Liability-Introduction of Proportionate Liability”
Torts Law Journal
109 at 121.
Building Act 1993
. See also Swanton and McDonald at 113.
. See para 2.41.
. RSBC 1979 c 298,
Leischner v West Kootenay Power and Light Co Ltd
(1986) 24 DLR (4th) 641
at 665-667.
. Citing Samuels JA’s interpretation of the British Columbia Act in
Barisic v Devenport
[1978] 2 NSWLR 111
at 149. See also Williams (1951) at 409.
. Law Reform Commission of British Columbia,
Report on Shared Liability
(LRC 88, 1986) at 22. This recommendation was more than the mere reversal by the British Columbia Law Reform Commission identified
by the New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at para 167.
. See paras 4.27-4.31.
. This would be further complicated by the suggestion that statutory claims arising out of consumer transactions should also be exempted:
Draft Model Provisions to Implement the Recommendations of the Inquiry into the Law of Joint and Several Liability
(1996) at 3.
. Express statements may be found in University of Alberta, Institute of Law Research and Reform,
Contributory Negligence and Concurrent Wrongdoers
(Report 31, 1979) at 31-33; Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 46-48; New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at para 167, but see discussion at paras 93-98.
Discussion Paper 38 (1997) - Contribution Between Persons Liable for the Same Damage
3. Rationale for Contribution
History of this Reference (Digest)
THE RATIONALE FOR NO RIGHTS TO CONTRIBUTION
The traditional argument against a right to claim contribution
3.1 The traditional reason for not allowing contribution between joint tortfeasors at common law was that the basis of a tortfeasor’s
cause of action for contribution would be that tortfeasor’s own wrongdoing. A court hearing such an action would, therefore,
be required to apportion liability between two wrongdoers in circumstances where both are fully liable to the plaintiff for the whole
of the damages.
The effect of the principle of solidary liability
3.2 As noted in Chapter 2, the existence of rights to contribution between joint wrongdoers is made necessary because the doctrine
of solidary liability essentially allows a plaintiff to choose which wrongdoer to proceed against and leaves open the possibility
that one wrongdoer, once chosen, must pay the full amount of the plaintiff’s loss. However, as Fleming notes, one reason for
not having any right of contribution between joint wrongdoers is that the doctrine of solidary liability, without any right of contribution,
leads to a more effective scheme of loss distribution:
This [the doctrine of solidary liability] had the result in most cases of allocating the loss to him who, in the plaintiffs estimate,
had the deeper pocket. For this reason, the rule against contribution has been defended as a welcome device for promoting loss distribution,
inasmuch as a defendant who is best able to absorb the loss is prevented from obtaining partial or complete reimbursement from a
co-defendant who may be uninsured or financially weak.
3.3 The passage above draws on the arguments of Professor Fleming James of the Yale Law School which were published in 1941 as a defence
of the rule in
Merryweather v Nixan
As among defendants, contribution tends to favour the large and wealthy at the expense of the relatively poor and weak, and for this
reason would bring about a less effective social distribution of accident losses than exist at present.
3.4 The appropriate distribution of loss is the general rationale for the introduction of the
Employee’s Liability (Indemnification of Employer) Act 1982
(NSW), which denies an employer a right of contribution from an employee who has committed a tort and thereby caused the employer
to sustain a loss. This Act was a response to the decision of the House of Lords in
Lister v Romford Ice and Cold Storage Co Ltd
which held that an employee, who was probably not insured, could be required to indemnify an employer for the loss sustained by the
employer. The then Attorney-General stated in his second reading speech on the bill:
The employer is best fitted to absorb or pass on the cost of tort damages on behalf of his servants by pricing and insurance, and
it is socially undesirable to frustrate this function. Similarly, it is no longer acceptable for insurance companies to exercise
their right of subrogation and recover from the employee in the name of the employer, thereby evading their proper function of risk
While the Act does deny, in certain circumstances, the availability of the right to contribution, it clearly accepts that the unfettered
operation of the rule of solidary liability is undesirable and that there is a need, in certain circumstances, to prevent recovery
being sought against the party which is least able to bear the burden.
Law and economics perspective
3.5 Economic theorists have attempted to justify the rule against contribution at common law on the grounds that it provides incentives
for efficient behaviour. In comparison with contribution, solidary liability is cheapest to administer. While actions between defendants
will have a distributive effect, the availability of contribution would have no impact on incentives for efficient accident avoidance.
So, while rules of contribution may deter negligent activity as effectively as solidary liability by itself, contribution, because
of the potential for complexity and multiple parties and actions, is, in fact, more expensive to administer and, therefore, less
THE RATIONALE FOR RIGHTS TO CONTRIBUTION
Solidary liability and arbitrariness as to which defendant is liable
3.6 The principal reason for introducing a scheme for contribution between joint wrongdoers is that the doctrine of solidary liability
allows a plaintiff a wide discretion in determining the defendant against which the plaintiff can proceed. As Fleming notes:
The most controversial aspect of the rule was, no doubt, the power it conferred on the plaintiff to determine the incidence of loss
distribution between co-tortfeasors at his own whim, allowing him to throw the whole loss, if so minded, on one of them and completely
exempt the other.
The basic rationale for equity maintaining rights of contribution was substantially similar:
And the doctrine has an equal foundation in morals; since no one ought to profit by another man’s loss where he himself has
incurred a like responsibility. Any other rule would put it in the power of the creditor to select his own victim; and, upon motives
of mere caprice or favouritism, to make a common burden a most gross personal oppression.
3.7 A recurring theme supporting rights of contribution is the injustice of the plaintiff having a right to decide conclusively which
wrongdoer shall bear the full amount of the plaintiff’s loss. An answer to this point, although ultimately an unsatisfactory
one, is provided by Professor James:
Proponents of contribution never tire of stressing the arbitrary power a plaintiff has in deciding how he will collect a judgment
against two or more tortfeasors. He may be guided by whim, caprice, or spite. He
be, of course, but in fact he usually
guided by an intelligent self-interest.
However, it is such unfortunate occurrences that the law must protect against. The other passages quoted above are evidence of the
underlying concept of fairness which supports rights of contribution between tortfeasors. Where the plaintiff’s damage results
from the wrongful conduct of more than one person it is unfair that the one to whom the plaintiff looks for payment (by suing only
one wrongdoer or pursuing only one following a judgment against all wrongdoers) should bear the whole of the loss.
Unjust enrichment
3.8 Another more recent rationale supporting rights of contribution between wrongdoers is one based on the restitutionary principle
of unjust enrichment. A consideration of the principle of unjust enrichment may help to give further meaning to the concept of fairness
which underlies the law of contribution.
3.9 The most comprehensive consideration of the rationale for the existence and further extension of rights to contribution is contained
in the Report of the Ontario Law Reform Commission.
This Report identifies the principle of unjust enrichment as forming the basis of “nearly all contribution and related claims
at common law and in equity” and also as providing “the underlying rationale of the right to contribution among concurrent
tortfeasors” found in the Ontario
Negligence Act
3.10 The Report states that, in the case of contribution:
D2 has received a benefit by D1’s payment, since D2’s liability to P has been discharged. Put another way, it may be said
that D2 has been unjustly enriched by D1’s payment discharging D2’s liability.
3.11 It is relevant to note that the Ontario Commission uses the same rationale to support the extension of rights of contribution
to wrongdoers whatever the source of their liability. The Commission argues that:
From the foregoing description of the scope of the right to contribution among tortfeasors and other wrongdoers, two general criticisms
of existing law emerge. First, the very reasons that made the rule in
Merryweather v Nixan
unfair apply with equal force to situations where D1 and D2 are concurrent contract breakers, or where one is a contract breaker and
the other a tortfeasor. The absence of a right to contribution allows the injured person to choose the defendant who is to bear the
entire loss for which two or more defendants are legally responsible. If the person sued by the plaintiff has no claim to contribution,
the other will have obtained a benefit that it is unjust to retain. It has been precisely to avoid this kind of injustice that, in
other contexts, equity, the common law, and statutes have provided rights of contribution and indemnity. The particular legal categories
into which the primary liabilities of D1 and D2 to P fall ought to be of no relevance to the secondary legal rights and duties arising
between D1 and D2.
This passage underlines the Ontario Commission’s reliance on the principle of unjust enrichment as the primary rationale for
both the retention and the extension of rights of contribution. Indeed, it has been noted that if this broader view of unjust enrichment
were accepted by the courts, there would be no need to consider the reform of contribution legislation.
However, the principle of unjust enrichment is ultimately an inadequate rationale for contribution in all cases. There are, indeed,
several instances where the Ontario Law Reform Commission decides that the strict application of restitutionary principles would
not be appropriate and would lead to an unfair result.
Proportionality
3.12 In LRC 65 the Commission argued for retaining the doctrine of solidary liability because a system of proportionate liability
would be unfair to plaintiffs who would often recover less than full damages. After balancing the rights of plaintiffs and tortfeasors,
the Commission concluded that the doctrine of solidary liability should be retained. In reaching this conclusion we did not reject
a system of apportioning liability where such apportionment merely determined the levels of contribution between wrongdoers. A scheme
providing for rights of contribution between wrongdoers provides a way of ensuring that, as far as possible, there is a rational
connection between the extent of a defendant’s responsibility for the loss sustained by a plaintiff and the degree of liability
which that defendant is required to bear.
3.13 The Scottish Law Commission chose to rely chiefly on a similar principle in support of the existence of a right to claim contribution:
The principle underlying one person’s right to claim relief from another is that he has discharged the proper debt or liability
of that other person.
CONCLUSIONS OF OTHER LAW REFORM AGENCIES
3.14 A number of law reform agencies have considered whether the law relating to contribution between concurrent wrongdoers should
be reformed. None of these agencies has recommended that rights of contribution apply to a more limited range of causes of action.
In fact most have extended rights of contribution to heads of liability other than tort.
3.15 There are strong reasons for retaining rights of contribution between wrongdoers. A plaintiff’s right to obtain full compensation
for an injury is protected without allowing the plaintiff the ultimate discretion of determining which defendants are liable to pay
that compensation. At the same time, each defendant is expected to pay an amount of damages equivalent to the extent of that defendant’s
responsibility for the harm sustained by the plaintiff. Where rights of contribution create an imbalance in the rights of plaintiffs
and tortfeasors, it may be necessary to limit, in particular circumstances, the rights available to defendants. The enactment of
Employees Liability (Indemnification of Employer) Act 1982
(NSW) is an example of a response to circumstances in which a right of contribution created an injustice by placing liability on
the defendant usually least able to bear that liability. In general, therefore, a scheme of rights of contribution between tortfeasors
appears to be justified.
QUESTION ARISING IN CHAPTER 3
3.1 Should rights of contribution be retained where solidary liability prevails
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of proposals
Abbreviations
Table of Legislation
Table of Cases
Select Bibliography
Table of contents
Merryweather v Nixan
[1799] EngR 669
101 ER 1337
. J G Fleming,
The Law of Torts
(8th ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1992) at 260.
. F James, “Contribution Among Joint Tortfeasors: A Pragmatic Criticism”
Harvard Law Review
at 1167. See also Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 55-56.
[1956] UKHL 6
[1957] AC 555.
McGrath v Council of the Municipality of Fairfield
[1985] HCA 33
(1985) 156 CLR 672.
In this case the Court decided that the
Employee’s Liability (Indemnification of Employer) Act 1982
(NSW) prevented an employer from claiming contribution from an employee who was a tortfeasor and who had caused the employer loss.
. New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 10 February 1982 at 1705.
. W M Landes and R A Posner, “Joint and Multiple Tortfeasors: An Economic Analysis” (1980) 9
Journal of Legal Studies
517 at 529-530.
. Fleming (1992) at 260.
Commentaries on Equity Jurisprudence
(3d ed (Eng), Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1920) at para 493.
. F James, “Contribution Among Joint Tortfeasors: A Pragmatic Criticism”
Harvard Law Review
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 50. See also University of Alberta, Institute of Law Research and Reform,
Contributory Negligence and Concurrent Wrongdoers
(Report 31, 1979) at 34-36.
. RSO 1980, c 315.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 70.
. J R Morris,
Apportionment of Civil Liability
(Legal Research Foundation Inc, Publication No 28, 1987) at 6.
. For example, the Commission considered that to “apply a strict restitutionary approach” in the context of D1 seeking
contribution after the settlement, release or waiver by a plaintiff (P) of D2’s liability “would give P too much power
to decide who should ultimately bear the loss”: Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 170. See also the Ontario Report at 153.
. Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) relying on dicta of Lord Murray in
Glasgow Corporation v John Turnbull & Co
[1932] SLT 457
at 459 which stated that in the law of Scotland this principle appeared to be the basis upon which the equitable right to relief
in all cases ultimately rests.
. Law Reform Commission of Hong Kong,
Report on the Law Relating to Contribution Between Wrongdoers
(Topic 5, 1984) at para 5.3; Law Reform Committee of South Australia,
42nd Report of the Law Reform Committee of South Australia to the Attorney-General Relating to Proceedings Against and Contributions
between Tortfeasors and Other Defendants
(1977) at 10-11; University of Alberta, Institute of Law Research and Reform,
Contribution, Negligence and Concurrent Wrongdoers
(Report 31, 1979) at 40-52; Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan,
Proposals Relating to Joint Obligations
(Report to the Minister of Justice,
1985) at 8-10; Victoria, Chief Justice’s Law Reform Committee,
Contribution
(1979) at para 5; England and Wales, Law Commission,
Law of Contract: Report on Contribution
(Law Com 79, 1977) at para 33.
Discussion Paper 38 (1997) - Contribution Between Persons Liable for the Same Damage
4. Contribution Between Concurrent Tortfeasors
History of this Reference (Digest)
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW) provides:
(1) Where damage is suffered by any person as a result of a tort (whether a crime or not)-
(a) judgment recovered against any tort-feasor liable in respect of that damage shall not be a bar to an action against any other
person who would, if sued, have been liable as a joint tort-feasor in respect of the same damage;
(b) if more than one action is brought in respect of that damage by or on behalf of the person by whom it was suffered, or for the
benefit of the estate, or of the wife, husband, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister, parent or child, of that person, against
tort-feasors liable in respect of the damage (whether as joint tort-feasors or otherwise) the sums recovered under the judgments
given in those actions by way of damages shall not in the aggregate exceed the amount of the damages awarded by the judgment first
given; and in any of those actions, other than that in which judgment is first given, the plaintiff shall not be entitled to costs
unless the court is of opinion that there was reasonable ground for bringing the action;
(c) any tort-feasor liable in respect of that damage may recover contribution from any other tort-feasor who is, or would if sued
have been, liable in respect of the same damage, whether as a joint tort-feasor or otherwise, so, however, that no person shall be
entitled to recover contribution under this section from any person entitled to be indemnified by that person in respect of the liability
in respect of which the contribution is sought.
(2) In any proceedings for contribution under this section the amount of the contribution recoverable from any person shall be such
as may be found by the court to be just and equitable having regard to the extent of that person’s responsibility for the damage;
and the court shall have power to exempt any person from liability to make contribution, or to direct that the contribution to be
recovered from any person shall amount to a complete indemnity.
This is the core provision which seeks to define the circumstances in which one defendant can claim contribution from another defendant
who is also liable to the plaintiff for the same damage.
Sections 2 and 3 of the Act remove some of the important differences between joint tortfeasors and several tortfeasors. Section 2
of the Act provides for the joinder of several concurrent tortfeasors by the plaintiff and s 3 of the Act allows that a defendant
(D1) may join as third parties anyone from whom D1 is claiming contribution. The following discussion will deal with some of the
relevant issues which have arisen as courts have sought to apply s 5(1)(c) in cases where one tortfeasor is seeking contribution
from another concurrent tortfeasor.
TORTS TO WHICH CONTRIBUTION APPLIES
Section 5(1)
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW) has no express exceptions excluding any specific categories of tort. It, therefore, covers all types of concurrent tortfeasors.
One question which arises is whether any specific categories of concurrent tortfeasors should be excluded from the application of
the section.
4.3 In the following sections the arguments for applying rights of contribution to the following torts will be considered:
torts that are crimes;
intentional torts;
torts of strict liability; and
statutory torts.
Torts that are crimes
Section 5(1)(c)
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW) provides that there is a right to claim contribution whether or not the tort committed by D1 is also a crime.
4.5 The argument against allowing a right to contribution where a tort is also a crime is similar to the principle, enunciated in
Merryweather v Nixan
that tortfeasors should not be able to base a cause of action on their own wrongdoing, that is,
on the basis of the commission of a crime.
4.6 The issue of the relationship between civil liability and criminal responsibility has been recently considered by the High Court
Gala v Preston.
The approach of the High Court in this case was that the existence of a joint illegal enterprise was not in itself a reason for denying
the existence of a duty of care. A duty of care would not arise in circumstances where the participants in the joint illegal enterprise
could have no reasonable basis for expecting that the other participants would act with reasonable care, or where the recognition
of the duty of care would affect the normative influence of the criminal law.
4.7 The application of the principle discussed in
Gala v Preston
cannot be directly applied to the question of whether there should be rights of contribution between defendants who have committed
torts that are also crimes. Rights of contribution are concerned with apportioning responsibility between defendants in circumstances
where there is little reason for allowing a plaintiff to decide which defendant should bear the ultimate burden. The principles relevant
to deciding upon the extent of rights of contribution will therefore be different from those relevant to deciding whether there should
be a duty of care between participants in a joint illegal enterprise.
4.8 There are, however, two principles which underpin the decision in
that are directly applicable to such torts. The first is that it is not possible to have a blanket provision preventing rights of
contribution where the tort is also a crime. The range of wrongs which constitute crimes, and the wide variety of contexts in which
those wrongs are committed, prevent the formulation of any firm rule for determining whether a right of contribution should be denied.
This was argued by the English Law Revision Committee in 1934:
At first sight public policy might appear to demand that such an exception would be made at any rate when the crime is wanton and
deliberate and not merely the result of inadvertence. We have, however, come to the conclusion that it is impracticable to draw such
a distinction and that any attempt to exclude from our recommendation torts which are also crimes would produce anomalies (such as
would result from the fact that libel is a crime while slander is not or that negligent driving may amount to a felony) and uncertainties
which it would be undesirable to introduce. Accordingly our recommendation is made without qualification.
The second, related, principle is that the question of whether a defendant should have a right of contribution would depend on the
nature of the crime committed and on the circumstances relevant to the case.
4.9 If these two principles are applied to the question of whether there should be rights of contribution between defendants who have
committed torts that are also crimes, it appears that there are good reasons for maintaining the current legal position. The right
to contribution should be qualified in two ways. First, as was acknowledged in
, the Court should retain a general discretion to determine in particular cases that a wrongdoer should not have a right of contribution.
The basis for such a decision would depend upon the facts of the particular case. Secondly, the right of contribution must be seen
in the context of the discretion of the court to order one defendant to meet the full extent of the plaintiff’s liability.
Intentional torts
4.10 There appear to be no decisions in New South Wales directly on the availability of a right to claim contribution where D1 has
committed an intentional tort. It has been suggested by Glanville Williams that courts may still, as a matter of public policy, apply
the rule in
Merryweather v Nixan
to cases where D1 has committed an intentional tort.
However, given a recent decision in England
which found that an intentional wrongdoer could claim from other wrongdoers,
and similar conclusions based on legislation in Ontario and British Columbia,
it seems that
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW) probably does apply to intentional wrongdoers.
4.11 As already noted, one of the arguments against allowing a right of contribution for intentional torts involves an extension of
the reasoning in
Merryweather v Nixan
for not allowing any rights of contribution between tortfeasors. The damage committed by the intentional tortfeasor, and hence the
basis for the award of damages, is so different from that of other torts that there is no just or equitable way to apportion responsibility.
A second, and related argument, is that intentional torts involve a high degree of wrongdoing and hence tortfeasors should be wholly
liable for committing them.
4.12 The responses to these arguments are essentially the same as the responses to the arguments that there should not be a right
of contribution for tortfeasors who have committed torts that are also crimes. It is not possible to formulate a general rule excluding
rights to contribution for intentional tortfeasors. It is both possible and just for courts to apportion responsibility between defendants
once one defendant’s liability to the plaintiff is established. Thus, rather than attempting to exclude particular kinds of
wrongs as ones not subject to contribution, the courts should be left with a wide discretion as to how to apportion responsibility,
including the right to award full contribution against particular defendants.
4.13 Further arguments in favour of retaining rights of contribution for intentional tortfeasors consider the position of the other
concurrent tortfeasors whose wrongdoing may or may not be categorised as intentional. It can be argued that a negligent concurrent
tortfeasor should not be allowed to escape liability for some share of the harm to a plaintiff simply because an intentional tortfeasor
was also responsible.
There is also the possibility that an intentional tortfeasor could escape liability simply because of the presence of another intentional
tortfeasor against whom the plaintiff seeks recovery.
Torts of strict liability
4.14 Liability which is imposed on a defendant may be strict. Such liability may arise at common law
or, more commonly, by statute. Some statutes such as the
Workers Compensation Act
(NSW) involve statutory rights of contribution.
There is hence no need to consider here the operation of the
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
In relation to other strict liability offences such as that created by
Damage by Aircraft Act 1952
(NSW), the position is not so clear. This provision states that “Where material loss or damage is caused to any person ...
on land ... by ... an aircraft while in flight ... damages in respect of the loss or damage shall be recoverable without proof of
negligence, or intention or other cause of action”. Breach of s 2(2) may be a tort for the purposes of
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
4.15 It appears that, where liability to a plaintiff arises from breach of statutory duty, a tortfeasor will have the right to claim
contribution from another tortfeasor.
The right to claim contribution may be recognised even though the tortfeasors cannot avail themselves of the defence of contributory
negligence in the primary action against the plaintiff.
4.16 The arguments against allowing rights of contribution for strict liability torts are based on the proposition that by creating
a strict liability offence, legislators or courts have clearly specified
the liability for the damage caused is ultimately to fall. There is, therefore, a good basis for excluding rights of contribution
for strict liability torts.
However, it can also be argued that strict liability torts may rather be concerned with ensuring that in certain defined circumstances
an injured plaintiff will recover compensation. Fleming states that the rationale for the
Damage by Aircraft Act 1952
based on fairness, considering the inequality between the parties where one is wholly at the mercy of the other, has not voluntarily
exposed himself to risk, and does not benefit, unlike the other, from the activity.
This explanation for the creation of a cause of action based on strict liability seems to be primarily concerned with ensuring that
any plaintiff injured by aircraft has a cause of action against the aircraft owner. When characterised in these terms there seems
to be no good reason for denying rights of contribution to tortfeasors who have committed strict liability torts. Once the plaintiff
has recovered compensation from a tortfeasor there seems to be no reason for denying that tortfeasor a right of contribution from
another tortfeasor.
4.17 Any recognition of a right of contribution in these circumstances would, as in the case of crimes and of intentional torts, be
qualified by a wide discretion of the court as to the way in which damages are to be apportioned.
Statutory regimes
4.18 There are a range of statutes which create specific causes of action without any reference to rights of contribution. The
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) and the
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) are two statutes which create obligations which plaintiffs may pursue through independent causes of action.
In neither case is there any reference to rights of contribution. There are diverging opinions as to whether the causes of action
created by these statutes are “torts” for the purposes of the
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW) and subject to the right to contribution found in
Heydon has doubted that the statutory right to contribution can apply in the Federal jurisdiction because
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) requires the Federal Court to apply only the “laws relating to procedure” of the State in which it is sitting.
In any case Heydon doubts that s 5(1)(c) could apply to actions under the
Trade Practices Act
, even if it relates to procedure, because a breach of
is not “a tort (whether a crime or not)”. However, he goes on to note that
Wrongs Act 1958
(Vic) would not suffer from the same problem because it refers to a “wrong” which is “sufficiently widely defined
to include a breach of
If New South Wales were to adopt provisions similar to those in Victoria, it would probably have no effect on the
Trade Practices Act 1974
but it would presumably apply to the
Fair Trading Act 1987
4.19 The failure by the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) and the
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) to provide for any rights of contribution between wrongdoers appears to be a major gap in the law.
All tortfeasors may claim contribution
4.20 The Commission has reached the conclusion that the general scheme of rights to claim contribution should be available to all
tortfeasors. The reasons for having a statutory scheme defining rights of contribution apply equally to torts that are crimes, intentional
torts and strict liability torts. In each case the existence of rights to contribution will reduce the discretion of the plaintiff
to determine who ultimately bears the loss and will provide for a just and equitable apportionment between wrongdoers.
4.21 Similar conclusions have been reached by others. Glanville Williams has argued that rights of contribution should apply to all
tortfeasors.
Although the Ontario Law Reform Commission considered this issue in less detail, it also recommended the extension of rights of contribution
to all tortfeasors.
In considering the extension of rights to contribution to all persons liable in damages for the same loss, whatever the basis of
their liability to the plaintiff, some law reform agencies, like the Scottish Law Commission, did not give any consideration to distinguishing
between different torts.
Rights of contribution between tortfeasors should apply to all tortfeasors.
D1’S CLAIM FOR CONTRIBUTION
4.22 The question whether D1 has a right to claim contribution from D2 is considered here in three basic circumstances:
where D1 is sued to judgment
by P - that is, found liable by a process of court;
where D1 has reached a settlement with P, or made some payment which has the effect of reducing D2’s liability; and
where D2 has successfully defeated an action brought by P.
4.23 In the context of the existing rights to contribution provided by
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW), situations where D1 is sued to judgment or has settled with P are concerned with the meaning of “liable” where
the term first occurs in
Where damage is suffered by any person as a result of a tort ... any tort-feasor
in respect of that damage may recover contribution ...
4.24 The situation where D2 has successfully defeated P is concerned with the meaning of “liable” where it occurs for
the second time in
... may recover contribution from any other tort-feasor who is, or would if sued have been,
in respect of the same damage.
Where P obtains judgment against D1
4.25 The question arises, when D1 is found liable to P, whether D2 can dispute D1’s liability to P or challenge the findings
made against D1 in that litigation, as part of D2’s defence to D1’s claim for contribution, when D2 was not a party to
the proceedings between D1 and P. It is clear that where P obtains judgment against D1 in tort, this is sufficient
to found a claim for contribution by D1 against D2. In
Bitumen and Oil Refineries (Australia) Ltd v Commissioner for Government Transport
the High Court quoted with approval a passage from the dissenting judgment of Lord Justice Denning in
Littlewood v George Wimpey & Co Ltd
It seems to me clear that a tortfeasor cannot recover contribution until his liability is ascertained. If he had not been sued and
has paid nothing and admitted nothing, he can have no cause of action for contribution, for the simple reason that he may never be
called on to pay at all. The damaged plaintiff may go against the other tortfeasor only. Once the liability of the first tortfeasor
has, however, been ascertained by judgment against him or by admission, then he has a cause of action for contribution against the
second tortfeasor.
4.26 The High Court then went on to say that:
A decision that the liability imposed by the previous judgment is a liability which par (c) of sub-s (1) contemplated does not necessarily
mean that the tribunal which discharges the responsibility of fixing the amount of contribution under sub-s (2) of
cannot consider whether owing to the fault of the now plaintiff it stands at an excessive figure.
Thus, while D2 cannot defeat D1’s contribution claim on the basis that D1 is not liable to P, D2 can challenge the quantum determined
in the original proceedings as excessive in order to determine what is “just and equitable” in the circumstances.
Finality of a finding that D1 is liable to P
4.27 There are several reasons why any finding in an action between P and D1 should be binding on D2 in a subsequent contribution
1. To the extent that D1 has satisfied the judgment in P’s action, D1 will have conferred a benefit upon D2 by removing or reducing
D2’s liability to P.
2. D1 cannot be said to have benefited D2 officiously, because the payment was made pursuant to a legal obligation.
3. Since D2 can raise against D1’s claim for contribution any defence that should have enabled D2 to defeat or reduce P’s
claim against him or her, D2 is not prejudiced by being bound by the outcome of litigation to which he or she was not a party.
4. Preventing D2 from reopening the issue decided in the action between P and D1 is an efficient use of judicial time and public funds,
and if D2 has to pay P in any event, he or she is not substantially prejudiced by this extension of issue estoppel.
4.28 On the other hand, if D2 is not able to defend D1’s claim for contribution by establishing that D1 ought not to have been
held liable to P in the original litigation, then D2 will have been deprived of a defence that D2 could have raised if D2 had been
brought into the original action as a co-defendant or by D1’s service of a third party notice upon him or her.
4.29 The Irish
Civil Liability Act 1961
specifically implements both aspects of the High Court’s reasoning in the
Bitumen and Oil Refineries
case. Section 29(1) provides:
In any proceeding for contribution, the contributor shall not be entitled to resist the claim on the ground that the claimant who
has paid the injured person was not liable to such person; but, subject to this section and to the general law of estoppel, he may
resist the claim on the ground that he himself is not liable to such person and, for this purpose, may dispute any question of law
or fact even though that question arises also on the liability of the claimant to the injured person; and the contributor may in
the same way dispute the amount of the damage suffered by the injured person.
4.30 The Ontario Law Reform Commission and the New Zealand Law Commission have endorsed the position embodied in the
Civil Liability Act 1961
The Ontario Law Reform Commission favoured an approach that would make the earlier finding as to the existence of liability against
D1 conclusive in a subsequent contribution action. It saw no policy justification for permitting D2 to open up the issue of D1’s
liability in that action. If D2 is liable to P, then, as a general proposition, the payment of money by D1 in satisfaction of his
or her judgment debt to P confers a benefit on D2. It would be unjust therefore, to allow D2 to relitigate the issue of D1’s
4.31 The Ontario Commission also adopted the principle in the
Civil Liability Act 1961
(Ireland) in respect of D2’s right to prove, in the contribution action, that the court erred in assessing the quantum of the
injured person’s loss in P’s action against D1.
The Commission was of the view that there is an important distinction between relitigating the issue of D1’s liability to P
and relitigating the issue of quantum:
[S]ince D2 is, by definition, a wrongdoer, she is not prejudiced by being compelled to accept the fact of D1’s liability. Such
is not the case where the quantum of P’s loss is in issue. Here, the inability to contest the earlier finding may be of critical
importance to D2, who may wish to argue in the contribution claim that, since P’s loss is actually less than that determined
, not all of D1’s payment to P has, in fact, benefited D2. Moreover, it bears emphasizing that, where P’s judgment against
D1 has not been satisfied or where P believes that her loss is more than the court held in her suit against D1, P may commence an
action against D2. In such an action, the court would have to deal with the quantum of the damage suffered by P, obviously without
reference to the results reached on the same issue in
. Accordingly, the Commission cannot see why that very issue ought not to be justiciable in the contribution action.
This is also the position adopted by the High Court in the
Consent judgments obtained by fraud or collusion
4.32 Another issue which should be addressed is whether consent judgments between D1 and P and judgments obtained by fraud or collusion
should be treated as final judgments.
4.33 The New Zealand Law Commission, in considering the finality of judgments for the purposes of contribution claims, excluded consent
judgments or payments into court as being “essentially in the nature of compromise without a determination of liability by
the court”, preferring to consider only judgments given “on the merits”.
In the Northern Ireland case of
James P Corry & Co Ltd v Clarke
it was held that D1 was not a tortfeasor for the purposes of a contribution claim merely because D1 had entered into a consent judgment
4.34 The New Zealand Law Commission also suggested that it should be possible to review a case if the judgment has been obtained by
fraud or collusion on the part of P or D1, but if the judgment is given against D1 “in good faith”, then the New Zealand
Law Commission could see no reason why D2 would be prejudiced if D1 were allowed to rely on the judgment, provided D2 was still able
to challenge his or her own liability to P.
The Ontario Law Reform Commission, despite stating that it could see “no policy justification for permitting D2 to open up
the issue of D1’s liability”, recommended that judgments obtained by collusion or fraud should be an exception to the
general principle. The Ontario Law Reform Commission provided no reasons for allowing this exception.
4.35 However, it can also be argued that there is nothing particularly special about a judgment “on the merits”, after
a fully contested hearing when consent judgments and judgments obtained by fraud or collusion have exactly the same effect, namely,
of discharging some of D2’s liability to P.
In contribution proceedings brought by D1 against D2, following a judgment (whether on the merits or by consent) against D1 in favour
of P, it should be no defence for D2 to establish that D1 was not liable to P. D2 may, however, contest any issue relevant to D2’s
liability to P, even if that issue was decided in favour of P in P’s action against D1, and may also argue that the level of
damages awarded in the judgment given against D1 was excessive.
Where D1 and P settle without judgment
4.36 While the High Court has decided authoritatively that judgment against D1, in an action brought by P, is a sufficient basis for
D1 to initiate a claim for contribution, there is no such statement as to the way in which settlement of a claim between P and D1
will affect D1’s claim for contribution from D2.
4.37 The rights of contribution between concurrent wrongdoers will be affected in part by the kind of settlement reached between the
plaintiff and the settling defendant. We have decided to deal with issues relating to partial settlements separately to those relating
to full settlements.
full settlement
is a settlement between D1 and P that is in full satisfaction of P’s claim. A plaintiff who reaches a settlement with a defendant
may decide to give up all causes of action in relation to that damage. In this instance, the settlement will be the final determination
of all of the plaintiff’s rights in relation to that damage. The primary issue will be whether the settling defendant (D1)
can use the settlement reached with P as the basis of a claim for contribution from D2.
partial settlement
refers to the situation where a person settles a claim by the injured person in such a way that other concurrent wrongdoers remain
liable to P, although the sum that they may be required to pay to the successful plaintiff will be reduced by the amount of the settlement.
In this instance, the settlement will not be a final determination of the plaintiff’s rights in relation to the damage. In
such cases the resolution of rights of contribution between concurrent wrongdoers is rather more complex. Typically, P will reach
a settlement with D2 which is not a final determination of P’s rights in relation to the damage. P will then proceed to bring
a separate action against D1. If this action is successful, D1 may then wish to claim contribution from the settling defendant, D2.
4.38 Two consequential matters should also be raised at this stage, namely the issue of the different legal consequences attaching
to joint wrongdoers and the policy of encouraging settlements.
Joint wrongdoers.
Chapter 7 includes a detailed discussion of the different legal consequences attaching to “joint” wrongdoers rather than
“several” wrongdoers.
One of these consequences is known as the settlement bar rule, which specifies that a release or a release by accord and satisfaction
with a joint wrongdoer discharges the liability of all. It is possible for a plaintiff to retain the right to bring actions against
other joint wrongdoers, but in this case the basis of the settlement between the plaintiff and the settling defendant is a “covenant
not to sue” rather than a release. The aim of the proposals for reform in Chapter 7 is, as far as possible, to remove the distinction
between joint wrongdoers and several wrongdoers. As far as settlements are concerned, it is proposed that the settlement bar rule
be abolished for all joint wrongdoers. The impact of this reform would be that the rules concerning settlements for joint wrongdoers
would become the same as for several wrongdoers. The crucial issue for joint wrongdoers would, therefore, be whether the settlement
reached with the defendant was a final determination of the plaintiff’s rights in relation to the damage.
Policy of encouraging settlements.
In reviewing the way in which settlements affect the law of contribution, there is a policy issue which requires special consideration,
namely that the law of contribution should not discourage parties from settling disputes, that is, by not throwing up barriers which
would prevent either D1 or P reaching a settlement. One way of encouraging settlements is to ensure that P’s decision to settle,
in part or in full, does not adversely affect D1’s claim for contribution. This means that, as far as possible, P’s final
settlement with D1 should be able to be used by D1 as the basis for a claim of contribution from D2.
Full settlements
4.39 There are two issues which arise when D1 settles with P and seeks to use the settlement as the basis of a claim for contribution
against D2. The first is whether D2 can resist this claim on the ground that D1 was never liable to P. The second is whether the
amount for which D1 settled with P should be the sum which the court apportions between D1 and D2 in the contribution proceedings.
Where D1 was never liable to P.
The question whether D2 can resist a claim for contribution brought by D1 on the ground that even though D1 settled with P, D1 was
never liable to P, has not been decided by any appellate court in Australia.
However, in the South Australian case of
Bakker v Joppich
Justice Wells, after discussing the High Court’s decision in
Bitumen and Oil Refineries (Australia) Ltd v Commissioner for Government Transport
Both on principle and authority, I am of the opinion that, with respect to the first question, the word “liable” in the
first line of par (c) of sub-s (1) of s 25
comprehends all circumstances in which a defendant becomes, under any head, legally liable to the plaintiff to pay damages on account
of acknowledged or alleged negligence: liability, within the meaning of that passage exists,
inter alia,
where the defendant has submitted to judgment on that account or has made an accord and satisfaction.
While Justice Wells clearly recognises D1’s entitlement to rely on a full settlement as the basis for a claim to contribution,
it is not clear to what extent D2 can resist the claim on the ground that D1 was not liable to P.
4.41 In England, s 1(4) of the
Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978
(Eng) requires that the settlement between D1 and P is a bona fide settlement, and that D1 “would have been liable assuming
that the factual basis of the claim against him could be established”. This provision seems to mean that D2 will have some
room to resist D1’s claim for contribution on the grounds that D1 was never liable to P.
4.42 The English position can be contrasted with s 3 of Ontario’s
Negligence Act
which specifically deals with settlements. It was held in
Marschler v G Masser’s Garage
that D1 was entitled to recover an indemnity from D2 where D1 had reached a settlement with P, but was subsequently found (in the
contribution proceedings between D1 and D2) not to be liable to P at all. Notwithstanding the fact that D1 was not a “tortfeasor”,
the court ordered that D2 indemnify D1. The court interpreted the term “tortfeasor” as “a person who impliedly
assumes or admits liability when he enters into a settlement”.
In New South Wales, this decision would be the equivalent of finding that D1’s settlement with P rendered D1 “liable”
to P for the purposes of
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
4.43 The Ontario Commission recommended that in the case of full settlements between D1 and P, D1 should be entitled to claim contribution
from D2 and argued that there were good reasons for confirming by legislation the position adopted in
Marschler’s
case and extending it to other heads of civil liability. The only qualification to this was that a court should be empowered to refuse
to make an order for contribution where “the person claiming contribution made the settlement without believing that he was
or might be liable and without regard to any legal proceedings that might be instituted against him by the injured person for the
claim settled”.
The Ontario Commission noted that in so finding, it strayed from the unifying principle of unjust enrichment. If D1 was never liable
to P, then D1’s payment to P cannot be regarded as conferring a benefit on D2. A gratuitous payment would be regarded as a
collateral payment which would not affect the extent of D2’s liability to pay damages to P.
4.44 The basis for the Ontario Commission’s recommendation was that a limitation on D2’s right to resist D1’s claim
for contribution could be justified on a number of grounds:
It would encourage the settlement of claims.
It seems contrary to common sense for D2 to be able to defeat D1’s claim by establishing that D2 was exclusively liable to P,
whereas D1’s claim may succeed if D1 establishes that he or she was indeed liable to P, no matter how small D1’s fair
share of responsibility is ultimately determined to be.
The benefit to D2 will normally be quite clear; D2 has been saved from having to pay a sum to P that he or she could otherwise have
been legally compelled to pay. This is not the kind of “unrequested” benefit for which it is unfair to require D2 to
pay: D1’s payment has not deprived D2 of any real choice about the way in which D2 will allocate his or her resources.
4.45 The limited capacity of D2 to resist a claim for contribution on the grounds that D1 was never liable will encourage settlements
without unduly impinging on the capacity of D2 to defend a claim for contribution. D1 will still have to establish that D2 would
have been liable to P. Where D1 has settled for an unreasonably high figure with P, D2’s position may be protected by allowing
D2 to argue that the quantum of the settlement is excessive.
4.46 The approach of examining the question as part of a broader consideration of general principles was taken by the Scottish Law
Commission which decided that all that should be required to enable D1 to claim contribution from D2 would be a payment by D1 which
has the effect of reducing or extinguishing D2’s liability in damages in respect of P’s loss.
For the purposes of the recommendation “payment” was taken to include payment by provision of goods and/or services where
the value of such could be ascertained.
The Scottish Law Commission particularly rejected the need to show that any agreement reached between the parties was “bona
4.47 The Scottish Law Commission relied heavily on the idea of fairness between concurrent wrongdoers, in particular the idea that
D2 should not be able to benefit by having his or her share of the liability discharged by D1, however gratuitous the payment. Their
recommendation was also formulated bearing in mind the other policy considerations of encouraging settlements and not prejudicing
the position of injured parties.
These objectives appear to have been met in the recommendation. It was considered, in any case, that the greatest safeguard for D2
would be a power in the court to ensure that D1’s right of relief is limited to what would be a just sum having regard to the
extent of D2’s liability to P.
4.48 It should be borne in mind, however, that the approach of the Scottish Law Commission is quite different from the approaches
adopted by other law reform agencies in that, by focusing solely on whether D2’s liability has been discharged by D1, it has
entirely dispensed with the need to consider the questions of establishing D1’s liability as a separate issue.
A settlement between D1 and P which is a final determination of P’s rights in relation to that damage should be the basis of
D1’s right to claim contribution from D2. Where D2 is liable to P, D2 should not be entitled to resist the claim for contribution
on the ground that D1 was never liable to P.
The sum to be apportioned.
The second issue in relation to a settlement between D1 and P is whether the amount of the settlement should be treated as the sum
to be apportioned between D1 and D2. In the South Australian case of
Bakker v Joppich
, Justice Wells stated that the “power to pronounce what is a just and equitable contribution enables the court to make due
allowance for the factor of improvidence, unreasonableness, or negligence on the part of the defendant (D1)” and further stated
the amount which he has agreed to pay on either legal foundation [by submission to judgment or by settlement by accord and satisfaction]
may be used as the basis for assessing contribution, by reference to the percentage of the third party’s responsibility subject
to such variation as may be called for if it clearly appears to the Court that the sum agreed upon is, for one reason or another,
improvident or unreasonable.
Thus the amount agreed to as part of the settlement between P and D1 is the starting point for apportionment between D1 and D2, but
the amount agreed upon in the settlement must be objectively reasonable.
Anderson v Haskins
Justice O’Loughlin expressed the view that in
Bakker v Joppich
Justice Wells had created a presumption of reasonableness in favour of the amount of the settlement between D1 and P:
I feel compelled to say that I support the views expressed by Wells J; they have, in their favour, the benefit of discouraging unnecessary
and expensive litigation. If a judgment or an accord has been struck between parties who have been properly advised, and a third
party, who may be affected, is not bound thereby but may seek to go behind that judgment or accord, it is not a matter of concern
to me that he may face a difficult task in rebutting the presumptions to which I have referred. The onus will still remain on the
party seeking contribution to prove that the third party is liable:
cf Bitumen & Oil Refineries Ltd v Commissioner for Government Transport.
4.51 The majority of the Full Court of the South Australian Supreme Court in
Saccardo Constructions Pty Ltd v Gammon
rejected this interpretation of
Bakker v Joppich
stating that the quantum of the settlement between D1 and P would not be presumed to be reasonable in contribution proceedings initiated
by D1 and that D1 could be required to prove the quantum of damages as in any other suit.
It was felt that the prospect of a potential costs order was sufficient to prevent D2 putting D1 to full proof of the quantification
of damages in the settlement with P.
4.52 Section 1(4) of the
Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978
(Eng) allows that contribution may be claimed by a “person who has made or agreed to make any payment in bona fide settlement
or compromise of any claim made against him” by the injured person. The section has been interpreted to require that a claim
for damages may be quantified by reference to the amount for which P settled only if the settlement figure was reasonable.
4.53 Under s 3 of the Ontario
Negligence Act
, D1 is required to “satisfy the court that the amount of the settlement was reasonable, and in the event that the court finds
the amount of the settlement was excessive it may fix the amount at which the claim should have been settled”. The onus of
proving the reasonableness of the settlement figure is upon D1, who will normally be able to discharge this burden by leading evidence
from which the court can approximate what P would have recovered if he or she instituted legal proceedings. The onus then shifts
to D2, who faces the burden of proving it was excessive.
4.54 The New Zealand Law Commission recommended that, in determining the “distributable sum”, D1 has to show that:
the compromise made by D1 with P was made bona fide; and
D2 is (or was) responsible to P for an amount equal to or exceeding the amount claimed by D1 by way of contribution.
If these matters are proved, the court should proceed to apportion the responsibility of the loss/damage suffered by P between the
defendants.
4.55 With regard to the sum to be apportioned in the contribution proceedings, the Scottish Law Commission observed that the best
way of protecting D2 from an excessive settlement between D1 and P was to ensure that D1’s right to contribution was limited
to a “just sum” and rejected the requirement that a settlement be bona fide for D1 to have a right to claim contribution.
4.56 A presumption of reasonableness in favour of the amount of the settlement or accord between D1 and P still permits D2 to contest
the quantum of the settlement reached between D1 and P. The introduction of such a presumption will encourage settlements and reduce
costly and unnecessary litigation. In this respect, the Commission accepts that the arguments put forward in support of a presumption
of reasonableness by Justice O’Loughlin
are persuasive. The aim of this proposal is therefore to treat a settlement or accord between D1 and P, so far as is possible, in
the same way as a judgment against D1 in favour of P. It appears to the Commission that a more limited review of the settlement figure
reaches an adequate balance between the need to encourage settlements and the need to ensure that the quantum of D2’s contribution
is just and equitable.
4.57 The Commission’s proposal is simpler than the proposal put by the New Zealand Law Commission, which places greater limitations
on D1’s capacity to rely on the settlement with P when claiming contribution from D2. The Commission’s proposal gives
the settlement figure reached between D1 and P a higher status than that recommended by the Ontario Commission, which recommended
that the onus be on D1 to establish that the settlement with P was a “reasonable” one.
In contribution proceedings, the sum agreed to between D1 and P in settlement of P’s claim should have the benefit of a presumption
of reasonableness. D2 may challenge a claim for contribution on the ground that the quantum of the award was unreasonable and the
court may order D2 to pay a sum which the court considers appropriate in the circumstances.
Partial settlements
4.58 There are two basic issues raised by partial settlements, where P retains the right to proceed against other defendants. The
first is whether D1, who is sued to judgment, is able to claim contribution from D2 who, at the time of the claim for contribution,
is no longer liable to P, because D2 and P have already settled. The second issue is whether D2, the settling wrongdoer, can retain
a right to claim contribution from D1 after D1 has been sued to judgment or settled with P. The resolution of these issues is dependent
upon balancing a variety of competing policy concerns:
the interest in encouraging settlements without resort to litigation;
allowing plaintiffs maximum opportunity to recover the full extent of their loss from any or all of the defendants;
not prejudicing those who are not parties to the settlement by an agreement made between the injured person and one of the wrongdoers;
the need to provide clear and workable rules by which the rights and duties of the parties are regulated.
4.59 Under the current law the plaintiff is entitled to obtain full compensation for the harm sustained and each of the tortfeasors
is entitled to pursue their rights of contribution provided for by
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW). In such circumstances, each of the tortfeasors is “liable” to the plaintiff and hence has the right to claim contribution
from other tortfeasors. Each of the tortfeasors is a person who “is, or would if sued have been, liable” and hence can
be the subject of a contribution claim.
4.60 There are three options for dealing with partial settlements:
the first allows for a series of multiple actions which aim to achieve full compensation to the plaintiff and a fair allocation of
liability amongst the tortfeasors;
the second denies any right of contribution to D2, who has settled with P and protects D2 from any claims by D1; and
the third limits the damages which P can recover from D1 having settled with D2.
Multiple actions.
This option allows for a series of multiple actions, the end result of which is that the plaintiff is fully compensated and the concurrent
wrongdoers pay an amount which reflects their degree of responsibility for P’s loss. If P, after reaching a partial settlement
with D2, subsequently brings an action against D1, the quantum of D1’s liability will be reduced by the size of the settlement
between P and D2. In this action, D1 may join D2 and claim contribution from D2 for any amount by which the judgment against D1 exceeds
D1’s fair share of the liability. Similarly, D2 may claim contribution from D1 if D2 has settled with P for an amount which
turns out to be greater than what would otherwise have been D2’s fair share. This option seems to represent the current legal
It was adopted by the
Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978
(Eng) following recommendations by the English Law Commission
and was also recommended by the Ontario Commission.
No right of contribution.
This is the most radical option. It denies any right of contribution to D2, who has settled with P, and protects D2 from any subsequent
claim for contribution by D1, who has either been found liable to P or settled with P. In the action brought by P against D1, P recovers
only that proportion of the loss for which D1 is responsible. Any settlement between P and D2 is ignored for the purpose of quantifying
D1’s liability. This involves a departure from the principle of solidary liability, which requires the court to allocate responsibility
for P’s loss among D1 and the concurrent wrongdoers who have settled, although they are not parties to the litigation. The
overall effect of the scheme is to provide D1 with some certainty but at the expense of throwing the risk of loss on to the plaintiff.
One way contribution.
The third option is the one proposed by Glanville Williams, and subsequently adopted by the
Civil Liability Act 1961
It prevents P, the injured party, from recovering, as a result of a partial settlement with D2 and a judgment against D1, more than
the amount that he or she would have recovered if he or she had not settled with D2. This is achieved by s 17(2) of the
Civil Liability Act 1961
(Ireland), which provides that if P settles with D2 and then sues D1, P’s damages will be the difference between P’s total
loss and the amount of either P’s settlement with D2 or D2’s proposed share of the liability, whichever is greater. D1
has no right of contribution against D2, but D2 may claim contribution from D1. Its major difference from the second option is that
P loses the right to retain any of the benefit obtained as a result of a favourable settlement with D2.
4.64 The third option is less likely to promote settlements than the second option because, if P underestimates the degree of fault
of D2 and settles for too low a figure, P bears any shortfall. P therefore bears the risk of settling at a figure that is too low
without being able to benefit from settling for a figure that is too high. The second option is somewhat better for P because P is
entitled to keep the full amount of the settlement with D2, irrespective of whether that settlement subsequently turns out to be
too high. This benefit for P, together with the protection of D2 from further claims offered by the second option, may have the effect
of encouraging settlements. In contrast, the first option protects the plaintiff’s interests but does so without encouraging
settlements.
4.65 As noted, the current legal position probably preserves the right of P to obtain full compensation and affirms the right of D1,
who is sued to judgment by P, to recover contribution from D2. The process by which each of the parties’ rights is determined
is a complicated one that leaves the settling defendant, D2, vulnerable to claims for contribution after reaching a settlement with
P. There are, therefore, two reasons for considering reform of this area of law. First, the current process for aligning the rights
of the parties is both complex and expensive. Secondly, there is little incentive for D2 and P to reach a settlement so long as D2
remains vulnerable to a claim for contribution.
4.66 There are, however, a number of arguments against any reform of the current legal position. The first is that both the second
and third options involve a greater risk that the plaintiff will be under-compensated. In the case of the second option, there is
also the possibility that the plaintiff will be over-compensated. A proposal by the Commission in conformity with either option would
therefore involve the recognition of a limited exception to the principle that a plaintiff is entitled to full compensation. The
second argument against any reform in this area is that partial settlements do not prevent the plaintiff bringing actions against
any of the other defendants. In this sense, a policy of encouraging partial settlements may or may not be consistent with an overall
policy of encouraging settlements.
4.67 Overall, the Commission is not persuaded that a change in the law is warranted. The current legal position protects the right
of the plaintiff to obtain full compensation for the harm sustained. The relatively complex state of the law is balanced against
the uncertain basis of any policy encouraging other than final settlements. Finally, the current legal position allows the parties
maximum room to negotiate a settlement which would be a final determination of all of P’s rights in relation to the damage.
The Commission proposes that, in the case of a partial settlement between D2 and P, D1 should have a right of contribution from D2;
D2 should have a right of contribution from D1; and P should be entitled to bring an action against D1 in order to obtain full compensation.
Releases and indemnities.
A specific instance of a partial settlement is where P releases D2 from liability altogether, leaving P with a single cause of action
against D1. An example of such an arrangement may be found in
AWA Ltd v Daniels
In this case, the plaintiff, AWA, sued the auditor, Daniels (D1). The auditor cross claimed against the non-executive directors (D2),
claiming contribution from the non-executive directors as defendants liable for the losses incurred by AWA. AWA had, however, given
indemnities and releases to the directors to ensure that they gave evidence in support of AWA’s claim against the auditors.
If the non-executive directors were found to have been in breach of their duties of due care and diligence, which they were not,
D1 (the auditors) would have claimed contribution from them. The non-executive directors would have relied on the indemnities given
to them by AWA with the consequence that the overall level of damages which AWA would have recovered from the auditors would have
been reduced by the amount of the indemnity.
4.69 A release and indemnity given by P to D2 is a special form of a settlement which is not a final settlement. It appears to the
Commission that the same rules should apply for all settlements which are not final settlements.
In circumstances where a release and indemnity is given by P to D2, the rights of contribution between D1 and D2, should be the same
as in the case of partial settlements.
Where P fails in an action against D2
Section 5(1)(c)
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW) provides that a tortfeasor liable in respect of the plaintiff’s damage (D1) may “recover contribution from any
other tortfeasor who is, or would if sued have been, liable in respect of the same damage”. The requirement that D1 may claim
contribution from any other tortfeasor (D2) “who is, or would if sued have been, liable” has given rise to a number of
problems in the following circumstances:
where D1 claims contribution from D2 when D2 has already successfully defended an action against P;
where D1 claims contribution from D2 when P is unable to take action against D2 because of the operation of a time bar;
where P’s action against D2 fails for want of prosecution; and
where P brings an action against D1 and D2 with each defendant joining the other as a third party, and where there is a finding that
D1 is liable to P but that D2 is not liable to P.
4.71 A further consideration arises where D2 is liable for the same damage caused to P as D1, but where the quantum of damages for
which D1 and D2 are each liable is different as would be the case where contributory negligence was available to only one of the
defendants.
Mahony v J Kruschich (Demolition) Pty Ltd
the High Court decided that the reference to “any tortfeasor liable in respect of that
did not require that D1 and D2 each be responsible for exactly the same
. Provided that both D1 and D2 are liable in tort for the same damage, it does not matter that the amounts of damages which each must
pay are different.
Where D2 successfully defends an action “on the merits”
4.72 The issue whether D1 can claim contribution from D2 when D2 has successfully defended an action brought by P depends upon the
meaning of “liable” where it occurs for the second time in
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW). This part of the subsection specifies that any tortfeasor “may recover contribution from any other tortfeasor who is,
or would if sued have been, liable in respect of the same damage”. In
George Wimpey & Co Ltd v British Overseas Airways Corporation
the House of Lords decided that the English equivalent of
prevented any claim for contribution against D2 in these circumstances. In order for D1 to establish a claim for contribution, D1
had to establish either that D2 was liable to P, or that, if D2 had been sued, D2 would have been liable to P. Where D2 had the benefit
of a judgment in an action against P, D2 could not meet either of these criteria. The problem for D1 in this circumstance is that
D1’s rights of contribution are lost in an action to which D1 is not a party. Despite this, the
Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978
(Eng) provides that any judgment by P against D2 “should be conclusive in the proceedings for contribution as to any issue
determined by that judgment in favour of [D2]”.
The Ontario Law Reform Commission recommended the adoption of a rule which prevented D1 claiming contribution from D2 where D2 successfully
defended an action brought by P “on the merits”.
The Ontario Law Reform Commission’s rationale for reaching this conclusion is that if D1 had a right to contribution against
D2, the latter would face a kind of “double jeopardy”.
Finally, the Ontario Law Reform Commission argued that the benefits flowing from allowing D1 to re-open D2’s liability to P
would not outweigh the costs associated in giving D1 this right.
4.73 For these reasons, the Commission’s provisional view is that there be no right of contribution for D1 where D2 has, on
the merits, successfully defended an action brought by P. This does not involve any change in the law and is consistent with the
relevant provision of the
Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978
Where P’s action against D2 is time barred
4.74 A variation of this situation occurs where P brings an action against D1 at a time when P is no longer able to bring an action
against D2 because of the expiration of the limitation period in relation to P’s action against D2.
The related issue of contractual limitations is dealt with in Chapter 6.
Brambles Constructions Pty Ltd v Helmers
the High Court decided that the words “or would if sued have been, liable” in
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW) meant “if sued at any time”. The consequence of this decision is that D1 is entitled to claim contribution from
D2 in circumstances where P’s own action against D2 is statute barred because the relevant limitation period has expired.
, D2 was not successful in defending D1’s claim for contribution because the plaintiff had not attempted to bring the time barred
action against D2. However, in
George Wimpey & Co Ltd v British Overseas Airways Corporation
D2 was successful in defending D1’s claim because P had previously sued D2 and been defeated by the time bar. D1’s success
in making a claim for contribution against D2, therefore, depends on whether P did or did not attempt to take action against D2 once
the cause of action had become statute barred.
However, it can be argued that a successful claim by D2 that P’s action against D1 had previously been found to be statute
barred would not constitute a hearing on the merits and D2 would therefore not deserve protection from a contribution claim by D1
in such circumstances.
4.76 Responses to this situation have been varied. The Scottish Law Commission has recommended that D1 be bound by a finding made
in favour of D2 where P’s right to an action against D2 is barred at the time P commenced an action against, or settled with,
The Ontario Law Reform Commission has recommended that D2 should remain liable to a claim for contribution from D1, even though P’s
right to an action against him or her has become barred, chiefly on the grounds that D1 should not be prejudiced by P’s delay
in instituting proceedings against D2.
Similar reasoning was followed by the New Zealand Law Commission.
The Commission proposes that the rule in
George Wimpey
be modified so that a statute bar in an action between D2 and P should not be a defence to a claim by D1 for contribution from D2
and, therefore, that D1 should only be prevented from claiming contribution from D2 where D2 has been successful on a hearing “on
the merits”.
Where P fails for want of prosecution
4.77 A further, related, issue arises where P’s action against D2 fails for want of prosecution. In
Canberra Formwork Pty Ltd v Civil & Civic Ltd
Justice Blackburn decided that the dismissal of a cause of action for want of prosecution was not a final order determining the question
of liability. Hence the principle in
George Wimpey
did not prevent D1 claiming contribution from D2 in these circumstances. The English Law Commission and the Ontario Law Reform Commission
each recommended that D1’s claim for contribution from D2 be allowed to proceed where P’s action against D2 failed for
want of prosecution.
The Commission sees no reason to reform the rule which allows D1’s claim for contribution to proceed in these circumstances.
Where D2 is found not liable in third party proceedings
4.78 Another issue arises where D1 and D2 are both parties to an action brought by P, and have joined each other as a third party.
It is possible that D1 will be held responsible for P’s loss, while D2 is found to be not liable to P. In these circumstances,
D1 may wish to appeal against the decision in favour of D2 in order to preserve a claim for contribution against D2. An “appeal”
of this kind by D1 is not prevented by operation of the rule in
George Wimpey & Co Ltd v British Overseas Airways Corporation
Castellan v Electric Power Transmission Pty Ltd
the New South Wales Court of Appeal found that D1 had no right to “appeal” from the ruling of the trial judge that D2
was not liable to P. This was because after the trial, D1 had paid the full amount of damages owing to P. In the opinion of Justice
Asprey, this had the effect of discharging the liability of all of the concurrent tortfeasors. Once the liability of all of the defendants
had been discharged, Justice Asprey found that the rule in
George Wimpey & Co Ltd v British Overseas Airways Corporation
prevented D1 claiming contribution from D2.
However, all of the judges in
recognised that, if D1 had not executed the judgment and paid the damages to P, D1 would have had a right of appeal from the ruling
of the trial judge that D2 was not liable to P.
An appeal in these circumstances was allowed in
Kelly v Newcastle Protective Coating Pty Ltd
The Commission is unable to identify any reason why D1’s appeal from the finding of the trial judge in these circumstances
should not be allowed to proceed. As a result, the Commission proposes that the right of D1 to appeal from the finding of the trial
judge in these circumstances should be formally recognised.
In an action brought by P against the contributor (D2), any judgment in favour of D2, following a hearing on the merits, should be
conclusive evidence that D2 is not “liable” to P for the purposes of D1’s claim for contribution against D2, except
1. P’s action against D2 fails for want of prosecution;
2. D1 is appealing from a decision in favour of D2 where both D1 and D2 are parties to the action brought by P and where both are
joined as third parties; and
3. P’s action against D2 fails because the action has become statute barred.
BASIS OF APPORTIONMENT OF LIABILITY
Section 5(2)
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW) provides the basis for apportionment of liability between D1 and D2 in contribution proceedings. This section states that:
In any proceedings under this section the amount of the contribution recoverable from any person shall be such as may be found by
the court to be just and equitable having regard to the extent of that person’s responsibility for the damage.
4.81 The apportionment of liability between wrongdoers is at the heart of a scheme for providing rights of contribution. Apportionment
of liability is also the most difficult element of the right to claim contribution to define with any degree of specificity.
Section 5(2)
allows a court a wide discretion to achieve a just and equitable apportionment, having regard to the extent of each person’s
responsibility. “Responsibility” here is taken to mean more than fault, and invites consideration of individual culpability
as well as of the relevant “causal factors”.
4.82 The High Court in
Bitumen and Oil Refineries (Australia) Ltd v Commissioner for Government Transport
indicated that the quantum of damages for which D1 is liable to P is only the starting point of D1’s claim for contribution
against D2. In establishing the amount which D2 is required to contribute to D1, D2 is entitled to attempt to establish that the
amount of damages paid to P by D1 was unreasonable.
4.83 Further,
provides that an order to make contribution includes the power to order that the contributor make a payment which amounts to a full
indemnity. This provision allows a court a wide discretion in apportioning liability including the power to order one defendant to
pay 100% of the plaintiff’s liability. The extent of this discretion is important in allowing the court to apportion responsibility
between the wrongdoers in a just and equitable way. This may be particularly important where one of the defendants has committed
an intentional tort.
4.84 The English Law Commission recommended retaining the requirement that the amount of contribution recoverable be that amount which
is found to be “just and equitable”.
This formulation has been supported by other law reform agencies.
In considering the appropriate standard for apportionment, the Ontario Commission recommended replacing the existing reference to
“comparative fault” in the
Negligence Act
with a provision similar to s 5(2). The basis of this recommendation was that the formulation in s 5(2) provided for a greater degree
of discretion, which was an essential ingredient for a legislative scheme which would extend rights of contribution to mixed concurrent
wrongdoers.
4.85 In Scotland s 3(2) of the
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1940
provides for the apportionment of liability in that D1 is entitled to recover from D2 “such contribution, if any, as the court
may deem just”.
The Scottish Law Commission found the English provision attractive but felt that the reference to D2’s “responsibility”
could cause problems where defendants were liable on different bases.
Although it was recognised that the English provisions “seemed to work well in practice”, it was decided not to depart
from the existing rule which was seen as “an appropriate formula to enable the courts to take into account a whole variety
of factors which may be relevant in a particular case”.
4.86 The Commission proposes that the discretion in s 5(2), which allows a court to determine the level of contribution on the basis
of a “just and equitable” amount and “responsibility” should be retained, chiefly because no better alternative
has presented itself and these bases work well in the context of contributory negligence where there is an established body of law
dealing with them.
Valuing goods and services
4.87 We have already mentioned the suggestion of the Scottish Law Commission that payments reducing or extinguishing D2’s liability
could include the provision of goods and services.
This reform has also been suggested by other law reform agencies so long as the value of such goods and services can be ascertained.
Such a provision is seen as being particularly appropriate to the settlement of claims in contract.
The Ontario Law Reform Commission recommended that if the provision of goods and services were involved, the court before which the
claim for contribution is brought should place a value on such goods and services so as to determine the amount of contribution recoverable.
The Hong Kong Law Reform Commission also recommended that such forms of payment be included as a means of discharging a defendant’s
liability for the purposes of a contribution claim.
Where the value of goods and services can be ascertained, they should be included as a means of discharging D2’s liability for
the purposes of a contribution claim.
QUESTIONS ARISING IN CHAPTER 4
4.1 Should contribution be available, in the discretion of the court, for torts that are also crimes?
4.2 Should rights to claim contribution extend to intentional wrongdoers?
4.3 Should contribution be available for strict liability torts?
4.4 Are there reasons for not extending rights of contribution to all tortfeasors?
4.5 Should D2 be able to raise a defence in contribution proceedings that D1 was not liable to P?
4.6 Where there is a final settlement between D1 and P, should D2 be able to resist D1’s claim for contribution on the grounds
that D1 was never liable to P?
4.7 In proceedings for contribution should there be a presumption of reasonableness in favour of the amount of the settlement between
4.8 Where P and D1 have settled should D1 be required to prove the quantum of damages in an action for contribution against D2?
4.9 Where P and D2 reach a partial settlement should D2 be entitled to protection from any subsequent claim for contribution by D1
and should D2 be denied the right to seek contribution from D1?
4.10 Where P and D2 reach a partial settlement:
(a) should P be prevented from recovering, in an action against D1, more than P would have recovered if there had been no settlement
with D2; and
(b) should D1 be prevented from claiming contribution from D2?
4.11 Where P and D2 reach a partial settlement:
(a) should D1 have a right of contribution from D2;
(b) should D2 have a right of contribution from D1; and
(c) should P be entitled to bring an action against D1 to obtain full compensation?
4.12 Should the rights of contribution between D1 and D2 in circumstances where a release and indemnity is given by P to D2 be the
same as those outlined in proposal 5?
4.13 Should D1 have a right of contribution against D2 where D2 has, on the merits, successfully defended an action brought by P?
4.14 Should a statute bar in an action between D2 and P be a defence to a claim by D1 for contribution from D2 and if so, why?
4.15 Are there reasons for not allowing D1’s claim for contribution to proceed where P’s action against D2 has failed
for want of prosecution?
4.16 Where D1 and D2 are both joined as third parties to an action, should D1 be allowed to appeal from a finding of the trial judge
that D2 was not liable to P?
4.17 Is the requirement that the amount of contribution recoverable be “just and equitable having regard to the extent of that
person’s responsibility for the damage” appropriate, or is there a more desirable formulation?
4.18 Should goods and services, whose value can be ascertained, be included as a means of discharging D2’s liability for the
purposes of a contribution claim?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of proposals
Abbreviations
Table of Legislation
Table of Cases
Select Bibliography
Table of contents
. The provisions in the other States are substantially similar:
Law Reform (Tortfeasors Contribution, Contributory Negligence, and Division of Chattels) Act
(Qld) s 5 and 6;
(SA) s 25 and 26;
Law Reform (Contributory Negligence and Tortfeasors’ Contribution) Act 1947
Tortfeasors and Contributory Negligence Act
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1956
(NT) s 12 and 13;
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
(ACT) s 11 and 12.
[1797] EngR 399
(1799) 7 TR 186
101 ER 1337.
[1991] HCA 18
(1991) 172 CLR 243.
. In the majority judgment Mason CJ, Deane, Gaudron and McHugh JJ found that there could be no duty of care where the only relationship
between the plaintiff and the defendant was involvement in a joint illegal enterprise and where the criminal activity was, of its
nature, “fraught with serious risks”: see
Gala v Preston
[1991] HCA 18
(1991) 172 CLR 243
at 254. Brennan J, in a separate judgment, found that involvement in a joint illegal enterprise would “sterilise” the
duty of care, otherwise owed to an injured party, only where “the admission of a duty of care impairs the normative influence
of the law creating an offence”:
Gala v Preston
[1991] HCA 18
(1991) 172 CLR 243
at 271-272.
. England and Wales, Law Revision Committee,
Third Interim Report
(Cmd 4637, July 1934) at 7.
Gala v Preston
[1991] HCA 18
(1991) 172 CLR 243
at 270-273.
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
See para 4.83.
[1799] EngR 669
(1799) 8 TR 186
101 ER 1337.
. G L Williams,
Joint Torts and Contributory Negligence
(Stevens & Sons, London, 1951) at 87-88.
. Applying the
Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978
[1993] 1 All ER 521.
Bell Canada v Cope (Sarnia) Ltd
(1980) 11 CCLT 170
(Ont HC). See also Manitoba Law Reform Commission,
Twenty-Second Annual Report 1992-1993
at 31-33. It should be noted that the issue of intentional torts is more relevant to the legislation in some Canadian Provinces than
to legislation derived from the English contribution provisions: see University of Alberta, Institute of Law Research and Reform,
Contributory Negligence and Concurrent Wrongdoers
(Report 31, 1979) at 37-38.
. In any case, the reasoning adopted by the English Law Revision Committee in 1934, and reproduced at para 4.8, must apply similarly
in the case of intentional torts.
Williams (1951) at 87-90 (eg, where the intentional tort is a property related tort such as conversion). Note
that in one sense the difference between intentional and unintentional torts may now be more distinct since the recognition of the
possibility in Australia that there may be no separate tort of negligent trespass: see
Platt v Nutt
(1988) 12 NSWLR 231.
. This argument is similar to some of those concerned with whether the defence of contributory negligence should be available for
tortfeasors who have committed intentional torts: see, eg,
R P Balkin and J L R Davis,
Law of Torts
(2nd ed, Butterworths, Sydney, 1996) at 147-148. The issue of whether there should be a defence of contributory negligence is different
because it involves weighing the impact of the tort against the plaintiff, where the tort may involve invasion of a plaintiff’s
basic rights, against the actions of the defendant. This may be said to require a court to make an apportionment where it would not
be just to do so. A right to contribution however only involves weighing the relative fault of two defendants.
. See Williams (1951) at 87-90; Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 61-63.
. New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at para 178.
. J R Morris,
Apportionment of Civil Liability
(Legal Research Foundation Inc, Publication No 28, 1987) at 8-9.
. The best known instance of strict liability at common law was the former rule in
Rylands v Fletcher
which has now been absorbed by the general principles of negligence:
Burnie Port Authority v General Jones Pty Ltd
[1994] HCA 13
(1994) 179 CLR 520
, especially at 556 per Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ. For other instances of strict liability at common law see
Clerk & Lindsell on Torts
(17th ed, Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1995) at 33-35.
Workers Compensation Act
Leonard v Smith
(1992) 27 NSWLR 5.
. See paras 4.18-4.19 and 5.4-5.5.
. But see, eg,
Southgate v Commonwealth of Australia
(1987) 13 NSWLR 188
which states that liability imposed by the
Damage by Aircraft Act 1952
(NSW) is not a breach of statutory duty, and therefore not a “tort”.
TAL Structural Engineers Pty Ltd v Vaughan Constructions Pty Ltd
[1989] VicRp 51
[1989] VR 545
at 556-557 per Kaye J with whom Hampel and Ormiston JJ agreed. In this case D1’s liability to P was based on the tort of breach
of statutory duty and it was acknowledged that D1’s right of contribution from D2 could be founded on the basis of D2’s
liability to P for either breach of a common law duty of care or breach of statutory duty.
Statutory Duties (Contributory Negligence) Act
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1965
(NSW) s 7. Whether the defence of contributory negligence should be available raises different issues from those that are relevant
in determining whether there should be a right to contribution for breach of statutory duty: see
Williams (1951) at 357-361; Balkin and Davis (1996) at 147-148.
. This is a further example of the application of the reasoning in
Merryweather v Nixan
[1799] EngR 669
(1799) 8 TR 186
101 ER 1337.
. J G Fleming,
The Law of Torts
(8th ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1992) at 331.
. Many provisions of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) create independent causes of action, eg, in
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth), the measure of damages is similar to that in tort:
Gates v City Mutual Life Assurance Society Ltd
(1985) 160 CLR 1
Fair Trading Act 1987
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd v Turnbull & Partners Ltd
[1991] FCA 618
(1991) 33 FCR 265
which says that a breach of
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) is not a tort; but see J C Campbell, “Contribution, Contributory Negligence and
Trade Practices Act
Australian Law Journal
87 which states that the causes of action created by
Trade Practices Act
(Cth) are either “torts” or a form of “statutory tort” and within the terms of
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
. J D Heydon, “Damages under the
Trade Practices Act
” in P D Finn (ed),
Essays on Damages
(Law Book Company, Sydney, 1992) 42 at 53.
. Williams (1951) esp at 94.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 61-65.
. Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) esp at paras 3.1-3.5.
. “Judgment” can be taken to include consent judgments and awards in court annexed arbitrations.
New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at para 220.
George Wimpey & Co Ltd v British Overseas Airways Corporation
[1955] AC 169.
[1955] HCA 1
(1955) 92 CLR 200
. (1953) 2 QB 501 at 519.
Bitumen and Oil Refineries (Australia) Ltd v Commissioner for Government Transport
[1955] HCA 1
(1955) 92 CLR 200
at 212 per Dixon CJ, McTiernan, Webb, Fullagar, Taylor JJ.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 114.
. But in Ireland a claimant (D1) is also considered liable for the purposes of establishing a right to claim contribution where D1
has paid a reasonable consideration for a release or accord either in settling with the injured person without barring the injured
person’s claim against other concurrent wrongdoers or paying to the injured person a sum on account of damages: s 22(2)
Civil Liability Act 1961
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 116; New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at paras 220-234.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 115.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 116.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 116.
. New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at para 220.
[1967] NI 62
. New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at para 226.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 115-116
. See Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) at paras 3.13-3.23; and Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 116 supporting consent judgments as being final.
. This distinction is drawn in Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 90-91 and 96-109
. See paras 7.16-7.31.
. This issue may be complicated by the terms of a settlement in which D1 agrees to make a payment to P without actually admitting
liability. In
Stott v West Yorkshire Road Car Co Ltd
[1971] 2 QB 651 the English Court of Appeal found that such a settlement by D1 could be the basis of a claim for contribution from
D2 but that D1 would, as part of the claim for contribution from D2, have to be able to prove that he or she was liable to P.
(1980) 25 SASR 468.
. Section 25(1)(c) of the
Wrongs Act 1936
(SA), equivalent to
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
Bakker v Joppich
(1980) 25 SASR 468
Stott v West Yorkshire Road Car Co Ltd
[1971] 2 QB 651. This case was, however, decided under the
Law Reform (Married Women and Tortfeasors) Act 1935
In this case the Court found that D1, who settled without admitting liability, was required to establish liability to P. But see the
judgment of Salmon LJ who followed the decision in
Marschler v G Masser’s Garage
(1956) 2 DLR (2d) 484.
. RSO 1980 c 135.
(1956) 2 DLR (2d) 484.
. Quoted in Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 87.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 96. See also pages 87-88 and 95 of the same paper and New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A
Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at 59 which says that it is enough for D1 to show his or her genuine belief at the time of the payment.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 91.
the views of the Scottish Law Commission outlined at paras 4.46-4.48 below.
. See also J R Morris,
Apportionment of Civil Liability
(Legal Research Foundation Inc, Publication No 28, 1987) at 21.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 93.
. Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) at paras 3.20-3.22.
. Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) at para 3.24.
. Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) at para 3.16.
. Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) at para 3.7.
. Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) at para 3.14.
. On this point see: Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) at para 3.17 where it is stated: “Recovery of contribution without proof of D1’s liability
is already possible under the present law where the court simply interpones authority to a joint minute settling P’s action
against D1".
Supreme Court Act 1970
s 101(2)(c).
Bakker v Joppich
(1980) 25 SASR 468
(1989) 8 MVR 425
at 433 (SA SC).
[1991] SASC 3102
(1991) 56 SASR 552
at 559-560.
. The decision was not unanimous. Mohr J, in dissent, found that D1’s settlement with P should have the benefit of a presumption
of reasonableness. The primary rationale for Mohr J’s decision was that such a presumption would discourage unnecessary litigation
(at 555-557).
Saccardo Constructions Pty Ltd v Gammon
[1991] SASC 3102
(1991) 56 SASR 552
at 560-561 per Matheson J and Zelling AJ.
Biggin & Co Ltd v Permanite Ltd
[1951] 2 KB 314 (CA).
. New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at 60.
. Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) at paras 3.14 and 3.16.
Anderson v Haskins
(1989) 8 MVR 425
at 433 (SA SC); see para 4.50 above.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 96-105.
. Balkin and Davis (1996) at 846-847.
. England and Wales, Law Commission,
Law of Contract: Report on Contribution
(Law Com 79, 1977)
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 105-108.
. The third option is the one adopted by the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Leonard v Smith
(1992) 27 NSWLR 5.
(1992) 7 ACSR 759
at 774-775 (affirmed in part as
Daniels v Anderson
(1995) 37 NSWLR 438).
. This was the issue dealt with in
George Wimpey & Co Ltd v British Overseas Airways Corporation
[1955] AC 169.
. For example, where one tortfeasor is liable under a statutory tort which may not allow contributory negligence to be raised.
[1985] HCA 37
(1985) 156 CLR 522.
[1955] AC 169.
Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978
(Eng) s 1(5).
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 168-169; see also England and Wales, Law Commission,
Law of Contract: Report on Contribution
(Law Com 79, 1977) at paras 22, 60-66. The recommendations of the English Law Commission in this respect were not adopted in the
Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978
. See also University of Alberta, Institute of Law Research and Reform,
Contributory Negligence and Concurrent Wrongdoers
(Report 31, 1979) at 76. The Scottish Law Reform Commission was primarily concerned with the great injustice involved in forcing D2
to defend himself or herself a second time on the same ground: Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) at para 3.41.
. See also paras 7.33-7.38.
. See paras 6.24-6.31.
[1966] HCA 3
(1966) 114 CLR 213.
. Reasons for retaining the rule in
are discussed at para 7.37.
[1955] AC 169.
. See also the discussion in
Castellan v Electric Power Transmission Pty Ltd
(1967) 69 SR(NSW) 159.
. Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) at para 3.44.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 157.
. New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at paras 248-249.
. See paras 7.32-7.44.
(1982) 41 ACTR 1.
Hart v Hall & Pickles Ltd
[1969] 1 QB 405 (CA).
. England and Wales, Law Commission,
Law of Contract: Report on Contribution
(Law Com 79, 1977) at para 61; Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 168-169.
(1967) 69 SR (NSW) 159.
at 180. It seems that Asprey JA may have confused the way in which satisfaction of the judgment discharged the liability of all of
the concurrent wrongdoers with the effect of the discharge on the claim for contribution. It will normally be the case that a defendant
will discharge liability to the plaintiff prior to pursuing a claim for contribution. The relevant time for D2 to be liable to P
is at the time at which P sustained the damage. See
Williams (1951) at para 31.
. Asprey JA found that in the absence of the satisfaction of P’s damages by D1, D1 would have had a right of appeal:
at 186-187; Walsh JA found that irrespective of the satisfaction of P’s damages by D1, D1 had a right of appeal:
at 172-175; Holmes JA agreed with the judgment of Asprey JA.
[1973] 2 NSWLR 45.
. This element of the proposal is discussed in paras 7.32-7.44.
(1992) at 263-264.
[1955] HCA 1
(1955) 92 CLR 200
[1993] 1 All ER 521.
. England and Wales, Law Commission,
Law of Contract: Report on Contribution
(Law Com 79, 1977) at para 69;
Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978
(Eng) s 1(2).
. Law Reform Commission of Hong Kong,
Report on the Law Relating to Contribution Between Wrongdoers
(Topic 5, 1984) at para 8.1; New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A
Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at paras 106-109; Victoria, Chief Justice’s Law Reform Committee,
Contribution
(1979) and also
Wrongs Act 1958
See also J R Morris,
Apportionment of Civil Liability
(Legal Research Foundation Inc, Publication No 28, 1987) at 12-15.
. RSO 1980 c 315.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 196.
. “Equitable” is presumably omitted from the formulation because of the Civil Law tradition in Scotland.
. Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) at para 3.54.
. Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) at para 3.55.
. See above at para 4.46.
. For the proposal to extend contribution beyond merely liability in tort see Chapter 6 below.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 117.
. Law Reform Commission of Hong Kong,
Report on the Law Relating to Contribution Between Wrongdoers
(Topic 5, 1984) at para 5.13.
Discussion Paper 38 (1997) - Contribution Between Persons Liable for the Same Damage
5. Contribution and Analogous Rights Between Wrongdoers other than Tortfeasors
History of this Reference (Digest)
5.1 This Chapter is concerned with contribution and analogous rights between wrongdoers other than tortfeasors and deals with statutory
rights of contribution, rights of indemnity and equitable rights of contribution.
RIGHTS OF CONTRIBUTION ARISING OUT OF STATUTORY LIABILITY TO PAY DAMAGES
5.2 A defendant may be required to pay damages to a plaintiff as a result of liability imposed by the operation of a statute. Liability
imposed by operation of statue is wholly defined by the relevant statutory provision and is quite distinct from the operation of
the common law. Liability arising out of the operation of
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) and under
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) are examples.
5.3 Where a defendant is liable under statute to pay damages to a plaintiff, there are two separate issues concerning that defendant’s
rights of contribution. The first is whether the statute itself makes any provision for rights of contribution between concurrent
wrongdoers. The second issue is whether the liability of D1, which is imposed by operation of the statute, can be described as a
“tort” for the purpose of
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
The second issue has been dealt with in the previous Chapter.
Statutory provision for contribution
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(NSW) is an example of a statute which provides that a plaintiff may recover a significantly different quantum of damages than a
plaintiff with a similar injury would recover using the tortious measure of damages. The Act specifically creates a right of contribution
between D1 (the employer) who is liable under the terms of the Act, and D2, who is liable in tort. The right of contribution created
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(NSW) makes specific provision for determining the amount that either D1 and D2 can claim in contribution, given the different extent
of their primary liability to the plaintiff.
5.5 The method of calculating damages against an employer under
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(NSW) significantly reduces a plaintiff’s damages below the amount that would apply under ordinary common law principles. The
overall effect of
is that P’s damages are reduced by the amount by which the damages payable under the Act fall below that provided by common
law. In this way, the employer is liable for the proportion of the damages which reflect the degree of the employer’s fault.
D2, whose damages are calculated according to ordinary common law principles, is liable for the proportion of the total damages which
reflect that defendant’s degree of fault. Finally, if the plaintiff first pursues D2, that defendant has a right to contribution
against the employer for the amount of the employer’s liability.
Statutes which do not provide for contribution
Trade practices legislation
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) does not make provision for rights of contribution between concurrent wrongdoers. The cause of action, and its associated remedies,
created by this statute are different in many respects from existing causes of action in tort. The Commission does not consider these
differences to be a sufficient reason for failing to make provision for any rights of contribution.
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) should be amended to provide for rights of contribution between concurrent wrongdoers.
5.7 The Commission recognises that the rights arising under the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) are similar to those arising under the
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW). The provision of rights of contribution in the
Fair Trading Act
should ideally be mirrored by similar amendments to the
Trade Practices Act
. The Commission, therefore, urges that similar amendments be sought to the
Trade Practices Act
Motor Accidents Act 1988
Motor Accident Act 1988
(NSW) provides that a person is entitled to compensation as the result of an injury caused by the fault of an owner or driver of
a motor vehicle in the use or operation of the vehicle.
The measure of damages is limited in ways which do not apply at common law, for example, by caps on the amount to be recovered. This
Act contains no specific provisions allowing rights of contribution for wrongdoers. Such specific provisions would be important where
the plaintiff’s injury was caused partly by the driver of a vehicle and partly by another defendant who is liable in negligence.
5.9 The Commission considers that the
Motor Accidents Act 1988
(NSW) should include specific provisions dealing with rights of contribution between concurrent wrongdoers
The scheme of contribution rights should follow the principles embodied in the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Proposal 10
Motor Accidents Act 1988
(NSW) should be amended to provide for rights of contribution between concurrent wrongdoers. The rights of contribution provided
Motor Accidents Act 1988
(NSW) should follow the principles set out in the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
RIGHTS OF INDEMNITY
Section 5(1)(c)
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW) currently provides that “no person shall be entitled to recover contribution under this section from any person entitled
to be indemnified by him in respect of the liability in respect of which the contribution is sought”. The position in the
United Kingdom is similar. The
Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978
(Eng) s 7(3) states:
The right to recover contribution in accordance with section 1 above supersedes any right, other than any express contractual right,
to recover contribution (as distinct from indemnity) otherwise than under this Act in corresponding circumstances; but nothing in
this Act shall affect -
(a) any express or implied contractual or other right to indemnity; or
(b) any express contractual provision regulating or excluding contribution;
which would be enforceable apart from this Act (or render enforceable any agreement for indemnity or contribution which would not
be enforceable apart from this Act).
The term “indemnity” in this context refers to the narrow meaning of that term:
[I]t refers to the case where two persons are liable for the same debt or damages, but the liability of one is primary and the liability
of the other is secondary. Where the person primarily liable defaults in his obligation, and the person secondarily liable pays in
his stead, as in the classic case of a guarantee, the payor may normally seek “indemnity” from the other; that is, in
the absence of any contractual provision to the contrary, for example, the payor may recover full compensation from the person primarily
liable. Unlike in the case of contribution, the determination of indemnity claims is based not on comparative fault or negligence,
but on the nature of the relationship between the parties.
This use of the term “indemnity” is to be distinguished from the broader use of the term in
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW) which states that “the court shall have power ... to direct that the contribution to be recovered from any person shall
amount to a complete indemnity”. This refers only to the possibility of a court ordering that D1 recover 100% of his or her
liability from D2.
EQUITABLE RIGHTS OF CONTRIBUTION
5.11 In contrast to the position at common law in relation to contribution between joint tortfeasors, equity recognises rights of
contribution in certain circumstances. In
Albion Insurance Co Ltd v Government Insurance Office of NSW
Justice Kitto stated that “persons who are under co-ordinate liabilities to make good the one loss (eg sureties liable to make
good a failure to pay the one debt) must share the burden pro rata”.
The rationale supporting equitable rights of contribution may be expressed in the following terms:
The claim certainly has its foundation in the clearest principles of natural justice; for, as all are equally bound and are equally
relieved, it seems but just that in such a case all should contribute in proportion towards a benefit obtained by all ... And the
doctrine has an equal foundation in morals; since no one ought to profit by another man’s loss where he himself has incurred
a like responsibility. Any other rule would put it in the power of the creditor to select his own victim; and, upon motives of mere
caprice or favouritism, to make a common burden a most gross personal oppression.
5.12 The central requirement to claim contribution in equity for breach of contract is that the liability incurred by both defendants
must be a co-ordinate liability to make good the one loss. Examples of co-ordinate liability are claims between co-sureties and co-insurers.
Similarly, rights of contribution between co-trustees arise because each of the trustees is liable for the same loss that is defined
as a co-ordinate liability.
This principle would seem to apply generally to breaches of fiduciary duties.
5.13 While there is some uncertainty about the precise definition of a co-ordinate liability, it is clear that there is no equitable
right to contribution where the plaintiff suffers one loss as a result of independent breaches of contracts by two defendants. For
example, where a plaintiff incurs a loss as a result of a breach of contract by an auditor and separately by breach of contract by
an employee, neither defendant has an equitable right of contribution from the other.
5.14 Despite these limitations, which closely define the coverage of rights of contribution between contract breakers, there are a
number of advantages for defendants in using equitable rights of contribution. The procedures for claiming rights of contribution
in equity are more effective than those at common law. In
Tucker v Bennett
Justice Orde put forward the following proposition:
A Court of Equity was peculiarly adapted to deal with the rights of sureties inter se because all might be joined as parties and it
was immaterial who were the plaintiffs and who defendants. A complete account could be taken of the amounts paid by each, whether
to the creditor or by way of partial contribution as among themselves, and the amounts still to be contributed by those who had paid
less than their due proportion and to whom such contribution should be made could all be dealt with in one decree.
5.15 Given the range of advantages for defendants in relying on equitable rights of contribution where they are available, it is perhaps
not surprising that there has been little interest in reforming the rules for contribution between co-sureties. The general approach
of law reform agencies has been to accept that the law in this area is not in need of reform. Representative of this approach is
the conclusion of the Ontario Law Reform Commission:
While it is difficult to justify in principle an assertion that there is some fundamental distinction between apportioning, as between
themselves, the liability of wrongdoers and debtors, two practical considerations support this limitation. First, there appears to
be no significant dissatisfaction with the present law respecting the existing rights to contribution among those who owe debts to
another. Although cases on guarantees appear quite regularly in the law reports, the contentious issues do not seem to relate to
questions of contribution or indemnification. Secondly, the omission of contribution among concurrent debtors avoids overburdening
proposals for law reform in an area that already contains a fair share of complexity.
The Commission concurs with this view, and does not consider that there is a need to reform the law relating to equitable rights of
contribution.
QUESTIONS ARISING IN CHAPTER 5
5.1 Should the
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) be amended to provide for rights of contribution between concurrent wrongdoers?
5.2 Should the
Motor Accidents Act 1988
(NSW) be amended to provide for rights of contribution between concurrent wrongdoers?
5.3 Should the amendments to the
Motor Accidents Act 1988
(NSW) follow the principles set out in the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
5.4 Is there a need to reform the law relating to equitable rights of contribution?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of proposals
Abbreviations
Table of Legislation
Table of Cases
Select Bibliography
Table of contents
. At paras 4.18-4.19.
Leonard v Smith
(1992) 27 NSWLR 5.
This solution to the problem is similar to that proposed by Williams (1951) at paras 32-33.
Motor Accidents Act 1988
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 5.
[1969] HCA 55
(1969) 121 CLR 342.
Albion Insurance Co Ltd v Government Insurance Office of NSW
[1969] HCA 55
(1969) 121 CLR 342
Commentaries on Equity Jurisprudence
(3rd ed (Eng), Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1920) at para 493.
. R P Meagher, W M C Gummow and J R F Lehane,
Equity: Doctrines and Remedies
(3rd ed, Butterworths Sydney, 1992) at 290. An example of the application of the co-ordinate liability requirement may be found in
Spika Trading Pty Ltd v Harrison
(1990) 19 NSWLR 211.
In this case the liability of directors under s 556 of the
Companies Code 1981
(NSW) was found to give rise to a common obligation to meet a co-ordinate liability.
. K S Jacobs,
Jacobs’ Law of Trusts in Australia
(6th ed, Butterworths, Sydney, 1997) at para 2118.
AWA Ltd v Daniels
(1992) 7 ACSR 759
(affirmed in part as
Daniels v Anderson
(1995) 37 NSWLR 438).
In this case AWA Ltd sustained a loss as a result of the breach of contract by both the managing director (contract of employment)
and the auditor. The only right of contribution in this case was that available to the auditor as tortfeasor.
. [1927] 2 DLR 42 at 47; Meagher, Gummow and Lehane (1992) at 287.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 74; see also New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at para 104.
Discussion Paper 38 (1997) - Contribution Between Persons Liable for the Same Damage
6. Contribution Between Mixed Concurrent Wrongdoers
History of this Reference (Digest)
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW) provides that rights to contribution are available only between wrongdoers who are tortfeasors. This chapter, therefore, considers
an issue which has been central to all recent proposals to reform the law of contribution, namely the extension of rights of contribution
to mixed concurrent wrongdoers. The essence of these proposals has been that all wrongdoers liable for the same damage should have
the same rights of contribution as those currently enjoyed only by tortfeasors.
6.2 The extension of rights of contribution to mixed concurrent wrongdoers will add a further degree of complexity to the law as it
will require courts to apportion responsibility between wrongdoers whose liability to a plaintiff differs, with the only common feature
being that each caused the same loss. Difficulties arise particularly where one defendant is liable to the plaintiff as a tortfeasor
and another for breach of contract. The primary aim of this chapter will be to evaluate the various arguments for and against extending
rights of contribution in this context in order to assess whether or not rights to contribution should be extended generally to include
all mixed concurrent wrongdoers.
DIFFICULTIES IN EXTENDING THE RIGHT TO CONTRIBUTION
6.3 There are a number of arguments against extending rights of contribution to mixed concurrent wrongdoers:
1. The on-going development of the common law has made reform unnecessary. The recognition of a wider range of circumstances where
there are concurrent tortious and contractual duties has already extended rights of contribution between wrongdoers. This is, however,
subject to the possibility that the plaintiff may be able to choose the head of liability he or she may proceed under, to the exclusion
of all others.
2. Liability arising under different sources of obligation, in particular tort and contract, is fundamentally different in kind. This
gives rise to the following concerns:
Whereas liability in tort is imposed by operation of law, liability in contract arises immediately out of agreements which have been
entered into voluntarily. While it is right for the State to determine rights and liabilities of tortfeasors, it is not right for
the State to use the law of contribution to alter the terms of private agreements.
The underlying principle of contribution is that each defendant is responsible for the same loss, and that each defendant has the
same kind of liability to the plaintiff. The requirement that each defendant be liable to the plaintiff in the same way is the basis
on which a court is able to apportion responsibility between the defendants.
3. The reform will add an unnecessary degree of complexity to an already complex area of law, including problems that will arise
from the fact that there are different bases of assessment of compensation in contract and tort.
The effect of concurrent liability on rights to claim contribution
6.4 The widening range of circumstances in which courts find that wrongdoers have a concurrent liability under different heads of
liability, may have the effect of extending wrongdoers’ rights to contribution beyond situations involving only tort. The full
extent of rights of contribution in such circumstances depends upon two separate issues:
the extent to which courts will find that liability in tort may be concurrent with liability for breach of contract or for liability
arising out of the operation of a statute; and
whether or not the plaintiff to the primary cause of action can prevent D1 claiming contribution by suing D1 only for breach of contract.
Expansion of the tort of negligence
6.5 The expansion of the tort of negligence has potentially widened the circumstances in which one tortfeasor may claim contribution
from another tortfeasor, under the
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
Concurrent duties in statute, common law and equity.
Situations can now be envisaged where claims arising from damage can be founded on tort as well as other bases of liability. An example
may be found in the Western Australian case of
Biala Pty Ltd v Mallina Holdings Ltd
where the plaintiffs claimed equitable compensation for breach of fiduciary duty, damages under s 574(8) of the
Companies (Western Australia) Code
and damages in negligence.
Concurrent duties in tort and in contract.
In recent years there has been some judicial consideration of the existence of concurrent duties in tort and contract. The case of
Hawkins v Clayton
which involved the relationship between a solicitor and that solicitor’s client, contains some statements which go against the
traditional view
that the relationship between a solicitor and that solicitor’s client is a contractual one, regulated by the contract alone.
Justice Deane held that there was no need to imply a contractual duty of care in the circumstances of the case where there was a
co-extensive duty of care in tort.
He also held that the tortious duty of care could go beyond the terms of the contract.
Chief Justice Mason and Justice Wilson, in a dissenting judgment, agreed in substance with Justice Deane’s statements but,
unlike Justice Deane, who was in the majority in finding that some form of liability existed, found that there was no implied term
in contract and no liability in tort in the instant case.
6.8 More recently, in
Bryan v Maloney
the High Court considered the question of whether a negligent builder could owe a subsequent purchaser of a property a relevant duty
of care. Chief Justice Mason and Justices Deane and Gaudron observed that the builder and the original owner of the property were
parties to a contract in relation to the house:
Whatever may have been the position in earlier times, the existence of such a contractual relationship between builder and client
did not preclude the existence either of a relationship of proximity between them in relation to that work or of a consequent duty
of care under the ordinary law of negligence.
6.9 The above decisions do not stand for the proposition that all duties arising out of the operation of contract law are concurrent
with duties imposed by operation of the law of tort.
There are duties imposed by operation of the law of contract which will not be concurrent with any duty imposed by the law of tort.
Obligations arising out of terms dealing with fitness for purpose or merchantibility are perhaps examples of obligations in contract
which would not be concurrent with duties imposed by operation of tort.
The plaintiff’s choice of action
6.10 The second issue of equal significance arises where a plaintiff brings an action in contract and the defendant wishes to assert
his or her liability in tort so as to form the basis of a right of contribution.
Brown v Sevrup Fisheries Pty Ltd
the Tasmanian Supreme Court found that there was no right to contribution between joint wrongdoers in these circumstances. Traditionally
the view of the courts has been that the existence of liability in contract meant that a plaintiff’s claim lay in contract
More recently there has been a tendency to allow a plaintiff the choice of the head of liability under which he or she wishes to
Some more recent decisions in New South Wales have not limited the right to contribution in such situations. In
Rap Industries Pty Ltd v Royal Insurance Australia Ltd
Justice Brownie stated that:
... there are many cases where defendants exchange cross-claims amongst themselves but where one defendant is liable in contract as
well as in tort, for example, as the employer of the plaintiff or as the proprietor of an omnibus upon which a fare-paying passenger
is riding when in a collision with another motor vehicle ... where appellate courts have not discerned any such limitation on the
function of sec 5(1)(c) [
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
] ... It seems to me, for example, that the reasoning of the High Court in
Mahony v J Kruschich (Demolitions) Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 37
(1985) 156 CLR 522
is inconsistent with [such a principle].
... The better view it seems to me is the view of Professor Glanville Williams ... which Sheppard J, sitting as a Judge of this Court,
thought sound in
Employers Corporate Investment Pty Ltd v Cameron
(1977) CLC 40-365.
... it seems to me to be entirely consistent with the provisions of the legislation that a defendant sued in contract [may demonstrate]
by evidence and submission at the trial that he is liable in tort and is therefore a tortfeasor liable in respect of the plaintiff’s
damage within the meaning of the statute. I see no reason why he should not be then regarded as other than a person whose liability
as a tortfeasor has been ascertained by judgment.
AWA Ltd v Daniels
, Justice Rogers referred to this passage and followed the approach adopted by Justice Brownie.
In any case, where a wrongdoer is liable in both tort and contract or, in tort and for breach of a statute, a concurrent wrongdoer
may, on this interpretation, be able to maintain a claim for contribution on the basis that both are tortfeasors.
6.12 However, in
Bryan v Maloney
Chief Justice Mason and Justices Deane and Gaudron stated that some aspects of the relationship between duties in tort and contract
were “helpfully and correctly explained” by Justice Le Dain of the Supreme Court of Canada in
Central Trust Co v Rafuse
One of the explanations referred to was as follows:
A concurrent or alternative liability in tort will not be admitted if its effect would be to permit the plaintiff to circumvent or
escape a contractual exclusion or limitation of liability for the act or omission that would constitute the tort. Subject to this
qualification, where concurrent liability in tort and contract exists the plaintiff has the right to assert the cause of action that
appears to be most advantageous to him in respect of any particular legal consequence.
This suggests that there is support in the High Court for the possibility that a plaintiff may choose the basis of liability under
which he or she may proceed against a defendant where liability in tort and contract are concurrent. This would have the effect of
allowing the plaintiff to decide, in some cases, on whom the financial burden of the plaintiff’s damage will ultimately fall.
Different nature of liability in tort and in contract
6.13 Another argument against the extension of rights of contribution to mixed concurrent wrongdoers is that the liability imposed
by the law of tort is of a fundamentally different nature from the liability arising out of the law of contract.
Intrusion of tortfeasors into private contractual arrangements
6.14 The overall effect of the proposed reform to extend rights of contribution will be to alter existing private contractual arrangements
by giving a tortfeasor a right of contribution against a defendant whose breach of contract has caused the same damage to the plaintiff.
There are several specific ways in which an extension of rights of contribution can be seen to intrude illegitimately into existing
private arrangements. These are:
If D2 has entered into a contract limiting or exempting D2’s liability to P, D2 ought not to be made liable to D1 through a
claim for contribution.
A successful claim for contribution by D1 will effectively penalise D2 who has already borne the cost of entering into the contract
P might wish to recover damages from D1 (a tortfeasor) but might not wish to sue D2 (a contractual obligor), for legitimate commercial
reasons. For example, P may have an interest in D2’s financial well-being. In deciding whether to sue D1, P would then have
to decide whether to run the risk of exposing D2 to a claim for contribution. This is, however, not a strong argument.
When P enters into a contract with D2, P is required to pay, in some way, for the contractual obligations owed by D2 to P. A successful
claim for contribution by D1 (a tortfeasor) against D2 will provide D1 with a benefit arising from the contractual relationship for
which P has in effect paid.
Apportionment of liability
6.15 There is also a possibility that the difference in the source of liability of mixed concurrent wrongdoers, D1 and D2, will make
it difficult for courts to decide how to apportion liability between D1 and D2.
6.16 An assumption underlying existing rights of contribution is that the liability of both wrongdoers to the plaintiff is the same.
In the case of equitable rights of contribution, this assumption is an explicit part of the doctrine. We have already noted that,
in order to seek contribution in equity, defendants need to be under a co-ordinate liability to make good the one loss.
The underlying principle of contribution is the requirement that each of the defendants be “equally bound” which is the
basis for the right to be “equally relieved”. A right of contribution is, in this sense, a simple and unproblematic apportionment
of responsibility between defendants who share the same kind of liability to the plaintiff. The law providing for rights of contribution
between tortfeasors is supported by the same rationale. Each defendant is liable to the plaintiff for the same kind of liability,
and apportionment between the defendants is simply required to be “just and equitable”.
6.17 Where the liability of the defendants is different, as in the case of one defendant being liable to the plaintiff for breach
of contract and the other defendant being a tortfeasor, the underlying rationale for the apportionment of responsibility disappears.
The liability of the defendant (D1), who is liable to P in tort, arises because D1 breached a duty imposed on D1 by operation of
the law. The liability of D2 in contract arises because D2 has breached a term of the contract with which D2 had promised to comply.
The only common element between D1 and D2 is that breach of their separate and independent obligations to P caused the harm sustained
by P. In this context it may be argued that a just and equitable apportionment of responsibility, between D1 and D2, is not possible,
because each of the defendants is exposed to an independent liability imposed for different reasons.
6.18 This approach to analysing rights of contribution places a high degree of importance on maintaining distinct boundaries between
the primary categories of legal rights, for example
between rights and duties imposed by the law of contract on the one hand and by the law of tort on the other. However, the simple
answer must be that the courts will do the best they can, just as they do in apportioning liability in cases of contributory negligence,
which involve the apportionment of damages between tortfeasors and plaintiffs, using concepts like “responsibility” and
“causation”.
The Alberta Institute of Law Research and Reform, for example, while recognising that the rules relating to remoteness of damage
and the measure of damages are not precisely the same in tort as in contract, observed that the claims for contribution would only
be available in respect of the same “overlapping damage, flowing from the overlap in liability, whether it arises in tort or
in contract” and concluded that there would not be any serious problems with the proposed reform.
Adding to the complexity of the law
6.19 The extension of rights of contribution to mixed concurrent wrongdoers will give rise to some added complexity for the law in
this area. An example of such an instance is the need to distinguish carefully between the doctrines of subrogation and contribution.
The following example shows the way in which the two principles operate. P sustains damage as a result of D’s negligence. P
has a contract of insurance with A (the insurer) which covers the same loss. P, if fully insured, recovers the loss from A.
A then succeeds, by operation of the doctrine of subrogation, to all of P’s rights against D.
It would not be possible, even with the introduction of rights of contribution between mixed concurrent wrongdoers, for D to entertain
any right of contribution against A in these circumstances. A simple variation on these facts would be that P successfully recovers
from D without claiming under the contract of insurance with A. In this case D cannot claim contribution (even if a right of contribution
arose between mixed concurrent wrongdoers) from A (the insurer) for two reasons. The first is that at the time of D claiming contribution
A has no legal liability to P. The second is that at the time when D claims contribution A is not responsible, by breach of contract,
for causing P the same loss for which D is responsible. The result would be unchanged even if at the time of P suing D for P’s
original loss P had a parallel action against A disputing the terms of the contract of insurance.
6.20 Another area of complexity may arise in the assessment of compensation in contract and tort. The object of damages in contract
is to put P in the position which P would have been in if the contract had been performed,
which leads to the award of expectation damages,
whereas, in tort, the object of damages is to put P in the position he or she would have been in if there had been no tort. Expectation
damages are, therefore, not available in tort. While the protection of P’s expectation may, in particular cases, yield a tortious
result, this is just a coincidence.
6.21 The extension of rights of contribution to cases involving other than liability in tort will also lead to more cases in which
multiple actions will be possible,
especially in light of the Commission’s tentative intention not to propose the introduction of a rule requiring that all claims
for contribution be heard as part of the one action.
ARGUMENTS IN FAVOUR OF EXTENSION
6.22 The case for extending the right to claim contribution to mixed concurrent wrongdoers is essentially a repetition of arguments
in favour of having rights of contribution between concurrent tortfeasors:
the unfairness in giving a plaintiff the right to determine which wrongdoer must ultimately pay for the loss;
the unfairness of denying D1 a right to contribution so that D2, who would also be liable, is unjustly enriched at D1’s expense;
the inappropriateness of relying on the development of concurrent liability as the basis for defining the extent of rights of contribution;
the appropriateness of the principle that, as far as possible, there should be a rational connection between a wrongdoer’s liability
for the harm caused and the wrongdoer’s responsibility for that harm.
6.23 The case for expanding rights of contribution therefore focuses on the responsibility of D1 and D2 for causing the same harm
to the plaintiff. If both the defendants cause the same harm to the plaintiff, the ultimate conclusion is that it is unjust for one
of the defendants to be wholly responsible for compensating the plaintiff and the other not responsible at all.
Where D2 and P have contracted to limit liability
6.24 It is helpful to apply these general arguments to a particular situation which will arise when there are rights of contribution
between mixed concurrent wrongdoers. Consider a situation where D1 and D2 have caused the same harm to P. D1 is a tortfeasor and
D2 has breached a term of D2’s contract with P. The contract between D2 and P, which was concluded before P sustained the harm,
includes a term which either limits or excludes D2’s liability to P.
A satisfactory resolution of this issue is necessary to the success of any proposal to extend rights of contribution to mixed concurrent
wrongdoers. It also requires that a fundamental choice be made about the way in which the proposed scheme of contribution should
6.25 There are three basic responses to the situation where D1 is liable to P in tort and D2 is liable to P for breach of contract:
D1 should have a full right of contribution against D2. This means that D2 would not have the benefit of the contractual exclusion
or limitation of liability in the contribution proceedings instituted by D1, but would have the benefit of the contractual term if
directly sued by P. This option has not been proposed by any law reform agency.
To allow P to recover in full against D1 (the tortfeasor) and limit, according to the contract, D1’s right to claim contribution
To provide that when P brings an action, P is identified with, and is responsible for, that proportion of the loss for which D2 is
responsible. The overall result is that D2 obtains the benefit of the contractual exemption, D1 is responsible for the relevant proportion
of the loss caused to P and the burden of the exemption clause is borne by P.
This option embodies a principle of proportionate liability in that, by requiring that the total amount of P’s damages be reduced
in accordance with a contractual limitation, it leaves the tortfeasor, D1, liable only for that portion of the loss which can be
attributed to D1’s negligence.
P bears D2’s liability
6.26 It appears to the Commission that the limited exception to the principle of solidary liability of making P bear that part of
D2’s liability which is excepted by contract should be rejected. The arguments which led the Commission to recommend that the
principle of solidary liability be retained, and that the principle of proportionate liability be rejected, apply equally to this
D1’s right to contribution limited by contract between D2 and P
6.27 The preferred option is to allow P to recover in full against the tortfeasor, D1, and to limit D1’s right to claim contribution
from D2 according to the contractual limitation or exclusion agreed between D2 and P. In relation to contractual exemptions only,
the Ontario Law Reform Commission considered various alternatives for reform, including that there be no change in the law which
denies D1 the right to claim contribution in such circumstances:
One possibility is to regard the present law as satisfactory and not in need of reform. Some of its strengths have already been indicated.
The first is that it is consistent with the notion that the law of contribution is restitutionary in nature, and that rights of restitution
are generally granted only for the purpose of preventing one person from retaining, without payment, a benefit conferred upon her
by another in circumstances where the recipient of the benefit would thereby be unjustly enriched at the expense of the person who
conferred it. Since D1’s payment to P did not discharge a liability owed by D2 to P, D2 received no benefit from P’s
payment, and should therefore not be required to pay contribution. The fact that D1’s payment to P may have persuaded P not
to launch proceedings against D2 - which, in any event, could not have resulted in a judgment against D2 in P’s favour - does
not constitute a “benefit” the conferral of which could support a restitutionary claim for contribution.
6.28 The result of this argument is that D1 is denied a right of contribution from D2 where the contract excludes all of D2’s
liability to P for the harm caused by D2’s breach of contract.
The application of the principle of unjust enrichment in these circumstances is, therefore, supportive of this approach. The principle
adopted by the Ontario Law Reform Commission to resolve this problem applies equally to cases in which D2 merely limits, rather than
excludes, liability in contract to P.
6.29 The second arm of the Ontario Law Reform Commission’s argument in favour of this option is based on the nature of P’s
claim to compensation from both D1 and D2. The Commission argued that:
[T]o prevent D1 from passing on to D2 any of the liability for the payment made to satisfy P’s claim is not necessarily unjust
to D1: for one thing, D1 would have been liable in the same amount if she alone had caused P’s loss, and for another, there
is no reason why D1 should benefit from the existence of a stipulation in the contract between P and D2 for which D2 bargained with
P. The price of the exemption clause may well be reflected elsewhere in the terms of the contract between P and D2; to allow D1 to
claim contribution from D2 would be to give D1 a benefit for which she has paid nothing.
6.30 The core principle adopted by the Ontario Law Reform Commission is that, even where the plaintiff has dealt with D2 in a way
that affects D1’s claim for contribution, the principle that the plaintiff is entitled to full compensation because he or she
has sustained a single, indivisible loss prevails over D1’s claim for contribution from D2. Other law reform agencies have
supported this conclusion, choosing to respect the contractual arrangements agreed upon before liability was incurred.
This approach has been adopted in England, following recommendations of the Law Commission,
by s 2(3) of the
Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978
which provides as follows:
(3) Where the amount of the damages which have or might have been awarded in respect of the damage in question in any action brought
in England and Wales by or on behalf of the person who suffered it against the person from whom the contribution is sought was or
would have been subject to-
(a) any limit imposed by or under any enactment or by any agreement made before the damage occurred; ...
the person from whom the contribution is sought shall not by virtue of any contribution awarded under section 1 above be required
to pay in respect of the damage a greater amount than the amount of those damages as so limited or reduced.
Determining the contributable sum
6.31 There are a number of options for determining the contributable sum between D1 and D2 in these circumstances. The solution adopted
by the Ontario Commission is:
that the fact that a wrongdoer’s liability to the injured person is limited should be ignored for the purpose of calculating
the amount that she is liable to pay by way of contribution, except for the purpose of ensuring that her liability to contribute
does not exceed the amount in which her liability to the injured person was limited.
The English Law Commission recommended that this was the preferred method for calculating rights of contribution in these circumstances.
VIEWS OF OTHER LAW REFORM AGENCIES
6.32 Several law reform agencies have considered the reform of rights of contribution between concurrent wrongdoers. One of the central
issues discussed in their reports is whether rights of contribution should be extended to mixed concurrent wrongdoers and each has
recommended that they should be.
In a number of cases, these recommendations have been adopted in the form of new legislation defining rights of contribution between
wrongdoers.
THE COMMISSION’S PROVISIONAL VIEW
6.33 The Commission’s provisional view is that rights of contribution should be extended to mixed concurrent wrongdoers. The
Commission is also of the opinion that, if rights of contribution are extended to mixed concurrent wrongdoers, new legislation should
clearly indicate that D2 should retain the benefit of a contractual term limiting or excluding D2’s liability to P in any contribution
proceedings.
Balancing the rights of the parties
6.34 In proposing that rights of contribution be extended to mixed concurrent wrongdoers the Commission bears in mind the arguments
against such an extension of rights of contribution. The Commission notes that there are important differences between obligations
which are voluntarily adopted and rendered enforceable by the law of contract, and obligations which are imposed by operation of
the law of tort and also that the law of contribution will intrude into some private contractual arrangements. If a person breaches
a contract so as to cause harm to the plaintiff, and a tortfeasor causes the same harm to the plaintiff, it seems to the Commission
that exposing the contractual obligor to a claim for contribution is not unduly intrusive. The law provides that both defendants
are subject to civil obligations for breach of which the plaintiff may seek a legal remedy. Basic principles of fairness would suggest
that in these circumstances it is unfair to allow the plaintiff to choose the wrongdoer from whom to recover the loss.
6.35 Where the contractual obligor has limited or excluded liability for the harm caused by the breach of contract different principles
apply. In this instance, the option of protecting D2 from a claim by D1 where D2 has the benefit of a limitation or exclusion in
the contract with P ensures that a fair balance is maintained between the rights of all of the parties to a claim for contribution.
P retains the right to obtain full compensation for the damage from the tortfeasor D1 and D2, whose breach of contract has caused
the same harm to P, retains the benefit of any clause limiting or excluding D2’s liability to P. The tortfeasor (D1) remains
liable for the full extent of the loss caused to P as provided for by the doctrine of solidary liability.
Breaches of trust and other fiduciary duties
6.36 In reaching its conclusion, the Commission has concentrated on instances where mixed concurrent wrongdoers are liable in tort
and contract. Although special considerations would apply where the mixed concurrent wrongdoers were liable in tort or contract and
for breach of fiduciary duty, there seems to be no reason in principle why this would present any difficulties greater than, or substantially
different from, the position where mixed concurrent wrongdoers are liable only in tort and contract. To some extent, equitable principles
have invaded contracts and it is not uncommon for the parties’ contractual relationship to have an equitable overlay.
In principle there should not be a problem, even where a remedy in equity, such as equitable compensation, is competent rather than
damages, since there will be no practical difference. It is conceivable, but unlikely, that the intrusion of equity would, in some
cases, result in the denial of compensation as a matter of discretion. But, generally, rights to contribution should only be affected
where they are excluded in the contract.
6.37 In any case, others have warned against taking too limited an approach to the extension of rights of contribution, lest the omission
of categories of wrongdoers other than those liable in contract will lead to further claims of injustice as has already been the
case with respect to contribution between tortfeasors and wrongdoers who are liable in contract.
Proposal 11
Rights of contribution should be extended to include mixed concurrent wrongdoers. Rights of contribution to mixed concurrent wrongdoers
liable in tort and contract should explicitly provide that a plaintiff’s right to full compensation be protected and that any
defendant whose liability to the plaintiff in contract is limited by a clause limiting or exempting liability to the plaintiff should
have the full benefit of those contractual terms.
Legislative provisions
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
(NSW) provides rights of contribution for tortfeasors who are responsible for a single loss sustained by the plaintiff. The various
proposals to extend rights of contribution to mixed concurrent wrongdoers aim to give all wrongdoers who have caused the same loss
to a plaintiff the same rights and obligations.
6.39 An example of a legislative implementation of the extension of rights of contribution to mixed concurrent wrongdoers may be found
Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978
(Eng). Section 1(1) of that Act provides:
Subject to the following provisions of this section, any person liable in respect of any damage suffered by another person may recover
contribution from any other person liable in respect of the same damage (whether jointly with him or otherwise).
Further, s 6(1) provides:
A person is liable in respect of any damage for the purposes of this Act if the person who suffered it (or anyone representing his
estate or dependants) is entitled to recover compensation from him in respect of that damage (whatever the legal basis of his liability,
whether tort, breach of contract, breach of trust or otherwise).
6.40 The formulation for the extension of rights of contribution proposed by the New Zealand Law Commission is a different example
of such a legislative provision:
This Act applies to loss or damage
(a) which arises wholly or partly from an act or omission of a person, whether intentional or not, including an act or omission that
(i) a tort, or
(ii) a breach of statutory duty, or
(iii) a breach of contract, or
(iv) a breach of trust or other fiduciary duty
whether or not the act or omission is also a crime, and
(b) for which that person has a civil liability to pay damages.
but does not apply to loss or damage arising wholly or partly from a failure to pay a debt or from the fault of two or more ships
within the meaning of Part XIV of the
Shipping and Seamen Act
This New Zealand proposal is not as clear as the English proposal in leaving open-ended the list of bases of liability to which the
provisions apply.
Application of the legislative scheme
6.41 If legislation extends rights of contribution to mixed concurrent wrongdoers it will be necessary to determine whether the legislation
will override existing contractual and equitable rights of contribution. Subject to certain limited exceptions, the Ontario Law Reform
Commission recommended that the proposed rights of contribution should supersede any other right of contribution:
The Commission believes that, as a general principle, the proposed new Act represents an equitable and workable statutory scheme of
contribution that ought to be made applicable to all cases of concurrent wrongdoing. However ... we do appreciate that certain exceptions
should be made to the otherwise universal scope of our Act.
One exception identified by the Ontario Law Reform Commission was the Ontario
Workers Compensation Act
A New South Wales equivalent would be the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(NSW) or any other statutes amended to include similar contribution provisions.
6.42 Similarly, s 7 of the
Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978
(Eng) provides that:
(3) The right to recover contribution in accordance with section 1 above supersedes any right, other than an express contractual right,
to recover contribution (as distinct from indemnity) otherwise than under this Act in corresponding circumstances; but nothing in
this Act shall affect -
(a) any express or implied contractual or other right to indemnity; or
(b) any express contractual provision regulating or excluding contribution;
which would be enforceable apart from this Act (or render enforceable any agreement for indemnity or contribution which would not
be enforceable apart from this Act).
6.43 The Commission regards it as obvious that, where statute establishes a general regime, that regime takes precedence only over
general schemes.
Express contractual provisions, where made, should also be allowed to take effect. However, out of an abundance of caution, the effect
of express contractual provisions should be stated in legislation. The Commission considers that the relationship between statutory
provision and normal equitable rights of contribution could, in light of the development of equitable principles,
become complex. The Commission is provisionally of the view that the equitable regime should continue to operate without any restraint
from the statutory regime. We are mindful of the fact that equitable rights of apportionment, with an emphasis on the maxim “equality
is equity”,
may turn out to be more rigid than the statutory regime. We invite submissions on this issue.
Proposal 12
The proposed legislation defining rights of contribution should supersede all other rights of contribution except equitable rights
of contribution. There should also be a provision allowing that statutory rights of contribution may be modified by express contractual
QUESTIONS ARISING IN CHAPTER 6
6.1 Should rights of contribution be extended to mixed concurrent wrongdoers?
6.2 Where D1 is liable to P in tort and D2 is liable to P for breach of contract, should P be made to bear that part of D2’s
liability which may be excepted by contract?
6.3 Where D1 is liable to P in tort and D2 is liable to P for breach of contract, should P be allowed to recover in full against D1,
and should D2 be allowed to retain the benefit of any contractual term limiting or excluding D2’s liability to P?
6.4 Where D1 is liable to P in tort and D2 is liable to P for breach of contract, should a plaintiff’s right to full compensation
prevail over a defendant’s right to seek contribution in all cases?
6.5 Should other rights of contribution, including equitable rights of contribution, be excluded from proposed legislation defining
rights of contribution?
6.6 Should statutory rights of contribution be modified by express contractual terms?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of proposals
Abbreviations
Table of Legislation
Table of Cases
Select Bibliography
Table of contents
(1994) 13 WAR 11.
. In the circumstances, however, the claim in negligence was dismissed:
Biala Pty Ltd v Mallina Holdings Ltd
(1994) 13 WAR 11
. (1988) 164 CLR 539.
Groom v Crocker
[1939] 1 KB 194.
. (1988) 164 CLR 539 at 585.
. (1988) 164 CLR 539 at 579.
. (1995) 182 CLR 609.
. (1995) 182 CLR 609 at 619. References have been omitted.
Hawkins v Clayton
(1988) 164 CLR 539 at 582-584 per Deane J.
. See M J Tilbury,
Civil Remedies Volume 2: Remedies in Particular Contexts
(Butterworths, Sydney, 1993) at 278-279.
[1970] Tas SR 1.
Groom v Crocker
[1939] 1 KB 194.
. See M J Tilbury,
Civil Remedies Volume 2: Remedies in Particular Contexts
(Butterworths, Sydney, 1993) at 278 and the cases there cited.
. In that case, the High Court held that a negligent tortfeasor could avoid liability for the consequences of a plaintiff’s
subsequent injury (whether negligently caused or not) depending on “whether the subsequent tort and its consequences are themselves
properly to be regarded as foreseeable consequences of the first tortfeasor’s negligence”:
Mahony v J Kruschich (Demolitions) Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 37
(1985) 156 CLR 522
at 528. See para 4.71.
Rap Industries Ltd v Royal Insurance Australia Pty Ltd
(1988) 5 ANZ Ins Cas 60-876
at 75,519-75,520.
AWA Ltd v Daniels
(1992) 7 ACSR 759
at 856-857 (affirmed in part as
Daniels v Anderson
(1995) 37 NSWLR 438).
. (1995) 182 CLR 609.
. [1986] 2 SCR 204-205; 31 DLR (4th) at 521-522.
Bryan v Maloney
(1995) 182 CLR 609 at 622.
. A similar argument applies to the extension of rights of contribution between tortfeasors and persons in breach of equitable obligations
. The Scottish Law Commission drew a distinction between contractual arrangements entered into before the loss, injury or damage was
sustained and those entered into afterwards. Their conclusion was that the former was acceptable, on the basis that interference
with freedom of contract in such instances was not warranted and that D2 would have received no benefit from D1’s payment,
while the latter was not acceptable being open to the real possibility of collusion between D2 and P to the detriment of D1:
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) at 18-19.
. See para 5.11; and also para 3.6.
. Section 5(2)
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
Pennington v Norris
[1956] HCA 26
(1956) 96 CLR 10
Podrebersek v Australian Iron and Steel Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 34
(1985) 59 ALJR 492.
. University of Alberta, Institute for Law Research and Reform,
Contributory Negligence and Concurrent Wrongdoers
(Report 31, 1979) at 50. See also England and Wales, Law Commission,
Contribution
(Working Paper 59, 1975) at para 47; and J R Morris,
Apportionment of Civil Liability
(Legal Research Foundation Inc, Publication No 28, 1987) at 9-11.
. This payment will not reduce the liability of D to pay damages to P. See
J G Fleming,
The Law of Torts
(8th ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1992) at 244, for a discussion of the principles applicable in the law of tort concerning collateral
Castellain v Preston
(1883) 11 QBD 380.
Commonwealth of Australia v Amann Aviation Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 54
(1991) 174 CLR 64.
. See generally M J Tilbury,
Civil Remedies Volume 2: Remedies in Particular Contexts
(Butterworths, Sydney, 1993) at 267-269 and 283-284.
. See para 4.61.
. See paras 7.7-7.11.
. See paras 3.6-3.13.
. In the case of a contract involving the exclusion of D2’s liability to P, consideration of the issues raised in this problem
requires the relaxation of the rule in
George Wimpey
Co Ltd v British Overseas Airways Corporation
[1955] AC 169.
In this case it was held that D1’s right of contribution from D2 was dependent upon D2 also being liable to P. In the case
of a contract excluding liability, D2 would not be liable to P and hence D1 would not be able to claim contribution from D2. Relaxation
of the rule in
George Wimpey & Co Ltd v British Overseas Airways Corporation
allows for a principled consideration of the various ways of dealing with rights of contribution between mixed concurrent wrongdoers.
. See esp Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) at para 3.37.
. An example of this option is where an exemption clause relieves D2 of all liability to P. P only recovers from D1 the proportion
of the loss for which D1 is actually responsible. Although the position is more complex, the same principle applies where D2 limits
his or her liability to P rather than excluding it altogether. In this latter case P will have to bear the amount of the loss caused
by D2 for which D2 is not responsible because of the clause limiting liability.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 124.
. The same conclusion, based on similar grounds, was reached by the Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) at paras 3.33-3.37.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 124.
. Law Reform Committee of South Australia,
Forty-second Report of the Law Reform Committee of South Australia to the Attorney-General, Relating to Proceedings Against and Contributions
Between Tortfeasors and Other Defendants
(1977) at 11-12; Law Reform Commission of Hong Kong,
Report on the Law Relating to Contribution Between Wrongdoers
(Topic 5, 1984) at paras 8.2-8.6. See also New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at 105.
. England and Wales, Law Commission,
Law of Contract: Report on Contribution
(Law Com 79, 1977) at paras 71-74.
Wrongs Act 1958
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 135.
. England and Wales, Law Commission,
Law of Contract: Report on Contribution
(Law Com 79, 1977) at paras 76-77.
. England and Wales, Law Commission,
Law of Contract: Report on Contribution
(Law Com 79, 1977) at para 81; Victoria, Chief Justice’s Law Reform Committee,
Report on Contribution
(1979); Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 15, 1988) at para 3.5; Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 73-75; New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability
(PP 19, 1992) at paras 99-104 and 175; Manitoba Law Reform Commission,
Scope of Apportionment under the Tortfeasors and Contributory Negligence Act
(Informal Report 22A, 1992); Law Reform Committee of South Australia,
Forty-second Report of the Law Reform Committee of South Australia to the Attorney-General Relating to Proceedings Against and Contributions
Between Tortfeasors and Other Defendants
(1977) at 10-11; Law Reform Commission of Hong Kong,
Report on the Law Relating to Contribution Between Wrongdoers
(Topic 5, 1984) at paras 5.2-5.3; University of Alberta, Institute of Law Research and Reform,
Contributory Negligence and Concurrent Wrongdoers
(Report 31, 1979) at 40-52. See also
G L Williams,
Joint Torts and Contributory Negligence: A Study of Concurrent Fault
(Stevens & Sons, London, 1951) at 506-507; and J R Morris,
Apportionment of Civil Liability
(Legal Research Foundation Inc, Publication No 28, 1987) at 11.
Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978
Wrongs Act 1958
Civil Liability Act 1961
(Ireland). The Irish Act was based almost entirely on recommendations for reform of the law of contribution made by Williams (1951).
. P D Finn, “Equity and Contract” in P D Finn (ed),
Essays on Contract
(Law Book Company, Sydney, 1987) at 104.
. See J R Morris,
Apportionment of Civil Liability
(Legal Research Foundation Inc, Publication No 28, 1987) at 11. See also the conclusions of the Alberta Institute of Law Research
and Reform who, after an initial rejection of an extension of contribution to breaches of trust, tentatively concluded that contribution
should apply to such breaches, but that provision should be made in the relevant trustee legislation: University of Alberta, Institute
of Law Research and Reform,
Contributory Negligence and Concurrent
Wrongdoers (Report 31, 1979) at 52. The Ontario Law Reform Commission also supported separate legislation to deal with breaches of
trust: Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 77-79.
. Similar provision is made in
Wrongs Act 1958
. Similar provision is made in
Wrongs Act 1958
. New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability
(PP 19, 1992) at para 50.
Wrongs Act 1958
(Vic) provides in generally similar terms in
a person liable in respect of any damage suffered by another person may recover contribution from any other person liable in respect
of the same damage ... .
Section 23A(1)
states that:
a person is liable in respect of any damage if the person who suffered that damage ... is entitled to recover compensation from the
first-mentioned person in respect of that damage whatever the legal basis of liability, whether tort, breach of contract, breach
of trust or otherwise.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 77-79.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 78.
. RSO 1980, c 539.
. As proposed by the Commission: see paras 5.8-5.9.
Generalia specialibus non derogant
Walsh v Permanent Trustee Australia Ltd
(NSW, Supreme Court, ED 2210/94, Hodgson J, 21 February 1997, unreported) at 5;
Leigh-Mardon Pty Ltd v Wawn
(1995) 17 ACSR 741
(NSW SC) at 751-753.
Aequitas est aequalitas
: see R P Meagher, W M C Gummow and J R F Lehane,
Equity: Doctrines and Remedies
(3rd ed, Butterworths, Sydney, 1992) at paras 329-330.
Discussion Paper 38 (1997) - Contribution Between Persons Liable for the Same Damage
7. Procedural Matters
History of this Reference (Digest)
7.1 The discussion below focuses upon those aspects of civil procedure which are particularly relevant to claims for contribution
among wrongdoers.
PROCEDURES FOR CLAIMING CONTRIBUTION
Joinder of actions
7.2 The common law rule preventing the joinder of several concurrent tortfeasors was abolished by
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
Supreme Court Rules 1970
District Court Rules 1973
(NSW). These provisions allow for the joinder of actions whether the liability is joint or several. Further,
Supreme Court Rules
District Court Rules 1973
(NSW) allow a plaintiff to decide not to join defendants who are jointly liable. A defendant is entitled, by use of the third party
procedure, to join a third party where the defendant intends to seek contribution from that third party.
Initiating a claim for contribution
7.3 There are two ways in which a wrongdoer may initiate a claim for contribution:
By joining a potential contributor as a third party to the principal action. The procedure for joining potential contributors as third
parties (or cross-defendants) is a way of obviating the “need to enforce a contribution by way of a separate action”.
By an independent action for the sole purpose of enforcing a right to contribution.
7.4 There are a number of reasons why the process of apportioning losses between wrongdoers is more effective and cost efficient when
they are parties to the same action. In New South Wales there are currently some provisions which aim to discourage plaintiffs from
bringing multiple successive actions against potential tortfeasors.
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) also contains an exhortation against multiple proceedings
which has received consideration by the High Court and Court of Appeal.
However, there are no specific provisions aimed at ensuring that all those from whom contribution may be sought are joined as third
parties to the plaintiff’s primary cause of action. The Commission has identified two possible options for reform in this area.
These approaches are embodied in the laws of Ontario and Ireland respectively, and are discussed below.
The Ontario approach
7.5 The Ontario
Negligence Act
has been interpreted as intending that a party who has been sued to judgment by P may claim contribution only within that action.
Thus, if D2 is a co-defendant, D1’s claim must be made in the statement of defence; if D2 is not joined as a co-defendant to
the plaintiff’s action, D1 must seek contribution by means of a third party claim. Despite suggestions from the Supreme Court
of Canada that the current interpretation is “unsatisfactory”,
the Ontario Law Reform Commission recommended a statutory codification of this rule.
The Irish approach
Civil Liability Act 1961
(Ireland) maintains the basic rule that a party who has been sued to judgment by P may claim contribution only within that action,
but provides the court with a discretion to allow a claim for contribution to proceed by way of an independent action.
The Act gives no indication of how this discretion should be exercised. Glanville Williams, upon whose draft legislation the Irish
Act is based, has stated that an independent action should be permitted only where it is impossible, as a practical matter, for the
third party notice to be served.
The Commission’s view
7.7 There are some advantages which would follow from the introduction of a single action rule
These include the cost savings flowing from a reduction in the number of separate proceedings, and also the fact that potential contributors
can determine with greater certainty whether they will be subject to a claim for contribution. However, an immediate introduction
of such a rule would likely create hardship in New South Wales because defendants currently have the right to bring a claim for contribution
at any time within the two year limitation period specified for contribution claims.
On the other hand, the introduction of a modified version of the rule found in the Irish
Civil Liability Act 1961
could be achieved without creating undue hardship.
The effect would be to impose a general rule, qualified by a discretion to grant leave to seek contribution in a separate action.
The basis for the exercise of the discretion should be that proposed by Glanville Williams, that, as a practical matter, it was not
possible to serve the third party notice on the potential contributor.
7.8 In considering whether D1, if sued by P, should be compelled to seek contribution by means of third party procedure, other law
reform agencies have had serious reservations about compelling D1 to claim in this way. Some of the arguments against such a provision
that it would be inappropriate in cases where D1 was not aware of the existence of other wrongdoers or where the other wrongdoers
were, in some way, not amenable to the court’s jurisdiction;
that it might lead to parties being brought to court unnecessarily as a precautionary measure to preserve any rights of contribution
which may happen to arise;
that there may be perfectly legitimate reasons why wrongdoers may prefer to leave a determination of liability amongst themselves
to another proceeding,
or indeed why a plaintiff may not consider a potential wrongdoer worth pursuing.
7.9 Most law reform agencies have preferred to maintain a sanction in costs and, to a lesser extent, a sanction in damages, as the
only means of encouraging contribution claims to be brought in the initial action.
7.10 In New South Wales claims by defendants against third parties who are not co-defendants are generally referred to as “cross-claims”.
Currently Part 6 r 9 of the
Supreme Court Rules 1970
District Court Rules 1973
(NSW) provide for situations where a defendant makes a cross-claim for contribution. Any change would, therefore, require consideration
by the Rules Committee of the Supreme Court.
7.11 The Commission is not entirely convinced of the need to introduce a rule based on the Ontario model, or a variant based on the
Irish model, because of the potential such a rule may have to work unfavourably in particular cases. Our tentative view is that such
a rule should not be introduced. However, we note the strong arguments on cost efficiency grounds to have all factual issues tried
in the same hearing unless there are good reasons to the contrary. The Commission invites submissions on all the approaches identified
SANCTION IN COSTS
Section 5(1)(b)
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW) provides that in cases of both joint and several liability a plaintiff pursuing successive suits will not be entitled to an
order for costs unless there are reasonable grounds for bringing the action. The rationale for this rule is that it operates as a
disincentive for a plaintiff to bring successive actions.
7.13 Most law reform agencies have recommended the retention of the sanction in costs rule, notwithstanding the belief that the courts
probably have the inherent power to make such costs orders in any case,
although some considered that the court’s inherent power alone is sufficient.
The Law Reform Commission considers that the sanction in costs should be retained and extended to include not only plaintiffs injured
by tortfeasors but all plaintiffs injured by wrongdoers.
Proposal 13
The sanction in costs should apply to all plaintiffs pursuing successive actions in relation to the same damage.
SANCTION IN DAMAGES
Section 5(1)(a)
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW) abolished the judgment bar rule for joint tortfeasors. However,
applied a sanction in damages to all successive actions whether the liability was joint or several. The “sanction in damages”
prevented plaintiffs from recovering any more in subsequent actions than that which they obtained in the first action. The rationale
of this provision was to discourage plaintiffs from bringing multiple actions and from “forum shopping” for increased
awards of damages.
The concern about “forum shopping” was particularly relevant when inconsistencies were apt to arise between jury verdicts,
but this concern is no longer so pressing with the decline in the use of civil juries.
7.15 Some law reform agencies have supported the retention of the sanction in damages, albeit with some modifications.
However, the balance of the argument seems to be on the side of abolition of the sanction. In England, the rule has been abolished.
The Ontario Law Reform Commission also recommended that it be abolished, reasoning that the sanction in damages was too onerous on
the plaintiff and that this unfairness would be heightened if rights to contribution were extended to all joint wrongdoers.
This could be the case, for example, where a plaintiff takes action against one wrongdoer liable under a contract which contains
some form of limitation before proceeding against a tortfeasor liable for the same damage.
Proposal 14
The “sanction in damages” rule should be abolished for all concurrent wrongdoers.
THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN JOINT WRONGDOERS AND SEVERAL WRONGDOERS
7.16 As already mentioned in Chapter 1,
concurrent wrongdoers may be either joint or several.
However, this distinction between them has become difficult to justify, especially since the passing of contribution legislation
has rendered the distinctions between joint tortfeasors and several tortfeasors irrelevant. Such differences as remain with respect
to wrongdoers generally will sometimes adversely affect a concurrent wrongdoer’s right to claim contribution. The aim of the
following paragraphs is to note the differences between joint wrongdoers and several wrongdoers and to propose reforms which will
remove these differences.
7.17 The consequences of three important differences between joint wrongdoers and several concurrent wrongdoers will be considered.
judgment against one joint wrongdoer bars actions against the others (the “judgment bar rule”);
release of, or accord with, one joint wrongdoer discharges all, unless there is an express reservation of rights against the others
(the “settlement bar rule”); and
when joint wrongdoers are sued together only one judgment can be given against them, and damages cannot be severed (the “single
judgment rule”).
7.18 The judgment bar rule has been affected by the provisions of the
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
and the relevant provisions of the
Supreme Court Rules 1970
(NSW) dealing with joinder.
The remaining distinctions between joint wrongdoers and several concurrent wrongdoers serve no useful purpose. The general aim of
reform in this area of the law should therefore be for the legal distinction between them to be abolished.
The judgment bar rule
7.19 The common law rule that judgment against one joint tortfeasor barred all further actions against other joint tortfeasors was
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW) which now provides that a plaintiff can bring an action against a joint tortfeasor after obtaining judgment against another
tortfeasor. The effect of this provision has been to place joint tortfeasors in the same position as several concurrent tortfeasors.
Where a plaintiff chooses to bring successive actions against joint tortfeasors,
provides for a sanction in damages and a sanction in costs.
7.20 The full impact of the operation of
on the “single judgment rule” and “settlement bar rule” is uncertain. There is also some uncertainty about
whether the abolition of the judgment bar rule is effective where a plaintiff brings a single action against two joint tortfeasors
and obtains judgment against one tortfeasor while the action is still pending against the other.
Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978
(Eng) abolished the defence of release by judgment by expressly applying it to “any person liable in respect of any debt or
damage”. Further, the judgment bar rule was abolished not only in respect of successive actions but also in relation to a “single
action against two or more persons”.
Section 5(1)(a)
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW) refers only to joint tortfeasors. If the proposal to extend rights of contribution to mixed concurrent wrongdoers is adopted,
it will be necessary to widen the abolition of the judgment bar rule to include mixed concurrent wrongdoers who are jointly liable
to the plaintiff, including co-sureties.
7.22 In addition to the necessary changes to
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW), s 97 of the
Supreme Court Act
(NSW) and relevant parts of both the
District Court Rules
Local Courts (Civil Claims) Act 1970
(NSW) will need to be amended to confirm the abolition of the judgment bar rule for all joint wrongdoers.
Proposal 15
The judgment bar rule should be abolished for all wrongdoers.
The settlement bar rule
7.23 At common law, release or release by accord and satisfaction by a plaintiff with a joint wrongdoer discharges the liability of
all other joint wrongdoers.
This was the case even where the amount for which the plaintiff settled with the wrongdoer was less than the amount of the judgment
in favour of the plaintiff. This rule was ameliorated by the effect of the distinction between a “release” and a “covenant
not to sue”. The latter, but not the former, preserved the plaintiff’s rights against the other parties who were liable
to the plaintiff. However, a plaintiff had to state specifically that the agreement with the joint tortfeasor was a covenant not
7.24 Fleming has argued that the basis for the settlement bar rule may have been implicitly abrogated by
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW) which provides for the authorisation of successive actions.
XL Petroleum (NSW) Pty Ltd v Caltex Oil (Australia) Pty Ltd
Justice Brennan stated that:
The effect of
upon the joint and several liability of joint tortfeasors is far reaching, for the unity of the cause of action against all joint
tortfeasors is severed by
and the resulting implications are not merely procedural ... As
confers on a plaintiff the right to recover judgments in successive actions against the respective tortfeasors, the unity of the
common law cause of action against all joint tortfeasors is severed. Axiomatically, a judgment awarding damages against any tortfeasor
must be founded on an antecedent cause of action against him, and so a plaintiff now has as many causes of action as there are joint
tortfeasors.
7.25 The High Court has since held, in relation to the Australian Capital Territory equivalent of
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
that the unity of a cause of action against joint tortfeasors has been effectively severed and there is no conceptual basis for the
rule concerning the release of joint wrongdoers which has, therefore, been abrogated.
7.26 There are other good reasons for explicitly abolishing the settlement bar rule, as Professor Fleming has noted:
The effect of the rule was in any event pernicious, either discouraging settlements or ensnaring the unwary. From a functional point
of view it was all the more difficult to justify because the law has otherwise been most solicitous to encourage settlements with
one or more multiple tortfeasors by only reducing the settlor’s claim against the others pro tanto rather than in equal shares
(pro rata).
7.27 Abolition of the settlement bar rule requires that the effect of a settlement by a plaintiff with a joint tortfeasor will be
entirely dependent upon the intention of the plaintiff who reaches the settlement with the defendant.
At least one law reform body has seen the need to provide expressly that it should be possible for contracting parties to state that
the “specific incidents of joint obligations will apply to their bargain”.
Abolition of the settlement bar rule should be extended to apply to all wrongdoers, as was proposed in relation to the abolition
of the judgment bar rule.
7.28 The English Law Commission noted the problem of the settlement bar rule but recommended against reform of the law because any
reform in this area would have to deal with all forms of joint liability.
By contrast, the Ontario
Courts of Justice Act
abolished both the judgment bar rule and the settlement bar rule for all kinds of joint wrongdoers.
7.29 The Commission’s tentative view is that the settlement bar rule should be abolished for all joint wrongdoers. The effect
of this proposal is that settlements involving joint wrongdoers should be treated in precisely the same way as settlement involving
several wrongdoers.
Proposal 16
The settlement bar rule should be abolished for all joint wrongdoers. The effect of a settlement between a plaintiff and one of a
number of joint wrongdoers should depend on the intention of the plaintiff.
Single judgment rule
7.30 One consequence of the single judgment rule was that it was impossible for a court to apportion damages between joint tortfeasors,
or to award exemplary damages against any one of them. In
XL Petroleum (NSW) Pty Ltd v Caltex Oil (Australia) Pty Ltd
, the High Court found that
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
(NSW) had abolished the common law rule that only one judgment could be awarded in an action for damages against joint tortfeasors.
XL Petroleum
the Court confirmed an award of exemplary damages against one of the joint tortfeasors who was a party to that action. In reaching
this conclusion, the High Court by implication abolished the single judgment rule.
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW) is recast to include all joint wrongdoers, it follows that the single judgment rule would likewise be abrogated for all joint
wrongdoers.
Proposal 17
There should be explicit recognition that abolition of the judgment bar rule for all joint wrongdoers will have the effect of abolishing
the single judgment rule.
LIMITATION PERIODS
7.32 There are two situations in which limitation periods may affect a claim for contribution made by D1 against D2. The first is
where P proceeds against D1 at a time when P’s primary cause of action against D2 is statute barred. The second is concerned
with the limitation period within which D1 is allowed to initiate a claim for compensation against D2.
Limitation period relevant to the primary cause of action
7.33 When provision is made for contribution between wrongdoers liable under different heads of liability, it is inevitable that,
in some cases, the limitation periods for the primary causes of action will differ with the result that P may bring an action against
D1 at a time when P’s action against D2 is barred.
The circumstances in which there are likely to be varying limitation periods are in cases involving personal injury,
in cases involving damage in the form of economic loss,
or in instances where statutes define specific limitation periods.
7.34 The approach to resolving this problem will depend in part on a general assessment of the role of limitation periods. The particular
problem in the case of rights of contribution is that the later two year limitation period for D1 to initiate a claim for contribution
does not begin to run until D1’s liability to P is determined.
7.35 The current position in relation to tortfeasors is that the termination of the limitation period in P’s action against
D2 will not prevent D1 claiming contribution from D2 because of the interpretation placed on
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
The Commission has identified two other ways to align the rights of D1 and D2 where there are different limitation periods. D1 could
be denied a right of contribution from D2 when P’s action against D2 is statute barred.
Alternatively, P’s right to damages in the action against D1 could be reduced on the grounds that P should bear the losses
flowing from a failure to sue D2 within the limitation period.
7.36 An acceptable solution to this issue depends in large part upon the weight to be accorded to the limitation periods for the principal
causes of action as against D1’s rights to contribution. The Ontario Law Reform Commission,
the New Zealand Law Commission,
Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978
have confirmed the position reached by the High Court in
Brambles Construction Pty Ltd v Helmers
where P initiates an action against D1 at a time when P’s cause of action against D2 is statute barred, D2 will not be able
to rely on the passing of the limitation period as a defence against D1’s claim for contribution.
7.37 There are two reasons for retaining the rule in
Brambles Construction Pty Ltd v Helmers
. The first, consistent with the doctrine of solidary liability, is that P should not bear the burden of having failed to bring an
action against D1 within the limitation period applicable to D2.
The second is that allowing D1 to claim contribution from D2, at a time when P’s action against D2 is statute barred, removes
in effect the capacity of P to decide whether D1 will be able to claim contribution from D2.
7.38 Some law reform agencies have raised concerns that the ability of D1 to settle with P long after the expiration of the primary
limitation periods for all defendants could result in the indefinite extension of the time during which D2 could be called on to
contribute to D1.
In fact, the Scottish Law Commission argued that:
Payment by D1 could, therefore, be a collusive device to get round the fact that P had failed to sue D2 within the appropriate time
However, this concern appears to have no basis in New South Wales where
Limitation Act 1969
(NSW) provides that an action for contribution cannot be pursued beyond four years from the expiry of the limitation period of the
principal cause of action.
Limitation period for contribution actions
7.39 In New South Wales a claim for contribution is a separate cause of action and hence has its own limitation period.
Section 26(1)
Limitation Act 1969
(NSW) provides that a claim for contribution is not maintainable if brought after the first to expire of:
(a) a limitation period of two years running from the date on which the cause of action for contribution first accrues to the plaintiff
or to a person through whom he claims; and
(b) a limitation period of four years running from the date of the expiration of the limitation period for the principal cause of
The date on which the cause of action first accrues is defined in
as the date on which judgment is given in the action of P against D1, or the date on which P and D1 reach a settlement to the action
of P against D1.
7.40 The overall effect of the operation of
is that a defendant seeking contribution has two years from the date of judgment in the principal action in which to initiate a claim
for contribution.
This is generally in line with the limitation period for claims for contribution established by the
Civil Liability (Contribution) Act
and with recommendations of other law reform bodies,
although some have opted for longer periods.
7.41 By contrast,
Wrongs Act 1958
(Vic) provides for a limitation period for a claim for contribution which is shorter than that in New South Wales. In Victoria, the
action must commence either within the period of limitation relevant to P’s action against D1, or within twelve months after
the writ in the action against D1 was served on D1. The University of Alberta Institute of Law Research and Reform has taken a different
approach and recommended that the limitation period for a contribution claim should be the limitation period for the original wrong.
7.42 The reasons which are generally used to justify imposing limitation periods are equally relevant to the cause of action for contribution.
Indeed, the general trend has been to reduce limitation periods for claims for contribution. This is primarily because the cause
of action for contribution only accrues when judgment is given in the principal action. The effect of this is that a claim for contribution
can be made well outside the limitation period for the principal cause of action.
7.43 While the arguments in support of a short limitation period for causes of action for contribution are strong, the Commission
takes the view the period provided by the
Wrongs Act 1958
(Vic) is too short. It is possible that D1 could otherwise lose his or her right to contribution before the cause of action to claim
contribution first accrued.
7.44 There is, however, one change which will need to be made to
Limitation Act 1969
If rights to contribution are extended to all concurrent wrongdoers,
will need to be amended to reflect this change so that there is one limitation period for causes of action for contribution.
Proposal 18
Limitation Act 1969
(NSW) should be amended to cover rights of contribution between all concurrent wrongdoers.
QUESTIONS ARISING IN CHAPTER 7
7.1 Should all claims for contribution be made in the same action? If not, in what circumstances should claims for contribution be
heard in separate actions?
7.2 Is a sanction in costs sufficient to discourage successive actions being taken against defendants by plaintiffs?
7.3 Is a sanction in damages desirable as a means of discouraging successive actions being taken against defendants by plaintiffs?
7.4 Should the abolition of the judgment bar rule be extended to all joint wrongdoers?
7.5 Should the settlement bar rule be abolished for all joint wrongdoers?
7.6 Should the abolition of the single judgment rule be extended to all joint wrongdoers?
7.7 Should the termination of the limitation period in P’s action against D2 prevent D1 claiming contribution from D2?
7.8 Should P’s right to damages in the action against D1 be reduced on the grounds that P should bear the losses flowing from
a failure to sue D2 within the limitation period?
7.9 How long should the limitation period for contribution actions be?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of proposals
Abbreviations
Table of Legislation
Table of Cases
Select Bibliography
Table of contents
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
. B C Cairns,
Australian Civil Procedure
(4th ed, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996) at 353.
. Namely the sanction in damages and the sanction in costs contained in
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
Supreme Court Act 1970
Neeta (Epping) Pty Ltd v Phillips
[1974] HCA 18
(1974) 131 CLR 286
at 307. See also cases cited in A V Ritchie,
Ritchie’s Supreme Court Procedure, New South Wales
(New ed, Butterworths, Sydney, 1984) Volume 1 at [s 63.1].
. RSO 1980 c 315.
. This rule was first established in
Cohen v S McCord & Co Ltd
[1944] 4 DLR 753 (CA). See also
Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among rongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 209.
R v Thomas Fuller Construction Co Ltd
[1980] 1 SCR 695.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 215-216.
Civil Liability Act 1961
. G L Williams,
Joint Torts and Contributory Negligence
(Stevens & Sons, London, 1951) at 185-186.
Limitation Act 1969
. Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) at paras 3.78-3.79; New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at para 256.
. University of Alberta, Institute of Law Research and Reform,
Contributory Negligence and Concurrent Wrongdoers
(Report 31, 1979) at 74.
. University of Alberta, Institute of Law Research and Reform,
Contributory Negligence and Concurrent Wrongdoers
(Report 31, 1979) at 74.
. New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at para 256.
. See paras 7.12-7.15.
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) s 78 and
Supreme Court Rules 1970
Cross-claims also incorporate claims brought in the one action by defendants against plaintiffs and by defendants against co-defendants.
. There is also the question of using a sanction in costs mechanism to encourage D1 to claim for contribution within the proceedings
initiated by P. See para 7.9 and Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) at paras 3.80-3.82.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 28; England and Wales, Law Commission,
Law of Contract: Report on Contribution
(Law Com No 79, 1977) at paras 37-39; Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan,
Proposals Relating to Joint Obligations
(Report to the Minister of Justice, 1985) at 12; Law Reform Commission of Hong Kong,
Report on the Law Relating to Contribution Between Wrongdoers
(Topic 5, 1984) at para 9.1; and University of Alberta, Institute of Law Research and Reform,
Contributory Negligence and Concurrent Wrongdoers
(Report 31, 1979) at 29-30. See also J R Morris,
Apportionment of Civil Liability
(Legal Research Foundation Inc, Publication No 28, 1987) at 24-25.
. Law Reform Commission of British Columbia,
Report on Shared Liability
(LRC 88, 1986) at 17; and New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at para 263.
England and Wales, Law Commission,
Law of Contract: Report on Contribution
(Law Com 79, 1977) at paras 40-41.
. Law Reform Commission of Hong Kong,
Report on the Law Relating to Contribution Between Wrongdoers
(Topic 5, 1984) at para 9.1; New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at para 259.
. University of Alberta, Institute of Law Research and Reform,
Contributory Negligence and Concurrent Wrongdoers
(Report 31, 1979) at 29-30; Law Reform Commission of British Columbia,
Report on Shared Liability
(LRC 88, 1986) at 16-17.
Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978
(Eng) s 9(2), repealing s 6(1)(b) of the
Law Reform (Married Women and Tortfeasors) Act 1935
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 20-21.
. See Law Reform Commission of Hong Kong,
Report on the Law Relating to Contribution Between Wrongdoers
(Topic 5, 1984) at para 9.1; England and Wales, Law Commission,
Law of Contract: Report on Contribution
(Law Com 79, 1977) at para 40. See also J R Morris,
Apportionment of Civil Liability
(Legal Research Foundation Inc, Publication No 28, 1987) at 23.
. See paras 1.9-1.11.
. The differences between joint wrongdoers and several concurrent wrongdoers should not be confused with the question of a defendant’s
joint and several liability to the plaintiff, that is,
that each person responsible for causing another person’s damage is, if sued by the plaintiff, liable for the full amount of
that damage. In this sense, the liability of both joint wrongdoers and several concurrent wrongdoers is solidary.
. Williams (1951) at para 3.
. See paras 1.13-1.17.
Supreme Court Rules 1970
. See Williams (1951) at para 3
. See paras 7.12-7.15.
Bryanston v De Vries
[1975] QB 703
; see also England and Wales, Law Commission,
Law of Contract: Report on Contribution
(Law Com 79, 1977) at paras 35-37.
Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978
(Eng) s 3; and
Wrongs Act 1958
. Williams (1951) at para 11. Note that this rule is quite distinct from that which provides that full satisfaction discharges the
liability of all other tortfeasors, both joint and several concurrent tortfeasors, to the plaintiff: see, eg,
Castellan v Electric Power Transmission Pty Ltd
(1967) 69 SR (NSW) 159
at 180-182 per Asprey JA.
. J G Fleming,
The Law of Torts
(8th ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1992) at 259.
XL Petroleum (NSW) Pty Ltd v Caltex Oil (Australia) Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 12
(1985) 155 CLR 448
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1955
(ACT) s 11.
Thompson v Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd
[1996] HCA 38
(1996) 71 ALJR 131
at 134-135 per Brennan CJ, Dawson and Toohey JJ, at 138 per Gaudron J, and at 151-152 per Gummow J.
. J G Fleming,
The Law of Torts
(8th ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1992) at 259.
. There may be a need to deal specifically with payments into court: see
Williams (1951) at para 12; Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among
ongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 13-14.
. Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan,
Proposals Relating to Joint Obligations
(Report to the Minister of Justice, 1985) at 10.
. England and Wales, Law Commission,
Law of Contract: Report on Contribution
(Law Com 79, 1977) at paras 42-43.
. SO 1984, c 11. Section 149(1) states that “Where two or more persons are jointly liable in respect of the same cause of action,
a judgment against or release of one of them does not preclude judgment against any other in the same or a separate proceeding”.
XL Petroleum (NSW) Pty Ltd v Caltex Oil (Australia) Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 12
(1985) 155 CLR 448
; Fleming (1992) at 258.
. See also paras 4.74-4.76.
Limitation Act 1969
Division 3 which provides for a three year limitation period with various provisions for extension of time in cases involving an
action “founded on negligence, nuisance or breach of duty, for damages for personal injury”;
the limitation period for either an intentional tort or for breach of contract which remains six years:
Pullen v Gutteridge Haskins & Davey Pty Ltd
[1993] 1 VR 27 at 65-71. In this case the plaintiff’s contractual claim was statute barred but the negligence action was within
time because the economic loss was sustained when the plaintiffs became aware of the defect, that is, the point of time when the
building sustained the diminution in value which amounted to the economic loss.
Trade Practices Act 1974
(three year period runs from when the person becomes aware of the loss). See paras 4.18-4.19 for discussion of whether there is any
right to contribution arising out of breach of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
Limitation Act 1969
George Wimpey & Co Ltd v British Overseas Airways Corp
[1955] AC 169.
. Williams (1951) at 444-446.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 157-158.
. New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A
Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at paras 240-249.
Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978
(Eng) s 1(3).
[1966] HCA 3
(1966) 114 CLR 213
. This involves a rejection of the solution proposed by Williams (1951) at 444-446, and adopted by the
Civil Liability Act 1961
(Ireland) s 35(1)(i).
. See also the discussion at paras 4.74-4.76.
. New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A
Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at para 252; Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) at paras 3.25-3.40; University of Alberta, Institute of Law Research and Reform,
Contributory Negligence and Concurrent Wrongdoers
(Report 31, 1979) at 71.
. Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) at para 3.25.
Limitation Act 1969
s 14(2)(b).
. The effect of
is to provide an outer limit to the right to contribution where no judgment is given, or settlement reached, four years after the
expiration of the original cause of action.
provides a general limitation period of two years for all causes of action.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
(1988) at 222-223; Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988) at paras 3.94-3.95; Law Reform Commission of Hong Kong,
Report on the Law Relating to Contribution Between Wrongdoers
(Topic 5, 1984) at paras 5.17-5.19. See also J R Morris,
Apportionment of Civil Liability
(Legal Research Foundation Inc, Publication No 28, 1987) at 51-60.
. Three years: New Zealand Law Commission,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A
Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992) at para 254.
. University of Alberta, Institute of Law Research and Reform,
Contributory Negligence and Concurrent Wrongdoers
(Report 31, 1979) at 76.
Van Win Pty Ltd v Eleventh Mirontron Pty Ltd
[1986] VicRp 49
[1986] VR 484.
Discussion Paper 38 (1997) - Contribution Between Persons Liable for the Same Damage
Table of Legislation
History of this Reference (Digest)
Corporations Law
Judiciary Act 1903
Navigation Act 1912
Trade Practices Act 1974
4.18, 4.19, 5.7, 7.33
New South Wales
Companies Code 1981
Corporations Law
Damage by Aircraft Act 1952
District Court Rules 1973
Employee's Liability (Indemnification of Employer) Act 1982
Fair Trading Act 1987
4.18, 4.19, 5.6, 5.7
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
1.1, 1.5, 1.8, 1.9, 1.13, 1.15, 4.14, 4.18, 6.1, 6.5, 6.38, 7.18
1.13, 1.15, 4.1, 7.25
1.14, 7.14, 7.19, 7.20-7.22, 7.24, 7.30, 7.31, 7.35
1.16, 7.4, 7.12, 7.14, 7.19, 7.20
1.17, 4.1, 4.4, 4.10, 4.14, 4.18, 4.23, 4.24, 4.26, 4.40, 4.42, 4.59, 4.70-4.72, 4.75, 5.3, 5.10, 6.10
4.9, 4.26, 4.80, 4.81, 4.83, 4.84, 4.86, 5.10, 6.16
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1965
Limitation Act 1969
7.34, 7.40, 7.44
Local Courts (Civil Claims) Act 1970
Motor Accidents Act 1988
Professional Standards Act 1994
s 23(1)(a)(ii)
Statutory Duties (Contributory Negligence) Act 1945
Supreme Court Act 1970
s 101(2)(c)
Supreme Court Rules 1970
Workers Compensation Act 1987
4.14, 4.63, 5.4, 5.9, 6.41
Law Reform (Tortfeasors Contribution, Contributory Negligence, and Division of Chattels) Act 1952
South Australia
Development Act 1993
Wrongs Act 1936
Tortfeasors and Contributory Negligence Act 1954
Building Act 1993
Wrongs Act 1958
Western Australia
Companies (Western Australia) Code
Law Reform (Contributory Negligence and Tortfeasors Contribution) Act 1947
Australian Capital Territory
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1955
1.15, 4.1, 7.25
Northern Territory
Building Act 1993
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1956
British Columbia
Negligence Act RSBC 1979 c 298
Civil Liability Act 1961
2.36, 2.41, 4.29, 4.30, 4.31, 4.63, 6.32, 7.7
New Zealand
Shipping and Seamen Act 1952
Courts of Justice Act SO 1984, c 11
Negligence Act RSO 1980, c 315
3.9, 4.84, 7.5
Workers Compensation Act
RSO 1980, c 539
United Kingdom
Civil Liability (Contribution) Act 1978
4.10, 4.61, 4.72, 4.73, 6.32
Companies Act 1929 (Eng)
Companies (Consolidation) Act 1908 (Eng)
Directors Liability Act 1890 (Eng)
Law Reform (Married Women and Tortfeasors) Act 1935 (Eng)
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1940 (Scot)
Maritime Conventions Act 1911 (UK)
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of proposals
Abbreviations
Table of Legislation
Table of Cases
Select Bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 38 (1997) - Contribution Between Persons Liable for the Same Damage
Table of Cases
History of this Reference (Digest)
Paragaph No
Albion Insurance Co Ltd v Government Insurance Office of NSW (1969)
Anderson v Haskins (1989)
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd v Turnbull & Partners Ltd (1992)
AWA Ltd v Daniels (1992)
2.8, 4.68, 5.13, 6.11
Bakker v Joppich (1980)
4.40, 4.49-4.51
Barisic v Devenport (1978)
Bell Canada v Cope (Sarnia) Ltd (1980)
Biala Pty Ltd v Mallina Holdings Ltd (1994)
Biggin & Co Ltd v Permanite Ltd (1951)
Bitumen and Oil Refineries (Australia) Ltd v Commissioner for Government Transport (1955)
4.25, 4.26, 4.29, 4.31, 4.40, 4.50, 4.82
Brambles Constructions Pty Ltd v Helmers (1966)
4.75, 7.36, 7.37
Brinsmead v Harrison (1871)
Brown v Sevrup Fisheries Pty Ltd (1970)
Bryan v Maloney (1995)
Bryanston v De Vries (1975)
Burnie Port Authority v General Jones Pty Ltd (1994)
Canberra Formwork Pty Ltd v Civil & Civic Ltd (1982)
Castellain v Preston (1883)
Castellan v Electric Power Transmission Pty Ltd (1967)
1.18, 4.75, 4.79, 7.23
Central Trust Co v Rafuse (1986)
Cocke v Jennor (1614)
Cohen v S McCord & Co Ltd (1944)
Commonwealth of Australia v Amann Aviation Pty Ltd (1991)
Daniels v Anderson (1995)
2.8, 4.68, 5.13, 6.11
Employers Corporate Investment Pty Ltd v Cameron (1977)
Gala v Preston (1991)
Gates v City Mutual Life Assurance Society Ltd (1985)
George Wimpey & Co Ltd v British Overseas Airways Corporation (1955)
-4.24, 4.70, 4.72, 4.75-4.79, 6.24, 7.35
Glasgow Corporation v John Turnbull & Co (1932)
Groom v Crocker (1939)
Hart v Hall & Pickles Ltd (1969)
Hawkins v Clayton (1988)
James P Corry & Co Ltd v Clarke (1967)
K v P (1993)
Kelly v Newcastle Protective Coating Pty Ltd (1973)
Leigh-Mardon Pty Ltd v Wawn (1995)
Leischner v West Kootenay Power and Light Co Ltd (1986)
Leonard v Smith (1992)
4.14, 4.63, 5.5
Lister v Romford Ice and Cold Storage Co Ltd (1957)
Littlewood v George Wimpey & Co Ltd (1953)
Mahony v J Kruschich (Demolition) Pty Ltd (1985)
Marschler v G Masser’s Garage (1956)
McGrath v Council of the Municipality of Fairfield (1985)
Merryweather v Nixan (1799)
1.10, 1.12, 1.17, 3.1, 3.3, 3.11, 4.5, 4.10, 4.11, 4.16
Neeta (Epping) Pty Ltd v Phillips (1974)
Pennington v Norris (1956)
Platt v Nutt (1988)
Podrebersek v Australian Iron and Steel Pty Ltd (1985)
Pullen v Gutteridge Haskins & Davey Pty Ltd (1993)
R v Thomas Fuller Construction Co Ltd (1980)
Rap Industries Pty Ltd v Royal Insurance Australia Ltd (1988)
Saccardo Constructions Pty Ltd v Gammon (1991)
Southgate v Commonwealth of Australia (1987)
Spika Trading Pty Ltd v Harrison (1990)
Stott v West Yorkshire Road Car Co Ltd (1971)
TAL Structural Engineers Pty Ltd v Vaughan
Constructions Pty Ltd (1989)
The Koursk (1924)
Thompson v Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd (1996)
Tucker v Bennett (1927)
Van Win Pty Ltd v Eleventh Mirontron Pty Ltd (1986)
Walsh v Permanent Trustee Australia Ltd (1997)
XL Petroleum (NSW) Pty Ltd v Caltex Oil
(Australia) Pty Ltd (1985)
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of proposals
Abbreviations
Table of Legislation
Table of Cases
Select Bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 38 (1997) - Contribution Between Persons Liable for the Same Damage
Select Bibliography
History of this Reference (Digest)
BALKIN, R P and DAVIS, J L R,
Law of Torts
(2nd ed, Butterworths, Sydney, 1996)
CAIRNS, B C,
Australian Civil Procedure
(4th ed, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1996)
CHEIFETZ, D,
Apportionment of Fault in Tort
(Canada Law Books, Aurora, 1981)
CLERK, J F,
Clerk & Lindsell on Torts
(17th ed, Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1995)
DAVIS, J L R,
Inquiry Into the Law of Joint and Several Liability: Report of Stage Two
(Commonwealth of Australia, 1995)
DAVIS, J L R,
Inquiry Into the Law of Joint and Several Liability: Report of Stage One
(Commonwealth of Australia, 1994)
Draft Model Provisions to Implement the Recommendations of the Inquiry into the Law of Joint and Several Liability
(July 1996)
ENGLAND AND WALES, Law Commission, Common Law Team,
Feasibility Investigation of Joint and Several Liability
(Department of Trade and Industry, HMSO, London, 1996)
ENGLAND AND WALES, Law Commission,
Law of Contract: Report on Contribution
(Law Com 79, 1977)
ENGLAND AND WALES, Law Revision Committee,
Third Interim Report
(Cmd 4637, July 1934)
FINN, P D, “Equity and Contract” in P D Finn (ed),
Essays on Contract
(Law Book Company, Sydney, 1987)
FLEMING, J G,
The Law of Torts
(8th ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1992)
GOFF, R and JONES, G,
The Law of Restitution
(4th ed, Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1993)
HEYDON, J D, “Damages Under the
Trade Practices Act
” in P D Finn (ed),
Essays on Damages
(Law Book Company, Sydney, 1992) 42
JACOBS, K S,
Jacobs’ Law of Trusts in Australia
(6th ed, Butterworths, Sydney, 1997)
JAMES, F, “Contribution Among Joint Tortfeasors: A Pragmatic Criticism”
Harvard Law Review
LANDES, W M and POSNER, R A, “Joint and Multiple Tortfeasors: An Economic Analysis” (1980) 9
Journal of Legal Studies
LAW REFORM COMMISSION OF BRITISH COLUMBIA,
Report on Shared Liability
(LRC 88, 1986)
LAW REFORM COMMISSION OF HONG KONG,
Report on the Law Relating to Contribution between wrongdoers
(Topic 5, 1984)
LAW REFORM COMMISSION OF SASKATCHEWAN,
Proposals Relating to Joint Obligations
(Report to the Minister of Justice, 1985)
LAW REFORM COMMITTEE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
42nd Report of the Law Reform Committee of South Australia to the Attorney-General Relating to Proceedings Against and Contributions
between Tortfeasors and Other Defendants
MANITOBA LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Scope of Apportionment under the Tortfeasors and Contributory Negligence Act
(Informal Report 22A, 1992)
McMAHON, B M E and BINCHY, W,
Irish Law of Torts
(Professional Books, Abingdon, Oxon, 1981)
MEAGHER, R P, GUMMOW, W M C and LEHANE, J R F,
Equity: Doctrines and Remedies
(3rd ed, Butterworths Sydney, 1992)
MORRIS, J R,
Apportionment of Civil Liability
(Legal Research Foundation Inc, Publication No 28, 1987)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Contribution Among Wrongdoers: Interim Report on Solidary Liability
(Report 65, 1990)
NEW SOUTH WALES, Attorney General’s Department,
Tort Liability in New South Wales
(Legislation and Policy Division, Issues Paper, 1989)
NEW SOUTH WALES, Attorney General’s Department,
Tort Liability in New South Wales
(Legislation and Policy Division, Discussion Paper, 1990)
NEW ZEALAND LAW COMMISSION,
Apportionment of Civil Liability: A Discussion Paper
(PP 19, 1992)
ONTARIO LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Report on Contribution Among Wrongdoers and Contributory Negligence
RITCHIE, A V,
Ritchie’s Supreme Court Procedure, New South Wales
(New ed, Butterworths, Sydney, 1984) Volume 1
SCOTTISH LAW COMMISSION,
Report on Civil Liability: Contribution
(Scot Law Com No 115, 1988)
SWANTON, J and McDONALD, B, “Reforms to the Law of Joint and Several Liability-Introduction of Proportionate Liability”
Torts Law Journal
TILBURY, M J,
Civil Remedies Volume 2: Remedies in Particular Contexts
(Butterworths, Sydney, 1993) at 278-279
UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA, Institute of Law Research and Reform,
Contributory Negligence and Concurrent Wrongdoers
(Report 31, 1979)
VICTORIA, Chief Justice’s Law Reform Committee,
Contribution
WILLIAMS, G L,
Joint Torts and Contributory Negligence
(Stevens & Sons, London, 1951)
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of proposals
Abbreviations
Table of Legislation
Table of Cases
Select Bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 38 (1997) - Contribution Between Persons Liable for the Same Damage
History of this Reference (Digest)
Apportionment of damages
sum to be apportioned where judgment
sum to be apportioned where settlement
Apportionment of liability
according to what is just and equitable
4.80-4.86, 6.16
basis of apportionment of liability
British Columbia
system of proportionate liability in
2.7, 2.36, 2.45
Co-insurers
Co-ordinate liability
Co-ordinate liability
5.11-5.15, 6.16
Co-sureties
Co-ordinate liability
Co-trustees
Co-ordinate liability
Concurrent liability
effect of, on rights to contribution
- expansion of the tort of negligence
- plaintiff’s choice of action
Concurrent tortfeasors
Contribution between concurrent
tortfeasors
Concurrent wrongdoers
Contribution between concurrent wrongdoers other than tortfeasors
choice of plaintiff to proceed under tort or contract
concurrent duties in tort and
different nature of liability in tort and
express contractual provisions overriding general contribution regime
intrusion of tortfeasors into private contractual arrangements
invasion of, by equitable principles
Contractual limitations
6.24-6.31, 6.35, 7.33-7.38
Contribution
between wrongdoers
procedures for claiming
rationale for no rights to
rationale for rights to
relationship to solidary liability
retention of rights to
wider law of
Contribution between concurrent tortfeasors
D1’s claim for contribution
- where D1 and P settle without judgment
- where P fails in an action against D2
- where P obtains judgment against D1
torts to which contribution applies
- intentional torts
- statutory torts
- torts of strict liability
- torts that are crimes
Contribution between concurrent wrongdoers other than tortfeasors
equitable rights of contribution
rights arising from statutory liability to pay damages
- statutory provision for contribution
- statutes which do not provide for contribution
rights of indemnity
Contribution between mixed concurrent wrongdoers
arguments in favour of extension
commission’s provisional view
difficulties in extending the right to
- adding to the complexity of the law
- concurrent liability
- different nature of liability in tort and contract
extension of judgment bar rule to cover
legislative implementation
views of other law reform agencies
Contributory negligence
move to apportionment for
Cross claims
Third party procedures
Damages, apportionment of
Apportionment of damages
Damages, exemplary
Exemplary damages
Damages, sanction in
Sanction in damages
Damages, statutory liability to pay
Statutory liability to pay damages
Davis Report
evaluation of
options considered by
Equitable, just and
Just and equitable
Equitable rights of contribution
concurrent duties in statute, common law and
invasion of contract by equitable principles
Exemplary damages
and single judgment rule
Fiduciary duties
breaches of
Full compensation
to plaintiffs, aim of
2.11, 2.13, 2.33, 2.43, 2.44, 4.58-4.61, 4.65, 6.30, 6.35
Goods and services
as means of discharging liability
-4.46, 4.87
In solidum, liability
Solidary liability
Indemnities, releases and
Releases and indemnities
order amounting to full
Liability insurance
Civil Liability Act 1961
2.6, 2.41, 4.29-4.31, 4.63, 7.6, 7.7
proportionate liability in
2.6, 2.36, 2.41, 2.45, 2.46
Joinder of actions
Joint and several liability
Solidary liability
Joint wrongdoers
Several wrongdoers
distinction between, and several wrongdoers
1.9, 4.38, 7.16-7.31
Judgment bar rule
1.10, 1.14, 7.17-7.22
Settlements
consent judgments obtained by fraud or collusion
finality of finding of D1’s liability
in favour of D2, on the merits
Just and equitable
apportionment according to what is
4.80-4.86, 6.16
Liability, apportionment of
Apportionment of liability
Liability, co-ordinate
Co-ordinate liability
Liability, concurrent
Concurrent liability
Liability, proportionate
Proportionate liability
Liability, solidary
Solidary liability
Liability in solidum
Solidary liability
Liability insurance
and limiting the liability of professionals
compulsory, in conjunction with proportionate liability
2.8, 2.15, 2.16, 2.37
contractual limitations
7.33-7.38, 6.24-6.32, 6.35
statutory limitation period for contribution actions
statutory limitation period for P’s action against D2
statutory limitation period relevant to the primary cause of action
Merryweather v Nixan, rule in
1.10, 3.1, 3.3, 3.11, 4.5, 4.10, 4.11
statutory exceptions
Mixed concurrent wrongdoers
Contribution between mixed concurrent wrongdoers
expansion of tort of
- concurrent duties in statute, common law and equity
- concurrent duties in tort and contract
Negligence, contributory
Contributory negligence
aim of full compensation to
2.11, 2.13, 2.33, 2.43, 2.44, 4.58, 4.59, 4.60, 4.61, 4.65, 6.30, 6.35
Procedures for claiming contribution
initiating a claim for contribution
joinder of actions
Professional liability insurance
Liability insurance
Professionals
limiting liability of
Proportionate liability
arguments against
British Columbia
2.7, 2.36, 2.45
building legislation
2.8, 2.34, 2.44
Davis Report
2.2, 2.3, 2.29-2.48
for non-economic loss in personal injury cases
2.7, 2.36, 2.41, 2.45, 2.46
Prosecution
Want of prosecution
Releases and indemnities
Sanction in costs
7.9, 7.12, 7.13
Sanction in damages
1.16, 7.9, 7.14, 7.15
Services, goods and
Goods and services
Settlement bar rule
1.10, 1.15, 4.38, 7.17, 7.20, 7.23-7.29
Settlements
full settlements
4.37, 4.39-4.57
partial settlements
4.37, 4.58-4.69
policy of encouraging
4.38, 4.44, 4.45, 4.58, 4.64-4.67, 7.26
Several wrongdoers
Joint wrongdoers
distinction between, and joint wrongdoers
1.9, 7.16-7.31
Single judgment rule
7.17, 7.20, 7.30, 7.31
Solidary liability
arguments against
arguments in favour of
Davis Report
departure from in context of contractual limitations
departure from in context of partial settlements
interim report on, by NSW Law Reform Commission
1.2, 2.2, 2.9-2.28
liability insurance crisis and
limitation periods and
movement away from
preserved in context of contractual limitations
relationship to law of contribution
2.3, 3.2-3.4
Statutory liability to pay damages
statutory provision for contribution
whether a “tort”
statutes which do not provide for contribution
concurrent duties in common law, equity and statute
Third party claims
Third party proceedings
where D2 found not liable in
concurrent duties in contract and tort
choice of plaintiff to proceed under tort or contract
different nature of liability in contract and
Tortfeasors
Contribution between concurrent tortfeasors
Trust, breaches of
Unjust enrichment
6.28, 3.8-3.11
Want of prosecution
where P fails for
Williams, Glanville
2.5, 2.6, 2.41, 4.10, 4.21, 4.63, 7.6, 7.7
Concurrent wrongdoers, Joint wrongdoers, Mixed concurrent wrongdoers
Several wrongdoers
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Summary of proposals
Abbreviations
Table of Legislation
Table of Cases
Select Bibliography
Table of contents
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter