URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NTLRC/2016/43.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:40:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Non-Consensual Sharing of Intimate Images [2016] NTLRC 43
1.0 TERMS OF REFERENCE
2.0 RECOMMENDATIONS
3.0 THE SENATE LEGAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS REFERENCES COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATIONS
5.0 INTRODUCTION
7.0 CIVIL REMEDIES
7.1 Invasion of privacy
7.2 Breach of confidence
7.3 Relevant court
7.4 Conclusion
8.0 CRIMINAL SANCTIONS JURISDICTIONAL COMPARISON
8.1 Legislative framework
8.2 Northern Territory
8.3 Other Australian States and Territories
8.3.1 South Australia
8.3.2 Victoria
8.3.3 New South Wales
8.3.4 Western Australia
8.4 Commonwealth
8.5 International
8.5.1 United Kingdom
8.5.2 New Zealand
8.6 Conclusion
9.0 CHALLENGES TO ENFORCEMENT
10.0 CONSTITUTIONAL INTERACTION
11.0 SCOPE OF CONDUCT
11.1 Application to children and young people
11.2 ‘Intimate Image’
11.3 Distribution
11.4 Consent
11.5 Threats
11.6 Defences
11.7 Penalty
12.0 CONDITIONS OF A DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ORDER OR SIMILAR
13.0 BROADER RESPONSES
13.1 Education
13.2 Reporting mechanisms
13.3 Removal and non-republication powers
13.4 Self-regulation mechanisms implemented by social media platforms
15.0 CONCLUSION
NORTHERN TERRITORY LAW REFORM
DRAFT REPORT
Report No. 43
November 2016
MEMBERS OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY LAW REFORM
The Hon Austin Asche AC QC Professor Les McCrimmon
Chief Local Court Judge Dr John Lowndes Mr Peter Shoyer
Ms Peggy Cheong Mr Tass Liveris
Mr Russell Goldflam Mr Jared Sharp
Superintendent Richard Bryson Mr Ron Levy
Sonia Brownhill SC SG (Ex-officio) Mr Tom Anderson
Ms Zara Spencer
MEMBERS OF THE NON-CONSENSUAL SHARING OF INTIMATE IMAGES
SUB-COMMITTEE
The Hon Austin Asche AC QC Professor Les McCrimmon
Chief Local Court Judge Dr John Lowndes Ms Peggy Cheong
Ms Megan Lawton Superintendent Kris Evans
Mr Matthew Nathan SC Ms Zara Spencer
ABBREVIATIONS
ALRC Australian Law Reform Commission
DVO Domestic Violence Order
Committee Northern Territory Law Reform Committee
Senate Committee Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References
Standing Committee New South Wales Standing Committee on Law and Justice
TABLE OF CONTENTS
On 25 February 2016, the Attorney-General and Minister for Justice, JOHAN
WESSEL ELFERINK, asked the Northern Territory Law Reform
Committee to
investigate, examine and report on law reform in relation to the practice of
using intimate personal material to intimidate,
hurt or extort others.
Matters for the Northern Territory Law Reform Committee’s
consideration and report
1. Advise on the structure, nature and scope of some form of new offence in
this regard:
(a) where a person intends to hurt, humiliate or gain an advantage over
another person by making, or threatening to make, intimate
personal materials,
publi[sh] or share them with another person or persons;
(b) where a person records, obtains or procures intimate personal material of
another person for those purposes;
(c) where a person is reckless as to the harm or humiliation caused to
another person by distributing intimate personal material;
(d) where a third person obtains intimate personal materials of a person for
the purposes of publication or distribution, whether
for profit or some other
purpose, and is reckless as to the harm or humiliation caused to that person by
its distribution;
(e) the possible range of intimate personal materials to be considered for
this purpose, including images, recordings, writings or
(f) whether and how the consent of a person, in providing or producing the
intimate personal materials at the time, may play any part
in the subsequent
2. Does the Northern Territory require legislation, similar in character to
that proposed in other jurisdictions, to adequately capture
this offending
Thank you for your attention in this matter and I look forward to your
considered response. I request that the committee present to
me a completed
report by 31 July 2016 [*].
[*Due to the complexity and significance of issues to be considered, on 21
June 2016 the Northern Territory Law Reform Committee was
extension to 30 November 2016 to complete its Report].
RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation 1
Civil remedies of injunction or damages resulting from publication or
non-consensual sharing of intimate images, presently within
the jurisdiction of
the Local and Supreme Court of the Northern Territory, should continue in
Recommendation 2
The Northern Territory Parliament should enact appropriate legislation to
protect all persons resident or present in the Northern
Territory from
lasting harm or distress caused to any person by what is colloquially known as
‘revenge porn’, but more
accurately described as the
‘non-consensual sharing of intimate images’.
Recommendation 3
The term ‘intimate image’ should be defined to mean a moving or
still image that depicts:
(a) a person engaged in a sexual activity; or
(b) a person in a manner or context that is sexual; or
(c) the genital or anal region of a person, or in the case of a female or a
transgender or intersex person and who identifies as female,
the breasts.
Recommendation 4
Legislation should include specific public interest defences. It is
recommended that conduct be defined as being of public benefit
necessary for or of assistance in:
(a) enforcing a law of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory; or
(b) monitoring compliance with, or investigating a contravention of, a law of
the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory; or
(c) the administration of justice; or
(d) conducting scientific, medical or educational research that has been
approved by the Minister in writing for the purposes of this
There should also be an exclusion for persons that collect, prepare or
disseminate material having the character of news, current
affairs, information
or a documentary or material consisting of commentary or opinion of this
Recommendation 5
Legislation should make it an offence to:
(a) publish, by any means, intimate images of a person without that
person’s consent. It is not relevant to the offence that
consent was
given to create the images. The onus for establishing that consent was given for
the publication should rest upon the
person publishing the intimate images;
(b) threaten to publish intimate images.
Recommendation 6
Public education and awareness campaigns about non-consensual sharing of
intimate images should be implemented by offices such as
Children's Commissioner and the Federal as well as Northern Territory
Police to educate and support adults, young people and
children in relation to
digital technology and cyber-safety.
Recommendation 7
The Northern Territory Parliament should enact appropriate legislation to
establish a statutory based administrative scheme that provides
for the rapid
issue of take-down and non-publication notices in relation to intimate images
that have been posted without consent.
Alternatively, should the Northern
Territory Parliament be of the view that such an administrative scheme is not
appropriate, it
should enact appropriate legislation to empower the Northern
Territory Police, or the individual whose intimate image has been posted,
apply to the Local Court for an ex parte injunctive order to take-down, and not
permit the republication of, the intimate image.
THE SENATE LEGAL AND
CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS REFERENCES COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATIONS
The Committee acknowledges the work of the Commonwealth’s Senate Legal
and Constitutional Affairs References Committee (Senate
Committee) and their
report of February 2016 headed ‘Phenomenon colloquially referred to as
“revenge porn”’
which has been of great assistance in the
development of this report.
The Committee agrees with the use of the phrase 'non-consensual sharing of
intimate images', or similar, when referring to the phenomenon
colloquially
known as 'revenge porn' in legislation and formal documentation. The Committee
also accepts that there is a need for
harmony and consistency between Australian
account any relevant
offences enacted by the Commonwealth.
The Committee
also supports the Commonwealth Government empowering a Commonwealth agency to
issue take down notices for non-consensually
shared intimate images.
The Committee also accepts the need for all Australian police officers to
undertake basic training in relation to the non-consensual
sharing of intimate
images, and in particular, any new offences in the relevant jurisdiction, to
ensure they are equipped to respond
to offences of this nature and are aware of
the gravity of failure to acknowledge the seriousness of the offence.
INTRODUCTION
The non-consensual sharing of intimate images encompasses a range of
behaviours relating to:
‘...images obtained (consensually or otherwise) in an intimate
relationship; photographs or videos of sexual assault/s; images
obtained from
the use of hidden devices to record another person; stolen images from the Cloud
or a person’s computer or other
device; and pornographic or sexually
explicit images that have been photo-shopped, showing the victim’s
Throughout this report the word ‘images’ is intended to encompass
both video and still images.
The activity of sharing intimate images proliferated with the evolution of
the Polaroid camera which facilitated taking private photographs
without the
need to engage the services of a photographic developer. The evolution of
digital photography and videography surpassed
the Polaroid in the ability to
quickly share images. One of the earliest cited examples of the
non-consensual sharing of intimate images was the commercial and informal
circulation of a pornographic home movie of Jayne Kennedy
and Leon Isaac Kennedy
in the late 1970s. The video became available only after Jayne divorced Leon.
It was suggested that Leon
released the tape to punish Jayne for leaving
In the 1980s, the
pornographic magazine ‘Hustler’ began publishing images of naked
women submitted by readers, sometimes
accompanied by identifying information
without the permission
of the women, and resulted in legal action
Wood v Hustler Magazine Inc.
[1984] 10 Media L Rep
Advances in photo-imaging combined with the emergence of social media
websites where images can easily be shared with ever larger
recipients, for example Facebook, have provided a forum to share images without
consent, and for the purpose of harassing
or otherwise causing harm. The use of
the phrase ‘revenge porn’ can be traced back to 2007. Facebook
acknowledged around
2011 that it was receiving increasing complaints about
intimate images being posted or shared without
There are two well-known
cases of prosecutions for this type of offending; a 2010 New Zealand case of
Police v Joshua Ashby
and the 2011 case of
Police v Ravshan
[2011] NSWLC 40, which relied on
section 578C
In some instances, intimate material may be published to a specific
‘revenge porn website’. It has been reported that
at least 3,000
websites ‘feature this
Northern Territory Police has recorded an increase in complaints regarding
the sharing of intimate sexual images and recordings on
social media platforms.
Many of the complaints made to Northern Territory Police occur within
acrimonious relationship breakdowns
where the image was originally obtained with
consent and during a dispute, threats are made to post the
The Top End Women’s Legal Service, in its submission to the Senate
Committee, acknowledged that the non-consensual sharing of
intimate images is a
highly gendered activity that is primarily committed by males and
disproportionately targets women (although
males may also be victimised).
Further, the impact of non-consensual distribution of intimate images is
arguably associated with
more serious consequences for females than men. This
is because female social status has traditionally been intertwined with
perceptions
of chastity and modesty. Accordingly, an offender may employ these
sexual norms to punish the female ‘victim’ by distributing
material to third parties or the general
Northern Territory Police created a High Tech Crime Squad to investigate
crimes that involve computer technology. Between July 2015
and January 2016,
the High Tech Crime Squad received six separate complaints of non-consensual
sharing of intimate images through
the Australian Cybercrime Online Reporting
Network (ACORN). These instances involved allegations of
ex-partners making material available either generally though the internet or
specifically to associates of the victim. The material
varied from mildly
provocative images to highly explicit sexual images or movies. The High Tech
Crime Squad’s investigations
into these reports did not proceed to
prosecution due to a number of factors. The Squad experienced difficulty
identifying the suspects
and establishing their level of involvement.
Investigations were also hampered due to victims’ embarrassment and
unwillingness
to proceed with a formal complaint and be involved in the court
process. There were also instances where the suspect was located
Australia and beyond the Northern Territory Police’s
In all of the
instances, the individuals posting the material used a variety of platforms and
methods to obfuscate their involvement,
often using platforms that are based
outside of Australia which in turn created significant delays and difficulties
in obtaining
evidentiary material. It also proved difficult to identify the
individual who actually posted the material and to identify the jurisdiction
which the offence occurred.
Since January 2016, Northern Territory Police report that complaints continue
to be made, however, responsibility for handling such
complaints now rests with
the Domestic Violence Unit.
A 2015 survey on online abuse and harassment conducted at the Royal Melbourne
Institute of Technology (RMIT) reported that 1 in 10
Australians (between 18 and
55 years of age) have had a nude or semi-nude image of them distributed online
or sent onto others without
their permission, with 10.7% reporting that someone
had taken a nude or semi-nude image of them without their permission; 9.3%
that someone had posted such images online or sent them on to others;
and 9.6% reporting that someone has threatened to post nude
or semi-nude images
of them online or send them on to
Cyber Civil Rights Institute (anon-profit public charity in Florida, United
States of America) hosted a survey on the website
‘endrevengeporn.org’
from August 2012 to December 2013, in
which participants visited the website and completed the survey of their own
accord. A total
of 1,606 individuals responded to the
The responses are as
• 61% of respondents said they had taken a nude photo/video of
themselves and shared it with someone else;
• 23% of respondents were victims of non-consensual sharing of intimate
• 83% of victims (of non-consensual sharing of intimate images) said
they had taken nude photos/videos of themselves and shared
them with someone
• 90% of victims (of non-consensual sharing of intimate images) were
• 68% were 18-30 years old, 27% were 18-22 years of age;
• 57% of victims said their material was posted by an ex-boyfriend, 6%
said it was posted by an ex-girlfriend, 23% said it was
posted by an ex-friend,
7% said it was posted by a friend, 7% said it was posted by a family
• 51% have had suicidal thoughts due to being a victim;
• 93% of victims said they have suffered significant emotional distress
due to being a victim;
• 82% said they suffered significant impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning due to being
• 42% sought out psychological services due to being a victim;
• 49% said they have been harassed or stalked online by users that have
seen their material; and
• 30% said they have been harassed or stalked outside of the Internet
(in person, over the phone) by users that have seen the
material online.
Significant numbers of respondents that were victims also reported as
• 34% said it has jeopardised their relationships with family;
• 38% said it has jeopardised their relationships with friends; and
• 37% said that they have been teased by others due to being a
Victims also reported fears for the future:
• 40% fear the loss of a current or future partner once he or she
becomes aware that this is in their past;
• 54% fear the discovery of the material by their current and/or future
• 55% fear that the professional reputation they have built up could be
tarnished even decades into the future;
• 57% occasionally or often have fears about how this will affect their
professional advancement; and
• 52% feel as though they are living with something to hide that they
cannot acknowledge to a potential employer (such as through
an interview).
Victims reported impacts on their engagement online:
• 25% have had to close down an email address and create a new one due
to receiving harassing, abusive, and/or obscene messages;
• 26% have had to create a new identity (or identities) for themselves
online; and
• 26% have had to close their Facebook account (11% closed their
Twitter account; 8% closed their LinkedIn account).
Victims also reported impacts on their employment or education:
• 26% have had to take time off from work or take fewer credits in, or
a semester off, from school due to being a victim;
• 42% have had to explain the situation to professional or academic
supervisors, co-workers, or colleagues;
• 6% were fired from their job or kicked out of school;
• 8% quit their job or dropped out of school;
• 13% have had difficulty getting a job or getting into school;
• 39% say that this has affected their professional advancement with
regard to networking and putting their name out there;
• 54% have had difficulty focusing on work or at school due to being a
• 3% have legally changed their name due to being a victim; and
• 42% haven’t changed their name, but have thought of it.
A survey of 1,000 Australian women by Symantec for Beyond Blue identified
that over half had been harassed online, while 76% of surveyed
women under 30
years of age had been victims of online harassment. While only 6% were victims
of non-consensual sharing of intimate
images, this grew to almost 10% for women
under 30 years of age.
impact on victims is clearly significant and cases of suicide have been linked
to non-consensual sharing of intimate
It is clear that it is
timely to examine whether existing laws are sufficient to regulate this
There is a significant amount of legislative reform occurring in this area
globally and in Australia. Victoria and South Australia
have enacted
legislation creating stand-alone offences for the
non-consensual sharing of intimate images. New South Wales and Western
Australia have announced plans to introduce similar legislation.
The Senate Committee carefully considered and made recommendations, including
recommendations for Commonwealth legislation dealing
with this matter. The
Senate Committee identified that jurisdictional issues within Australia hinder
both victims and police in
pursuing allegations of non-consensual sharing of
intimate images and accepted that uniform legislation across Australia would
substantially
address these issues. It is clear that there is impetus for
action and that this conduct remains a serious and increasing concern;
that a level of
co-ordination is needed. A Bill dealing with these matters was before the
previous Federal Parliament, prior to its dissolution in
April 2016.
The scope of this report is limited to consideration of the legislative
context and opportunities for legislative reform. Importantly,
this report
reflects that criminal law can have a symbolic, as well as censuring function.
Also, criminal law is a public matter
generally prosecuted by the state, with
remedies designed primarily to punish the harm-doer rather than compensate the
victim. The
legislative context also includes consideration of civil law which
is a private matter between the individual parties with remedies
primarily to compensate for any loss or harm caused. This report notes the
advantage of creating specific criminal offences,
rather than relying on general
criminal offences or the civil law, that flows from offenders being convicted
according to the perceived
wrongfulness of the behaviour, as this communicates
society’s core values and confirms in the public’s mind the
wrongfulness
of the behaviour.
This report acknowledges that a legislative response is not the only
mechanism to respond to this concerning behaviour and the problems
within the community. These matters are discussed further below.
In determining whether criminalising certain types of behaviour is an
appropriate course to take, it is necessary to understand what
civil remedies
are currently available to Territorians for the disclosure and distribution by
another of images which, when taken,
were meant to be kept confidential.
Suffice to say that this is an area that has received considerable attention by
law reform and
parliamentary bodies in recent
and, therefore, the topic
will be addressed only briefly in this report.
Currently, at a Commonwealth level, there is no statutory cause of action for
a ‘serious invasion of privacy’, although
such a cause of action has
been recommended by the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) in two
Further, no State or
Territory has yet enacted such legislation, although in March 2016, the New
South Wales Legislative Council
Standing Committee on Law and
(Standing Committee)
recommended that such a cause of action be enacted based on the model outlined
by the ALRC in its report titled
‘Serious Invasions of Privacy in the
Digital Era’.
cause of action exists currently in the Northern Territory, and to the
Committee’s knowledge, a statutory cause of
action for a serious invasion
of privacy is not being considered currently by the Northern Territory
Parliament.
Actions available at common law to address the type of conduct under
consideration in this inquiry fall into two broad categories:
an action in tort
for invasion of privacy; and an action in equity for breach of confidence. The
first is at an embryonic stage
of development in Australia, whereas the second
is more established.
Invasion of
Before 2001, the generally held view was that a common law right to privacy
was not recognised in Australian law. This view was based
on an interpretation
of the High Court decision in
Victoria Park Racing and Recreation
Grounds Co Ltd v Taylor
(1937) 58 CLR
Australian Broadcasting Corporation v Lenah Game Meats
, the High Court left open the possibility of the development at common
law of an action in tort for invasion of privacy. Justices
Gummow and Hayne,
with whom Gaudron J agreed,
noted at [106]-[107]:
‘Lenah suggested in its submissions that to date the Australian courts
most probably had not developed “an enforceable
right to privacy”
because of what generally was taken to follow from the failure of the
plaintiff’s appeal in
Victoria Park Racing and Recreation Grounds Co
Ltd v Taylor
Victoria Park
does not stand in the path of the
development of such a cause of action.’
To date, the invitation extended by the High Court to develop a tort of
invasion of privacy in Australia has been taken up by only
two lower courts: the
Queensland District Court in
Grosse v Purvis
[2003] QDC 151
Victorian County Court in
Doe v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[2007] VCC 281.
No appellate court has recognised such a tort, leading the ALRC
to conclude that the ‘cases suggest that the future development
common law [tort of privacy] is, at best,
uncertain’.
A more fruitful common law remedy to address in a civil action the conduct
under consideration in this report is the equitable action
for breach of
confidence. In
Commonwealth of Australia v John Fairfax & Sons
[1980] HCA 44
(1980) 147 CLR 39
at 50, Mason J enunciated the equitable principle relating to
the disclosure of confidential information as follows:
‘The principle is that the court will ‘restrain the publication
of confidential information improperly or surreptitiously
obtained or of
information imparted in confidence which ought not to be divulged’ (Lord
Ashburton v Pape
Swinfen Eady LJ).’
With the advent of digital technology, and the increasing ease with which
intimate personal images shared in confidence can be taken
and distributed, the
courts have exhibited a willingness to use the action in breach of confidence to
direct that the disclosed images
be removed, prohibit the further distribution
of the images by a defendant and award damages to the wronged party. Two
cases can be used to illustrate how the action for breach of
confidence has been applied in such a context.
Giller v Procopets
[2008] VSCA 236
(2008) 24 VR 1
dealt with the aftermath of the
breakdown of a de facto relationship. Between November and December 1996, the
respondent had videotaped
the parties engaging in sexual activity in the privacy
of their bedroom. Some of the videos were taken without the appellant’s
She did, however,
subsequently become aware of later recordings. After the relationship ended,
the respondent:
‘...showed a video of the sexual activities of the parties to one
person, left a video with the plaintiff’s father and
threatened to show
the video to a number of people including the plaintiff’s employer. He
made contact with the employer on
9 December [1996]. He was taken into custody
by the police early the following day. He did not attempt to show the video
until about the middle of the following year when he showed it to a female
friend of his.’
The Victorian Court of Appeal found that the actions of the respondent
constituted a breach of confidence. Further, the Court held
that the appellant
was entitled to monetary compensation for the emotional distress caused by the
release of the video tapes. Finally,
the Court held that such compensation was
available both in the exercise of the Court’s jurisdiction to award
damages in equity,
and pursuant to the Victorian version of
Cairns’ Act
(21 & 22 Vic c
In the Supreme Court of Western Australia case of
Wilson v Ferguson
[2015] WASC 15
, the Court summarised the issue before the court as follows:
‘The issue raised is how an Australian court exercising equitable
exlover, to a broad
audience via the internet, of explicit images of a former partner which had been
confidentially shared between
the sexual partners during their
relationship.’
, the breach at issue in
Wilson v Ferguson
the non-consensual distribution by the male defendant of naked and semi-naked
photographs of the parties, and videos of
the parties engaged in sexual
activities, which images were taken on their mobile phones. The plaintiff
maintained that the ‘photographs
and videos were intended for the
exclusive enjoyment and gratification of the plaintiff and defendant for so long
as their relationship
Following the breakup of the relationship, the defendant posted 16 explicit
photographs and two explicit videos on his Facebook page.
Included in the
post was the defendant’s comment, ‘Happy to help ya boys at home ...
enjoy!!’. Later the same
day, the defendant also posted the following:
‘Let this b a fkn lesson. I will shit on anyone that tries to fk me ova.
time of the post, the defendant had approximately 300 Facebook
‘friends’ who would have been able to view and
download the images.
Further, the damage to the plaintiff was exacerbated by the fact that the
parties worked at the same mining
site, and many of the defendant’s
Facebook ‘friends’ also were the plaintiff’s co-workers.
In upholding the plaintiff’s claim for breach of confidence, Mitchell J
‘(a) the intimate nature of the images clearly had about them the
necessary quality of confidence;
(b) any reasonable person standing in the shoes of the defendant would know
that the images were only for his viewing and were not
to be shared;
(c) the defendant was aware that disclosure of the images would cause immense
embarrassment and distress to the plaintiff; and
(d) the defendant’s disclosure of the pictures and videos on his
Facebook page was motivated by his knowledge of the embarrassment
and distress
the disclosure of the images would cause to the plaintiff.’
By way of remedy, the Court granted injunctive relief to the plaintiff. The
injunction restrained the defendant from publishing,
either directly or
indirectly, the images other than on the terms specified in the
The Court also ordered
that the defendant pay to the plaintiff equitable compensation in the sum of
$48,404; which consisted of
lost wages in the sum of $13,404, and $35,000 for
the embarrassment and distress suffered by the plaintiff as a result of the
of the images.
Support for an award of equitable damages for embarrassment and distress
arising from a breach of confidence can be found in the decision
Maxwell P, for
example, after an extensive review of the relevant authorities, stated:
‘The present case involved a deliberate course of conduct on the part
of Mr Procopets, intended to cause maximum distress to
Ms Giller. The judge
found that this conduct had caused her great distress. In my opinion, this was
a separate and distinct basis
in law for the award of damages of $40,000 which
Neave JA and I would make on the claim for breach of
confidence.’
It is clear from the above that the equitable action for breach of confidence
is well suited to address the non-consensual sharing
of intimate images;
however, it is important to note that its reach is limited. In particular, the
action for breach of confidence
is not suited to situations where the harm
suffered by the complainant related to the threat of publication of intimate
images, rather
than the actual publication of such images. This limitation was
highlighted by Lord Justice Toulson of the Supreme Court of the
United Kingdom, a co-author of a leading text on
confidentiality,
written in 2007 (when his Lordship was a member of the Court of Appeal):
‘A consequence of the development of privacy within the action for
breach of confidentiality is that it is presently confined
to cases involving
the use of information of a private nature, whether in word or pictorial form.
So however strong and understandable
may be the feeling of harassment of a
person who is hounded by photographers when carrying out activities of a private
nature, and
however unacceptable the behaviour of the pack, there will be no
cause of action until an intrusive photograph is
published.’
While the above observations focused on the actions of the paparazzi, in an
Australian context the same would apply to the actions
of jilted ex-lover. This
was emphasised by the ALRC when it noted, ‘if the UK’s approach
applied, the plaintiff in
would (and did on the findings of the
trial judge) have a recognised cause of action for breach of confidence, but the
claimant in
Grosse v Purvis
would be without a
The monetary limit for the Northern Territory Local Court’s civil
means that generally an action framed in either breach of confidence or the tort
of invasion of privacy will be commenced in
the Local Court. Further, with
respect to an action for breach of confidence, the Local Court can award the
suite of remedies usually
awarded in such an action: monetary
injunctions.
Of course, as with
any civil claim, legal expertise generally will be required to draft the
pleadings and to prosecute the claim.
The inherent cost and time involved in
civil litigation, even if commenced in the Local Court, may deter many victims
of the non-consensual
sharing of intimate images from pursuing such
It can be concluded from the above that, in appropriate cases, a person who
has suffered loss, including non-economic loss for distress
and embarrassment,
can recover monetary damages in equity arising from the disclosure of intimate
images shared in confidence. Further,
the equitable remedy of injunctive
relief, if appropriate, will be available in such circumstances. Finally, while
some lower courts
in Australia have recognised a tort of invasion of privacy,
whether such an action is a viable option is still uncertain.
Of course, to avail her or himself of the remedy an equitable action in
breach of confidence or the tort of invasion of privacy provides,
party will have to commence proceedings in court. Such a process will
inevitably be time-consuming and expensive.
Recommendation 1
Civil remedies of injunction or damages resulting from publication or
non-consensual sharing of intimate images, presently within
the jurisdiction of
the Local Court and the Supreme Court of the Northern Territory, should
continue in force.
CRIMINAL SANCTIONS
Legislative
A number of Australian jurisdictions are contemplating or have introduced
criminal provisions to address this concerning behaviour.
South Australia and Victoria are the only Australian jurisdictions that
currently have specific offences criminalising the non-consensual
intimate images.
The Committee has examined the Victorian and South Australian legislation as
a guide, and adheres to the principle that, unless for
some reason particular to
the Northern Territory it is inappropriate, uniformity with the existing State
legislation should be achieved.
It could be argued, though rather optimistically, that section 47(e) and (f)
Summary Offences Act
(NT) could apply to a situation of the
non-consensual sharing of intimate images:
‘Every person who is guilty:
(e) of unreasonably causing substantial annoyance to another person; or
(f) of unreasonably disrupting the privacy of another person, shall be guilty
of an offence.
Penalty: $2,000 or imprisonment for 6 months, or both.’
These subsections are not sufficiently specific so far as the non-consensual
sharing of intimate images is concerned and designed
for the more immediate,
transitory and familiar instances of ‘offensive conduct’ dealt with
in the Local Court. Due
to the non-specific nature of these offences, instances
where this provision has been used to prosecute non-consensual sharing of
intimate images cannot be cited with any accuracy. The Committee understands
that these offences have not been utilised to prosecute
Anecdotally, it appears that charges for ‘up skirting’ (the
practice of surreptitiously and without consent photographing
underneath a
female’s dress or skirt) which come before the Local Court are most
commonly laid under section 47(a) of the
Summary Offences Act
section 12(1) of the
Surveillance Devices Act
Section 47(a) of the
Summary Offences Act
(NT) provides:
‘Every person who is guilty:
(a) of any riotous, offensive, disorderly or indecent behaviour, or of
fighting, or using obscene language, in or within the hearing
or view of any
person in any road, street, thoroughfare or public place;
Penalty: $2,000 or imprisonment for 6 months, or both.’
Section 12(1) of the
Surveillance Devices Act
(NT) provides ‘[a]
person is guilty of an offence if the person:
(a) installs, uses or maintains an optical surveillance device to monitor,
record visually or observe a private activity to which
the person is not a
(b) knows the device is installed, used or maintained without the express or
implied consent of each party to the activity.
Maximum penalty: 250 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years.’
Other Northern Territory criminal offences that may cover similar conduct
• assault and aggravated assault under section 188 of the
(NT) (by virtue of the definition of assault which can include
threats by words alone e.g. by telephone). The penalty for assault
imprisonment. If the circumstance of the assault is that it is a male
assaulting a female, aggravated assault may be charged
and the maximum penalty
is 5 years, or 2 years if found guilty summarily;
• threat to kill under section 166 of the
Criminal Code Act
which can be evidenced by the production of technology facilitated threats. The
maximum penalty for this offence is 7 years
imprisonment;
• unlawful stalking under section 189 of the
Criminal Code Act
(NT) (if requirements of the offence are made out by using a telephone or
electronic communication methods). In circumstances of
non-consensual sharing
of intimate images, it could be suggested that the technology
(the internet) has been used to cause harm to
a victim. The maximum
penalty for this offence is 2 years imprisonment, or where the conduct
contravenes a bail condition, an injunction
or other order of a court of the
Northern Territory, Commonwealth or other jurisdiction (for example,
a Domestic Violence Order),
or where the conduct involves a weapon, the
maximum penalty is 5 years imprisonment;
• threats under section 200 of the
Criminal Code Act
maximum penalty for this offence is 2 years imprisonment; and
• unlawful publication of defamatory matter under section 204 of the
Criminal Code Act
(NT). While prosecution for criminal defamation
is rare, where cyber-bullies post derogatory or denigrating material on the
that is sufficiently egregious, prosecution under section 204 of
Criminal Code Act
(NT), ‘Unlawful publication of defamatory
matter’, may be warranted. This offence carries a maximum penalty of 3
imprisonment.
Australian States and Territories
8.3.1 South
Section 26C(1)
Summary Offences Act 1953
(SA) prohibits the
distribution of an invasive image of persons without their consent and provides
for a maximum penalty of $10,000
or 2 years imprisonment.
‘Distribute’ is defined in
section 26A
Summary Offences
(SA) as including:
(a) communicate, exhibit, send, supply, upload or transmit; and
(b) make available for access by another,
but does not include distribution by a person solely in the person’s
capacity as an internet service provider, internet content
host or a carriage
service provider.
Section 26A
Summary Offences Act 1953
(SA) defines
‘invasive image’ as a moving or still image of a person:
(a) engaged in a private act; or
(b) in a state of undress such that the person’s bare genital or anal
region is visible,
but does not include an image of a person under, or apparently under, the age
of 16 years or an image of a person who is in a public
On its face, it appears that the definition of ‘invasive image’
is unduly narrow and arguably creates a high threshold
to be satisfied in order
for a particular image to attract criminal sanction for its distribution,
primarily because of the age requirement,
and the removal of public places from
the definition.
‘Private act’ is then defined in
section 26A
(a) a sexual act of a kind not ordinarily done in public; or
(b) using a toilet.
It is a defence to a charge under
section 26C(1)
if the distribution of the
image was for a purpose connected to law enforcement, or for medical, legal or
scientific purposes, or
if the image was filmed by a licensed investigation
agent in the course of an investigation for a claim for compensation or
From 1 May 2013 to 26 July 2016, there were 34 individuals charged with an
offence under
section 26C(1)
Summary Offences Act 1953
These 34 individuals were charged with a total of 39 offences. Seven charges
were brought against persons under the age of
18 years. Of these seven charges,
two charges were not finalised and the remaining five were heard via a
‘family conference’.
Summary Offences (Filming and Sexting Offences) Amendment Bill 2016
updated the offences in
Summary Offences Act 1953
The Bill inserted a new section 26DA into the
Summary Offences Act 1953
(SA) to make it an offence to threaten to distribute an invasive image.
Summary Offences (Filming and Sexting Offences) Amendment Bill 2016
passed by the Legislative Council on 23 June 2016, and received royal
assent on 29 September 2016. The amendments to the
Summary Offences Act
(SA), inserted by the Bill, commenced on the 28 October 2016.
8.3.2 Victoria
Sections 41DA and 41DB of the
Summary Offences Act 1966
make it an offence to threaten to distribute or distribute an intimate
image. Section 41DA prohibits the intentional distribution
intimate image where the distribution is contrary to community standards of
acceptable conduct’. The offence
is not applicable where the subject of
the image is an adult who consents to the distribution. Section 41DB
‘prohibits a person
from making a threat to distribute such an
image’. The section emphasises that it is the consent of the subject that
publication lawful or criminal and explicitly takes into account the
contextual nature of consent. Section 41DA(3)(b) provides that
the respective
consent must be to the ‘distribution of the intimate image’ and the
specific ‘manner in which the
intimate image was distributed’.
The maximum penalty for distribution of an intimate image under section 41DA
is 2 years imprisonment, while the maximum penalty for
threatening to do so
under section 41DB is 1 year imprisonment.
‘Distribute’ is defined in
Summary Offences
(Vic) as including:
(a) publish, exhibit, communicate, send, supply or transmit to any other
person, whether to a particular person or not; and
(b) make available for access by any other person, whether by a particular
person or not.
It is unclear from this definition of ‘distribute’ whether
‘communicate’ could mean ‘showing’
someone an image,
i.e. printed hardcopy or an image on a screen. It has been suggested that any
new offence ‘should clearly
state that distribution can mean sharing and
showing, and that it is irrelevant whether it is distributed to one person or
of people’.
defines ‘intimate image’ as a moving or still image
that depicts:
(a) a person engaged in sexual activity; or
(b) a person in a manner or context that is sexual; or
(c) the genital or anal region or a person or, in the case of a female, the
It is noted that the limitation of this definition is that it does not
account for broader concepts of sexuality and thus may not
be sufficient to
create an offence to publish the breasts of a person who is transgender.
An offence under section 41DA does not apply to the distribution of an image
with the consent of the person.
The Victorian legislation states that community standards of acceptable
conduct must be taken into account. ‘Community standards
of acceptable
conduct’ are defined by a range of factors such as the nature and content
of the image and the circumstances
in which the image was captured and
distributed. The vulnerability of the subject in the image is also relevant
(including the impact
on their privacy).
In 2015, there were 10 offenders charged against section 41DA (there were no
persons charged with an offence against section 41DB).
In 2016 (up to June
2016), there have been 35 alleged offenders charged against section 41DA, and
alleged offenders charged against section 41DB.
8.3.3 New South Wales
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) contains a range of offences that may be
applicable to the matter of the non-consensual sharing of intimate images. Most
relevantly,
section 578C
makes it an offence to publish an indecent article.
‘Indecent’ is nowhere defined in the
Crimes Act 1900
The maximum penalty for the offence is 100 penalty units ($1,100) and/or
imprisonment for 12 months. This provision was used
in a 2012 case,
, where the defendant posted six intimate photographs of his former
partner to his Facebook page without her consent. He pleaded
guilty in the
Local Court and was sentenced to six months imprisonment, which on appeal was
reduced to a six month suspended sentence
Usmanov v R
[2012] NSWDC
Following a conviction
for an offence against
section 578C
, a court may order, pursuant to
Victims Rights and Support Act 2013
(NSW), that
offenders compensate victims for any loss occurred as a result of the
Various other offences in the
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) have been noted as
having potential application to serious invasions of privacy, including
sections: 545B (intimidation or annoyance
by violence or otherwise), 91J
(voyeurism), 91K (filming a person engaged in a private act), 91L (filming
a person’s private
parts), 91M (installing a device to facilitate
observation or filming), 192J (dealing with identification of information), 249K
(blackmail),
308H (unauthorised access to or modification of
restricted data held in a computer), 91H(2) (essentially
‘sexting’ an
image of a person under 16 years). There are also
offences provided by the
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Surveillance Devices Act 2007
(NSW) which may be
applicable to some serious invasions of privacy and, consequently, to the
sharing of intimate images without consent.
On 3 March 2016, the Standing Committee published its report titled
‘Remedies for the serious invasion of privacy in New South
In its report, the Standing Committee recognised that a number of criminal
offences currently on the New South Wales
statute books may have
application to some forms of serious invasions of privacy. However, it was
noted that the available offences
fail to cover some key types of
non-consensual sharing of intimate images type scenarios. The Standing
Committee noted that it would be appropriate for the New South
Wales Government
to consider the Senate Committee’s recommendations for the introduction of
criminal offences at a federal
level as well as in the States and
Territories to address the non-consensual sharing of intimate images. This
recommendation has
been accepted by the New South Wales Government.
On 5 September 2016, the New South Wales Attorney-General announced that the
New South Wales Government is proposing to specifically
criminalise
the non-consensual distribution of intimate images. The New South Wales
Department of Justice has developed a discussion
paper identifying issues and
posing questions to assist in the development of a new offence, which can be
accessed from their website.
Written feedback on the discussion paper has been
requested by Friday, 21 October 2016. The consultation process has sought
on such matters as the definition of ‘intimate image’, how
images are shared or distributed, what penalties should apply
and how the
offence may apply to children and young people.
8.3.4 Western
Restraining Orders and Related Legislation Amendment (Family Violence)
(WA) received royal assent on 29 November 2016. Whilst
Part 1 of the Act commenced on royal assent, the rest of the Act will commence
on a day fixed by proclamation. The Act inserts a new Part IB (family violence
restraining order) into the
Restraining Orders Act 1997
(WA). In this
Part, section 10G (restraints on respondent) is concerned with the restraints
that the court may impose in making a
family violence restraining order. Two
additional matters have been included in the
non-exhaustive list of restraints that may be imposed: (2)(d) stalking or
cyber-stalking; and (2)(g) distributing or publishing, or
threatening to
distribute or publish, intimate personal images of the person seeking to be
protected . These inclusions recognise
the role of technology in facilitating
family violence and mirror the references in new section 5A (which defines
family violence).
The new section 5A(2) provides examples of behaviour that may
constitute family violence and subsection (k) refers to the
‘distributing
or publishing, or threatening to distribute or publish,
intimate personal images of the family member’. The penalty for breaching
a family violence order will be $6,000 or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
The current Attorney-General of Western Australia has committed to
introducing a stand-alone offence addressing the non-consensual
intimate images, early in a next term of government, if re-elected in March
Commonwealth
Prior to proroguing Parliament ahead of the 2016 election, the Commonwealth
had before it a Bill to address the issue of non-consensual
sharing of intimate
images. Currently, the most relevant
Criminal Code Act 1995
offence is section 474.17 (using a carriage service to menace, harass or cause
offence). Other provisions of the
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) that are
potentially relevant include sections 471.12 (producing, supplying or obtaining
data or a device with intent to copy
an account identifier), 474.19 (using a
carriage service for child pornography material), 474.20 (possessing,
controlling, producing,
supplying or obtaining child pornography material for
use through a carriage service), and 474.25 (obligations of internet service
providers and internet content
Of the Commonwealth offences, section 474.17 is considered to be most on
A person is guilty of an offence under section 474.17 if the person intended
to use a carriage service and was reckless as to whether
they were using a
carriage service in a way that reasonable persons would regard in all of the
circumstances as menacing, harassing
or offensive. A person who commits an
offence against 474.17 is liable to imprisonment for 3 years.
Under section 473.4 of the
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth), matters to be
taken into account when deciding whether reasonable persons would regard
particular material or use of a carriage
service as being offensive include: the
standards of morality, decency and propriety generally accepted by reasonable
adults; the
literary, artistic or educational merit of the material; and the
general character of the material.
The Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions previously expressed the
opinion that it would be beneficial to create a new Commonwealth
targeting non-consensual sharing of intimate images as this would provide an
opportunity to clarify the sort of material
and the circumstances to which the
offence would apply.
It appears that section 474.17 does not adequately contemplate or address a
number of aspects that the phenomenon of non-consensual
sharing of intimate
images raises, such as:
• consent of the victim (to the creation/taking of the original
• defining what might constitute an offensive communication (in the
context of disseminating intimate, personal or sexual material
electronically);
• the issue of whether the victim held and maintained any expectation
of privacy in relation to the image; and
• the section does not extend to non-online conduct (i.e. the
distribution of hard copy
The Criminal Code Amendment (Private Sexual Material) Bill 2015 was
introduced and read for the first time by the Commonwealth Parliament’s
House of Representatives in October 2015. The Bill proposed to amend the
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) to insert new offences in relation to the
use of a carriage service for private sexual material (image-based sexual
exploitation
non-consensual sharing of intimate images). The proposed offences reflected
the community’s increased use of telecommunications
to engage in harmful
and abusive behaviour of a sexual nature and the harm that can be caused. The
Bill was directed to making it
an offence for a person to use or make a threat
to another person to use a ‘carriage service’ to transmit, make
publish, distribute, advertise or promote ‘private sexual
material’, as well as to possess, control, produce, supply
private sexual material, for a commercial purpose or for the purpose of
obtaining a benefit with the intention that it
be used by that person or another
person in committing one of the primary offences. The Bill lapsed in April
Proposed section 474.24D defined ‘private sexual material’ as
(a) the material depicts:
(i) a person (the subject) who is engaged in, or appears to be engaged in, a
sexual pose or sexual activity (whether or not in the
presence of other
persons); or
(ii) a person (the subject) in a manner or context that is sexual; or
(iii) a sexual organ or the anal region of a person (the subject); or
(iv) the breasts of a person (the subject) who is female, or who is a
transgender or intersex person who identifies as female; and
(b) a reasonable person in the position of the subject would expect the
material to be kept private.
Proposed section 474.24E created an offence for a person to use a carriage
service to transmit, make available, publish, distribute,
advertise or promote
‘private sexual material’. The maximum penalty for the proposed
offence was 3 years imprisonment.
Proposed section 474.24F created an offence for a person to make a threat to
another person to transmit, make available, publish,
distribute, advertise or
promote private sexual material of which the second person or a third person is
a subject. The maximum
penalty for the proposed offence was 3 years
imprisonment.
Proposed section 474.24G created an offence for a person to possess, control,
produce, supply or obtain private sexual material, for
a commercial purpose or
for the purpose of obtaining a benefit, with the intention that it be used, by
that person or another person,
in committing an offence against proposed
sections 474.24E or 474.24F. The maximum penalty for the proposed offence was 5
imprisonment.
Proposed section 474.24H(1) creates a ‘public benefit’ defence.
Conduct was defined as being of public benefit if it
was necessary for or of
assistance in: (a) enforcing a law of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory;
or (b) monitoring compliance
with, or investigating a contravention of, a law of
the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory; or (c) the administration of justice;
or (d) conducting scientific, medical or educational research that has been
approved by the Minister in writing for the purposes
of this section. Proposed
section 474.24H(3)(b) provided a defence for the offences in sections 474.24E
and 474.24G for journalists
and people otherwise engaged in media activities.
Finally, proposed section 474.24J provided that the Commonwealth
Attorney-General must give consent for a person under the age of
prosecuted under the offences.
International
8.5.1 United Kingdom
In April 2015, the United Kingdom introduced a specific offence for the
non-consensual sharing of intimate images. Section 33(1) of the
Justice and Courts Act 2015
(UK) provides:
‘It is an offence for a person to disclose a private sexual photograph
or film if the disclosure is made:
(a) without the consent of an individual who appears in the photograph or
(b) with the intention of causing that individual distress.’
The maximum penalty for the offence on summary conviction is imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 12 months and/or a fine; or, on
conviction on
indictment, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years and/or a fine.
A photograph or film is ‘private’ if it shows something that is
‘not of a kind ordinarily seen in public’.
A photograph or film is
‘sexual’ if it shows all or part of an individual’s exposed
genitals or pubic area, it
shows something that a reasonable person would
consider to be sexual because of its nature, or its content, taken as a whole,
such that a reasonable person would consider it to be sexual.
The definitions ‘private’ and ‘sexual’ can include
digitally altered photographs and videos. ‘Disclosure’
occurs when
‘by any means’ a person gives, shows, or makes available an image to
another person.
Section 33 provides for specific defences to a charge of disclosing private
sexual photographs and films with intent to cause distress.
The defences relate
• the investigation of crime;
• the publication of journalistic material that is reasonably believed
to be in the public interest; and
• a photograph or film that had previously been disclosed for reward
with the consent of the person depicted in the images.
The United Kingdom’s provisions to address non-consensual sharing of
intimate images are centred on the perpetrator’s
intent to cause distress.
The focus on the ulterior intent of the distributor rather than the harm that
arises from non-consensual
distribution creates a serious limitation for the
protection of potential
However, the United Kingdom offence provides a ‘flexible’
approach to the issue of consent. The United Kingdom provision
provides that
‘consent’ to a disclosure of private sexual material includes
general consent covering the disclosure,
as well as consent to the particular
disclosure. The express inclusion of consent to ‘particular’
conduct expressly
affirms that consent can be limited to certain people and
circumstances.
Following the introduction of non-consensual sharing of intimate images
legislation in the United Kingdom, proposals are now being
considered in
the United Kingdom to provide automatic anonymity to a complainant of
non-consensual sharing of intimate images, rather
than requiring specific
individual suppression orders on a case by case basis. In this context, it is
section 15YR
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) makes it an offence
to publish any material which identifies a victim in certain proceedings, such
as those involving vulnerable
adult witnesses. It is noted that the Senate
Committee’s report makes mention of the potential need to expand the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) to incorporate the victims of this type of crime
under the umbrella of vulnerable adult
The BBC received Freedom of Information request responses from 31 police
forces in England and Wales for the period April 2015 to
December 2015 (i.e.
since the introduction of section 33 of the
Criminal Justice and Courts
(UK)). The BBC’s analysis
• 1,160 reported incidents of non-consensual sharing of intimate images
from April 2015 to December 2015;
• three victims were 11 years old with some 30% of offences involving
young people under 19;
• the average age of victims of non-consensual sharing of intimate
images was 25;
• around 11% of reported offences resulted in the alleged perpetrator
being charged, 7% in a caution and 5% in a community resolution;
• some 61% of reported offences resulted in no action being taken
against the alleged perpetrator. The main reasons cited by
police include a
lack of evidence or the victim withdrawing support; and
• Facebook was used by perpetrators in 68% of cases where social media
was mentioned in reports. Then came Instagram (12%)
followed by Snapchat
The UK Crown Prosecution Services in its 2015-16 crime report reported that
206 prosecutions for the non-consensual sharing of intimate
images were
commenced since the legislation came into
‘Successful’
prosecutions of non-consensual sharing of intimate images in the United Kingdom
have largely been resolved
by guilty pleas.
8.5.2 New Zealand
Harmful Digital Communication Act 2015
(NZ) (the HDC Act), was
enacted on 2 July 2015.
The HDC Act created a new civil enforcement regime that includes: setting up
an approved agency to be the first port of call for complaints;
establishing a
mechanism whereby people can now take serious complaints to the District Court,
which can issue take-down orders,
cease-and-desist notices and impose penalties;
the adoption of 10 statutory ‘communication’ principles recommended
the Law Commission based on criminal and civil law and regulatory rules; the
introduction of new offences (to post a harmful digital
communication with the
intent to cause harm, and incitement to commit suicide, even in situations when
a person does not attempt
to take their own life); and the introduction of a
standard takedown procedure for removing content on request (i.e. that provides
online content hosts with an optional process for handling complaints that, if
followed, will allow people easily and quickly to
request the removal of harmful
and illegal content posted by others, while limiting the host’s liability
for that content –
a safe harbour provision).
The new offence of greatest relevance to this report is found in section 22
of the HDC Act (causing harm by posting digital communication).
requires that three things be established:
• posting a digital communication intending that it cause harm to the
• posting the digital communication would cause harm to an ordinary
reasonable person in the position of the victim; and
• posting the digital communication causes harm to the victim.
Harm is defined to mean ‘serious emotional distress’. Posting of
a digital communication is defined in section 4 of the
HDC Act as follows:
(a) means transfers, sends, posts, publishes, disseminates, or otherwise
communicates by means of a digital communication—
(i) any information, whether truthful or untruthful, about the victim; or
(ii) an intimate visual recording of another individual; and
(b) includes an attempt to do anything referred to in paragraph (a).
Section 4 of the HDC Act defines ‘intimate visual recording’ as
(a) means a visual recording (for example, a photograph, videotape, or
digital image) that is made in any medium using any device
with or without the
knowledge or consent of the individual who is the subject of the recording, and
that is of—
(i) an individual who is in a place which, in the circumstances, would
reasonably be expected to provide privacy, and the individual
(A) naked or has his or her genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or female breasts
exposed, partially exposed, or clad solely in undergarments;
(B) engaged in an intimate sexual activity; or
(C) engaged in showering, toileting, or other personal bodily activity that
involves dressing or undressing; or
(ii) an individual’s naked or undergarment-clad genitals, pubic area,
buttocks, or female breasts which is made—
(A) from beneath or under an individual’s clothing; or
(B) through an individual’s outer clothing in circumstances where it is
unreasonable to do so; and
(b) includes an intimate visual recording that is made and transmitted in
real time without retention or storage in—
(i) a physical form; or
(ii) an electronic form from which the recording is capable of being
reproduced with or without the aid of any device or thing.
A person who commits an offence against section 22 of the HDC Act is liable
to imprisonment for no more than 2 years or a fine not
exceeding $50,000.
The challenge with this approach is that the prosecutor would need to
establish actual harm to the victim and intention to cause such
harm. However,
the approach would cover instances where the body is not directly exposed but
visible through the clothing.
There are varying approaches with respect to the nature of the offence that
ought to be captured by any criminal sanction. The New
Zealand approach seems
to acknowledge that non-consensual sharing of intimate images is only a part of
the concerning behaviour that
occurs in the online environment and that, more
broadly, the prevalence of online harassment is damaging and ought to attract
It is clear that there is a need for the harmonisation of criminal sanctions
that attach to online conduct, however, this is more
appropriately part of a
broad national debate, and that addressing non-consensual sharing of intimate
images is an important step
in the right direction.
Recommendation 2
The Northern Territory Parliament should enact appropriate legislation
to protect all persons resident or present in the Northern
Territory from
lasting harm or distress caused to any person by what is colloquially known as
‘revenge porn’, but more
accurately described as the
‘non-consensual sharing of intimate images’.
CHALLENGES TO
ENFORCEMENT
Enforceability of current legislation in the Northern Territory is
problematic, and these problems are likely similar throughout other
access to the evidence in a timely way.
The nature of the evidence is both the
data on the source device used to originally capture the images and, more
importantly, the
websites where these images or videos are posted and
subsequently accessed. As many social media services and devices are
to cloud storage of data, there needs to be some lawful authority to
obtain this information and to present it at hearing. The scope
information required by investigators is limited to that information that is
normally available to the user of the device.
Given the likely increase in the number of such offences, there needs to be
available mechanisms that facilitate their ready execution
and yield quick
results. At present, there appear to be two main ways in which this
information is obtained, both of which are problematic.
The first approach is
to contact the service provider directly and request the information and the
second is to apply for a warrant
Crimes Act 1914
Applications under the
(Cth) are problematic and
open to criticism where they are used to enforce State legislation.
Additionally, the process of obtaining
such a warrant is burdensome and would
need to be streamlined as it becomes increasingly relevant to more offences (for
breach of a domestic violence order by Facebook Messenger).
Applications to service providers have proven to be long and drawn out
involve multiple agencies.
Considerations for reform of police powers include:
• the ability to use a device to access data stored online that would
normally be available to the user of that device (e.g.
web based email; Facebook
feeds; Twitter; Snap Chat, etc.);
• the power to require biometric and password unlocking of devices
(e.g. PIN; fingerprint; facial recognition, etc.); and
• the power to compel the provision of passwords for accounts in the
same way as personal particulars.
In evaluating these proposals, consideration would also need to be given to
the balancing of personal rights and freedoms, which is
beyond the scope of this
report. Examples of these challenges include:
• the potential for additional offences to be identified unrelated to
the original reason for exercising the power and protections
against its
• the risk of data loss if the device is set to remote wipe; and
• the potential to infringe the rights of innocent third parties.
CONSTITUTIONAL
INTERACTION
Under section 51(v) of the Australian
Constitution
, the Commonwealth has
power to make laws with respect to postal, telegraphic, telephonic, and other
like services. This has been
interpreted as giving the Commonwealth power to
make laws with respect to ‘carriage services’, including
telecommunications
networks and the
The criminalisation of non-consensual sharing of intimate images should
include the distribution of such images other than online
(e.g. in hard copy).
Commonwealth legislation may be restricted to online forms for constitutional
reasons. The Senate Committee
noted that unified and uniform legislation across
Australia would substantially address jurisdictional issues within Australia
hinder both victims and police in pursuing allegations of non-consensual
sharing of intimate images. Given concerns about the potential
of Commonwealth
legislation to invalidate inconsistent State and Territory legislation, the
preference appeared to be that Commonwealth
legislation operate in conjunction
with that in the States and
Territories.
The phrase non-consensual sharing of intimate images encapsulates a broad
range of conduct and suggests a motive. As discussed above,
appropriate to describe the offensive conduct as non-consensual sharing of
intimate images. It is a growing problem that
requires legislative action. It
frequently emerges in circumstances where the first person (the victim)
willingly participates in
the production of intimate images but does not consent
to sharing them with another or others. The conduct that ought to be captured
by the offence includes when the second person (the first offender) deliberately
or recklessly shares those images with others (distribution
or publication),
possibly using a publication point such as a social media platform (the
secondary offender). Consideration must
be given to the scope of the conduct to
be captured by any offence, including the mental requirements. The mental
element of the
offence ought to be considered and ought to capture inadvertent
publication, and further, any aggravating or ameliorating elements.
The Committee also considered related issues such as whether the offence
should include intimate images obtained without consent of
the victim.
Importantly, the offence ought not require the existence of a relationship
between the victim and the offender as the
Committee considers it is irrelevant
that the victim consents to the initial creation of the images.
Non-consensual production and distribution of intimate images such as third
parties secretly recording otherwise consensual activity
or the recording of
sexual assault ought to also be caught within any offence provisions.
Additionally, publication is not the only
offence as threats to publish can
cause significant harm to a victim and ought to be captured within an
Application to
children and young people
Given the prevalence of this behaviour among young people, there is no basis
for excluding juveniles from being captured by a non-consensual
intimate images offence. In circumstances where the victim is a child, there
are already offences that would attach to
the creation and possession of images.
There are already specific offences in relation to creation, possession and
distribution of
images of people under the age of 18.
As the offence being contemplated is in relation to non-consensual sharing,
consensual sharing of intimate images between people under
18 years of age ought
not to be caught. If, however, the sharing of the images is not consensual, the
offence should apply notwithstanding
that the person sharing the images is under
18 years. Consideration ought to be given to the relative age of the offender
and victim,
particularly in cases where the perpetrator is over the age of 18
years and the victim is not. In that circumstance, the victim’s
be an aggravating factor.
Where the offender is a juvenile, they would be dealt with under the
Justice Act
The Committee considers that persons under the age of 18 who engage in the
non-consensual sharing of intimate images should be referred
to diversion
(including family conferencing) in the first instance, and that the laying of
charges should only be undertaken as a
last resort. Accordingly, the
offence of non-consensual sharing of intimate images should not be prescribed as
offence’ for the purpose of section 39 of the
Justice Act
The image(s) that would attract the offence could be both still (photographs)
and/or moving (film or video). Where image(s) are altered
to look like the
victim (i.e. using a non-private depiction of a person’s face in an
altered image of another consenting person
or publicly available pornographic
image(s)) should also be covered by the offence. As noted above, the Committee
uses the term
‘image’ throughout this discussion in the broader
It is important to define the bounds of the ‘intimate images’
that would attract sanction. Of relevance is whether the
images need to have a
sexual content or is it sufficient that the images are offensive? Is it
necessary that the images contain
nudity, which is not always offensive or
sexual, or can the images be merely
embarrassing?
The South Australian provisions relate to an ‘invasive image’
which includes images of genitalia or a person engaged in
act.’ The definition of private act includes ‘a sexual act not
ordinarily done in public.’ This
seems broader than the Victorian
provisions which have a sexual nexus or exposure of the genitals. For the
purpose of the recommended
Northern Territory offence the Committee is of the
option that the critical consideration is whether when the images were captured,
the victim had a ‘reasonable expectation of privacy’. Thus, while
the image of a person exercising at the gym may be
embarrassing, it is not
sufficient to fall within the proposed
The Committee also
concluded that images of transgender individuals should not be overlooked and
that, in the recommended Northern
Territory offence, it was necessary to modify
the Victorian provisions to ensure that transgender victims are also protected.
The Committee considered that the offence ought to be confined to sexual
images and include where a person is depicted:
• naked or partially naked (irrespective of whether genitals are
exposed or the type of pose);
• engaged in a sexual activity;
• in a way that suggests the image is of an intimate or private nature
(for example, wearing lingerie or adopting a sexual pose);
• which exposed the genitals, anus or breasts.
Recommendation 3
The term ‘intimate image’ should be defined to mean a moving
or still image that depicts:
(a) a person engaged in a sexual activity; or
(b) a person in a manner or context that is sexual; or
(c) the genital or anal region of a person, or in the case of a female
or a transgender or intersex person who identifies as female,
Distribution
It is recommended that an offence be created to proscribe the publication and
distribution of ‘intimate images.’
Criminal Code Act
(NT) section 125A defines ‘publish’
as including:
(a) distribute, disseminate, circulate, deliver, exhibit, lend for gain,
exchange, barter, sell, offer for sale, let on hire or offer
to let on hire;
(b) have in possession or custody, or under control, for the purpose of doing
an act referred to in paragraph (a); or
(c) print, photograph or make in any other manner (whether of the same or of
a different kind or nature) for the purpose of doing
such an act.
Consideration was given to the need to create an offence in the Northern
Territory that would capture the conduct of a secondary offender,
such as the
website host. Importantly, such a provision would be relatively unenforceable.
It was concluded that the Commonwealth
provisions adequately addressed this
conduct, and similarly, such conduct ought to be explicitly excluded similar to
section 26A
Summary Offences Act
(SA) discussed above which
states: ‘but does not include distribution by a person solely in the
person’s capacity as
an internet service provider, internet content host
or a carriage service provider’.
The Committee was mindful that ‘distribution’ should include both
physical and cyber forms of distribution so as to include,
for example, the
sharing or sending of a hard-copy photograph to another.
Consent should be the central tenet of any non-consensual sharing of intimate
image offence. The offence should capture the intentional
distribution of an
intimate image. The offence should not apply where the subject of the image is
an adult who consents to the distribution.
It is important to emphasise that it
is the consent of the subject to the distribution that renders publication
lawful or criminal.
The consent to the creation of the image is immaterial and
consent must be both to the publication of the intimate image and to
specific manner in which the intimate image is distributed. It is also
recommended that there be a rebuttable presumption that
consent for intimate
images to be created or disseminated during the course of a relationship
terminates upon the conclusion of the
relationship.
It is recommended that consideration be given to a defence of consent with
the onus resting on the defendant to prove, on the balance
of probabilities that
consent was given by the victim. To establish the defence, the defendant ought
to be required to establish
explicit consent to each particular image and its
publication or distribution. It is not relevant to the offence that the victim
consented to the creation of the image; however, the defence must establish that
consent was provided both for the creation and distribution
of the image or
images. There are challenges that would present to establishing such consent
existed. However, at the time of establishing
intent to publish or distribute,
it is irrelevant that the alleged offender did not turn their mind to the
presence or absence of
the victim’s consent. Thus it is that recklessness
would be a preferable fault element in this case.
There is no requirement that the offence include ‘an intent to cause
harm’ or ‘proof of harm’ element. The
perpetrator’s
intentions and whether or not the victim is actually harmed are not pertinent
– the act of non-consensually
taking and/or sharing intimate images should
be sufficient for an offence to have been committed.
In light of the serious harm that can result, threats to publish intimate
images must also be proscribed. In that circumstance, it
is sufficient to
threaten to distribute or publish intimate images of the victim whether or not
those images exist.
It is accepted that some instances ought to be excluded from the offending
provision. Similar to the proposed Commonwealth provisions,
specific public
benefit defences should be included. It is recommended that conduct be defined
as being of public benefit if it was
necessary for or of assistance in:
(e) enforcing a law of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory; or
(b) monitoring compliance with, or investigating a contravention of, a law of
the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory; or
(c) the administration of justice; or
(d) conducting scientific, medical or educational research that has been
approved by the Minister in writing for the purposes of this
Similarly, there ought to be an exclusion for persons that collect, prepare
or disseminate material having the character of news,
current affairs,
information or a documentary or material consisting of commentary or opinion of
this material.
Recommendation 4
Legislation should include specific public interest defences. It is
recommended that conduct be defined as being of public benefit
necessary for or of assistance in:
enforcing a law of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory; or
monitoring compliance with, or investigating a contravention of, a
law of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory; or
the administration of justice; or
conducting scientific, medical or educational research that has been
approved by the Minister in writing for the purposes of this
There should also be an exclusion for persons that collect, prepare or
disseminate material having the character of news, current
affairs, information
or a documentary or material consisting of commentary or opinion of this
In line with other Australian jurisdictions, the offence of publication ought
to attract a maximum penalty of two years imprisonment.
It is acknowledged
that there may be circumstances where the volume or nature of the offending
ought to attract a greater penalty,
however, the power to impose either
partially or wholly cumulative sentences as derived from section 51 of the
Sentencing Act
(NT) provides adequately for this.
Recommendation 5
Legislation should make it an offence to:
publish, by any means, intimate images of a person without that
person’s consent. It is not relevant to the offence that consent
given to create the images. The onus for establishing that consent was given
for the publication should rest upon the person
publishing the intimate images;
threaten to publish intimate images.
CONDITIONS OF A
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ORDER OR SIMILAR
Non-consensual sharing of intimate images occurs in a range of circumstances,
including situations of domestic or intimate partner
Domestic and Family Violence Act
(NT) provides for the making of
orders protecting people from domestic and family violence. A Domestic Violence
Order (DVO) may restrain
a defendant from making any contact with the
‘protected person’, including by the use of technology.
Section 5, of the
Domestic and Family Violence Act
(NT) provides
that ‘domestic violence’ includes ‘intimidation’, which
is defined by section 6(c) as including
‘any conduct that has the effect
of unreasonably controlling the person or causes the person mental harm’.
experiencing domestic violence may apply to the Local Court for a DVO
or have one issued by Northern Territory Police (see section
A DVO is a civil order; it is not a criminal charge. An application for a
DVO may be accompanied by related criminal charges and
criminal penalties may
apply if a DVO is breached. Part 5.2 of the
Domestic and Family Violence
(NT) sets out the offences. If there is not, or there has not been, a
‘domestic’ relationship, provisions akin to those
and Family Violence Act
(NT) apply in the form of Personal Violence
Restraining Orders.
In its submission to the Australian Law Reform Commission on ‘Serious
Invasions of Privacy in the Digital Era’, in 2014,
the North Australian
Aboriginal Justice Agency noted that its clients had been able to obtain limited
protection against ‘harassment
and control by the uploading of
sexually explicit material which can then be readily accessed on the
internet’ through seeking
novel forms of orders under the
Domestic and
Family Violence Act
(NT) in the (then) Court of Summary Jurisdiction. By
relying both on the provision under the Act that provides for orders to include
restraints (section 21(1)(a)), but also the facility of orders imposing
obligations (section 21(1)(b)), orders were obtained in the
1. The defendant is restrained from posting, uploading or otherwise
displaying, disseminating, duplicating or distributing any image
protected person in any form whether electronic, digital, hard copy, video or
any other form.
2. Within 24 hours of service of this order, the defendant is to permanently
delete and destroy any images or video of the protected
person that are in the
possession of the defendant or to which the defendant has access.
A DVO in the Northern Territory can restrain the defendant from
‘intimidating’ and ‘harassing’ the protected
This can provide protection from future threats to post or distribute material
to which a reasonable expectation of privacy
attaches. Accordingly, threats may
constitute harassment or intimidation.
Limitations to the use of DVOs include that they are not effective until
served, so if the perpetrator cannot be found, the orders
cannot be enforced.
Further difficulties may include the ability of Northern Territory Police to
devote resources to enforcing any
alleged breach of such an order or in the
Court finding a particular breach is enforceable.
Non-consensual sharing of intimate images is a complex issue and it is likely
that criminalising it will be an insufficient response
in isolation. In this
context, it is clear that there is impetus for action and that this conduct
remains a serious and increasing
concern and a level of coordination is needed.
Issues that need further consideration include:
• the division between Commonwealth legislative power and State and
Territory legislative power and the most effective use of
• co-operation between States and Territories in legislating, and in
dealing with offenders in one State or Territory moving
to another State or
• Recommendations 1-8 of the Senate Committee (see Attachment 1);
• sharing of information; and
• education strategies for law enforcement and other service
In addition, there are many other responses to this conduct beyond
legislative reform that need to be considered. Other measures
• developing community or corporate codes of conduct that stipulate
clearly that this behaviour is unacceptable, similar to
approaches taken with
domestic violence perpetrators;
• supporting and advocating for the victims, including challenging the
stigma experienced by victims rather than those committing
these offences;
• training and resourcing police and service providers; and
• awareness-raising and prevention within the community – similar
to or incorporated within responses to domestic
Consideration should be given to the creation of education and awareness
campaigns in the Northern Territory covering three important
aspects: first,
education and awareness about what constitutes non-consensual sharing of
intimate images; secondly, how to deal with
it if you are a victim; and thirdly,
appropriate responses amongst enforcement and support agencies. An important
part in any education
strategy would be reducing the stigma experienced by
victims of non-consensual sharing of intimate images. Education, therefore,
should not only be directed at potential perpetrators but also at agencies such
as schools and law enforcement to ensure complaints
are appropriately dealt with
and victims are supported.
In recommending an education campaign a note of caution must be sounded.
There is a risk that an excessive focus on educating individuals
consequences of allowing sexual images to be taken could be harmful. Messages
that focus on the risks that arise from
consenting to the production of private
sexual images are easily translated to the message that people who take such
risks are personally
responsible for any harm that may befall them. This
obscures the gendered inequities of such offending and harmfully amplifies
and out-dated cultural norms that blame women who experience gendered
violence. Such an approach overlooks the fact that digital
technology has been integrated into modern sexual life and implies that victims
are responsible for the decisions of perpetrators
committing this kind of
The position that it
is a woman’s responsibility to manage such risk fails to take into account
the spontaneous nature of
sexual interaction and that such acts do not lend
themselves to calculative
rationality.
The emphasis of an
‘education drive’ should thus be on the need to not distribute the
images that a partner has implicitly
been trusted with.
The Northern Territory should also collaborate with the Commonwealth
Government when it implements any such education strategies.
Recommendation 6
Public education and awareness campaigns about non-consensual sharing of
intimate images should be developed and implemented by appropriate
offices such
as the Children's Commissioner and the Northern Territory Police to prepare and
support adults, young people and children
in relation to cyber-safety and the
misuse of digital technology.
It could be that the Australian Cybercrime Online Reporting Network (ACORN),
an online reporting facility that enables the public
and small businesses to
securely report cybercrime incidents, could be further developed in this
For example, a formal
mechanism by which Commonwealth agencies, and internet and social media
providers regularly engage on issues
non-consensual sharing of intimate images should be established (see 11.4
An alternative avenue is that pursued by the UK, which has implemented a
‘Revenge Porn Helpline’, providing victims with
a means of reporting
non-consensual sharing of intimate images offences and an avenue to take action.
Removal and
non-republication powers
The material reviewed demonstrates that there is strong recognition of the
need for action to be taken against sites that share intimate
non-consensually. It is also important that individuals who have had intimate
images posted without their consent have timely
cost-effective mechanisms for removing such images. While it is perhaps
unlikely that internet sites established specifically to
share such images would
adhere to an order to take the material down from the site, particularly if the
site is located outside of
Australia, social media sites such as Facebook are
more likely to comply with such orders given that the failure to do so could
in reputational damage.
The Commonwealth Office of the Children's eSafety Commissioner has certain
powers under legislation to efficiently remove images from
social media and
websites, as well as images that have been transmitted by email. Further, in
Recommendation 4 of the Senate Committee’s
report entitled
‘Phenomenon colloquially referred to as “revenge porn”’,
the Senate Committee recommended
that the ‘Commonwealth government
consider empowering a Commonwealth agency to issue take down notices for
non-consensual shared
While clearly it
would be preferable that a national scheme for the removal of such images be
established, to date this has not
occurred. Consequently, given the urgency of
the problem and the damage being suffered by those whose intimate images are
online without their consent, the Committee recommends that the Northern
Territory government enact take-down notice provisions.
The fundamental issue for most individuals faced with publication of intimate
images is that there is both an ongoing affront to their
dignity and an ongoing
invasion of their privacy. The continuing nature of the affront (open to a
large portion of the family, friends
and work colleagues of the victim and,
often, to the world at large) is of particular importance in establishing
appropriate remedies.
Further, we live in a digitally-connected world where
publication is instant, as is the ability to share the image. The remedies
victims must match this environment. In such cases, every minute counts.
While court action, either civil or criminal, is an important remedy, such
actions alone cannot sustain a just outcome for the individual
victim. The most
effective remedy for the individual, at least initially, is to stop immediately
the intrusion into their privacy.
This should not, at first instance, involve
lengthy, complex or expensive court proceedings. The remedy should be a simple
speedy process that provides legal authority to compel individuals and
service providers to take down, and not to re-publish, intimate
another posted without that person’s consent. The Committee is also of
the view that such a remedy, at least initially,
should be heavily weighted in
favour of the individual whose intimate image has been posted without her or his
Ideally, as a victim’s first contact to complain of the posting of
intimate images without consent generally is the police;
the Police Commissioner
or his or her delegate should have the power to issue a take-down and
non-republication notice. Such decision
would be reviewable, either by the
Northern Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal or the Local Court.
Alternatively, should the Northern Territory government be of the view that
such a take-down notice scheme constitutes the exercise
of a judicial rather
than an administrative function, consideration should be given to the enactment
of a statutory power for the
Northern Territory Police, or the individual whose
intimate image has been posted, to apply to the Local Court for an ex parte
order. As has been noted in Chapter 5, there is still some
uncertainty in Australian law regarding the court’s power at common
provide a remedy for a serious invasion of privacy. It is the Committee’s
view, therefore, that the ability to apply
for the ex parte injunction be
provided for in a statute.
Recommendation 7
The Northern Territory Parliament should enact appropriate legislation
to establish a statutory based administrative scheme that provides
for the rapid
issue of take-down and non-publication notices in relation to intimate images
that have been posted without consent.
Alternatively, should the Northern
Territory Parliament be of the view that such an administrative scheme is not
appropriate, it
should enact appropriate legislation to empower the police, or
the individual whose intimate image has been posted, to apply to the
Local Court
for an ex parte injunctive order to take-down, and not permit the republication
of, the intimate image.
Self-regulation
mechanisms implemented by social media platforms
The adequacy of State and Territory-based legislation to address the issue of
the non-consensual sharing of intimate images is questionable
given the frequent
extra-territorial and transnational nature of technology-facilitated crimes
where, for example, images are posted
on a website hosted outside Australia, or
the owners of the site do not reside in
As non-consensual sharing of intimate images and online harassment is
increasingly tied to internet use, and as much of our internet
use is mediated
by companies like Google and Facebook, the self-regulation mechanisms of those
companies can be a practical tool
for the victims of these offences. Given the
difficulty in removing images from the internet, sites that share material
urged to provide timely, appropriate mechanisms for taking down
material shared without the subject’s consent. There is an
unquestionable
need to engage with internet companies to provide effective solutions.
While the current mechanisms arguably provide aggrieved individuals with a
means to stop the further dissemination of the non-consensually
intimate images, it must be noted that the availability of these mechanisms are
subject to the whims of the relevant companies
and providers, and the effect of
any such mechanisms is prospective and not deterrent. Further, for some of the
‘less reputable
photo sharing websites’ (sites tailored specifically
to hosting this sort of activity), there is often no mechanism for reporting
material and/or making complaints for people to have their respective private
sexual material removed.
The terms of reference of such websites are relevant. In 2015, Facebook
clarified its ‘Community Standards’ in respect
non-consensual sharing of intimate images and will remove content depicting
explicit content. Facebook also claims to refer
threats to share intimate
images to law enforcement. Facebook users can report content that includes the
non-consensual sharing of intimate images which is then evaluated and
potentially removed by Facebook User Operations
Similar mechanisms are
also available on Facebook-owned
as well as on
. To this limited
extent, social media platforms provide an efficient way to achieve the removal
of intimate images at no monetary
cost to the victim. Breach of the Community
Guidelines by a user may lead to that user’s access to the platform being
for breach of the relevant Terms of Use.
However, practically it is very difficult to get Facebook either to provide
evidence to law enforcement or to take down images as
they are located in the
United States of America (if, for example, the self-regulation mechanism fails).
Accordingly, if nothing
else, this ‘gap’ highlights the need to
engage with internet companies to provide effective solutions. Reputable
such as Google, Facebook and others that allow for distribution of
images of private sexual material should be required to assist
prosecutors of
non-consensual sharing of intimate images – how this should occur and what
shape it would take requires further
consideration.
The Committee recommends that offences be created to deal with the
non-consensual sharing of intimate images as well as threats to
images. Importantly, consideration needs to be given to enforceability of such
measures and the challenges of evidence
gathering. There is a fast growing need
for regulation of online behaviour and for the broad, symbolic, communicative
and censuring
function of the criminal law to be brought to bear. This report
affirms the advantage of creating specific criminal offences rather
than relying
on general criminal offences or the civil law that is seeing offenders convicted
according to the perceived wrongfulness
of the behaviour, which communicates
society’s core values and confirms in the public’s mind the
wrongfulness of the
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References
Committee’s Recommendations
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that Australian governments use the phrase
'non-consensual sharing of intimate images' or similar when referring
phenomenon colloquially known as 'revenge porn' in legislation and formal
documentation.
Recommendation 2
Taking into account the definitional issues discussed in this report, the
committee recommends that the Commonwealth government legislate,
to the extent
of its constitutional power and in conjunction with state and territory
legislation, offences for:
• knowingly or recklessly recording an intimate image without
• knowingly or recklessly sharing intimate images without consent;
• threatening to take and/or share intimate images without consent,
irrespective of whether or not those images exist.
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that the states and territories enact legislation
with offences the same or substantially similar to those
outlined in
Recommendation 2, taking into account relevant offences enacted by the
Commonwealth government.
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that the Commonwealth government consider empowering
a Commonwealth agency to issue take down notices for
non-consensually shared
intimate images.
Recommendation 5
If not already in existence, the committee recommends that the Commonwealth
government establish a formal mechanism by which Commonwealth
agencies and
internet and social media providers regularly engage on issues relating to
non-consensual sharing of intimate images.
Recommendation 6
The committee recommends that the Commonwealth government give further
consideration to the Australian Law Reform Commission's recommendations
regarding a statutory cause of action for serious invasion of privacy.
Recommendation 7
The committee recommends that the Commonwealth government implement a public
education and awareness campaign about non-consensual
sharing of intimate images
for adults by empowering and resourcing the Office of the Children's eSafety
Commissioner and the Australian
Federal Police to build on their existing work
with children in relation to cybersafety.
Recommendation 8
The committee recommends that that all Australian police undertake at a
minimum basic training in relation to non-consensual sharing
of intimate images,
in particular any new offences in the relevant jurisdiction.
Senate, Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Phenomenon colloquially referred to as ‘revenge porn’
Salter, M., & Crofts, T.
(2015), ‘Responding to revenge porn: challenges to online legal
impunity’ in L. Comella
S. Tarrant (Eds.),
New Views on Pornography: Sexuality, Politics, and the
, California: Praeger at 234.
Salter, M., & Crofts, T.
(2015), ‘Responding to revenge porn: challenges to online legal
impunity’ in L. Comella
S. Tarrant (Eds.),
New Views on Pornography: Sexuality, Politics, and the
, California: Praeger at 234.
http://blog.oxforddictionaries.com/2015/02/words-news-revenge-porn/.
Standing Committee on Law and
Justice, Parliament of New South Wales,
Remedies for Serious Invasion of
(2016) at [2.11].
Northern Territory Police
Force, Submission to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References
Committee for inquiry and report:
Phenomenon colloquially referred to as
‘revenge porn’, 15 January 2016 at p.2.
Top End Women’s Legal
Service Inc., Submission to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs
References Committee for inquiry
and report: Phenomenon colloquially referred to
as ‘revenge porn’, 18 December 201[5] at p.3.
Northern Territory Police
Force, Submission to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References
Committee for inquiry and report:
Phenomenon colloquially referred to as
‘revenge porn’, 15 January 2016 at p.2.
Northern Territory Police
Force, Submission to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References
Committee for inquiry and report:
Phenomenon colloquially referred to as
‘revenge porn’, 15 January 2016 at p.3.
A. Powell and N. Henry,
Digital Harassment and Abuse of Adult Australians: A Summary Report, RMIT
University, Melbourne, 2015. See
also Dr Nicola Henry, Senior Lecturer, La
Trobe University, Committee Hansard, 18 February 2016, p.30.
http://www.endrevengeporn.org/main_2013/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/RPStatistics.pdf.
http://www.afr.com/leadership/workplace/norton-by-symantec-beyondblue-say-online-harassment-affects-half-of-all-women-20160302-gn8ng7.
See the case of Tiziana
Cantone from Naples Italy who committed suicide in September 2016 due to the
online harassment and abuse
that resulted when a video she sent to her
ex-boyfriend was uploaded without her consent.
Australian Privacy Law
and Practice
(ALRC Report No 108, 2008) Ch 74;
Invasion of Privacy
(NSWLRC Report No 120, 2009);
Surveillance in Public Places
(VLRC Report
No 18, 2010);
A Commonwealth Statutory Cause of Action for Serious Invasion
(Issues Paper, Dept of PMC, 2011);
Too Much Information: a
Statutory Cause of Action for Invasion of Privacy
, (SALRI Issues Paper 4,
2013); Parliament of Victoria,
Inquiry into Sexting
(Parliamentary Paper
No 230, 2013);
Serious Invasions of Privacy in the Digital Era
Report No 123, 2014); Standing Committee on Law and Justice, Parliament of New
South Wales,
Remedies for Serious Invasion of Privacy in New South Wales
Australian Privacy Law
and Practice
(ALRC Report No 108, 2008) Rec 74-1;
Serious Invasions of
(ALRC Report No 123, 2014) Recs 4-1 and 4-2.
Standing Committee on Law
and Justice, Parliament of New South Wales,
Remedies for Serious Invasion of
(2016) at Recs 3 and 4.
Serious Invasions of
(ALRC Report No 123, 2014).
For a discussion of the
Victoria Park Racing
case see: D Butler, ‘A Tort of Invasion of
[2005] MelbULawRw 11
Melbourne University Law Review
Australian Broadcasting
Corporation v Lenah Game Meats
(2001) 208 CLR 199
Serious Invasions of
(ALRC Report No 123, 2014) at [3.56].
Lord Ashburton v Pape
[1913] UKLawRpCh 80
[1913] 2 Ch 469
Giller v Procopets
[2008] VSCA 236
(2008) 24 VR 1
Giller v Procopets
2004] VSC 113
Giller v Procopets
[2008] VSCA 236
(2008) 24 VR
Supreme Court Act
Wilson v Ferguson
[2015] WASC 15
Wilson v Ferguson
[2015] WASC 15
Wilson v Ferguson
[2015] WASC 15
Wilson v Ferguson
[2015] WASC 15
Wilson v Ferguson
[2015] WASC 15
. The terms were: as required by law; to professional
advisers for the purpose of obtaining professional advice; with leave of the
WASC; or with the express written consent of the plaintiff.
Giller v Procopets
[2008] VSCA 236
(2008) 24 VR 1.
Giller v Procopets
[2008] VSCA 236
(2008) 24 VR 1
R Toulson & C Phipps,
Confidentiality
(3rd ed, Sweet and Maxwell, 2012).
R Toulson, ‘Freedom of
Expression and Privacy’ (Paper presented at the Association of Law
Teachers Lord Upjohn Lecture,
London, 9 February 2007, 7. See also,
Australian Privacy Law and Practice
(ALRC Report No 108, 2008) at
Australian Privacy Law
and Practice
(ALRC Report No 108, 2008) at [74.115].
Local Court Act
Local Court Act
Local Court Act
Northern Territory Police
Force, Submission to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References
Committee for inquiry and report:
Phenomenon colloquially referred to as
‘revenge porn’, 15 January 2016 at p.2.
Section 26C(2),
Offences Act 1953
Senate, Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Phenomenon colloquially referred to as ‘revenge porn’
Section 41DA(3),
Offences Act 1966
Standing Committee on Law
and Justice, Parliament of New South Wales,
Remedies for Serious Invasion of
(2016) at [3.30].
Senate, Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Phenomenon colloquially referred to as ‘revenge porn’
at [1.24] and [1.28].
Senate, Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Phenomenon colloquially referred to as ‘revenge porn’
Senate, Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Phenomenon colloquially referred to as ‘revenge porn’
at [3.10 – 3.11].
Senate, Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Phenomenon colloquially referred to as ‘revenge porn’
Senate, Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Phenomenon colloquially referred to as ‘revenge porn’
Senate, Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Phenomenon colloquially referred to as ‘revenge porn’
http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-england-36054273?ns_mchannel=social&ns_campaign=bbc_daily_politics_and_sunday_politics&ns_source=facebook&ns_linkname=news_central.
Crown Prosecution Service,
Violence Against Women and Girls, Crime Report 2015-16, p.90.
Senate, Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Phenomenon colloquially referred to as ‘revenge porn’
Senate, Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Phenomenon colloquially referred to as ‘revenge porn’
Note the ‘fat
shaming’ incident of 19 July 2016 where a Playboy model Dani Mathers,
posted a picture of a woman in a
change room at her gym with herself in the
foreground hand clasped over her mouth in mock horror with the caption ‘if
unsee this then you can’t either’
http://thenewdaily.com.au/entertainment/celebrity/2016/07/19/dani-mathers-snapchat/.
In response to the news that
a website was sharing the intimate images of over 500 South Australian women a
furore erupted when Sunrise
Twitter post asked ‘when are women going to
learn not to share these images’ which created a victim blaming backlash
from Clementine Ford.
http://www.news.com.au/entertainment/tv/morning-shows/feminist-clementine-ford-adds-nude-post-accusing-sunrise-of-being-run-by-a-sexist-parade-of-morons/news-story/410cf98dffe515150f8c08e82ecc20c3.
Submission: Serious
Invasions of Privacy in the Digital Era (DP80), Domestic Violence Legal
Service/North Australian Aboriginal Justice
Agency, May 2014 pp.6-7.
A. Powell and N. Henry,
Ending ‘revenge porn’: how can we stop sexual images being used
The Conversation 16 February 2016 online.
Top End Women’s Legal
Service Inc., Submission to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs
References Committee for inquiry
and report: Phenomenon colloquially referred to
as ‘revenge porn’, 18 December 201[5] at p.6.
Salter, M., & Crofts, T.
(2015), ‘Responding to revenge porn: challenges to online legal
impunity’ in L. Comella
S. Tarrant (Eds.),
New Views on Pornography: Sexuality, Politics, and the
, California: Praeger at 236.
Senate, Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Phenomenon colloquially referred to as ‘revenge porn’
Senate, Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Phenomenon colloquially referred to as ‘revenge porn’
Senate, Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Phenomenon colloquially referred to as ‘revenge porn’
Facebook, Community
Standards, 2016, www.facebook.com/communitystandards - see also ‘What
Happens After You Click Report’.
Instagram Inc., Community
guidelines https://help.instagram.com.
Snapchat, Inc., Community
guidelines – https://support.snapchat.com.
YouTube Community Guidelines
www.youtube.com.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (330 KB)
PDF format (562 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter