URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/TASLRI/2019/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:50:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Notional Estates [2019] TASLRI 27
Should Tasmania Introduce Notional Estate Laws?
Final Report No. 27
September 2019
Information
The Tasmania Law Reform Institute was established on 23 July 2001 by
agreement between the Government of the State of Tasmania, the
University of
Tasmania and the Law Society of Tasmania. The creation of the Institute was part
of a Partnership Agreement between
the University and the State government
signed in 2000. The Institute is based at the Sandy Bay campus of the University
of Tasmania
within the Faculty of Law. The Institute undertakes law reform work
and research on topics proposed by the government, the community,
the University
and the Institute itself.
The work of the Institute involves the review of laws with a view to:
• the modernisation of the law
• the elimination of defects in the law
• the simplification of the law
• the consolidation of any laws
• the repeal of laws that are obsolete or unnecessary
• uniformity between laws of other States and the Commonwealth.
The Institute’s Director is Associate Professor Terese Henning. The
members of the Board of the Institute are Associate Professor
Terese Henning
(Chair), Professor Tim McCormack (Dean of the Faculty of Law at the University
of Tasmania), the Honourable Justice
Helen Wood (appointed by the Honourable
Chief Justice of Tasmania), Ms Kristy Bourne (appointed by the
Attorney-General), Associate
Professor Jeremy Prichard (appointed by the Council
of the University), Mr Craig Mackie (nominated by the Tasmanian Bar
Association),
Ms Ann Hughes (appointed at the invitation of the Institute
Board), Mr Rohan Foon (appointed by the Law Society of Tasmania), Ms
Baumeler (appointed at the invitation of the Institute Board) and Ms Rosie Smith
(appointed at the invitation of the Institute
Board as a member of the Tasmanian
Aboriginal community).
The Board oversees the Institute’s research, considering each reference
before it is accepted, and approving publications before
their release.
The Institute can be contacted by email at Law.Reform@utas.edu.au, or by mail
Tasmania Law Reform Institute
Private Bag 89
Hobart, TAS 7001
to this Final Report
In December 2016, the then Attorney-General, the Honourable Dr Vanessa
Goodwin MLC, wrote to the Institute following an approach by
the Treasurer, the
Honourable Peter Gutwein MP, about the issue of whether Tasmania should
implement the concept of ‘notional
estate’ within existing family
provision legislation. The Institute subsequently received a formal reference on
this matter
and funding from the Solicitors’ Guarantee Fund to undertake
the reference. The Institute released an Issues Paper in March
Tasmania Introduce Notional Estate Laws
(Issues Paper No 28), with a call
for submissions by 24 May 2019. It produced and published a short video,
factsheet and Easy Read
summary of the Issues Paper to enhance the availability
of accessible information about the review. The Issues Paper and video were
published on the Institute’s website and announced via social media. The
Institute’s researcher was interviewed on ABC
Radio Hobart and an opinion
piece about the review was published in
The Mercury
newspaper on 13 March
2019. Articles also appeared in
The Examiner
Advice of the review was announced to Tasmanian legal practitioners and
members on the Law Society of Tasmania’s weekly bulletin.
The Institute
was invited to attend meetings of the Law Society Elder and Succession Law
Committee and Family Law Committee. The
Institute also obtained approval to
write to accountants and financial advisors to inform them of the review and
provide them with
a flyer that they were invited to distribute amongst their
clients and other contacts.
The Institute received 28 written responses and four verbal submissions to
the questions asked in the Issues Paper, comprising the
views of 67
individuals
organisations.
The Institute
received public submissions from the following respondents:
• The Treasurer, the Honourable Peter Gutwein MP
• Elder & Succession Law Committee of the Law Society
• Litigation Committee of the Law Society
• Family Law Committee of the Law Society
• Mr Robert Young
• Ms Susan Baldock
• Joint submission of Mrs Dorothy Lowe, Mrs Evelyn Jones, Mr Kevin
Claridge, Mr Nigel Claridge, Mr Dennis Claridge, Mr Graeme
Claridge, Ms Teresa
Edwards, Mr Brian Claridge, and Mr Philip
• Mr Tony Gray
• Mr Essen Bradbury
• Ms Heather Dunn
• Mr Barry Claridge
• Ms Ann Hamilton
• Ms Phillipa Alexander
• Mr Justin McMullen
• Ms Alice Grubb
• Mr Geoffrey Nash
• Mr Steven Bishop
• Ms Nina Hendy
• Joint submission of Ms Christine Schokman, Mr Dexter Marcenko and Mr
Michael Flanagan
• Mr Sam McCullough
• Mr James Walker
The Institute thanks all those who responded to the Issues Paper or met with
the Institute.
Acknowledgments
This report was prepared for the Board by Mrs Kate Hanslow. The Issues Paper
that preceded this Final Report was prepared by Mr Ken
Mackie, Dr Elise Histed,
Mr Dylan Richards and Mrs Kate Hanslow. Both were edited by Mr Bruce Newey.
The Institute thanks Mrs Nina Hendy, Ms Kimberley Martin and Mr Frank Kennedy
who participated in the filming of the Institute’s
short video about the
review. The Institute also thanks Mr Richard Williams of CineStill for producing
the video, and Speak Out Tasmania
for their preparation of the Easy Read
versions of the Issues Paper and this report. The Institute also wishes to
acknowledge the
assistance and guidance provided by Distinguished Professor Don
Chalmers, Professor Gino Dal Pont, Dr David Plater and Professor
of Reference
Whether notional estate legislation should be introduced in Tasmania.
List of Recommendations
notional estate laws not be introduced in Tasmania in the absence of nationally
uniform family provision laws.
2. That, if notional estate laws are introduced:
2.1 There be a comprehensive public education campaign advising stakeholders
of the effect of legislative reform.
2.2 Reforms not operate retrospectively.
2.3 Legislative reform broadly align with
Succession Act
(NSW), subject to any variations made necessary to ensure consistency
with existing terminology used in the
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act
(Tas) and Recommendation 2.4.
2.4 The term ‘relevant property transaction’ be limited to acts
rather than failures to act.
2.5 The legislative framework incorporates a section consistent with
Succession Act 2006
(NSW) enabling the Supreme Court to approve
agreements between eligible claimants about the transfer of assets and
relinquishment
3. That the State Government advance the national debate surrounding
nationally uniform family provision legislation via the Council
Attorneys-General or by referring the matter to the Institute to advance through
coordination of a national project amongst law
reform bodies.
4. That, if nationally uniform estate dispute laws are progressed, this
matter be revisited, and, following a full evaluation of the
operation of the
New South Wales notional estate scheme, the utility of incorporating notional
estate provisions within national
uniform laws be considered as well as the form
that those provisions might take.
Glossary and Abbreviations
Administrator
Someone who obtains a Grant of Letters of Administration
from the Supreme Court of Tasmania
British Columbia Law Institute
Binding death benefit nomination
Donatio mortis causa
Also known as a ‘death bed
Elder Law Committee
Elder & Succession Law Committee of the Law
Society of Tasmania
Assets held by the deceased at their death or that are paid to
the person’s legal personal representative
European Union Committee
Someone appointed under a will to administer the
will-maker’s estate
Family provision claim
A claim by an eligible applicant for additional
provision from a deceased’s estate under the
Testator’s Family
Maintenance Act 1912
(Tas) (or equivalent laws in other jurisdictions)
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Committee
Family Law Committee of the Law Society of
Grant of Administration
‘A legal document issued under the Seal
of the Court which enables the person(s) named as Executor(s) or
Administrator(s)
to deal with the assets held by the deceased in
Grant of Probate
‘Probate is the process of officially proving
the validity of a Will as being the last Will of the deceased. A Grant of
is issued when the deceased’s last Will and testament is proved by
one or more Executors named in the
Grant of Letters of Administration
A Grant made if a person dies
without a will
Where a person dies without a will that gifts the whole of
their estate
Legal personal representative
An executor or administrator who obtains
a Grant of Administration
Litigation Committee
Litigation Committee of the Law Society of
New South Wales Law Reform Commission
Succession Act
Succession Act 2006
New Zealand Law Commission
Queensland Law Reform Commission
South Australian Law Reform Institute
See ‘Will-maker’
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act 1912
The National Committee
National Committee for Uniform Succession
Victorian Law Reform Commission
Law Reform Commission of Western Australia
A person who makes a will.
In 1977, the New South Wales Law Reform Commission (‘NSWLRC’)
recommended that New South Wales’ estate dispute legislation
be reformed
to broaden the classes of assets that may be affected by a family provision
claim. In response, the New South Wales Government
enacted the
Provision Act 1982
(NSW) which enables the court to deem certain non-estate
assets as ‘notional estate’ for the purpose of funding successful
family provision claims.
Despite the National Committee on Uniform Succession Laws endorsing the New
South Wales approach to notional estate laws, it remains
the only Australian
fund provision for successful
claimants. The merits of legislation of this type
have been considered by the Victorian Law Reform Commission (‘VLRC’)
and South Australian Law Reform Institute (‘SALRI’), with SALRI
recommending that such laws not be introduced and the
VLRC making no
recommendation concerning their introduction. In 2016, the former
Attorney-General, the Honourable Dr Vanessa Goodwin
MLC, requested that the
Institute review potential reforms to the
Testator’s Family Maintenance
’) to incorporate notional estate
provisions in Tasmania.
The Issues Paper that preceded this report asked a range of questions to
gauge the degree of community support or opposition to the
introduction of
notional estate laws in Tasmania. The Issues Paper stimulated significant
community interest, with a range of competing
views expressed in the 32 formal
submissions received. After conducting its review of the current law,
considering the feedback received
to questions asked in the Issues Paper and
examining the research and developments in other jurisdictions, the Institute
that notional estate legislation should not be introduced in Tasmania
at this time. The Institute does, however, make several recommendations
what such a scheme should look like if introduced and how future reforms might
fit with the broader objective of nationally
uniform succession laws.
What are family provision claims?
In Australia, all capable adults are able to make a document (called a will)
that outlines what is to happen to their assets (called
‘estate’) after their death. There are no fixed amounts that must be
left to family members and the person is free
to choose how they want their
estate dealt with.
Part 1 of this report explains that there is, however, legislation that
enables limited classes of people to claim a share (or a larger
share) of a
person’s estate. These are often called ‘family provision
claims.’ In Tasmania, these laws are contained
Those able to make a claim are limited to spouses and children of the deceased
(including step-children), or the deceased’s
parents where they did not
have a spouse or child. A person may bring a claim because they were not left
anything under a will, or
they may consider that what they were provided is not
adequate or proper in the circumstances. It is equally possible for someone
challenge their entitlement under intestacy, where statute outlines who is to
receive a person’s estate where they die without
a valid will that
distributes the whole of their estate.
A family provision claim is commenced by application to the Supreme Court of
Tasmania, which determines a claim if the matter cannot
be resolved amongst the
parties. The applicant must satisfy the Court that they have been left without
adequate provision for their
proper maintenance and support. The Court will
consider a range of factors in its discretion, which may include matters like
applicant’s need, the size of the estate available, the nature and
quality of the relationship between the applicant and the
deceased, the
competing claims of beneficiaries and any reasons ascertained why the deceased
wished to gift their estate as they
did. The Court can decline to award
provision for an applicant where it determines that they have disentitled
themselves due to their
conduct. This might occur, for example, where the
applicant has been violent or abusive towards the deceased.
If the Court is satisfied that an applicant satisfies the test outlined in
, it may order that the applicant receive an amount (or
additional amount) from the deceased’s estate. The key elements of the
are explained in Part 1.
What assets are able to be claimed?
In all Australian jurisdictions other than New South Wales, a court may only
make provision for a successful family provision applicant
deceased’s estate. It is possible for a person who might be considered
wealthy to die with very little (if anything)
in their estate. This might occur
where the person owns property with others as a joint tenant, or where assets
are held in trusts.
Assets may pass to beneficiaries outside of a person’s
estate, for example, where superannuation or life insurance proceeds
directly to beneficiaries rather than to the person’s legal personal
representative. A person may also gift assets
before their death, with any
assets gifted then ceasing to be part of their estate. Those assets that may
fall outside a person’s
estate are outlined in Part 2.
The way people hold their assets may exist for a range of reasons — for
example, for asset protection or taxation purposes.
Pre-death gifts may be made
to reward or compensate individuals who have provided someone with care or
assistance. On the other hand,
structuring arrangements may be deliberate
strategies to reduce or eliminate the risk of challenge to assets after death
via a family
provision claim. In either case, the effect is to significantly
reduce, and sometimes eliminate, the possibility of an applicant
further provision from an estate, because there is no estate to claim.
In Tasmania, an applicant must file a family provision claim within three
months of a Grant of Administration having been made in
the estate, although the
Court has discretion to extend this period. If the claim period passes and a
legal personal representative
has not had notice of any claims, the legal
personal representative may commence distributing the estate amongst
beneficiaries. The
confirms that assets distributed in these
circumstances cease to be part of an estate. These assets are then also
unavailable to
fund provision for a successful applicant where the Court allows
them to make a family provision claim out of time.
Designating non-estate assets as ‘notional estate’
Part 3 explains that legislation in New South Wales, and some overseas
For example,
provisions within the
Succession Act 2006
(NSW) (‘NSW
’) enable the court to designate assets outside of a person’s
estate as ‘notional estate’. The court can then
utilise this
notional estate when awarding provision for a successful applicant. These
provisions are not dissimilar to laws that
apply to bankruptcy, where assets may
be ‘clawed-back’ when they are disposed of within certain timeframes
prior to the
commencement of a person’s bankruptcy. Similarly, in the
family law context, superannuation is considered property of the parties,
the Family Court able to make orders splitting superannuation between partners.
In some circumstances, trust assets may also
be considered a financial resource
of a party for the purposes of family law property orders despite those assets
being held in a
trust and not owned personally.
details the notional estate provisions operating in New South Wales.
In broad terms, the New South Wales Supreme Court may only make
estate order if an applicant is successful in their claim, and only if there are
insufficient assets in the estate to
fund the award ordered, or to pay legal
costs. Only transactions occurring within three years of death (or that occur
upon or after
a person’s death) are relevant. The provisions apply equally
to acts and omissions. So, if a person fails to do an act —
like sever a
joint tenancy, or make or change a binding death benefit nomination, or make a
distribution from a trust — then
those ‘transactions’ may also
be captured. Before designating property as notional estate, the Court must
consider the
importance of not interfering with reasonable expectations in
relation to property, the substantial justice and the merits involved,
other matter it considers relevant.
The New South Wales’ notional estate provisions align with the National
Committee for Uniform Succession Laws’ (‘National
Committee’)
recommendations made in 1997, and subsequent recommendations in 2004. Despite
this, New South Wales is the only
estate laws. Some overseas jurisdictions have similar, although not identical,
provisions,
including parts of the United Kingdom, Canada and the US. The New
Zealand Law Commission (‘NZLC’) has endorsed legislative
aimed at addressing family provision avoidance although their recommendations
have not been enacted in statute.
Notional estate laws enable the court to award provision for successful
family provision claimants from a much broader pool of assets
than are presently
available in Tasmania. On one hand, extending the reach of family provision laws
to assets not currently impacted
imposes a further restriction on a
person’s ability to choose how they want their estate distributed after
their death. On
the other hand, there is scope for people to structure their
affairs in ways that limit the utility of family provision laws which
intended to ensure that a person makes adequate provision for their spouse and
children. The recommendations contained in this
report aim to reach an
appropriate balance between these competing issues.
Conclusions reached in this report
of this report outlines and analyses the submissions that the
Institute received to its Issues Paper. It concludes by answering the
whether Tasmania should introduce notional estate laws at this time in the
negative. Primarily, the Institute’s reasons
for reaching that conclusion
• that the extent to which meritorious claims are being defeated
through assets passing outside a person’s estate has
not been clearly
demonstrated;
• that, without nationally uniform legislation, a person may structure
their affairs to avoid the operation of notional estate
laws — meaning
that their effectiveness in addressing the issue identified is limited;
• that the effectiveness of the New South Wales notional estate
provisions has not been established;
• that most respondents to the Issues Paper supported narrowing the
scope of the
rather than expanding its jurisdiction to include
non-estate assets;
• that notional estate laws have the potential to have an adverse
impact on a large percentage of the population, for example
by prolonging the
administration of estates and increasing legal costs for legal personal
representatives, beneficiaries and parties
to family provision litigation;
• that aggrieved beneficiaries who are unable to pursue assets through
a family provision claim may have remedies available
to them under other legal
doctrines, notably equitable causes of action.
These considerations are canvassed in detail in Part 5. The Institute
recommends that discussion around nationally uniform family
legislation be advanced. The Institute further recommends that decisions about
the merit and form of notional estate provisions
within model legislation be
supported by an evaluation of the effectiveness of the existing New South Wales
scheme and research on
the need for reform.
As noted in the Issues Paper, the Institute’s terms of reference are
confined to the question of whether Tasmania should have
notional estate laws.
It is outside the scope of this report to consider the need for, or desirability
of, other changes to the
, other than to consider any changes that
may become necessary or desirable if notional estate legislation were
introduced.
Introduction
2.1.1 Australia adopts a ‘freedom of testation’ model, where a
person with the necessary capacity to make a will (a ‘will-maker’)
is free to make a will that leaves their estate to whomever they wish upon their
death. There is no legal obligation to leave any
particular amount or share of
an estate to a spouse, children or other dependant. Where a person dies without
a valid will, legislation
sets out how their estate is to be divided amongst
family members.
2.1.2 All states and territories, however, have legislation that allows a
court to make provision (or additional provision) for an
eligible applicant
where the court determines that a will, or the effect of intestacy laws, does
not make adequate provision for
that applicant’s proper maintenance and
In Tasmania, these laws are contained in the
Testator’s Family
Maintenance Act 1912
’). Claims are
commonly known as ‘family provision’ or ‘TFM’
2.1.3 Only those assets that are part of the deceased’s
‘estate’ can be used to fund a successful
Broadly speaking, this
includes assets that the deceased possessed or was entitled to at their
There are many instances
where assets that might be viewed as the deceased’s are not, in fact, part
of their estate. This includes
assets owned with others as a joint tenant,
assets held in trusts and, in some instances, superannuation or the proceeds of
insurance policy. A person may also validly gift assets prior to death
with the effect that they then cease to form part of their
estate. It is
immaterial whether or not those gifts or arrangements are made prior to death
with the intention of defeating a potential
family provision claim.
2.1.4 Legislation in New South Wales enables the court to deem assets outside
of an estate as ‘notional
The court may
then use this notional estate to fund provision for a successful family
provision applicant. Some other countries have
similar legislation that enables
the court to ‘clawback’ assets so that they may be used to fund
awards for successful
claimants. It is in this broad legislative context that
the Institute conducted the reference provided by the government.
Report structure
2.2.1 The purpose of this report is to evaluate whether Tasmania should amend
to incorporate notional estate provisions.
2.2.2 The report comprises five parts. Part 1 summarises the history of
succession laws and the introduction of family provision legislation.
outlines the family provision legislation operating in Tasmania under the
and explains those assets available for successful applicants. This part
continues by highlighting the interrelationship and differences
between claims
and other claims that may be pursued against estate and
non-estate assets, particularly claims in equity.
2.2.3 Part 2 frames the issue by identifying those assets unable to be
claimed as part of a family provision claim under the
then introduces the concept of a ‘notional estate’, and details the
consideration and development of notional
estate-style provisions in some
that have evaluated
the potential introduction or use of notional estate
provisions in Australia.
2.2.4 Part 4 details the development and scope of notional estate provisions
contained within
Succession Act 2006
(NSW) (‘NSW
Succession Act
then outlines and considers submissions
that the Institute received in response to the questions asked in the Issues
Paper about
the merits of introducing notional estate provisions in Tasmania. It
concludes by recommending against the introduction of a notional
estate scheme
in Tasmania at this time. However, it also outlines proposed approaches that
could be implemented if legislative reform
is progressed, including through
nationally uniform legislation.
Freedom of testation and the development of
family provision laws
2.3.1 The law of succession in Australia is based on liberal views of the
rights of ownership and possession of private property developed
basic argument was that testamentary freedom was a consequence of individual
property rights. It followed that there should be
no automatic right for
individuals to inherit. This approach contrasts with most civil law countries
which feature partial forced
succession laws, where immediate relatives of the
deceased are entitled to certain shares of an estate of which they may not be
Freedom of testation then rests only with that part of the estate not
subject to the shares.
2.3.2 The ability of a will-maker to leave his or her property to whomever
pleased him or her was the dominant doctrine in the common
law world for about
200 years before the twentieth
increasing concerns that complete testamentary freedom meant that will-makers
could entirely ignore the claims of dependants
(typically wives and minor
children), the early twentieth century saw the introduction of legislative
intervention to protect those
dependants. The original suggestions for reform
were for the adoption of a mixed system of testate and universal succession,
fixed shares devolving on a will-maker’s wife and/or
Eventually, however,
that system was considered to be too inflexible and rigid and the solution
adopted by all Australian jurisdictions
was to vest the courts with a
discretionary power to award provision where the circumstances were
appropriate.
2.3.3 The first legislation of this type was enacted in New Zealand with the
passing of the
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act
in 1900. All
Australian state and territory jurisdictions followed suit: Victoria in 1906,
Tasmania in 1912, Queensland in 1914,
New South Wales in 1916, South Australia
in 1918, Western Australia in 1920 and both the Australian Capital Territory and
the Northern
Territory in 1929.
Similar legislation was passed in England in
The focus of the earlier law was upon the protection of widows, as exemplified
by the parliamentary remarks of the Attorney-General
of New South Wales
preceding the introduction of the original New South Wales Act of 1916:
It is remarkable that in Australia, where the rights of women have developed
as rapidly as the matter of property, we have wiped out
whatever right a woman
has in the estate of her husband. The dower which existed here for many years
exists no longer. It was abolished
in the year 1890 and today a man may leave
the whole of his property both real and personal, to any stranger to whom he
leave it. The wife may have been with him a partner for forty or
fifty years. She may have assisted him in acquiring whatever wealth
possesses, yet he, dying, may will the property away and leave her dependent on
the kindness of friends or the charity of the
state. During his lifetime he
cannot do that, for it is incumbent on him to maintain his wife. The object of
the Bill is to secure
that after her husband’s death the right of the wife
to get sufficient from his estate to maintain her shall continue, and
of his children shall be equally
As is evident in this statement, the
original legislation was directed at the protection of women, along with the
children of a marriage.
individuals were likely to be financially dependent on their husbands and have
limited prospects to earn an
Over time, however, the
categories of eligible applicants have been expanded. Justice Callinan in
Barns v Barns
upon the widening of family provision legislation since its inception, quoting
the following passage from
From time to time the enactments have been amended, almost always in the
direction of wider access to the relief which the legislation
affords. This has
no doubt occurred in response to the pressures created by social
2.3.5 Any future reform to family provision legislation should consider its
purpose and intent within contemporary
Former Queensland Supreme Court Judge, Justice Atkinson, has said the following
and its relevance to future
law reform:
The law of family provision has two broad objectives: to allow substantial
testamentary freedom in the disposition of property and
to ensure that those
with a legitimate moral claim on the estate are adequately provided for. Law
reform must seek to find an appropriate
balance between these two often
competing objectives, in light of changing societal circumstances. In addition,
law reform should
seek to reduce the number of opportunistic claims, while
ensuring that those with legitimate claims are not improperly excluded and
reduce the complexity created by the different regimes in the various states and
territories.
Testator’s Family Maintenance
2.4.1 Legislative provisions enabling certain family members to claim further
provision from an estate in Tasmania are contained within
It is the Supreme Court
of Tasmania that has jurisdiction to hear and determine claims under the
2.4.2 The following classes of people are eligible to make a claim:
• a spouse (defined to include a person in a significant relationship
with the deceased at the date of their death within the
meaning of the
Relationships Act 2003
• children, including an adopted child,
and surrogate
• parents, where the person dies without a spouse or children; and
• a former spouse if they were receiving, or entitled to receive,
maintenance from the deceased at their
2.4.3 In some jurisdictions, the classes of those eligible to apply for
provision are more expansive and can include a person partly
or wholly dependent
on the deceased,
a person living
in a close personal relationship
with the deceased at their
grandchildren
circumstances.
2.4.4 An application must be filed with the Court within three months of the
date of a grant of administration being made in the estate,
although the Court
may grant an extension of this time in its
discretion.
outlines the test that the Court must apply when determining
the merits of a claim. The section provides a threshold jurisdictional
requiring the Court to be satisfied that a deceased’s will or intestacy
provisions have left an applicant ‘without
adequate provision for his
proper maintenance and
If, and only if,
that condition is satisfied may the Court embark on the discretionary question
as to whether provision should be
made, and if so, to what
2.4.6 Courts have made it clear that the words ‘adequate’ and
‘proper’ establish independent tests as to eligibility.
‘Adequate’ relates to the actual needs of the applicant, but
‘proper’ is a matter that can only be determined
having regard to
all the circumstances of the
provides that, when assessing the merits of a claim, a judge may have regard
• the net value of the
• the financial resources of the
• the deceased’s reasons, so far as they are ascertainable, for
making the dispositions in their will, or for not making
any provision or
further provision.
2.4.7 The Court may refuse to make an order where the character or conduct of
the applicant disentitles him or her to the benefits
2.4.8 Whilst the
does not list other factors, the following
matters may be considered when assessing the merits of a claim:
• the financial responsibilities of the applicant;
• the applicant’s age and health;
• the nature and quality of the relationship between the applicant and
the deceased;
• services rendered to the applicant by the deceased;
• any benefits that the applicant or beneficiaries received from the
deceased during his or her life; and
• the competing moral and financial claims of the beneficiaries,
including the duty of the deceased to provide for other members
Property available to satisfy a family
provision claim
2.4.9 Section 3(1) of the
provides that any order of the
Court is restricted to the estate of the deceased. As Dal Pont and Mackie state:
can therefore be made only out of the property that the
deceased beneficially owned at the time of death and that passes to the
personal representative, less the liabilities of the
The High Court
has defined the concept of an ‘estate’ as follows:
assets of which the testator might at his death dispose and which have come
or could come to the hands of the personal representative
by reason of the grant
of probate or letters of
administration.
2.4.10 Assets within a person’s estate might include:
• real property or other assets owned solely or owned with others as a
tenant in common;
• cash or investments held in sole accounts;
• chattels or personal items owned solely, for example jewellery, art
or antiques;
• shares owned by the deceased personally;
• debts owed to the deceased personally;
• superannuation that is paid to the deceased member’s legal
personal representative;
• the proceeds of a life insurance policy paid to a legal personal
representative; and
• any funds in a beneficiary loan account of the deceased’s
within a trust.
2.4.11 Part 2 explains the assets that fall, or may fall, outside a
person’s estate and are therefore not available to the Court
when awarding
provision for a successful applicant.
2.4.12 There are certain scenarios where assets gifted prior to death or at
death may still be available in the context of family
provision claims. These
are explained in the following paragraphs.
Property subject to contract: testamentary promises
2.4.13 Sometimes will-makers may make contracts with third parties in which
they agree to gift their property in certain ways under
their will. A common
example is agreements between spouses to make their wills in certain ways.
the High Court held
that property the subject of a contract between parties for one to make their
will in a certain way was available
to satisfy an order under family provision
legislation. The effect of the decision is that a will-maker is unable to
quarantine assets
from risk of a family provision claim by entering into an
agreement with someone to make certain gifts in their will. Gifts made
in compliance with a mutual wills agreement may still be used to fund provision
for successful family provision applicants,
subject to the court retaining its
discretion in relation to which assets should bear the burden of an
Transfers subject to unconscionability or undue influence
2.4.15 Assets that a person validly transfers or
gifts before their death fall outside their estate and cannot be claimed via a
provision claim. There are, however, circumstances where a transaction
may be set aside, with the result that the asset will revert
deceased’s estate. This might occur, for example, where:
• the deceased entered into an agreement without the necessary capacity
• the deceased entered into the transaction subject to undue
or fraud; or
• the transaction was subject to
unconscionability.
2.4.16 For example, in
Bridgewater v
an uncle sold a
portion of his property to his nephew for its true value, but by deed forgave a
substantial portion of the debt.
The nephew also benefitted under his
uncle’s will by being given the option to purchase his rural property
substantially under
value. Following the uncle’s death, his widow and
daughters applied to have the transaction set aside. The majority of the
held that the deceased was in a disadvantaged position when the deed was signed,
having an emotional attachment and dependency
on the nephew. The nephew had
taken advantage of this to secure the benefit. The transaction was therefore set
2.4.17 As this case illustrates, transactions that a deceased entered into
before their death either at a time when they did not have
the ability to
understand the transaction, or were unduly influenced, may already be addressed
through existing remedies. Introduction
of notional estate legislation would not
affect this situation.
Property Falling Outside Family
Provision Claims
Introduction
3.1.1 Part 1 explained the development and operation of the
It was noted that certain assets fall outside a person’s estate and
therefore may not be used to fund provision for a successful
applicant under the
. This part provides additional detail to explain those assets
that are excluded from family provision claims and the circumstances
they are excluded. It is these assets and circumstances that notional estate
provisions are intended to address.
Pre-death gifts and transfers
3.2.1 The present law provides scope for potential family provision claims to
be defeated through a person removing property from
their estate, for example
transferring or gifting away their assets prior to death. If a gift is
the Court does not
have jurisdiction in respect of that property (except in limited
) as it does not
constitute the ‘estate’ of the deceased.
3.2.2 The Issues Paper provided the following example of such a scenario:
Mr Smith has three adult children. His only substantial asset is a dairy farm
at Deloraine. His daughter helps with the farming operations
as well as living
with Mr Smith and assisting him with domestic tasks. Mr Smith does not have a
close relationship with his two sons
who live interstate.
Mr Smith wants his daughter to take over the farm on his death. He is adamant
that he does not want the farm to be sold and is worried
that this might happen
if his sons were to claim a share of his estate after his death.
Mr Smith therefore decides to transfer (gift) the farm to his daughter during
his life. The effect is that, on Mr Smith’s death,
the farm does not form
part of his estate. It is unable to be claimed by his sons via a family
provision claim.
3.2.3 It is irrelevant whether a gift was made with the purpose of defeating
a potential claim.
Joint tenancy assets
3.3.1 Property held jointly with another person may be held in a ‘joint
tenancy’ form of ownership or a ‘tenancy
in common’ form of
ownership. Each are treated differently. Co-owned assets held as joint tenants
do not form part of a person’s
estate, whilst interests held jointly as
tenants in common do form part of an estate.
3.3.2 The legal effect of joint tenancy ownership is to automatically vest a
co-owner’s interest in the property in the surviving
co-owner. This is
called a right of survivorship. As a result, a co-owner’s interest in
property held as a joint tenant is
not an asset that can be gifted via their
will or dealt with under intestacy. The effect is that a deceased’s
interest in a
joint tenancy asset falls outside of the pool of assets from which
provision can be made for a successful applicant under the
3.3.3 This situation is in contrast to a tenancy in common form of ownership
where one co-owner’s share does not automatically
vest in a surviving
co-owner upon death. Each co-owner holds a distinct share that then forms part
of their estate upon their death.
3.3.4 The Issues Paper explained the effect of joint tenancy ownership upon
family provision claims using the following example:
Lucinda and Gary commence a relationship in their sixties. Both have children
from previous relationships. Lucinda owns a house at
Smithton in her sole name
which she received from her late husband’s estate.
Lucinda wants to make a will that leaves the property to Gary.
Lucinda learns that her children will be able to challenge a gift of the
house to Gary in her will. She also learns that, if the property
was held by
them as joint tenants, Gary will automatically receive it and it will not form
part of Lucinda’s estate and be
able to be challenged. She therefore
decides to transfer the house so that she and Gary own it as joint tenants.
On her death, Lucinda’s children are unable to claim any share of the
house under the
as Gary automatically receives the property as
the surviving joint tenant.
3.3.5 The High Court case of
demonstrates this
issue. In that case, the Court considered whether a lawyer preparing a will was
negligent for failing to advise
his client about options to structure his estate
in order to reduce the risk or impact of a family provision claim. At first
Chief Justice Blow explained:
The testator could have arranged his affairs during his lifetime so that the
assets of the estate available to satisfy a claim under
the TFM Act were worth
far less than $200,000.
principal assets were his interests in two properties on the Tasman Peninsula.
He and the plaintiff owned each property as tenants
in common in equal shares.
If he had made arrangements for the plaintiff and himself to hold both
properties as joint tenants then,
when he predeceased the plaintiff, those
properties would have ceased to form part of his estate. There are no
‘notional estate’
provisions in the TFM Act. Similarly, he could
have given or transferred other assets to the plaintiff before he died, placing
out of reach for the purposes of the TFM Act. He was terminally ill when he
gave the solicitor instructions for his last will, and
the solicitor knew
The plaintiff contends that the solicitor and his firm were negligent in that
they (a) failed to advise the testator of the risk of
the daughter making a
claim under the TFM Act, and (b) failed to advise him of the options available
for him to arrange his affairs
so as to reduce or extinguish his estate, so as
to avoid or partly avoid any claim which could disturb his testamentary
3.3.6 In summary, had the deceased entered into arrangements to transfer
ownership of properties to a joint tenancy ownership, they
would have been
unavailable to satisfy the ultimately successful claim for
3.3.7 Joint bank accounts have the same effect as joint tenancy property.
Superannuation
3.4.1 Superannuation can be a substantial asset of
an individual. The Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
reports that there were $2.7 trillion in superannuation
assets in Australia at 30 June
The average account
balance was $69,807.
individual may also hold life insurance within superannuation, with it being
estimated that 13.5 million Australians have a life
insurance policy within
comprising more than 70
per cent of the life insurance policies in
3.4.2 The treatment of a person’s superannuation upon their death
depends on several factors including the rules of the fund
in which it is held
and any binding nominations made by the member effective upon their death.
Depending on these factors, a person’s
superannuation death benefits may
or may not form part of their estate. It may not form part of a person’s
estate if, for example,
they have made a valid and
binding death benefit
nomination that directs all of their death benefits to a beneficiary, for
example to a spouse or other dependant.
3.4.3 Death benefits that a fund pay directly to beneficiaries fall outside
of the purview of a claim under the
. It is only death benefits
that are paid to a deceased’s legal personal representative that become
available for use to fund
successful claims.
3.4.4 The Issues Paper gave the following illustrative example:
Barry has superannuation with the ABC Superannuation Fund with $450,000 in
his member account. He wants his five children to receive
his superannuation
when he dies and does not want any of it to be claimed by his partner.
Barry completes a binding death benefit nomination that directs all of his
superannuation to his five children equally. The nomination
means that, on his
death, Barry’s super must be paid to his children, which is what the fund
ultimately does. His partner is
unable to claim provision from any of the
superannuation when making a family provision claim under the
Proceeds of a life insurance policy
3.5.1 The way that the proceeds of a life insurance policy are treated is
similar to the position in relation to superannuation. In
summary, the proceeds
of a life insurance policy are paid according to the details of the policy
— who the account holder is
and any beneficiaries nominated.
3.5.2 Proceeds of a life insurance policy paid to a person’s legal
personal representative form part of their estate and are
available for
challenge under the
. Proceeds of a life insurance policy that are
paid directly to a nominated beneficiary fall outside of the person’s
and are not available to satisfy successful family provision claims.
3.5.3 The Issues Paper gave the following hypothetical scenario:
Jenny takes out a life insurance policy to ensure that there will be enough
money for her daughter, Tamika, to complete her education
if Jenny were to die
young. Jenny does not want there to be any possibility that the proceeds of the
policy could be paid to anyone
else and wants them used solely for
Tamika’s benefit.
Jenny therefore nominates Tamika as the beneficiary of her life insurance
policy. The effect is that the life insurance company must
pay the proceeds to
Tamika and they are unable to be affected by any claim that might be made under
Trust assets and property the subject of a
power of appointment
3.6.1 Assets held within a trust, for example a family trust, do not form
part of a person’s estate with the exception of any
beneficiary loan
account the deceased has within the
3.6.2 A will-maker may have a controlling role in relation to a trust, for
example as a trustee, appointor, protector or guardian.
In many instances, the
terms of a trust deed give the trustee broad discretion about the treatment of
income and capital. A trustee
may, for example, have power to distribute income
and/or capital to themselves as a beneficiary. If they were to make such a
distribution,
then the amount received would become part of their
3.6.3 Despite a person having had effective control of a trust during their
life, including the ability to appoint income and capital
to themselves as a
beneficiary, the assets of that trust are not part of their estate. The
trust’s assets may not, therefore,
be used to fund provision for a
successful family provision applicant.
3.6.4 The terms of a trust deed may also give individuals the ability to
appoint a successor controller of the trust by deed or by
will. When a
will-maker exercises their power of appointment in their will, the property
appointed is not part of their estate.
3.6.5 The following example was given in the Issues Paper to demonstrate this
Mr Nguyen is the sole appointor and trustee of the Nguyen Family Trust. The
trust has in excess of $1 million net assets. Despite
having terminal cancer and
knowing of his imminent death, Mr Nguyen does not appoint any capital of the
trust to himself as a beneficiary.
The $1 million of net assets therefore remain
within the trust following his death.
The Trust Deed sets out how Mr Nguyen can pass control of the trust to
successors in the event of his death. Before his death, Mr
Nguyen exercised this
power by including a clause in his will which nominated Mrs Nguyen.
Mr Nguyen’s children are worried because they have no guarantee that
they will receive any distributions from the trust. The
terms of the trust give
the trustee a broad discretion in relation to decisions about distributions of
income and capital. Mr Nguyen’s
children are unable to claim any of the
assets held in the Nguyen Family Trust if they decide to bring a family
provision claim against
Mr Nguyen’s estate.
Estate assets distributed from an
3.7.1 Assets that were within an estate, but that a legal personal
representative distributed prior to the making of a family provision
also be excluded from a family provision claim.
requires a family provision claim to be filed with
the Court within three months of the grant of
administration.
Section 11(4)
provides that any application seeking an extension of this time limit must be
made before the estate has been fully
distributed.
An application ... shall be made before the final distribution of the estate
of the deceased person, and no distribution of any part
of the estate made
before the making of an application ... shall be disturbed by reason of that
application or of any order made
thereon or in consequence thereof.
3.7.3 This was the situation that arose in
This case involved
an application by a surviving spouse which was made after the expiry of the
three month claim period. In the meantime,
the executors had distributed the
main asset in the estate, property at St Helens worth about $650,000, in
accordance with the terms
of Mr Williams’ will.
3.7.4 Whilst the Court approved the applicant’s claim being made out of
it was confirmed that, as
a consequence of s 11(4) the
, the distribution of the St Helens
property could not be disturbed for the purpose of making provision for the
This significantly
reduced the pool of assets from which additional provision could be made for the
3.7.5 The courts have made clear, however, that where an executor or
administrator distributes an estate prematurely or with notice
of a claim, the
court may make orders requiring a representative to restore assets to an estate.
By way of illustration, in the case
Justice Hallen
quoted the following statement by Chief Justice Young:
I wish to make it quite clear that in my view that where there has been a
premature distribution of the estate the Court is not obliged
to consider
questions of notional estate, but would make an order that the executors
personally restore the money which they have
taken into the estate with interest
and then make an order out of the augmented actual
3.7.6 There thus remains scope for the court to restore assets to an estate
where they have been distributed improperly. In that
instance, those assets
would remain available to fund claims under the
3.8.1 As the analysis in this part illustrates, potential family provision
claims may be defeated, or at least the assets at risk
reduced, based upon the
way that a person structures and deals with their assets during their life.
3.8.2 In response to this circumstance, New South Wales and some overseas
called) within
family provision legislation. These provisions enable assets to be treated as
though they comprised part of a person’s
estate for the purpose of
awarding provision to a successful family provision claimant. The development of
these ‘notional
estate’ laws are explained in Part 3. The New South
Wales framework is explained in more detail in Part 4.
Development of Notional Estate
Introduction
4.1.1 Preceding parts of this report have summarised the development of
family provision laws and explained those assets that may
be claimed as part of
a family provision claim in Tasmania. This part explains the development of
notional estate laws in other jurisdictions
which are broadly framed as
‘anti-avoidance’
mechanisms to eliminate, or at least substantially reduce, the ability for
individuals to defeat family provision claims by removing
assets from challenge.
New South Wales is the only jurisdiction in Australia to enact notional estate
laws. However, consideration
has been given to their introduction in relation to
joint tenancy properties in Western Australia. Their enactment has been rejected
in Victoria and South Australia. Internationally, they have been considered in
New Zealand and Scotland, and implemented in a more
limited form in parts of the
United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States. This part details both the debate
that has occurred and
the approach subsequently taken in the United Kingdom,
Scotland, Canada, New Zealand and the United States as well as the debate
approach in Victoria, South Australia and Western Australia. Because New South
Wales is the only jurisdiction to enact notional
estate laws in Australia, the
legislation there is given separate and detailed consideration in Part 4 of this
England and
4.2.1 The Law Commission (England & Wales)
reviewed family provision laws in England during the 1970s, publishing its final
The Commission’s review examined two types of transactions intended to
defeat claims: the disposal of property during a person’s
contracts to leave property by
It concluded that it was
necessary to enact legislative provisions to prevent will-makers removing assets
from risk of challenge
in order to protect dependants and to discourage
individuals from prejudicing
dependants.
The Commission
observed that similar provisions already existed under family law to deal with
situations where individuals transfer
or dispose of assets with the intention of
defeating a claim.
noted the potential interference with a person’s freedom to dispose of
their assets as they please, and the potential
uncertainty created for third
parties, it concluded that ‘it is a matter of overriding importance to
ensure that family provision
effective.’
4.2.2 The Commission ultimately recommended that legislation provide the
court with broad powers to deal with circumstances where
a deceased has, within
six years of their death,
entered into a transaction with the intention of defeating a potential family
provision claim. It recommended that the court only
be empowered to clawback
assets where the recipient of the property (including money) has not given full
valuable consideration in
return. It proposed that the court be required to
consider all of the circumstances before making an order, including the
circumstances
in which a disposition was made, any consideration given and the
conduct and financial resources of the recipient and their relationship
4.2.3 The Commission separately considered the issue of joint tenancy assets,
the proceeds of life insurance policies and pension
fund benefits.
4.2.4 In relation to the question of whether joint
tenancy assets should be available to satisfy family provision claims, the
recommended that a deceased’s severable share should be
considered part of their net estate, if the court considers it just
circumstances.
However, in order
provide some degree of certainty to co-owners, it proposed that legislation only
enable joint tenancy properties
to be included in the pool of available assets
where a family provision claim is made within six months of the date of the
of representation and that there should be no ability for the court to
extend that time period.
4.2.5 The Commission saw ‘considerable difficulties’ with
including the proceeds of a life insurance policy as part of
a ‘notional
estate’ pool
and concluded
that they should not be available for family provision claimants. It
recommended, however, that the court have power
to require recipients of the
proceeds of a policy to repay to an estate some or all of the insurance premiums
paid as may be just
in the circumstances. Its rationale was that it is this
amount that has been lost to the
4.2.6 In relation to pension funds, the Commission also concluded that there
were difficulties with interfering with trustees’
discretion and did not
recommend that legislative provisions include the ability for the court to
capture those benefits within a
‘notional estate’ style
Inheritance (Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
(UK) was introduced following this review. It provides that the following assets
may be considered as part of the ‘net estate’
for the purpose of
family provision claims and used to fund successful claims:
• property or money that a person receives as a consequence of a
nomination made by a deceased that was in force at their
• property or money that a person receives as a
donatio mortis causa
(death-bed gift);
• the deceased’s severable share in joint tenancy
• property disposed of within six years of death with the intention of
defeating a family provision claim where the recipient
of the property did not
provide full valuable
consideration.
4.2.8 Further detail of the model operating in the UK is provided in Appendix
2010 European Union Committee Report
European Union Committee
(‘EUC’), a Select Committee of the House of Lords, considered estate
laws as part of its review of cross-jurisdictional issues involving succession
laws in the European Union in
The purpose of
the review was to consider conflict of law issues between jurisdictions, noting
that substantial variations exist
amongst EU countries, some of which adopt
civil law systems whilst others adopt common law models. One issue considered
was the operation
of clawback laws in civil law jurisdictions where individuals
seek to evade forced heirship laws by disposing of or gifting assets
their death.
4.2.10 The EUC’s report expressed concerns about the proposed
legislation that had been drafted, commenting that the outcome,
which would
result in the ‘claw-back’ legislation having broader application,
was a ‘serious defect’ in the
and that this was the
‘single most contentious issue for the
4.2.11 It noted the following criticisms that had been made of the operation
of clawback laws:
• ‘Those receiving gifts, including charitable gifts and gifts
made on marriage, would be uncertain whether the property
would be subject to
clawback. This would either inhibit the use of the gift or force them to seek
forms of protection such as insurance.
• Anyone whose property might possibly have been acquired from a donee
and subject to clawback, whether or not they were aware
of this fact, may feel
the need to take out protection against a clawback claim.
• It would be difficult to fix a price for assets subject to
• Trusts and the use of insurance or pension policies to effect estate
planning would be undermined, even transfers to offshore
trustees if the
property remains in the UK.
• Increasing legal costs would be incurred in advising on property
rights and the transfer of property.
• The various UK registers of property title would be undermined
because they would not provide a guarantee as to the ownership
4.2.12 The Chancery Bar Association submission to the EUC noted:
Under our private international law, gifts and other lifetime transactions by
deceased persons are not characterised as matters of
succession and there is
therefore no question of their being ‘clawed back’ on
4.2.13 The EUC concluded that clawback provisions present a problem for the
stating that:
As a number of our witnesses pointed out, there is in the UK a legal culture
of freedom for individuals to dispose of their property
as they wish; and there
is a strong UK cultural heritage of providing social support through gifts to
charity. To this may be added
the important role played by trusts in the
4.2.14 The EUC contrasted the more limited clawback provisions under the
Inheritance (Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
(UK), stating
that they were ‘of relatively limited impact, and practitioners know how
to advise their clients.’
The EUC’s report thus provides some evidence of community acceptance of
the limited clawback provisions operating in the UK
but strong opposition to
expansion of their scope.
2011 Law Commission (England & Wales) Review
4.2.15 In 2011, the Law Commission (England & Wales) undertook a review
of family provision claims in the United
The Commission noted existing provisions under the
Inheritance (Provision for
Family and Dependants) Act 1975
(UK), particularly ss 8–10 which
enable the following as part of the deceased’s net estate:
• death-bed gifts;
• statutory nominations;
• a deceased’s share in joint tenancy property; and
• property transferred under-value during the six years before a
deceased’s death with the intention of defeating a family
provision claim
as part of the deceased’s net
4.2.16 The Commission did not comment on the need for or desirability of
amending these provisions and did not make recommendations
for reform with the
exception of the following matters:
Joint tenancy properties
4.2.17 The Commission noted that the then existing legislation stipulated
that an applicant may only seek provision from joint tenancy
assets where their
claim is commenced within time, with there being no power to affect that joint
tenancy property if a claim is
commenced out of
That approach was
consistent with its previous
recommendations.
Commission asked whether the court should have the discretion to permit an order
to include joint tenancy assets where a claim
is permitted out of time. It
reported that this proposal was well supported, primarily on the basis that it
would give the court
greater flexibility and ‘avoid inequitable
It noted that
the Society of Trust and Estate Practitioners, for example, commented that
‘it is not sensible to include arbitrary
traps within our
It therefore
recommended that the section be revised to permit joint tenancy property to be
used to fund provision where claims are
permitted out of
It acknowledged that
this reform could result in an increased number of orders affecting joint
tenancy properties.
4.2.18 In summary, in relation to joint tenancy properties, the Commission
endorsed retaining the inclusion of joint tenancy properties
and recommended
extension of those provisions to cover claims made out of time. This legislative
reform was subsequently
4.2.19 The Law Commission (England & Wales) observed the differences
between family provision legislation and family law legislation
as they relate
to powers over pension funds.
It therefore asked whether there should be reform to permit recourse to pension
funds as a last resort where the assets of the estate
would otherwise be
insufficient to fund a successful claim.
4.2.20 The Commission reported that, of those respondents addressing the
question, over half favoured
one quarter were
opposed and others did not express an
One argument put
forward in opposing inclusion of pensions within the pool of available funds was
that pension trustees have a discretion
It was submitted
that ‘little would be gained by subjecting the exercise of the
trustees’ discretion to the supervision
of the courts in family provision
proceedings.’
criticisms made included that most pension funds are modest in size, therefore
making claims not worthwhile,
and that if they were included there would be increased complexity, leading to
4.2.21 In considering the different contexts in which family provision laws
apply compared to the operation of family law, the Commission
The ancillary relief method of sharing a pension that has not (usually)
entered payment (that is to say that the pensioner is not
yet in receipt of a
pension) is very different from altering the destination of a payment that has
already been made by permitting
the court to override the discretion vested in
pension trustees.
4.2.22 The Commission did not make any recommendations to include within
family provision legislation pension funds falling outside
4.3.1 Whilst Scotland adopts a form of forced heirship, the issue of clawback
is also relevant to the devolution of estates under
this system and was thus
considered by the Scottish Law Commission in its review of succession laws
between 2007 and
The Scottish Law Commission considered specifically the effect of pre-death
gifts or under value transfers made prior to death which
have the effect of
reducing the size of a deceased’s estate. It evaluated whether there
should be any clawback provisions within
its succession law to protect the
rights of family members in these circumstances. The Commission observed that
anti-avoidance provisions
already operated in Scotland under family
4.3.2 The Scottish Law Commission found during public consultation that there
was ‘almost unanimous opposition to this
Accordingly, it
did not propose legislative reform to incorporate clawback style provisions
within its succession laws, stating:
As many respondents pointed out, any anti-avoidance scheme would create
numerous practical difficulties and would be likely to be
complex. And, from a
principled perspective, it would disrupt or frustrate otherwise legitimate and
intentional acts on the part
of the deceased before death. In addition, those
who were well advised would be able to take steps to organise their affairs in
light of whatever anti-avoidance measures may be in place, but those who
were not in that position, which generally would be people
with more modest
estates, would be liable to be unduly and unjustifiably
4.3.3 The outcome was thus a rejection of notional estate-style provisions to
fund inheritances.
4.4.1 During the 1970s, the Uniform Law Conference of Canada
(‘ULCC’) proposed the enactment of uniform family provision
The proposed Uniform
Act incorporates notional estate-style provisions dealing with circumstances
where a person enters into a transaction
with the intention of defeating a
The Act deals with:
• ‘unreasonably large’ dispositions of property occurring
within one year of a person’s death where full valuable
consideration is
circumstances, the court must be satisfied that there are insufficient assets in
the estate to make provision for a successful
with the amount to
be paid determined in accordance with prescribed
donatio mortis causa
(or death-bed gifts);
• money deposited in an account in the name of the deceased in trust
for another, remaining on deposit at the date of the death;
• money deposited in an account in the name of the deceased and another
person or persons and payable on death under the terms
of the deposit or by
operation of law to the survivor or survivors, remaining on deposit at the date
of the death of the deceased;
• any disposition of property made by a deceased whereby property is
held by the deceased and another as joint tenants;
• any disposition of property made by the deceased in trust or
otherwise, to the extent that the deceased at the date of his
or her death
retained, either alone or with another person or persons, a power to revoke such
disposition, or a power to consume,
invoke or dispose of the principal; and
• any amount payable under a policy of insurance effected on the life
of the deceased and owned by him or her.
4.4.2 There are no time limits imposed upon these transactions, other than
the first scenario listed.
4.4.3 Despite the recommendation of the ULCC, only two provinces, Ontario and
Yukon, have enacted legislation broadly consistent with
the Uniform Act in this
Only in Yukon may the
court ‘clawback’ unreasonably large gifts occurring in the year
before the will-maker’s death
with the intention of defeating a claim.
Both Yukon and Ontario enable the other dispositions outlined in the Uniform Act
above) to be treated as estate assets and used to fund provision for
successful family provision claimants. Details of the varying
models operating
in Canada are provided in Appendix 2.
4.4.4 Whilst only a minority of provinces have enacted clawback provisions
consistent with the Uniform Act, most have legislation
providing that property
disposed of pursuant to a contract to dispose of property by will (for example,
a mutual wills contract)
may be included within a family provision claim, to the
extent that the recipient did not give full
consideration.
These provisions are consistent with the approach in Australia as a consequence
of the decision of
where the High
Court held that property disposed of pursuant to a mutual wills contract can be
affected by a family provision claim.
4.4.5 Although not all Canadian provinces have
incorporated anti-avoidance provisions within family provision legislation, some
the division of assets between spouses after death within family law
legislation.
Even within these jurisdictions there is broad variation between the treatment
of non-estate assets. For example, in Saskatchewan,
substantial gifts of
property without the consent of a spouse, or assets transferred for less than
full consideration with the intention
of defeating a claim where the recipient
knew or ought to have known of that intention may be clawed
Other non-estate
assets, however, like joint tenancy properties or bank accounts, are not
On the other hand,
Manitoba’s family law legislation includes provisions similar to the
Uniform Act that provide that non-estate
assets, including
donatio mortis
, joint tenancy property, and the proceeds of life insurance policies,
may in certain circumstances
be treated as part of an estate where the deceased spouse did not receive
adequate consideration.
Ontario deals with these issues differently again, the effect of which is to
include certain non-estate assets as part of the pool
of family assets but with
limited clawback ability.
4.4.6 These issues were considered by the Alberta Law Reform Institute
(‘ALRI’) in 2000. It noted the absence of clawback
provisions in
Alberta, describing this circumstance as
‘inadequate’
allowing for ‘easy circumvention’ of
It proposed reform to
its family law legislation to include certain non-estate assets as part of the
parties’ pool of
There was an almost
equal split of views amongst respondents to the supplementary question of
whether these assets should then be
able to be recovered from third party
recipients.
It was ultimately
concluded that non-estate assets ought to be able to be utilised to fund awards
for surviving spouses where the
assets within an estate are
insufficient.
Despite this
recommendation, these reforms have not been
4.4.7 In 2006, the British Columbia Law Institute (‘BCLI’)
considered reform to its succession laws, including family
legislation. It proposed a varied anti-avoidance model to that contained in the
Uniform Act and operating in a modified
form in Ontario, having concluded that
those provisions were ‘too intrusive and
draconian.’
was expressed because the effect of the provision can ‘extend to innocent
transactions and interrupt contractual
relations entered into in good
faith.’ This view was consistent with the BCLI’s earlier comments
4.4.8 The varied model that the BCLI proposed provided for
transactions
entered into
with the intention of defeating claims to be voidable for the purpose of funding
The BCLI proposed,
however, that transactions that third parties enter into for valuable
consideration and in good faith where, at
the time of the transaction, they had
no notice or knowledge of the purpose of the transfer being to defeat a claim,
ought to be
BCLI advocated this approach on the basis that it would then ‘provide
finality and protect settled expectations in completed
It proposed
that property only be used to the extent necessary to make sufficient assets
available to fund provision. The model advocated
limited the classes of eligible
applicants able to make a claim and the BCLI stated that this supported its
conclusion that ‘there
ought to be a means of preventing the rights of
deserving claimants from being deliberately defeated by transfers of property
the deceased’s
4.4.9 Despite the recommendations of the BCLI, these reforms have not been
enacted, although reforms enacted in 2009 via the
Wills, Estates and
Succession Act
were otherwise broadly consistent with the recommendations
contained in the BCLI’s
4.4.10 To summarise the position in Canada, whilst notional estate-style
provisions have been recommended by the Uniform Law Conference
of Canada since
the 1970s, these provisions been only been enacted to their full effect in one
proposing narrower notional
estate-style provisions to those contained in the Uniform Act have not been
enacted in those jurisdictions
where recommendations have been made.
New Zealand
4.5.1 New Zealand has also examined the utility of notional estate laws in a
review completed by the New Zealand Law Commission
It released its final report in the same year that the National Committee for
Uniform Succession Laws proposed a roll out of notional
estate provisions across
It too endorsed
introduction of similar provisions for New Zealand.
4.5.2 In its preliminary paper, the NZLC observed that art 17 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
confirms the right
to freedom from arbitrary interference with privacy, home and correspondence and
stated that succession laws should
protect this
It also noted, however, that states also have other obligations under other
international human rights laws including the
International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
and the United
Convention on the Rights of the
4.5.3 Initially, the NZLC had proposed that an administrator have the ability
to require non-probate assets to bear part of the burden
of a family provision
claim where they are of the opinion that ‘so much of the estate of a
deceased person as is disposed of
by will or intestacy is significantly affected
by a claim.’
proposed that beneficiaries have the right to appeal an administrator’s
4.5.4 The NZLC further proposed that claimants have the right to apply to the
court for non-probate assets to be called in. It suggested
that this should
include gifts and transactions made for less than full consideration, if made
within three years of death, and transactions
entered into with the fraudulent
intention of removing property from challenge (without time
4.5.5 Following community consultation, the NZLC recommended that non-probate
assets be available to satisfy claims, so long as the
holder of that property is
a party to the proceedings.
The Commission argued for this approach on the basis that,
This is required in fairness to claimants, since the will-maker’s
obligations apply irrespective of the technical arrangements
used to dispose of
property upon death. It is also required in fairness to the will or intestate
beneficiaries, who may otherwise
bear a disproportionate burden which cannot be
passed on to the successors to the non-probate
4.5.6 It drafted separate sections dealing with:
• assets disposed of otherwise than by will — for example trust
assets and joint tenancy
properties;
• transactions that a deceased entered into prior to death with the
intention of prejudicing
• transfers made less than three years before death where full valuable
consideration was not
4.5.7 The draft provisions put the onus upon a person who acquired property
to prove that they acquired it for valuable consideration
and in good
4.5.8 The NZLC’s recommendations relating to the inclusion of notional
estate are yet to be enacted,
while recommendations made in the NZLC’s reports relating to other
matters, including
forfeiture,
requirements for wills
been adopted.
4.5.9 Whilst there has not been reform to the
Family Protection Act
to cover non-estate assets, spouses in New Zealand
are able to apply for the division of property of a relationship after death,
including certain non-estate assets, under family law legislation. Consistent
with Australian family law,
Property (Relationships) Act
enables the court to
clawback assets disposed of with the intention of defeating claims under the
This section applies to
situations where recipients and subsequent recipients of property receive assets
otherwise than in good faith
and without full or adequate
consideration.
The court has
discretion to refuse to make an order for the recovery of the relevant asset(s)
if the recipient received the property
in good faith, and has altered his or her
position in reliance such that the court considers it is inequitable to grant
whole or in part.
Property (Relationships) Act
also contains provisions which enable
superannuation and life insurance to be treated as assets of a relationship for
the purpose
of dividing property between
4.5.10 The availability of family law legislation to deal with the division
of property between spouses after death may thus, at least
in part, address the
absence of notional estate provisions within family provision legislation in New
Zealand insofar as spouses
are concerned. This approach is similar to some
provinces in Canada which also enable use of family law legislation to divide
amongst spouses after death rather than being the exclusive
legislation.
United States
4.6.1 The United States’
Uniform Probate
also adopts a
form of notional estate law, enabling non-estate assets to be treated as part of
an ‘augmented estate’ and
used to calculate and, if necessary,
spouses’ shares of an estate. These provisions capture property that the
deceased held a power of appointment in
respect of immediately prior to death,
joint tenancy property and accounts and proceeds of insurance
4.7.1 Previous paragraphs have explained international approaches. The
following section explains Australia’s consideration
of notional estate
Recommendations of the National Committee for Uniform Succession
In 1991, the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General (the ‘Standing Committee’) agreed to progress
nationally uniform
succession laws. The Queensland Law Reform Commission
(‘QLRC’) was engaged to coordinate the project, convening the
Committee for Uniform Succession Laws (the ‘National
Committee’) to ensure national representation and input.
4.7.3 The National Committee’s report presented to the Standing
Committee examined the New South Wales approach to notional
estate legislation
and endorsed similar provisions being included in the new national model
legislation.
Part 4 explains
in more detail the notional estate legislation operating in New South Wales and
the recommendations of the New South
Wales Law Reform Commission
(‘NSWLRC’) upon which that model was based.
4.7.4 The National Committee’s acceptance of the New South Wales
approach has been criticised for its lack of critical analysis:
What is curious — to me at least — is that there was apparently
no discussion in the National Committee’s work of
the model of the
claw-back property provisions. The New South Wales provisions are used because
they are there and have been in force
for a while now to see if there is
anything hugely wrong with them. It is a convenient — and pragmatic
— approach to
law reform, in sticking to the familiar.
But the model has always bothered me. For a start, it is based on the old New
South Wales death duty provisions. There the formula
was a complex one, the end
result of which was just to determine — precisely — the dutiable
value of assets on death.
It was not about attaching property in any way and,
hence, served a different purpose... A precisely formulated scheme like that
death duties placed the emphasis in the wrong place — for family provision
purposes...
A second problematic aspect of the definition of notional estate was the
mixing up of subjective and objective elements: again placing
extra hurdles in
the way of getting to the
issue under the
legislation.
4.7.5 The National Committee revisited the issue of uniform succession laws
in a Supplementary Report to the Standing Committee in
The purpose of the
report was to outline draft model legislation for Australia giving effect to the
National Committee’s earlier
recommendations contained within its 1997
legislation included replicating, in broad terms, the notional estate provisions
from New South Wales.
4.7.6 The NSWLRC subsequently published a report containing commentary in
relation to the draft model
legislation.
4.7.7 In 2007, the Northern Territory Law Reform Committee
(‘NTLRC’) reviewed the draft model legislation at the request
Northern Territory
Attorney-General.
It approved in substance the provisions dealing with notional estate, except for
use of notional estate to fund provisions for claims
made out of time. This view
was expressed on the basis that it would seem to create unfairness for third
parties affected by a notional
4.7.8 Despite the recommendations of the National Committee, notional estate
legislation has not been implemented in any other Australian
Senior Counsel, Lindsay Ellison SC, has commented in relation to this inaction:
It would be adventurous to say in this regard New South Wales ‘leads
the way’ since in the 35 years since the
Family Provision Act
came into force, no other State has
The Law Commission of Western Australia
4.7.9 The Law Reform Commission of Western Australia (‘WALRC’)
was engaged to conduct a review of Western Australian law
applying to joint
tenancy and tenancy in common properties, releasing its report and
recommendations in
4.7.10 The review noted developments internationally and the notional estate
provisions operating in New South Wales as they apply
specifically to joint
tenancy properties. The WALRC identified arguments both for and against reforms
enabling the court to utilise
joint tenancy properties to fund provision for
successful family provision claimants. It tentatively favoured a more limited
to the New South Wales
Succession Act
. It suggested that
provisions should cover:
• acts (rather than omissions) — for example, where assets are
transferred to joint tenancy rather than the failure to
sever a joint tenancy
prior to death;
• transactions occurring within a limited period of one year prior to
death where full consideration is not given;
• transactions where there is an intention to defeat a family provision
• claims progressed in a timely
• protections for third parties, for example financial institutions;
• situations where there are otherwise insufficient assets in the
estate to fund an award.
4.7.11 The WALRC concluded, however, that it was inappropriate to propose
legislative reform to deal solely with joint tenancy properties
recommended against legislative
It recommended that
it was instead desirable for Western Australian family provision legislation to
be reviewed more broadly in relation
to the potential use of non-estate assets
to fund awards of provision.
This recommendation has not been
progressed.
Victorian Law Reform Commission Review
4.7.12 The Victorian Law Reform Commission (‘VLRC’) released a
Consultation Paper in 2012 as part of its review of succession
Amongst other matters, it dealt with the possibility of introducing notional
estate provisions in
4.7.13 In its Final Report, the VLRC observed that several respondents’
submissions were not in favour of introducing notional
estate laws in Victoria
on the basis that the law ought not detract from the general proposition that
persons are able to deal with
their property as they wish during their
4.7.14 Some respondents expressed the view that, if notional estate
provisions were introduced, they should only apply to transactions
entered into
with the specific intention of defeating a claim for family
In relation to the
relevance of intention, however, the VLRC concluded:
The Commission considers that a notional estate scheme that only applied to
transactions entered into with the intention of avoiding
family provision
obligations could be easily circumvented. Further, intention is difficult to
prove, as evidenced by the clear preference
for the notional estate provisions
in New South Wales which do not require proof of intention to defeat a possible
family provision
claim. The Commission also agrees that any notional estate
scheme that does not require some intention on the part of the deceased
risks being too far-reaching and unduly limiting of a person’s right to
dispose of their property during their
4.7.15 Further, it commented:
The Commission also considers that any transaction entered into before death
may have the effect of benefitting the same people who
could later be family
provision claimants. The gift during life may give effect to the person’s
responsibility to provide,
but does this before death rather than
4.7.16 It concluded that the need for notional estate laws and the
effectiveness of the New South Wales provisions in meeting that
need (if any)
had not been demonstrated. It noted
The National Committee’s recommendation to adopt the New South Wales
provisions was not based on empirical research demonstrating
the need for such
provisions, but rather because the provisions existed and had been in operation
for some time, and there was ‘nothing
hugely wrong with
4.7.17 The VLRC did not recommend introduction of notional estate provisions
in Victoria due to ‘the absence of clear evidence
demonstrating the need
for such provisions in Victoria, or the effectiveness of such provisions in New
South Wales.’
4.7.18 In 2014, the Victorian Parliament considered reforms to their family
provision legislation to, amongst other things, narrow
the class of eligible
applicants, and deal with costs provisions. The Second Reading speech when the
Justice Legislation Amendment (Succession and Surrogacy) Bill 2014
stated: ‘The starting point is that a deceased is entitled to dispose of
their estate as they see fit, and this
should only be departed from where they
had a moral duty to provide for the needs of the claimant and yet failed to do
Notional estate
legislation has not been progressed in Victoria, consistent with the
recommendations of the VLRC.
South Australian Law Reform Institute
4.7.19 SALRI released a report in 2017 that considered a range of issues
related to family provision, including the possibility of
introducing notional
estate legislation in South
4.7.20 The majority of respondents to SALRI’s Background
expressed opposition to
the introduction of notional estate legislation. Reasons given included that
notional estate laws intrude
upon testamentary freedom and that there may be a
host of valid reasons for a will-maker entering into arrangements during his or
her lifetime other than seeking to defeat a future family provision claim.
4.7.21 SALRI sought feedback about the operation of superannuation and
trusts, but there was little support for notional estate provisions
areas. There was some support, however, for using notional estate provisions to
equalise benefits given where beneficiaries
received pre-death
4.7.22 SALRI’s conclusion was as follows:
SALRI is not persuaded of the case for introducing NSW style notional estate
and clawback laws in South Australia. The relevant laws
are complicated. SALRI
finds the reasoning of the VLRC convincing. It also accepts the views presented
in consultation that NSW style
notional estate or clawback laws are very
problematic in terms of both policy and practice and would especially undermine
the concept
of testamentary freedom. SALRI notes that when a strong theme of
both its consultation and wider research is the importance of enhancing
testamentary freedom and reducing a court’s ability to intervene, it would
be inconsistent to introduce NSW style notional
estate or clawback laws in South
4.7.23 It recommended that notional estate laws not be introduced in South
and to date no such
laws have been implemented there.
New South Wales Notional Estate
Introduction
5.1.1 New South Wales is the only jurisdiction in Australia to have
introduced notional estate legislation. For that reason, these
provisions are
considered in detail below.
5.2.1 In 1977, the NSWLRC was the first Australian law reform commission to
consider and recommend adoption of notional estate laws
as part of its broad
review of family provision legislation operating in New South Wales at the
5.2.2 It summarised the competing issues arising in relation to the utility
of inclusion of notional estate legislation within family
provision legislation
as follows:
The interests involved are fundamental: on the one hand, the interest of a
person in arranging his affairs in his way and the interest
of a transferee of
property in securing his title and, on the other hand, the interest of a family
in not being disinherited. In
trying to answer these questions, any reformer
faces a dilemma. If all dispositions of property made by a person in his
are valid against the surviving members of his family, the new Act will
give incomplete protection to the family. And if the surviving
members can claim
against property disposed of by, say, their deceased father, the new Act will be
recognizing a potential interest
in that property which must clog its
alienability and adversely affect ifs utility and
5.2.3 After weighing up these competing issues and
submissions it received, the NSWLRC concluded that there was a need for notional
estate laws, commenting that:
If the new Act can be evaded, its effectiveness will be limited. If it does
not contain provisions directed at some common arrangements
of property, it will
not concern those with the means and the determination to attain and follow
expert advice; only the poor or
the inert will be affected by it. The Act can be
evaded. Property can be put outside its application in a variety of ways and
without difficulty. In some circumstances, opening a joint bank account or
taking out a policy of life assurance is sufficient. Indeed
one volume of
English precedents contains a form for a
Settlement upon Mistress and
Illegitimate Child for Purpose of Evading the Inheritance (Family Provision) Act
5.2.4 The NSWLRC recommended that the court be empowered to deal with certain
gifts a deceased made during life and, secondly, to
utilise property distributed
substitutes’.
that, if the reforms proposed were enacted, they would ‘introduce new and
far-reaching rules into the law of
succession.’
5.2.5 The NSWLRC proposed that NSW’s notional estate provisions
• property gifted by the deceased within three years of death, if made
with the intention of defeating an application for provision;
• gifts made within one year of death, regardless of intention;
• property subject to a power of disposal by the deceased;
• property comprised in certain settlements;
• property held on a joint tenancy;
• property held in certain life assurance schemes; and
• property in certain superannuation
5.2.6 The NSWLRC’s recommendations, not all in their original form,
were put into effect by the
Family Provision Act 1982
(NSW). It has been
noted that the passing of notional estate laws in New South Wales was not
without controversy and there was significant
debate about their inclusion:
Parliamentary Counsel and the Commissioner, Gressier, disagreed on several
fundamental issues concerning the Bill, eventually narrowing
down to two, but
major, issues: the definition of ‘eligible person’ and the notional
estate provisions, but it dragged
the process of implementation out over several
years. It was like a game of ‘ping pong’. The disagreement was
resolved by a compromise, the Commission giving way on notional
estate and Parliamentary Counsel giving way on eligibility
5.2.7 Similar observations have made about the strong opposing views that
experts expressed in response to the recommendations of
the NSWLRC relating to
notional estate.
Family Provision Act
was subsequently repealed, and family
provision laws incorporated into the NSW
Succession Act
provisions relating to notional estate retained and included in ch 3,
The current provisions are explained in the following paragraphs.
Part 3.3 of the NSW
5.3.1 Part 3.3 of the NSW
Succession Act
allows the court to make
orders designating property not within a person’s estate as comprising the
‘notional estate’
of the deceased. Any property designated as
‘notional estate’ becomes available to make provision for a
successful family
provision application as though it were part of the
The New South Wales
legislation explains the effect of the provisions as follows:
This Part applies where, as a result of certain property transactions,
property is not included in the estate of a deceased person
or where property
has been distributed from the estate of a deceased person. This Part enables the
Court in limited circumstances
to make an order designating property that is not
included in the estate, or has been distributed from the estate, as
estate’ of the deceased person for the purpose of making a
family provision order under
in respect of the estate of the deceased
person (or for the purpose of ordering that costs in the proceedings be paid
from the notional
5.3.2 Certain classes of transactions may be caught by the New South Wales
notional estate provisions:
• property that has been distributed from an
• property that has been the subject of a ‘relevant property
transaction’;
• property falling within the preceding two scenarios and which has
been the subject of a subsequent ‘relevant property
transaction’.
5.3.3 The notional estate provisions operating in New South Wales are given
detailed analysis below.
When the court
may make a notional estate order
5.4.1 This section explains when a notional estate order may be made under
Succession Act
A ‘relevant property transaction’
5.4.2 To designate property as notional estate, the court must be satisfied
that there has been a ‘relevant property transaction’.
‘relevant property transaction’ is defined as follows:
A person enters into a relevant property transaction if the person does,
directly or indirectly, or does not do, any act that (immediately
time later) results in property being:
(a) held by another person (whether or not as trustee); or
(b) subject to a trust,
and full valuable consideration is not given to the person for doing or not
doing the act.
5.4.3 The legislation specifies a number of
examples of ‘relevant property
transactions’.
• failure to exercise a power of appointment;
• failure to prevent property passing by survivorship by not severing a
joint tenancy;
• failure to exercise a power to extinguish a trust or a property
interest held by another person over property;
• failure to nominate a beneficiary under a life assurance policy;
• failure to nominate a beneficiary under a superannuation fund; or
• entering into a contract for the disposition of property out of the
deceased’s estate,
in situations where valuable consideration was not given.
This list is not
exhaustive.
5.4.4 Providing full valuable consideration for a particular act or omission
excludes that transaction from being a ‘relevant
transaction’. ‘Full valuable consideration’, broadly speaking,
means that the person receiving an item
has paid full value for the item. For
example, if a property is worth $300,000 and the person receiving the property
pays $300,000
for it, this is full valuable consideration.
5.4.5 The case of
provides an example of where the court has
designated trust assets as notional
In that case, a
trust, known as the ‘Edward Wardy Trust’, was established in 1998.
At the date of Mr Wardy’s death,
the trust had assets of $11.5m. Mr
Wardy’s estate had assets of approximately $9.6m. The trustee of the trust
was a company
which had two directors — one being the deceased, and the
other his son, John. Mr Wardy had two other sons and a surviving
spouse. They
comprised the applicants in the case, seeking a declaration that assets of the
trust should be designated as notional
estate. Mr Wardy was the sole shareholder
of the corporate trustee. He had been the appointor of the trust until 2008 when
replaced by John. At trial there was an argument that the removal of Mr
Wardy as appointor was a ‘relevant property transaction’,
this argument was unsuccessful as Justice White was unpersuaded that the
transaction was entered into with the intention
of denying or limiting a claim,
as required by the
legislation.
5.4.6 The sons argued that the deceased’s omission, in his capacity as
a director of the corporate trustee, to appoint the assets
of the trust to
himself as a beneficiary was a ‘relevant property transaction.’
Alternatively, they argued that, as sole
shareholder, he could have removed John
as a director of the company and then resolved to distribute the assets of the
trust to himself.
submitted that it was immaterial that the appointor could have removed the
trustee company, because there was no evidence that
John would have done that
even if he had been removed as a director or the deceased took steps to
distribute some or all of the assets
of the trust to
commented, ‘[t]he placing of assets in a family discretionary trust with a
corporate trustee controlled by the deceased
is a paradigm case for the intended
application of the notional estate
provisions.’
5.4.7 His Honour concluded that the assets of the trust were capable of being
designated as notional estate. Specifically, his Honour
considered the omission
of Mr Wardy to appoint the assets of the trust to himself, disadvantaging his
estate, to be a relevant property
transaction.
applicants (a spouse and two children of the deceased) were successful in their
claims, with provision awarded for them
out of the assets of the trust
designated as notional
Timeframe covered
5.4.8 The NSW
Succession Act
provides that the court may make an order
designating property as notional estate if it is satisfied that a person entered
relevant property transaction before his or her death and that the
transaction:
• if taking effect
within three years
deceased’s death — was entered into with the intention of wholly or
partly defeating or limiting a claim for
family provision;
• if taking effect
within one year
before the deceased’s
death — was entered into at a time when the deceased had a moral
obligation to make adequate provision
that was substantially greater than any
moral obligation to enter into the transaction. In these circumstances the
intention is irrelevant; or
• took effect or is to take effect on or after the deceased’s
explains when a relevant property transaction takes effect.
It provides that ‘a relevant property transaction is taken to have
when the property concerned becomes held by another person or subject to a trust
or as otherwise provided by this section.’
It confirms that a relevant
property transaction can take effect upon the deceased’s death.
5.4.10 When a transferee enters into a subsequent relevant property
transaction, the court continues to hold power to make an order
designating
property as notional estate if it finds there are special
circumstances.
Succession Act
also deals with circumstances where a transferee dies and
the property becomes held by either their legal personal representative
distributed from their
Test that is applied
5.4.11 For the court to make an order designating property as notional
estate, it must find that there has been disadvantage, or lack
of benefit, to
the estate, or a person is entitled to apply for a family provision order.
5.4.12 Specifically, the court must be satisfied that a relevant property
transaction:
• directly or indirectly disadvantaged the deceased, the estate or a
person entitled to apply for a family provision order;
• involved the exercise (or failure to exercise) by the principal party
to the transaction or any other
of a right, a
discretion or a power of appointment, disposition, nomination or direction that,
if not exercised (or exercised), could
have resulted in a benefit to the
deceased, the estate or a person entitled to apply for a family provision
Restrictions on power
5.4.13 There are a number of restrictions on the power of the court to
designate property as notional
5.4.14 First, the court can only make a notional estate order if it is
satisfied that:
• the deceased left no estate; or
• the deceased’s estate is insufficient for the making of the
family provision order or costs orders that the court thinks
should be made; or
• orders should not be made wholly out of the deceased’s estate
because there are other persons who could apply for family
provision orders, or
there are special
circumstances;
• the deceased’s estate has been distributed and no estate
remains, or the remainder is insufficient for the court making
family provision
orders or costs orders.
5.4.15 Secondly, the court may not exercise its power unless it has
considered the importance of not interfering with reasonable expectations
relation to property, the substantial justice and the merits involved in making
or refusing to make an order and any other matter
it considers
5.4.16 The assessment of ‘reasonable expectations’ has been
explained as follows:
‘What amounts to “reasonable expectations in relation to
property” was considered in
Petschelt v Petschelt
[2002] NSWSC 706
at [68], by McLaughlin M (as the Associate Justice then was), who said:
That phrase does not, however, indicate the person by whom those reasonable
expectations are held. Clearly the Court must consider
the reasonable
expectations of the First Defendant in relation to property. By the same token,
however, the Court should also consider
the reasonable expectations of the
Deceased herself in relation to property, and also, possibly, the reasonable
expectations of the
D’Albora v D’Albora
[1999] NSWSC 468
, at [53], Macready
M (as the Associate Justice then was) gave examples of the circumstances which
might give rise to reasonable expectations
for the purposes of this section:
the Court has to consider the importance of not interfering
with the reasonable expectations in relation to the property. Such reasonable
expectations may well occur in a number of circumstances. For example, a
beneficiary who receives a property may have spent money
on the property or
worked on the property ... Another common area where one often sees in this
matter is where there is a promise
in relation to the property and the acting by
an intended beneficiary on the fact of that promise.
Similarly, in
Wentworth v Wentworth
[1992] NSWCA 268
, Priestley JA,
with whom Samuels AP and Handley JA agreed, referring to the “more general
precautionary provisions” in
Family Provision Act
for example, says the Court shall not make an order designating
property as
notional estate unless it has considered, amongst other
things, the importance of not interfering with reasonable expectations in
relation to property. If someone is in possession of property, otherwise than by
gift, after having given up something of equivalent
value in order to obtain
that property, it would be entirely reasonable for that person to expect to
remain in possession of it.”
Factors considered when deciding what property is to be designated as
notional estate
5.4.17 The court must consider the following matters when deciding what
property should be designated as notional estate:
• the value and nature of any property the subject of a relevant
property transaction, or subject to a subsequent transaction;
• any consideration given in a relevant property transaction;
• any changes in the value of property or the consideration since the
relevant property transaction was entered into, distribution
consideration given;
• whether the property or consideration could have been used to obtain
• any other matter it considers relevant in the
circumstances.
5.4.18 The court may only designate property as notional estate to the extent
it considers necessary to make the provision that it
determines should be made
(or for costs to be
5.4.19 The NSW
Succession Act
also clarifies that, where property
becomes held by a person as a trustee, the court may not designate any property
held by that
person as notional estate apart from the property held by them as a
trustee as a consequence of a relevant property
transaction.
5.4.20 It is possible to apply to the court to vary a notional estate order
to change the property
This enables
property affected to be substituted for alternative property.
Effect of notional estate order
5.5.1 An order designating property as notional estate extinguishes rights to
that property to the extent of the
Critique of New South Wales’ notional
estate laws
5.6.1 Some commentators and those practicing in succession law have raised
issues with New South Wales’ notional estate laws.
These critiques are
included within
of this report when considering the question whether
Tasmania should adopt these provisions within the
5.7.1 The terms of reference ask for the Institute’s advice about
whether Tasmania should enact notional estate provisions.
One matter asked of
respondents was, if Tasmania introduced notional estate laws, should it adopt
the New South Wales provisions,
or should certain aspects be different.
Responses to this question, along with responses to the Issues Paper’s
other questions
are outlined in Part 5.
Should Tasmania Introduce
Notional Estate Laws?
Introduction
6.1.1 The Issues Paper asked a series of questions to ascertain the need, and
degree of community support, for the introduction of
notional estate laws in
Tasmania. It asked respondents whether they considered that notional estate laws
would create any adverse
consequences. Respondents were also asked whether, in
their view, the New South Wales provisions ought to be adopted unchanged or
whether there were certain elements that should be amended.
6.1.2 The Issues Paper generated significant community interest, with 32
formal submissions received, representing the views of 67
individuals and two
organisations. This part outlines responses received and concludes with an
analysis of the merits of notional
estate-style provisions. The
Institute’s view is that, at this time, notional estate legislation would
have limited impact
in resolving an unquantified problem.
Is there a problem?
6.2.1 The Issues Paper commented that, to decide whether to introduce
notional estate legislation, the first question that should
be asked is,
‘is there a need?’ One difficulty in answering this question is the
lack of empirical evidence about the
extent of disputes occurring in Tasmania
including the number that are resolved informally, those that result in the
commencement
of court proceedings and the percentage that proceed to trial.
Available data is outlined below.
Prevalence of claims
6.2.2 The number of reported Supreme Court decisions provides some evidence
of the prevalence of family provision disputes in Tasmania.
6.2.3 Appendix 3 summarises the reported decisions between April 2009 and
April 2019. The following observations are made:
• during this period, there were 13 reported decisions (1.3 per year
• taking into account the two cases involving multiple
applicants,
there were 17 individual claims determined (average 1.7 per year), with nine of
those claims being successful (52.9%);
• two matters involved claims by surviving spouses (11.8%), with the
substantial majority commenced by adult children (88.2%);
• both claims by spouses were successful (100%), whilst seven out of
the 15 adult children claims were successful (46.7%) (total
success rate
6.2.4 To gauge the prevalence of disputes, it is useful to review the number
of deaths occurring during that period. Australian Bureau
of Statistics data
reveals that there were 49,889 deaths in Tasmania between 2009 and 2017
(statistics are unavailable for 2018 and
Whilst it is not
possible to draw accurate conclusions, it is apparent that the frequency with
which family provision hearings occur
as a percentage of all deaths in Tasmania
is relatively rare.
6.2.5 The fact that there are few matters that
proceed to trial does not, however, mean that there is not a problem. Many
may be resolved informally within families and between beneficiaries
without court action becoming necessary. And the statistics
do not reveal the
percentage of claims that are commenced but are resolved or abandoned before
trial. Australian research, for example,
found that only 31% of the Public
Trustees’ files sampled that involved estate disputes resulted in a
The Supreme Court of Tasmania advised the Institute that approximately 60 to 65%
of civil matters (including family provision claims)
are settled at mediation
and a large proportion settle after mediation.
6.2.6 The Supreme Court’s Annual Reports contain data of the number of
Grants finalised each year and number of family provision
claims filed. These
details are outlined in Table 1.
Table 1: Number of Grants made and family provision claims
filed/determined per
Financial Year
No. Applications for a Grant* Finalised
No. Family Provision claims filed
Percentage of claims to Grants made
Number of reported decisions
‘Grant’ includes applications for Probate and
applications for Letters of Administration. It excludes Reseals of Probate
to data not being available prior to 2016–2017.
6.2.7 These statistics illustrate the infrequency with which family provision
disputes are litigated in Tasmania.
Prevalence of family provision avoidance
6.2.8 The previous paragraph reviewed the number of matters that proceed to a
court hearing, concluding that family provision disputes
in Tasmania are
relatively infrequent. The extent of the issue, however, can only be gleaned
through data identifying the number
of eligible applicants that have been unable
to pursue their claims because assets passed outside an estate. To gauge the
true extent
of the issue, it would then be necessary to assess those claims
against their merits to establish the extent to which meritorious
unable to be pursued because of the absence of notional estate provisions in
6.2.9 These are matters about which there is little, if any, empirical
evidence. For this reason, the Institute sought information
individuals had experienced situations where a person had structured their
affairs to remove them from risk of a family
provision challenge:
In your experience, do people deal with or structure their assets in order to
reduce the property that is available to make provision
for a successful
applicant under the
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act 1912
Please provide examples.
6.2.10 There were
submissions addressing
this question. Either explicitly or implicitly,
submissions (82%)
indicated that, in their experience, there are occasions in which people
structure their affairs to remove assets
from their estate. Some respondents,
however, qualified their response by indicating either:
• that the circumstances in which this is completed for the primary
purpose of removing assets from a family provision challenge
is, in their
experience, relatively rare;
• that the removal of assets from the estate environment is more
commonly completed for a range of other reasons including taxation,
protection purposes, or to avoid the need for a Grant of Administration after
6.2.11 Three lawyers
stated that, in their experience, clients who structure their affairs with the
intention of removing assets from a foreseeable challenge
are usually well
informed and do so only after careful consideration. Lawyer Justin McMullen
submitted that more commonly, where
a client has concerns about an adult child
receiving an inheritance, clients put in place protective measures for their
rather than removing that child as a beneficiary:
Typically, where a testator parent has concerns over the poor behaviour of a
child, they are more likely to put in place appropriate
measures to protect that
child from their poor behaviour. That is to say, parents no longer ‘cut
out’ the spendthrift,
gambling or drug addicted child but rather use
discretionary and protective trusts to ensure that they can safely make
for those beneficiaries to ensure that they may get the highest
benefit from the legacy that they will receive.
6.2.12 Retired lawyer Ann Hamilton stated:
In my experience people making a decision to cut a family member out of
receiving a share of their estate find that decision difficult,
and emotionally
stressful. I would be constantly reminded of the complexity of family
relationships and would see how much hurt is
involved in estrangement. I never
felt that people made the decision to cut someone off lightly or without
re-living the pain of
a difficult relationship.
6.2.13 Several respondents
observed that usually people’s intentions behind minimising the assets in
their estate were to ‘make things easier’,
or to provide certainty
for loved ones. In other words, minimising the assets in their estate was
usually motivated by a desire to
assist their chosen beneficiaries, rather than
being completed for malicious purposes. One submission expressed this as
‘I believe the motivation is usually always to protect their
“true beneficiaries” as opposed to disinheriting a
6.2.14 Tony Gray, a financial planner with 25 years’ experience,
commented upon the infrequency with which he had experienced
clients or their
families making malicious or unfair decisions about the division of assets after
In only one instance have I encountered a client situation where they were
manifestly unfair in their estate plans — and that
did not involve
superannuation or insurance and the assets fell within the estate (and was not
challenged). By contrast, we regularly
find clients who wish to limit the risk
of challenge when planning their estate position and do so in a fair and
considered fashion.
6.2.15 Justin McMullen made similar observations about the infrequency with
which deliberate asset stripping occurs:
I find it extremely rare that potential TFM claim avoidance strategies are
undertaken in typical nuclear family groups. Such action
is typically undertaken
only where there is very significant relationship breakdown between, say, a
testator parent and an adult
child. Even within the class of those will makers
who may depart for standard estate distributions, it is a much smaller sub class
of people who then take material steps to diminish their estate to defeat any
potential claim. To take the further step often means,
say with real property,
relinquishing a level of control over that asset during the testator’s
lifetime. In many cases, that
is a step too far.
6.2.16 Eight
submissions
informed the
Institute of situations where eligible applicants had been unable to apply under
because assets had passed to beneficiaries outside the estate
environment. The substantial majority were adult children claimants,
submission from three litigation lawyers at Hobart law firm, Ogilvie
provided examples
of three different matters, one of which affected children who were minors.
Further details of these examples are
outlined later in this report to
illustrate their support for notional estate
legislation.
6.2.17 Another respondent commented that they intend to structure their
affairs to remove assets from risk of
Consistent with
observations that many lawyers made (outlined above), it was stated their
intentions for doing so were to protect
certain beneficiaries whom they
considered to be deserving. Two
respondents
stated that they
had worked hard to build up their assets and sacrificed a lot and that they
should have the choice about who receives
their assets after death. The
perceived importance of individuals having freedom of testation is considered
further at [
6.2.18 In summary, it is apparent that some Tasmanians do structure their
affairs and make certain arrangements in order to protect
assets from a family
provision challenge. The extent to which this occurs, however, remains
unquantified although responses suggest
that the frequency is relatively low.
What does the public think about this circumstance?
6.2.19 The question that follows concerns the degree to which Tasmanians
consider it appropriate for individuals to be able to take
steps to protect
assets. If there is broad community support for individuals having the ability
to remove assets from their estate,
then there is no ‘problem’
requiring redress. The Issues Paper therefore asked the following question:
Should people be entitled to deal with their assets during their lifetime to
reduce the property that is in their estate and available
to claim under the
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act 1912
(Tas)? Please provide
reasons for your opinion.
6.2.20 There was a diverse range of answers to this
question, ranging from those strongly opposed to avoidance schemes, to those
in support of people retaining the ability to structure their affairs
to reduce the assets in their estate.
6.2.21 Of the six
submissions
concerns with the current scheme, reasons given in support of their views
included that:
• the effectiveness of the
is severely limited whilst
people are able to limit, and sometimes eliminate, family provision claims;
• most statutes dealing with financial impositions contain
anti-avoidance provisions — for example, taxation, family law
bankruptcy;
• they had experienced situations where they considered legitimate
claims had been defeated through there being no assets able
to be claimed;
• it can result in eligible applicants in financial need becoming or
remaining reliant upon government
6.2.22 All of the
respondents
that stated that
their claims had been defeated through assets being transferred prior to death
raised concerns about the circumstances
in which transfers or the making of a
will had occurred.
undue influence, deception, coercion and fraud
were mentioned with it being
apparent that these concerns contributed to respondents’ sense of anger
and frustration that they
felt their claims had been effectively defeated in
these circumstances. There was a sense that respondents considered that choices
wishes and intentions and were instigated by third
parties (step-parents or
siblings) with ill-motives. In other words, it appeared these respondents were
of the view that their parents’
ability to act as ‘wise and just
testators’ was overborne by external factors and that this was one reason
a need for judicial intervention.
6.2.23 These submissions demonstrate the complexities and range of issues
that can arise in estate disputes with sometimes interweaving
or compounding
issues exacerbating frustration and dissatisfaction with existing laws. However,
as explained elsewhere in this
concerns about the
validity of a gift or transfer due to incapacity, undue influence or fraud and
questions about the validity of
a person’s will are not necessary
components for the making of a notional estate order and those matters can be
addressed through
existing causes of
In other words,
enactment of notional estate legislation would not alter a person’s
existing right to seek redress where they
assert that gifts and transfers have
been completed without the transferor having capacity or whilst subject to undue
influence or
fraud. Further, in circumstances where a transaction results in a
step-parent inheriting a biological parent’s asset, children
recipient’s step-children) remain eligible to pursue a claim against that
step-parent’s estate following their
6.2.24 Nevertheless, the examples that
provided where
clients had been unable to pursue family provision claims due to the lack of
estate assets did not raise questions
that they were overborne by undue influence. They indicated that, under existing
laws, there
were no available remedies for those clients without notional estate
legislation.
6.2.25 Reasons given by those (n =
) who considered it valid
or appropriate for individuals to be able to structure their affairs to reduce
the assets at risk included:
• the importance of freedom of testamentary disposition, or the ability
for a person to decide who receives their assets after
• that people should be able to deal with their assets during their
lifetime as they wish;
• that it provides will-makers and their beneficiaries with certainty,
and therefore peace of mind, that assets are free from
• that will-makers are themselves best able to consider and weigh up
the various competing claims to their assets and decide
what is an appropriate
division in the
circumstances;
• that it avoids delay in the administration of
• that the need for notional estate legislation has not been
established through clear
• that there is a lack of evidence of the effectiveness of the New
South Wales notional estate provisions in addressing any
6.2.26 In summary, of the respondents addressing this question, most were of
the view that individuals should have the ability to
structure their assets to
reduce what is in their estate and therefore available for claimants under the
. Paragraph [
outlines in more detail the arguments advanced in support of respondents’
Potential issues with notional estate
6.3.1 A further factor to consider when assessing the merits of introducing
notional estate legislation is whether it would create
any unintended or
undesirable consequences. The VLRC, for example, observed that people deal with
their assets in particular ways
for a variety of reasons, including to provide
for their family during their lifetime, and that to introduce notional estate
legislation
would interfere with legitimate structuring
arrangements.
6.3.2 Appreciating the importance of not introducing a scheme that is
intended to resolve one issue but by doing so creates others,
the Institute
requested respondents’ views about whether they considered notional estate
legislation would create any adverse
consequences:
Do you consider that introduction of notional estate provisions in Tasmania
would create difficulties or issues? For example, in your
experience or opinion
how might notional estate legislation interfere with:
(a) tax planning;
(b) asset protection arrangements;
(c) provisions made for individuals during a person’s life;
(d) farming or business succession arrangements; or
(e) other aspects of estate planning?
6.3.3 There were 12
responses to this question.
Potential adverse consequences raised included:
• the effect upon asset protection arrangements, for example where
trusts are established for asset protection
• the potential impact upon tax planning
including the
potential for adverse taxation consequences if, for example, superannuation is
paid to non-dependants;
• the impact upon gifts made for individuals during a person’s
• that it undermines estate planning strategies, particularly where a
person dies shortly after completing a restructuring of
6.3.4 In acknowledging that notional estate provisions could have adverse
consequences, lawyer Steven Bishop expressed the view that
upholding the
objectives of the
is of greater importance:
It may interfere with the listed matters [included in Question 4]. In my
view, that would only be to the extent that it is necessary
compliance with the obligations under the TFM Act. Those matters are of a lesser
priority than the need to comply with
the TFM Act, and should therefore yield to
that small extent. I note that they are all matters upon which parties would be
legal or other professional advice, and there is no reason to think
that such advice cannot encompass suitable compromises. This
is a lesser evil
than allowing untrammelled freedom of testamentary disposition to set at nothing
the proper social objectives of
the TFM Act.
6.3.5 Lawyers, Christine Schokman, Dexter Marcenko and Michael Flanagan also
noted that any adverse consequences in making a notional
estate order would be a
factor that the court would consider:
The courts under
Succession Act 2006
required to consider the difficulties which may be caused if they are asked to
exercise their jurisdiction to make provision
from notional estate. Similar
provisions in Tasmania would afford protection against undue interference with
transactions which are
effected pre-death.
There is also a large body of legislation and common law which considers the
adverse consequences which may be given rise to as a
result of other statutory
provisions which prohibit attempts to defeat the due operation of statutory
regimes. Parliamentary Counsel
can no doubt draw upon the lessons of these
statutory and common law principles.
6.3.6 In contrast, three
respondents
expressed an
opposing view, stating that notional estate laws would disadvantage more
individuals than they would benefit. One commented
that ‘many more would
suffer their ill effects than those for whom they might
McMullen submitted:
[notional estate legislation would] introduce a substantial impost onto every
testator who might wish to structure their affairs for
tax minimalisation, asset
protection, protection of beneficiaries, balancing between different categories
of beneficiaries in melded
relationships and many other valid forms of
structuring — none of which is designed to deny provision to beneficiaries
are due adequate provision for their proper maintenance and support after
the death of the testator.
Should Tasmania introduce notional estate
legislation?
6.4.1 Answers to previous questions elicited that there is at least a
percentage of potential claimants who have been unable to pursue
claims under
because assets were held or distributed outside of the estate
environment. There were diverse and conflicting views amongst respondents
whether present arrangements are appropriate.
6.4.2 The Issues Paper asked respondents for their views about whether
notional estate legislation should be introduced in Tasmania:
Please indicate your level of support (if any) for the following proposition:
‘notional estate legislation should be introduced
in Tasmania’:
1. strongly agree;
3. somewhat agree;
4. neutral/no view;
5. somewhat disagree;
6. disagree;
7. strongly disagree.
Please provide reasons explaining your view.
6.4.3 There were 25 responses to this question.
Ten (40%) either agreed
strongly agreed
that notional
estate legislation should be introduced, whilst 15 (60%) either
or strongly
reform. Accounting
for the fact that some submissions were made jointly, there were 19 individual
respondents
who either agreed
or strongly agreed with the introduction of notional estate legislation, with 12
individuals and two organisations
opposing reform.
6.4.4 The following section outlines the feedback received both for and
against enactment of notional estate provisions in Tasmania.
against notional estate provisions
6.5.1 Sixteen submissions expressed objection to the introduction of notional
estate legislation. Reasons given are summarised below.
Freedom of testation and freedom of disposition
6.5.2 The importance of individuals having freedom
to decide who receives their assets on death was the most common reason conveyed
in support of the view that notional estate legislation should not be
introduced. The Elder Law Committee, for example, stated:
There are many reasons why a testator may wish to disinherit a child or
children or leave them a smaller proportion of their estate.
When a Will maker
has worked their life building the assets in their estate they should be able to
do what they want with them. It
is the Will maker’s property therefore
they should be able to give it to whom they want. Children should not have an
entitlement to a share of their parents’ estate.
6.5.3 The Committee went on to state:
There are many countries around the world that operate under a system of
forced heirship where a proportion of a person’s estate
has to pass to
certain classes of beneficiaries. In Australia we are free to give our assets to
whomever we want under testamentary
freedom. The introduction of notional
estates would severely curtail this freedom.
6.5.4 The Committee’s submission noted that one of its members, a
litigation lawyer, held a dissenting view. This dissenting
opinion was conveyed
in the submission of member Christine Schokman, made jointly with Dexter
Marcenko and Michael Flanagan. They
expressed a view that opposition to notional
estate legislation based upon testamentary freedom is misguided:
Any extension of the jurisdiction of the courts under the TFM Act to allow
for consideration of a notional estate does not unduly
restrict testamentary
freedom or stop people dealing with their assets during their lifetime as they
wish. The judges exercising
this jurisdiction are very cognisant of their
obligations to take into consideration the wishes of a testator when faced with
application under the TFM Act. ...
Acts by a testator which attempt to thwart the objects of the Act would be
accounted for as evidence of a deceased’s testamentary
intentions. Indeed
s 8A of the Act expressly provides that evidence as to the deceased’s
reasons for their dispositions are
a relevant consideration. Few other
considerations are expressly enshrined in the Act.
6.5.5 They went on to state:
Citing the principle of testamentary freedom as a basis for opposing the
introduction of notional estates carries limited force. The
Court’s respect for the principle of testamentary freedom in the course of
determining proceedings under the Act is
6.5.6 Freedom for a person to leave their assets as they wish is often raised
when discussing family provision
legislation.
Its importance
was highlighted in the 1870 decision of
Banks v Goodfellow
the power of disposing of property in anticipation of death has ever been
regarded as one of the most valuable of the rights incidental
to property, while
there can be no doubt that it operates as a useful incentive to industry in the
acquisition of wealth, and to
thrift and frugality in the enjoyment of
6.5.7 Despite the passing of time since
Banks v Goodfellow
decided, Justice Lindsay
said of this statement that, ‘[t]he genius of this passage is that it is
timeless in its understanding of the human condition.
It is instructive even in
Several legislative reforms have extended the concept of testamentary freedom
over the years,
providing the courts with ‘dispensing powers’ to overcome
deficiencies with wills,
powers to rectify wills.
6.5.8 Steven Bishop expressed the view that testamentary freedom has been
given ‘undue precedence.’ His submission included
the following
quotation from a journal article to illustrate the need for limits upon absolute
testamentary freedom:
‘The notion of Testamentary freedom was a construct of the 19th
century, an offshoot of the style of English laissez-faire liberalism
fashionable at the time. However it was recognised late in the 19th century that
testamentary freedom of this type allowed
some testators to ignore their
responsibilities...’
6.5.9 Christine Schokman, Dexter Marcenko and Michael Flanagan made similar
comments about the limited relevance of testamentary freedom,
stating: ‘We
have recognised for over a century that testamentary freedom should not permit
testators to fail to provide for
those who are financially dependent upon them
or who have a “moral” claim for provision.’
6.5.10 Whilst interference with testamentary
freedom is a common concern, notional estate orders in New South Wales are in
fact relatively
rare. Appendix 4 contains a summary of reported decisions
between April 2018 and April 2019 where the issue of notional estate was
Seven of the 29
handed down during that period raised the question of potential notional
estates, with only one matter
resulting in a notional estate order being made.
Freedom to deal with one’s assets during life
6.5.11 Several respondents noted that, it is not
only testamentary freedom that is affected by notional estate legislation, but
the freedom for a person to deal with their assets during their life. Of
the fundamental distinction between these rights, the Hon
Mr Justice David
Hayton has commented that it was vital to ‘protect well-established
fundamental property principles that make
a clear distinction between
property rights and testamentary property
The Institute
of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales expressed a similar view in its
submission to the EUC, commenting that:
‘Clawback will destroy the
fundamental right of an individual to alienate himself from his property in
lifetime and on death.’
The Scottish Law Commission has made similar observations, referring to the
following statement of the British Columbia Law Reform
Commission about the
function of succession laws as being ‘to distribute what remains of the
testator’s estate after
his death, not to remedy any injustices which may
have occurred during his
6.5.12 These sentiments were shared by several respondents to the
VLRC’s review, including the Law Institute of Victoria, Carolyn
and barrister Andrew
Verspaandonk.
commented upon the importance of individuals having the ability to deal with
assets during lifetime, including making
gifts to family, particularly in the
context of an ageing population and economic changes:
With the greater general longevity of the population, older family members
often wish to benefit their descendants during their lifetime
opportunity not available when people typically died at a much younger age.
Making provision for family and dependants
when they most need it, and when a
testator has the desire and the enhanced ability to do so with the enjoyment of
greater wealth
and security, (eg: superannuation), is something many people
6.5.13 In summary, several commentators and bodies have noted that notional
estate legislation affects a person’s right to deal
with their assets
during their lifetime, including their right to make gifts in accordance with
their wishes.
Lack of demonstrated need
submissions
expressed the
view that the need for notional estate legislation has not been
demonstrated.
It was stated
that there is ‘no wave of avoidance that needs to be
and that there
is an absence of ‘empirical evidence of the “mischief” that is
to be corrected.’
views align with observations made at [
] that the instance of notional
estate orders in New South Wales is relatively infrequent. This fact raises
questions about first,
whether there is a sufficient problem with the law that
requires redress and, secondly, whether New South Wales’ notional estate
laws address the perceived need.
6.5.15 Justin McMullen stated that instances where one party to a
relationship owns all assets of the couple solely is declining,
meaning that
cases where a surviving spouse is left without adequate provision is declining,
and will continue to decline:
It is rare in my experience to find one spouse of a couple who is ignorant as
to the assets of the relationship. Anecdotally, people
are more knowledgeable
corporate and trust structures.
To that end, it is less likely that one spouse
of a couple will own the property of the relationship in their sole name. It is
that reason that the incidence of lack of provision to surviving spouses has
diminished and will continue to diminish over time.
6.5.16 Lawyer Essen Bradbury commented that further evidence is required to
demonstrate a need for legislative reform:
this quick survey is inadequate if we are going to undertake such structural
reform to the TFM legislation that has been brought about
by one instance of
what may appear on its surface to be an unfair outcome. Accordingly, more
research to investigate the costs of
estate legislation, and a review of matters
that are dealt with out of court needs to be undertaken before making such
dramatic erosions
of testamentary freedom.
6.5.17 Two respondents similarly submitted that there would need to be a
compelling argument to justify the intrusion upon a person’s
deal with their assets as they
Will-makers are best equipped to assess the competing claims to their
6.5.18 An Australian study of will-making trends
found that over one quarter of the people surveyed who had made wills making
provision between their children stated that their reasons for doing so
were in recognition of financial contributions or
Consistent with these
findings, some respondents observed that individuals may, during their lifetime,
make gifts to someone in recognition
of, or to compensate them for their
assistance or support. It was submitted that individuals should have the freedom
to make gifts
to thank or reward effort and that it is inappropriate for those
transactions to be later subject to challenge under a family provision
The Elder Law
Committee also provided the example of a parent who, during their lifetime,
transfers a shack to one of their children
as they pay all the maintenance and
other expenses and are the only child who uses it. The Committee commented that
notional estate
laws could disadvantage the recipient of the shack in those
circumstances.
6.5.19 When reviewing its succession laws, the New
Zealand Law Commission expressed the view that, ‘[i]n many cases the best
person to judge who is family and what duties are owed to family is the
will-maker.’
other hand, Christine Schokman, Dexter Marcenko and Michael Flanagan commented
that will-makers do not always act as a ‘wise
and just testator.’
They provided the following illustrative example:
A testator had four children who unfortunately became embroiled in a bitter
feud which resulted in the testator siding with one of
his children. Not long
before his death the testator wrote his other three children out of his will and
he gifted a substantial real
estate holding to the favoured child with the
evident intent of defeating any future claim under the Act.
The reason the favoured child benefitted so greatly was because she and the
testator each vehemently denied that another relative
sexually molested the
testator’s grandchildren (the issue of the children whose TFM application
was intentionally defeated).
They maintained this denial of guilt
notwithstanding that a jury unanimously made findings of guilt against the
relative. Had the
Act been allowed to operate as intended the Court would have
surely found that the testator had a strong moral obligation to provide
of his children.
This recent example illustrates that not all testators are wise and just and
that the principle of testamentary freedom should always
be subject to the
provisions of the Act.
6.5.20 Robert Young noted that the courts consider
what assets beneficiaries receive outside an estate when assessing the merits of
a family provision claim.
Young suggested that a useful reform to the
would be to include
an express provision allowing these gifts to be considered when a judge is
assessing a claim.
Loss of control and lack of certainty
6.5.21 Five submissions stated that notional
estate legislation would create uncertainty for individuals and their intended
beneficiaries
because a broader range of assets could be affected by a family
provision claim.
for example, individuals who hold assets as joint tenants, or who complete
binding death benefit nominations, have certainty
that those assets will not be
affected by a potential family provision claim after death. Similarly, the
recipients of assets gifted
during life have certainty that those gifts will not
later be the subject of a family provision
There is a risk that
creating uncertainty might deter individuals from maintaining, developing or
improving properties.
6.5.22 It was said that uncertainty would erode the peace of mind that is
achieved when individuals have confidence that assets will
pass to their chosen
beneficiaries free from challenge. Financial advisor Tony Gray explained the
comfort that family members often
feel upon being informed that decisions that
the deceased had put in place during their life were free from risk of
challenge, irrespective
of whether a specific claim was foreseen.
6.5.23 Several respondents observed the challenges that individuals face when
planning for their death and deciding upon the distribution
of assets amongst
family members, particularly in blended families. Some lawyers commented that
these decisions can be stressful
and emotional and that clients take comfort in
knowing that the choices that they ultimately make can be implemented in a form
after death, is immune from a family provision challenge. One respondent
commented that notional estate laws ‘would disrupt
the lives of many
families and create chronic/acute
6.5.24 By way of contrast, it has been observed that family provision
disputes have a substantial degree of uncertainty:
The jurisdiction is riddled with uncertainty and any advice given to
testators and their survivors is therefore no more reliable than
taking a bet on
the horses ... nobody can be certain that testamentary wishes will indeed
withstand challenge. That is one of the
reasons for the increase in trusts. They
give the settlor more control over the destination of assets they have
accumulated.
Delay and complexity in the administration of estates
6.5.25 Four submissions commented that
introduction of notional estate provisions would mean that the typical time
taken to administer
estates would be
Concerns about
delay were also raised when the NSWLRC conducted its initial review of notional
estate legislation.
6.5.26 It was noted that, if Tasmania had notional
estate laws, then, prior to applying for a grant of administration, legal
representatives would need to take additional steps to identify all
assets that may be characterised as notional estate — including
investigation of all transactions that the deceased entered into in the three
years prior to death.
Lindsay of the New South Wales Supreme Court has commented that this
investigative process can be a complicated task where
a deceased had an attorney
acting on their behalf as they are not usually subject to regular reporting
requirements.
In Tasmania,
for example, absent a direction of the donor or order of the Board, there are no
reporting requirements upon
This may affect
the quality of record-keeping
which may not have been subject to external audit.
6.5.27 One respondent
raised a concern that beneficiaries may not have access to financial resources,
for example, a bank account, whilst an estate remains
un-administered.
6.5.28 It was submitted that the complexities of
notional estate provisions would result in longer court disputes and therefore
delays for beneficiaries. Judicial comment from New South Wales supports
the view that notional estate laws add complexity, with
Justice Einstein
describing notional estate laws as ‘a complex
Hallen has made similar observations, commenting that the path that the court is
required to take before making an order
designating property as notional estate
and awarding provision for a successful applicant from that notional estate is
‘a tortuous
The National Committee itself acknowledged that the New South Wales notional
estate provisions are ‘complicated and not easy
understand’.
6.5.29 Three submissions
stated that there would be additional complexity and administrative work for
trustees of superannuation funds if they were required
to consider succession
and estate planning matters if notional estate legislation were introduced.
On behalf of the Government, the Treasurer submitted
that defined benefit schemes should be excluded from the operation of any
notional estate law as it would ‘add significant complexity and
administrative work’ and be ‘contrary to the original
design of the schemes.’ Whilst this comment was directed specifically at
defined benefit schemes, similar issues
arise in relation to application of
notional estate legislation to superannuation funds more broadly.
Increased costs of litigation and estate administration
6.5.30 One respondent stated that, in their
opinion, parties’ legal costs would increase if notional estate
legislation were
introduced.
Phillipa Alexander commented:
As a legal costs consultant operating in the NSW jurisdiction, I estimate
that costs in excess of $50,000 are incurred for even the
smallest case, with
costs in the hundreds of thousands incurred for those which run for more than
one or two days’ hearing.
This has the potential to cause hardship to a
substantial number of persons.
6.5.31 Lawyer, James Walker commented that legal costs of estate disputes are
often paid for by an estate and an increase in litigation
would adversely affect
the size of estates.
6.5.32 It is possible for legal costs to be affected in two ways:
• as discussed at [
legal personal representatives and potential claimants may need to make
extensive enquiries to ascertain those assets that may
be captured by the
notional estate provi
• the number of parties to a dispute may increase as the recipients of
assets — for example, those inheriting a property
by survivorship or
beneficiaries of superannuation — would need to have the opportunity to be
joined as parties to any court
6.5.33 The potential for a notional estates order may not, however, enlarge
the number of parties to a dispute in all cases. An example
is where a spouse is
the executor and sole beneficiary of an estate whilst also the recipient of
non-estate property, for example
a joint tenancy property or the proceeds of a
life insurance policy. In those circumstances, there may not be any other
parties potentially
6.5.34 Notional estate legislation could streamline some claims by
consolidating into single court proceeding matters that would otherwise
separate court actions. Presently, a disgruntled beneficiary may pursue court
action to recover assets to an estate prior
to making a family provision claim
by asserting undue influence or unconscionability to void a pre-death transfer
of property.
Alternatively,
an individual may claim an equitable interest in non-estate property, whilst
simultaneously commencing proceedings
Whilst these causes
of action and remedies are distinct, there may be instances where, if notional
estate legislation existed, individuals
may proceed solely with a family
provision claim as the court would have the ability to utilise non-estate assets
to award provision
for a successful applicant.
6.5.35 Additional legal costs may be mitigated where parties to a dispute
agree upon those assets that may be included within a potential
notional estate
order. In New South Wales, reported decisions suggest that it is not uncommon
for parties to agree upon the assets
that may be the subject of a notional
estate order. Where early concessions or agreements are made, protracted legal
argument and
discovery of documents may be unnecessary, thus minimising
Greater prevalence of family provision claims
6.5.36 Four submissions suggested that notional
estate laws would increase the prevalence of family provision disputes in
This was partly
because claims that are presently unable to be pursued because of the lack of
estate could then be pursued against
notional estates. Further, the enlarged
pool of assets available might make family members more inclined to pursue
claims. One respondent
expressed concern about this adding to the existing
backlogs experienced in the
Another respondent
It is in the public interest for otherwise preventable litigation to remain
something which is capable of being
6.5.37 It is difficult to reach conclusions about
the extent to which notional estate legislation could increase the prevalence of
claims. It is useful to look at the experience in New South Wales. A 2015 study
of family provision claims across Australia found
that New South Wales had 60%
of all family provision hearings — three times the number in
The researchers hypothesised that notional estate laws increase the money
available for challenge and that this may be a factor leading
to an increased
prevalence of claims in New South Wales. They found, however, that this was not
the case as disputes in both Victoria
and Queensland involved larger estates and
yet those jurisdictions had fewer contests:
Notional estate was mentioned in relation to 15 of 59 estates, but in 5 of
those estates, it was clear it was not driving the contest,
for example, because
the potential increase in the estate’s value was very small. However, in
the remaining 10 estates, we
concluded that in 8, the availability of notional
estate was very likely to have played a role in bringing a family provision
Eight estates is a relatively modest number and notional estate goes only a
little way to explaining the position in New South Wales.
If those eight estates
were excluded, New South Wales would still have well over double the number of
contested estates through family
provision than Victoria (the next highest
state), so there are other more important influences at
6.5.38 These statistics only reveal the number of New South Wales claims
proceeding to trial. As discussed elsewhere in this
it is difficult to
gauge the number of claims that are commenced but settled without a court
determination. The New South Wales Supreme
Court’s Annual Reports reveal
that, on average, in the three years between 2015 and 2017, there were 988
family provision claims
filed each year in New South
This demonstrates that
there are a significant number of claims settled before a hearing. Essen
Bradbury’s submission advised
that the number of claims settled out of
court does not assist in the gaining of a clear picture of the impact of
notional estate
laws in New South Wales.
6.5.39 Reported family provision cases from New South Wales between April
2018 and April 2019 are summarised at Appendix 4. Of the
29 decisions handed
seven (24%) raised the
issue of potential notional estate. Most cases were therefore unaffected by the
existence of notional estate
laws in that jurisdiction. In at least some cases,
however, whether there are assets able to be designated as notional estate may
have had a significant impact upon whether a claim was filed. For instance, in
the matter of
deceased’s estate was only about $8,000, whilst the value of possible
notional estate was about $600,000. It is likely
that the availability of this
potential notional estate was a key factor in the claim being pursued.
Increase in unmeritorious claims
6.5.40 Three submissions suggested there could be
an increase in unmeritorious or vexatious claims being made or
threatened.
Two respondents
noted that parties may feel pressured to settle unmeritorious claims to avoid
the legal costs, delay and stress of
litigation.
Life is short, and the average person just wants to live a happy and peaceful
life, free from the conflict, severe stress and the
cost that litigation brings.
In many cases, litigation severely impacts on the health and overall wellbeing
of litigants over a long
and protracted period. None of which is a positive for
the society in which we
6.5.41 It is acknowledged that participation in litigation of any sort can
have a significant impact on the person and their family.
This is argued to be
particularly so in the context of estate litigation where disputes occur during
a period of grief.
implications have been described as follows:
Contests over estates have economic, social and psychological costs to
families and individuals. The distribution of assets after
death is not a purely
financial or legal exercise and dispositions in a will can represent a very
public realignment of relationships
and hierarchies within a
6.5.42 It is difficult to draw conclusions about whether there would be an
increase in unmeritorious claims if notional estate laws
were introduced. This
is a discretionary jurisdiction so, by its very nature, it is not possible to
determine conclusively the merits
of a claim in the absence of a hearing where
all the evidence is presented. Ultimately the question of merit is a matter for
in their discretion.
Adult children claimants
6.5.43 As explained in Part 1, the
enables spouses and children to bring family provision
This Act does not
distinguish between the respective claims of adult children and children who are
minors and each are eligible to
apply and succeed if they satisfy the court of
the merits of their claims.
Some respondents
concerns about further extension of family provision legislation in regards to
adult, financially independent claimants
with minimal financial need.
6.5.44 A recent Australian study of family provision cases found that by far
the largest cohort of claimants were adult
The researchers
found that more than half of claims were brought by competent adult children and
that about one third of claimants
‘could be regarded as “financially
comfortable” adults just wanting
Another study in
South Australia also found that the greatest proportion of claimants in South
Australia between 2000 and 2018 were
A review of
reported Tasmanian family provision cases provides consistent results, with most
cases proceeding to hearing involving
adult children
applicants.
6.5.45 Several academics have expressed concerns about the prevalence of
adult financially independent children bringing and succeeding
provision claims.
White et al
comment that one option for legislative reform would be to remove the automatic
eligibility for adult children to bring
a family provision claim and imposing a
requirement to demonstrate that the deceased had a responsibility to provide for
The National
Committee’s Report and Supplementary Report, which endorsed notional
estate provisions, contained recommendations
limiting the eligibility of adult
children so that they would not automatically be entitled to provision —
proposing that they
need to establish that ‘the deceased owed a
responsibility to provide maintenance, education or advancement in
In 1997, the
NZLC also recommended that new legislation ‘give children no greater
rights than they had during their parents’
Many Acts in
Canada limit the eligibility of adult children to those with special needs, for
example due to disability.
These reforms have been consistent with recommendations of their law reform
commissions.
Some Canadian
transferred or provided dual jurisdiction for the family court to deal with the
division of property between spouses after
death. The effect is that, in
Manitoba for example, notional estate-style provisions are available to spouses
under family law legislation
but not to the broader range of claimants under its
family provision legislation.
6.5.46 This discussion suggests a need for the
to be reviewed
more broadly so that it reflects current community expectations. Chief Justice
Gleeson noted in
Vigolo v Bostin
that community standards ‘change
and develop over time.’
The relevance of prevailing community standards with regards to claims by adult
children was referred to in a recent Tasmanian decision,
where Associate Justice
Holt commented:
I do not think that prevailing community standards, even in the case of large
estates, contain a requirement that a testator should
completely remove the
welfare burden of the State for his adult
6.5.47 It is outside of the Institute’s terms of reference to consider
or make recommendations about the provisions of the
including who is eligible to bring a claim. The reference is limited to the
question of whether notional estate legislation
should be introduced. The
matters are distinct with the question of whether notional estate legislation
ought to be introduced being
quite separate to the question of who ought to be
able to make a claim.
6.5.48 Notional estate legislation equally benefits children who are minors,
financially dependent children or children with special
needs. It also benefits
financially dependent or interdependent spouses. One
provided an
example where notional estate legislation could have benefited minor children.
Limiting discussion to adult children
claimants fails to consider the broad
range of applicants to whom notional estate provisions would extend.
Undermining the intention of joint tenancy ownerships, binding death
benefit nominations and trusts
6.5.49 One of the fundamental features of joint
tenancy is the doctrine of survivorship — that a surviving co-owner
automatically
receives a joint tenancy property on the death of their co-owner.
This provides certainty for co-owners that the survivor will inherit
a property,
irrespective of the terms of each other’s wills, and free from the risk of
a family provision challenge. One
introduction of notional estate legislation has the potential to defeat this
arrangement:
The benefit of a joint tenancy is that a property owner need not be concerned
these provisions were to
be introduced, it is unclear what purpose joint tenancies would serve if they
would be treated like a tenancy
in common after
6.5.50 This issue has also been considered by the WALRC which commented upon
the potential issues that could occur if joint tenancy
property were able to be
clawed back via notional estate legislation:
in many cases the other joint tenants will have acted in good faith in
reliance upon the expectation that they could acquire the property
survivorship and that it may cause hardship to them if their vested rights are
upset in order to make provision for the family
6.5.51 A similar argument may also be made about
the application of notional estate law to superannuation. Superannuation
legislation
enables members of super funds to execute a binding death benefit
nomination (‘BDBN’) which directs the payment of their
superannuation after death.
If the rules of the fund permit use of a BDBN, and the nomination is completed
in accordance with legislation and any particular
rules of the fund, then the
BDBN overrides any default discretion that the trustee might otherwise have to
decide who receives a
member’s benefits after their death. The trustees
are unable to override a valid BDBN and it may not be challenged by family
members. Notional estate legislation has the potential to alter this arrangement
by effectively providing eligible claimants with
the opportunity to challenge a
person’s BDBN in order to seek provision from those funds. Ann Hamilton
commented upon the interaction
between state and federal laws in her
submission:
I am unclear how the legislation interacts with the provisions of the SIS Act
and regulations concerning binding death benefit nominations
... It seems a
significant inroad into the decision making of a fund member for the death
benefit (contrary to the nomination) to
become part of a notional estate and so
available to claimants the member did not wish to benefit.
6.5.52 Ms Hamilton expressed similar concerns
would pose ‘an unacceptable intrusion into a trust that was
likely established for the benefit of a wide range of beneficiaries’
an ‘unacceptable intrusion into ... the rights of beneficiaries.’
Four other submissions
raised concerns about the application of notional estate provisions to trusts.
The Elder Law Committee illustrated their concern
with the following
A client has multiple family trusts. The family business is run through the
trusts. One son operates the business so the parents transfer
control of all of
the trusts to the son. If notional estates existed then the court could change
the control of the trusts and then
other siblings who know nothing about the
business could have a say in its
Questions about the effectiveness of notional estate laws
6.5.53 Several
respondents
commented upon a
perceived lack of effectiveness of notional estate legislation. It was noted
that, in the same way that estate planning
strategies can presently be employed
to remove assets from risk, strategies would equally be used to avoid the
operation of notional
estate provisions. Lawyer, Alice Grubb commented:
Those who insist on avoiding any obligation they may have under the TFM Act
will not be stopped by this legislation.
6.5.54 Similar observations were made when the Law Commission (England &
Wales) reviewed this issue, with respondents stating
that ‘attempts to
prevent evasion would lead to great
complication.’
Elder Law Committee stated that introduction of notional estate provisions would
increase the costs of estate planning advice
due to the need to provide more
complex advice.
6.5.55 One strategy referred to was the transfer of assets early so that any
‘relevant property transaction’ occurs outside
the three-year period
covered in New South Wales.
This could involve parents transferring ownership of assets (for example, the
family home) to one or more of their children whilst
they are well, in the hope
that they remain alive past three years so that the asset is then outside the
notional estate clawback
provisions. Unless appropriate arrangements are put in
place to secure the parents’ rights, there is a risk that if relationships
breakdown, they may lose their right to use and enjoy that asset. Particularly
where that asset is a family home, this loss of control
can create dependency
and thus vulnerability. One
raised concerns
of elder abuse.
Removal of assets from the jurisdiction
6.5.56 Four
submissions
referred to the
potential for introduction of notional estate legislation to have a negative
impact investment in Tasmania. It was
observed that individuals may choose to
own assets in a jurisdiction that does not have notional estate laws in order to
remove that
asset from risk. One
noted that one
strategy advocated in continuing legal education forums where there is a risk of
a family provision challenge to a
client’s estate is the removal of assets
from New South Wales (as the only jurisdiction with notional estates). In a
vein, if Tasmania were to introduce notional estate legislation then it
was submitted that it was likely that lawyers and other professional
would advise clients to consider holding their assets outside
James Walker
observed that, when Queensland abolished death duties, there was anecdotal
evidence that a significant number of individuals
moved their investment assets
to Queensland to avoid death
Accordingly, it is
foreseeable that similar conduct could follow the introduction of notional
estates laws.
6.5.57 Three respondents noted that only one Australian jurisdiction has
notional estate legislation and that we should adopt an approach
consistent with
the majority.
6.5.58 As noted elsewhere in this
one of the key
drivers for the enactment of notional estate legislation in New South Wales was
the desire to further the objectives
of family provision legislation. The
absence of nationally uniform family provision legislation operates as a
significant barrier
to notional estate legislation achieving this purpose. This
matter is discussed further at [
] to support the Institute’s
conclusion that notional estate legislation should not be introduced in Tasmania
in the absence
of national uniformity.
Existing alternative claims to estate and non-estate assets: Equitable
6.5.59 A relevant factor to consider is the extent
to which individuals can pursue a claim to non-estate assets without notional
legislation. One submission raised this
6.5.60 In certain circumstances, individuals may have claims to non-estate
assets without resort to family provision legislation.
it was explained that
where assets are transferred at a time when the person did not have the
necessary capacity to understand the
transaction, or were subject to undue
influence or fraud, the transaction may be set aside. Similarly, transfers that
an attorney
or administrator undertook without authority may also be rendered
void. The effect is to restore the assets to the deceased’s
6.5.61 Separately, individuals may pursue a claim
in equity to property that a deceased person owned. This includes assets falling
outside a person’s estate. The doctrine of equitable estoppel, for
example, enables applicants to claim relief where a deceased
has, during their
lifetime, made representations or promises to them that they have then relied
upon to their detriment such that
it would be unconscionable for the deceased to
depart from the expectation they had
6.5.62 An example is
In that case, a
deceased’s son applied to the court, claiming that his father had made
certain promises to the effect that
a property the father built at Berridale was
‘going to be his and his sisters one
The son asserted
that, as a result of his father’s representations, he had assisted him
with the construction of the home,
including providing advice, assisting with
the purchase of materials and supplying labour free of charge, to his detriment.
was purchased in the deceased’s sole name, however was later
transferred to a joint tenancy with his partner for ‘natural
affection’. The effect was that, upon the father’s death, the
property vested in his surviving partner and did
not form part of his estate. As
a result, it could not be claimed via a family provision claim.
6.5.63 Justice Estcourt held that the elements of an equitable estoppel had
been established. His Honour did not, however, consider
that the facts supported
the declaration of a constructive trust over the property. Instead, his Honour
ordered that the deceased’s
partner pay equitable compensation for the
amount the son lost in not having charged his father for materials and
Evans v Public
Chief Justice
Cox considered a surviving spouse’s equitable claim to the assets of her
late partner’s estate, including
their family home, a property at
Bothwell, a car and trailer. She sought a declaration that she and the deceased
held the assets
as joint tenants in equity, or in default that they were owned
by them as tenants in common pursuant to an express, implied or constructive
trust. Under intestacy, his estate was to be divided between the partner (the
applicant), their daughter and the deceased’s
three children from a prior
relationship.
6.5.65 His Honour was satisfied that the applicant had contributed both
financially and non-financially (through the performance of
household duties) to
the family home. His Honour declared that the family home and its contents were
impressed with a constructive
trust in favour of the deceased and the applicant
as tenants in common in equal shares. The effect was to remove one half of the
value of the family home and its contents from the partner’s estate, with
the applicant entitled to those assets.
Leaman v Public
further example. In that case, a surviving partner applied to the court seeking
a declaration that property registered
in his late partner’s name was held
pursuant to a resulting trust in his favour. Whilst the property had been
purchased using
the applicant’s funds, it was registered in his
partner’s sole name. The Court was satisfied that the reasons for this
were partly asset protection purposes, and partly due to the applicant’s
poor English and his embarrassment at the difficult
spelling of his surname. The
applicant predominantly paid the loan repayments and also completed maintenance
on and improvements
to the property. The applicant gave evidence that, despite
the property being registered in the deceased’s sole name, it was
that ‘naturally whoever died first, the other would take
6.5.67 Justice Cox was satisfied that it was the mutual intention of the
parties that the property be held for their joint use and
benefit during their
lifetimes and would then pass to the survivor on the death of the first of them.
His Honour therefore made orders
declaring that the applicant was the beneficial
owner of the property, with the effect that it did not form part of his late
6.5.68 As these cases demonstrate, equitable doctrines already enable family
to seek the
Court’s intervention where, for example, they have contributed to estate
assets, or have acted to their detriment
in reliance upon a deceased’s
promise that they would inherit certain assets. These claims can be resolved
outside the family
provision environment and do not require enactment of
notional estate legislation to clawback assets. On the other hand, examples
some respondents shared with the Institute confirm that existing remedies may
not resolve all instances that notional estate
provisions could.
6.5.69 Equitable doctrines focus upon preventing unjust or inequitable
outcomes where a person has suffered detriment, for example
by not being
compensated for their contributions to a deceased’s assets. Their
availability thus addresses criticisms that
some respondents and commentators
application of family provision legislation to financially independent children
without financial need because the focus
is upon recognising their equitable
interests in property.
Other matters
6.5.70 The Elder Law Committee’s submission
raised two other issues in support of their objection to notional estate
legislation.
First, it raised concerns about the potential impact that notional
estate provisions would have upon charitable giving and bequests:
Some wealthy clients wish to leave their estates to charities rather than
their children. In some cases their children are all financially
independent and
do not need their wealth. The majority of charities include in their annual
budget an item for ‘bequests’.
Although they do not know how many
bequests they will receive in any given year they have a fair idea based on
previous years. The
introduction of notional estates could significantly reduce
bequests to charities due to claims by children which could impact on
that the charities are able to undertake. If clients are aware of notional
estates then this may also impact on how much
they leave to charities and
overall it may reduce people being
benevolent.
6.5.71 The Committee also expressed concerns about
the impact that notional estate provisions would have for professionals advising
clients about their estate planning:
We have already seen an increase in the number of clients who say
‘What’s the point of making a Will? The court can just
gets what anyway’. Notional estates may actually reduce the number of
people who come to solicitors to get their
wills drawn. It may also encourage
people to complete more will kits instead of spending money to see lawyers to
get a will drafted
because in their mind what is the point in spending all that
money when their wishes are not going to be listened to anyway.
Arguments in support of notional estate
6.6.1 Ten submissions
endorsed inclusion of notional estate provisions within the
Reasons given in support are outlined below.
That notional estate legislation promotes the purpose and effectiveness
of the TFM Act
6.6.2 Most respondents who supported notional
estate legislation commented that the
is ineffective whilst there
exists relatively simple mechanisms for individuals to avoid its operation.
Notional estate provisions
were therefore described as furthering the objectives
To extend the Court’s reach to assets notionally held by an estate
would be to the advancement of the objects of the Act. The
objects are to ensure
that the obligations of a person to provide for a dependent spouse or child are
met. These objects are noble
as they correct capricious and unjustified
testamentary
dispositions.
6.6.3 These observations align with comments made by Chief Justice Gleeson in
Barns v Barns
where his Honour stated: ‘a legally effective
disposition of property prior to death placed such property beyond the reach
the legislation.’ His Honour went on to refer to this as an
‘inherent limitation in the legislative
6.6.4 Steven Bishop commented that, without
anti-avoidance provisions, compliance with the
is effectively
Quite simply, as is the case in most other areas of law where there is
financial imposition from the state, given the chance people
will avoid their
obligations ... Without anti avoidance provisions, those unwilling to comply
with the obligations can simply do
6.6.5 The submission of Christine Schokman, Dexter Marcenko and Michael
Flanagan also commented upon the existence of anti-avoidance
provisions under
other statutes, stating ‘[l]egislation is littered with statutory
prohibitions against transactions which
are intended to defeat valid
Steven Bishop
commented upon the utility of anti-avoidance provisions, submitting that
‘without compulsion, a significant minority
of people will not comply with
the law when it conflicts with their own desires.’
6.6.6 A desire to promote the effectiveness of family provision legislation
was the driving force behind the NSWLRC’s recommendations
enactment of notional estate legislation in New South Wales and has also been
considered by other law reform
Different outcomes under the
Family Law Act
Family Law Act 1975
’) provides one example of legislated anti-avoidance
provisions. Under
, the Family Court can set aside transactions that are
either entered into with the intention of defeating a claim or anticipated
order, or that, irrespective of intention, have the effect of defeating an
6.6.8 An example of this section in operation is the decision in
In that case, a husband had transferred a family home, then worth
to his children in
the months prior to his death from a terminal illness. Prior to his death, his
wife of 35 years had filed proceedings
with the Family Court of Western
Australia. She argued that the transfer of the home to the deceased’s
children should be set
aside and that family court property orders be made. In
the alternative, she argued that the transfer should be set aside —
would then pursue a family provision claim against her husband’s estate,
including the family home.
Without the transfer being set aside, the residue of his estate was only
approximately $50,000.
6.6.9 Justice Duncanson upheld the application, stating:
Having regard to the value of the Suburb N property which is by far the most
significant asset of the marriage, it is readily apparent
that it is appropriate
that I exercise my discretion to set aside the transfer. If I did not do so,
this most significant asset of
the parties would be excluded from the property
of the parties to be the subject of orders. In exercising my discretion I take
account that the second and third respondents received the property by way
of a gift from the husband as opposed to a bona fide
6.6.10 His Honour made orders for the property to be sold with 55% of the
sale proceeds to be paid to the
6.6.11 Under the
, the Supreme Court
does not have power to set aside a transaction that is intended to, or has the
effect of, defeating a claim. Had
the wife in
not commenced
Family Court proceedings prior to her husband’s
she would have been
unable to claim any of the family home via a family provision claim as, like
Tasmania, Western Australia does
not have notional estate legislation. The wife
would have had to rely upon equitable doctrines to pursue any interest in the
Notional estate
provisions are therefore similar to s 106B of the
in that they give
the court power to clawback assets in certain circumstances. The case of
also illustrates, however, that in certain circumstances use of
can avoid the need for notional estate provisions within family
provision legislation.
6.6.12 Whilst both the
deal with the division
of property upon the ending of a relationship, different outcomes can occur
between jurisdictions. The following
has been said of this circumstance:
Just what a remarkable dichotomy exists therefore between the position of a
spouse who has, prior to the death of his/her partner,
separated from that party
and instituted an application for property settlement pursuant to s 79 and that
of a spouse who has separated
from his/her partner but not instituted a s 79
application prior to the death of the partner. Similarly disadvantaged too is a
who has lived in connubial bliss with his/her marital partner only to
discover upon the partner’s death that no or little provision
made for him/her in the testator’s Will. He/she is omitted [from] most or
all of the property which they enjoyed,
or at least acquired during the marriage
registered in the deceased’s partner’s
6.6.13 This quotation refers to the fact that the
surviving spouses who may have remained in long and happy relationships with
their partners. There is an argument that
this quality justifies favourable
outcomes for those surviving widows and
In response to this
proposition, Justice Brereton has commented that:
In my view, the proper measure nowadays of the community’s expectation
as the basic minimum which testators should provide for
their spouses, even in
an unhappy marriage, is that provision which the surviving spouse would have
received pursuant to Part VIII
Family Law Act
had the parties
separated and instituted such proceedings. In a happy marriage, the standard
might well exceed this ... The dutiful
spouse who finds upon her husband’s
death that no or inadequate provision has been made for her is then in no worse
than a spouse who has separated before death and commenced property
proceedings.
6.6.14 His Honour concludes by stating that:
There is neither social sense nor legal logic in a surviving spouse who has
not instituted proceedings before the other dies being
in a position worse than
would have been the case had such proceedings been instituted. Even more so
where the surviving spouse was
not separated but remained happily married until
the death of the other, should such spouses not be in a worse position vis-a-vis
the estate of the other than had the marriage failed
If the outcome did in fact depend upon the chance of whether property
proceedings had or had not been instituted before death, or
resulted in a
‘dutiful’ spouse who remained happily married to the deceased being
worse off than if he or she had separated
from the other, there would be
justifiable cause for
6.6.15 The Family Law Committee of the Law Society observed that introduction
of notional estate legislation would provide the Supreme
Court with broader
powers more akin to those in the Family Court. It also noted that it would
‘remove an uncertainty for spouses
in respect of which forum to file
proceedings where a party is approaching the end of their
Others have
endorsed alignment of family provision legislation with federal reforms under
6.6.16 Conversely, a Hobart law
commented in its
submission that the different contexts in which the
operate justify differences in approach and that comparing the two
to adult children, with the
limited to the division of
property between separating
Treatment of superannuation under the
6.6.17 Whilst no submissions raised this issue, there is a second difference
between the operation of the
. This arises in
relation to the court’s powers over superannuation.
6.6.18 Since 2001, the Family Court has been able to make orders splitting
superannuation between parties to a
relationship.
These reforms
are consistent with recommendations of the Joint Select Committee on Certain
Aspects of the Operation and Interpretation
Family Law Act
In 1992, the Joint Select Committee commented that:
With the value of superannuation increasing in significance as an
individual’s personal savings and the proportion of the household
now being devoted to superannuation payments, the Committee feels that a just
property assessment must include consideration
of superannuation
entitlements.
6.6.19 Whilst the Family Court now has access to superannuation, under the
, the Supreme Court is unable to utilise superannuation to fund
provision for a successful applicant unless that superannuation is
paid into an
estate. To illustrate the different outcomes, if a husband has a super account
with $500,000, those funds may be included
in the Family Court’s orders
dealing with the division of property upon the ending of his relationship. If,
however, the relationship
ends not upon separation but due to his death, then
whether that $500,000 is available for his wife depends upon the arrangements
that the husband made in relation to his member account. If he had completed an
effective BDBN directing his superannuation to, say,
his daughter, then the wife
is unable to seek any of his superannuation in a family provision claim. The
differences in outcome can
thus be significant.
6.6.20 The Australian Law Reform Commission (‘ALRC’) recently
undertook a comprehensive review of the family law
It commented in its discussion paper that:
in many cases, a fair property split cannot be
achieved without a superannuation split, such as where there are minimal
non-superannuation
assets, and a significant disparity in superannuation
balances. Failure to provide the economically weaker party with access to
superannuation
may also contribute to poor living standards in retirement.
6.6.21 Similar comments were made in the ALRC’s final report where it
Given that caring responsibilities are typically, but not always, borne by
women, and can have a lifelong impact on earnings, property
division on or
following separation can be an important mechanism for addressing deficiencies
in the accumulation of
superannuation.
6.6.22 These extracts highlight the significance of superannuation as an
asset, a matter also discussed at [
]. The Supreme Court’s
inability to utilise superannuation paid directly to beneficiaries can therefore
lead to significant
differences between couples who separate and seek orders
and those where one dies and the
applies. On
the other hand, whilst Ann Hamilton’s submission referred to the
importance of superannuation as an asset for many
Tasmanians, she submitted that
this factor supports her position that notional estate legislation ought not
apply to superannuation:
Superannuation benefits are important assets for estate planning of people
whose personal unencumbered assets are relatively few and
it does not seem
appropriate for the power to direct what occurs to those assets to be reviewed
under notional estate legislation.
Concluding remarks about operation of the
6.6.23 As noted at [
criticism that is sometimes made of family provision legislation is its
application to financially independent adult children.
Some individuals object
to the enactment of notional estate legislation on the basis that it would
further extend the rights of financially
independent children to claim assets of
their parents that they do not have a right to claim during their parents’
6.6.24 As explained in Part
New Zealand and some
provinces in Canada
transferred or provided dual jurisdiction to the family court to make orders
after death. The effect is to
create consistency between laws applying to spouses following separation and
those applying after death.
It thus resolves criticisms outlined earlier in this
part about the different outcomes that can occur between the
and reduces or eliminates the need for notional estate
laws to achieve consistency for spouses. A further consequence of transferring
respondents raised about the availability of non-estate
assets to financially
independent claimants.
6.6.25 For these reasons, there would seem to be merit in further evaluating
the potential role that the
could play in resolving the division of
assets between spouses after death where family court proceedings have not been
prior to a spouse’s death. Whilst the ALRC recently undertook an
extensive review of the family law system in Australia, its
final report did not
discuss a potential extended role for the
to deal with the division
of assets after death where proceedings are not already on
It is outside the scope
of this review to consider this issue further, noting in particular the fact
is federal legislation and not a matter falling within the
ambit of the Institute’s role. The Institute highlights these matters,
however, to demonstrate that some jurisdictions adopt different policy responses
to resolve the issues raised in this Report.
Inequitable access and utilisation of estate planning
6.6.26 The joint submission of Christine Schokman,
Dexter Marcenko and Michael Flanagan stated that some individuals have unequal
access to obtain and utilise estate planning advice and that this can lead to
inequitable outcomes. This can arise:
• for will-makers, as those unable to afford legal advice may not be
able to obtain advice, or then implement recommendations
to structure their
affairs to minimise assets at risk; or
• for potential claimants, where those in similar circumstances can
experience different outcomes depending upon whether their
parent or spouse
sought advice and then structured their affairs to reduce the assets within
their estate.
6.6.27 It appears from the Institute’s
consultation that many community members are unaware of strategies that may be
protect assets from challenge. For those aware, obtaining advice can be
financially prohibitive particularly for low-income earners.
circumstances there may be other expenses incurred in structuring affairs to
protect assets from challenge, notably capital
gains tax or duty
implications.
The result can
be that wealthy individuals have greater access to obtain and rely upon estate
planning advice than individuals in
lower socio-economic
Christine Schokman,
Dexter Marcenko and Michael Flanagan demonstrated this problem using the
following example they had encountered:
Another recent example involved a testator who, just one year prior to his
death, held an estate which would have been conservatively
valued in excess of
$12 million. He had one estranged son who, unlike the other children, was of
illegitimate birth. The illegitimate
son was raised with his half-siblings who
were each the issue of a marriage. Our client instructed that he had been abused
infancy because of his bastardry and his father’s shame.
The testator almost completely divested himself of his assets in the twelve
months prior to his death. Our searches revealed that
even in the 48 hours prior
to his death the testator and his other children engaged in major share
There was no mystery as to his motivations for the inter vivos transactions.
However, given that our client could not challenge the
validity of those
transactions, we conducted TFM proceedings on the basis that the estate was
valued at approximately $150,000. He
settled his TFM claim for a sum of
approximately 1% of the value of his siblings’ collective inter vivos
inheritances. Our
client was living on a disability support pension and had five
dependent children. Notwithstanding his estrangement, he had a strong
claim against the depleted estate.
The lesson of this second example is that, quite often, it is the wealthiest
of testators who have the means and the motive to engage
commercial solicitors
to protect their estates from applications under the Act.
6.6.28 As this scenario demonstrates, potential claimants may have almost
identical circumstances but experience different outcomes
depending upon whether
their family member structured their affairs to remove assets from challenge. To
provide an example, two daughters
may not receive anything from their respective
mother’s estate whilst being in significant financial need, reliant upon
pensions and unlikely to be able to work in the future. In one case,
the mother obtains advice and transfers ownership of her house
to joint tenancy
and transfers her term deposits to joint accounts. The other mother does not, so
that at her death her estate includes
her home and term deposits. The first
daughter is prevented from pursuing a family provision claim because there is no
claim. The second daughter is able to pursue a claim as there are
assets available in her mother’s estate. It might be that
daughter’s claim is ultimately unsuccessful. It illustrates, however, the
fact that one daughter may pursue an ultimately
successful claim for further
provision whilst the other daughter, in almost identical circumstances, is
unable to do so. This results
in a breach of the fundamental human rights
principle that all people should be equal before the law. On the other hand, the
already treats individuals differently by limiting the classes of
applicants able to apply for provision. Similarly, individuals
in financial need
can encounter different outcomes because, for example, one might have a parent
who is wealthy whilst another’s
parent does not have any assets of
substance able to be claimed irrespective of the availability of notional estate
legislation.
It is thus more an example of people coming to the law from unequal
positions rather than the law creating unequal outcomes.
6.6.29 Balanced with individuals’ rights to be treated equally before
the law is the competing common law right to the use and
enjoyment of
This right applies
not only to will-makers who may wish to make gifts of their assets during their
lifetime, but also recipients
of assets who may be deprived of the right to
enjoy their property.
factor was discussed further at [
6.6.30 Christine Schokman, Dexter Marcenko and
Michael Flanagan made the point that sometimes unequal outcomes can occur
being the deceased’s intention. Individuals purchasing
properties jointly may not appreciate the different consequences between
tenancy or tenancy in common
Or individuals may
have purchased property some years before and fail to recall the form of
ownership or its legal consequences.
These matters were noted by the Law
Commission (England & Wales) as part of its justification for recommending
that joint tenancy
property be included within its family provision
6.6.31 Another example is where individuals may
not intentionally structure their affairs so that their superannuation falls
or outside their estate. This occurred in the case of
where the deceased
had not made a binding or non-binding nomination although this was permissible
under the rules of the fund.
In some circumstances a trustee’s exercise of discretion about the payment
of a member’s death benefits may be reviewable,
enabling individuals to
pursue a claim under superannuation
legislation.
Nevertheless,
Christine Schokman, Dexter Marcenko and Michael Flanagan’s submission
provided an example where this was not
We represented three children, two of whom were under the age of 18. The
deceased had separated from their mother some two to three
years before his
death. His estate was modest but he held significant funds in his
superannuation/death benefit scheme.
The trustees of the scheme were left with no discretion other than to pay the
funds to his current spouse (his de facto of just over
two years). The
Superannuation Complaints Tribunal had no jurisdiction to alter that
distribution and the children were left with
no support from him and no remedy.
A discretion to consider notional estate would provide an avenue for addressing
this dilemma.
This illustrates the injustices to potential applicants which are unintended
by a deceased but could be remedied by the availability
of notional estate.
Proceedings under the
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act
always inconsistent with the desirability to give effect to one’s
testamentary intentions.
6.6.32 A potential benefit of notional estate legislation is that it can
rectify such ‘irregularities’ that arise by chance
or circumstance
rather than by design.
‘Fairness’ for estate beneficiaries
6.6.33 Whilst no submissions raised it, linked to
the previous discussion is the consideration that notional estate legislation
enable the burden of successful family provision claims to be shared equally
between the beneficiaries of an estate and the ‘non-probate’
beneficiaries. A recent New South Wales case illustrates this
In that case, a
step-son filed a family provision claim against his step-father’s estate,
asserting that his step-father’s
superannuation (valued at approximately
$858,000) be designated as notional estate. The beneficiaries named in the
will supported their step-brother’s claim for their
father’s superannuation to be designated as notional
Justice Lindsay made
the observation that that argument had an ‘added attraction’ for the
beneficiaries as it would reduce
the impact of any order upon their gifts under
The applicant was
ultimately successful, with Justice Lindsay ordering the superannuation as
notional estate to fund provision for
the successful claimant.
Burden on the state
6.6.34 Steven Bishop’s submission referred
to the fact that, without notional estate legislation, eligible applicants in
significant
financial need can become or remain reliant upon government support.
In this way, the absence of notional estate legislation has
an adverse impact
upon not only the individual who is unable to bring a claim, but also the
broader community.
6.6.35 Mr Bishop provided the following example where he acted for a client
in receipt of government assistance who was unable to
pursue a claim:
In a matter upon which I gave advice, a Testator was reputed to have had,
prior to disposing of it, property to the value of about
$15,000,000.00. In
accordance with advice received from a solicitor, he systematically disposed of
the assets in his individual ownership
so that upon death he was virtually
penniless. He had left two children, one of whom was aged approximately 40 and
who had been involved
with drugs since the age of 15, and a burden on the tax
payer since about the age of 18 ... Most importantly, the child with a drug
problem will in all probability continue to be a burden on the tax payer in
receipt of social security and in need of treatment and
assistance from the
various over strained services ... a cost the tax payer should reasonably expect
to have been met by his deceased
6.6.36 Justin McMullen expressed a contrary view, submitting that the
potential impact upon tax-payer resources does not justify enactment
of notional
estate provisions:
it is not a reasonable argument that protection of the public purse is an
appropriate public policy reason to justify the removal
of the long held right
of a person to utilise their assets in any manner they choose. There is no law
today requiring a testator
to make provision for their spouse or adult child
during the testator’s lifetime — why should it be so upon their
6.6.37 In summary, submissions were split reasonably equally between those
who supported notional estate legislation and those who
opposed reform. There
was no absolute majority in support of either option. The Law Society noted that
its Committees had expressed
a range of views, even within committee
memberships, reflecting the ‘differing views in the community’. It
the view that ‘[e]xamples of injustice have been provided that
support both sides of the debate.’ The Public Trustee
similarly declined
to make a submission, observing the conflicting positions between its role in
acting for will-makers, potential
claimants and legal personal representatives
of an estate. This demonstrates that public opinion about the utility of
notional estate
legislation often depends upon an individual’s perspective
based upon their own experiences with the law.
The New South Wales
6.7.1 To consider fully the question whether Tasmania should introduce
notional estate legislation, it is necessary to articulate
what those provisions
might look like. The Issues Paper noted that one option would be simply to
introduce identical provisions to
those in New South Wales. These provisions are
consistent with the National Committee’s recommendations about the
that national uniform succession laws should
There has, however,
been some criticism made about how these provisions were developed and drafted
based upon the former death duty
provisions.
6.7.2 The Issues Paper asked whether stakeholders considered the NSW
Succession Act
was an appropriate precedent or whether there are any
perceived difficulties with the Act.
If notional estate provisions were introduced in Tasmania, should the New
South Wales legislation be used as a precedent? If so, are
there any parts of
these provisions that you think should be changed? For example, do you consider
that there is a need to make any
(a) the types of property that may be affected;
(b) the acts (or failures to act) captured;
(c) the relevance of a person’s intentions;
(d) the period of time in which a relevant property transaction occurs that
is covered;
(e) the circumstances in which a notional estate order may be made; or
(f) any other provisions.
6.7.3 Fifteen submissions addressed this
Whilst not all
respondents agreed that Tasmania should enact notional estate provisions,
considered that, if
notional estate laws were introduced, the NSW
Succession Act
used as a base for legislative reform. Steven Bishop made the following comments
It is ridiculous that in this day and age in a modern nation such as
Australia there should be State differences in important laws.
I cannot conceive
of any changes that are of such monumental significance that they require
different provisions for different Australians.
Adopting the New South Wales Provisions will enable access to a considerable
body of pre-existing jurisprudence for the guidance of
the profession. Of
course, this includes judicial decisions, but also the text books and learned
papers that we already have
6.7.4 The Elder Law Committee also expressed the view that it would
‘seem sensible’ to have consistent legislation. The
benefits of
nationally consistent succession laws have also been advocated
previously.
6.7.5 Nine submissions
expressed a view that, if notional estate legislation were introduced, there
should be variations made to the New South Wales legislation.
disagreed that the
New South Wales approach should be adopted.
6.7.6 The following concerns about the New South Wales notional estate
provisions were raised:
The types of property that may be affected
6.7.7 Five respondents commented upon the property covered by New South Wales
notional estate orders.
expressed a view that the types of property should be more specifically
6.7.8 Three submissions stated that notional estate legislation should not
apply to superannuation.
issue was discussed at [
stated that notional estate provisions should not apply to
This matter was also
considered elsewhere in this
The acts (or failures to act) captured
6.7.9 Three
submissions
advocated that,
notional estate laws
should not apply to failures to act — for example, failure to sever a
joint tenancy or make a distribution
from a trust. Sam McCullough advocated this
approach on the basis that it would focus the scheme upon positive
asset-stripping undertaken
with the intention of defeating claims. The effect
would be to exclude family trusts, superannuation, life insurance policies and
joint tenancy properties unless positive acts were undertaken within the
prescribed period like a deposit of funds into a superannuation
fund or trust or
the creation of a joint tenancy. It was said that extending notional estate
legislation to failures to act —
for example the failure to sever joint
tenancies or make or change a binding death benefit nomination or make a
distribution from
a trust — is a step too far.
6.7.10 These views are consistent with observations the WALRC has made of the
New South Wales notional estate provisions which capture
severances of joint
tenancy. It expressed these considerations as follows:
The policy of the Act seems to be that once it becomes clear that one joint
tenant runs a significantly greater risk of dying first,
he is morally obliged
to sever the tenancy so that he can leave his share in the property by will. If
not, the property becomes part
of the notional estate. This is unfair. The
fellow joint tenant, who has borne the risk of losing all property in the event
first, is to be deprived of the benefit of survivorship in the
interests of providing for the first joint tenant's family. In these
right of a transferee of property to security of title should prevail over the
interest of the deceased’s family
or dependants not to be
disinherited.
6.7.11 The Institute discusses the application of the New South Wales
notional estate provisions to failures to act further at [
The relevance of a person’s intentions
6.7.12 Whilst the relevance of a person’s intentions when entering into
a property transaction was a matter raised by several
respondents when the VLRC
considered the question of notional estate
legislation,
it was a factor
that only one respondent
raised with the Institute. Whilst expressing the view that notional estate
legislation should not be introduced, Geoffrey Nash stated
that, if Tasmania had
notional estate laws, then a person’s intentions should be given stronger
weight. On the question of
intention, however, the VLRC concluded:
a notional estate scheme that only applied to transactions entered into with
the intention of avoiding family provision obligations
could be easily
circumvented. Further, intention is difficult to prove, as evidenced by the
clear preference for the notional estate
provisions in New South Wales which do
not require proof of intention to defeat a possible family provision claim. The
also agrees that any notional estate scheme that does not require
some intention on the part of the deceased person risks being too
far-reaching
and unduly limiting of a person’s right to dispose of their property
during their life.
The period of time that is covered
6.7.13 The NSW
Succession Act
provides that ‘relevant property
transactions’ occurring within three years of death may be designated
notional estate.
comparison, the UK’s legislation covers transactions occurring within six
years of death, consistent with the recommendations
of their Law
Commission.
There is a need
for balance between competing issues when considering the timeframe to which
notional estate provisions apply:
Too long a period exposes donees to potential liability for many years and
may prevent them dealing with their property as they would
wish to do. A long
period increases the investigations that the executors would have to carry out
in order to discover whether relevant
lifetime gifts had been made. On the other
hand too short a period makes the anti-avoidance scheme easy to
circumvent.
6.7.14 Nine submissions
expressed concerns about the period of time designated under the New South Wales
provisions. Varying views were, however, expressed
should be covered ranging from an unlimited
to shortening the
timeframe to 12 months prior to
6.7.15 Three submissions
stated that the timeframes imposed within legislation are
Each stated that
the three-year timeframe can create opportunities for avoidance — for
example, through transferring assets
early. Justin McMullen queried why
different outcomes should occur for those who transfer assets within three years
of their death,
and those who transfer assets three years and one day before
their death:
I submit that the policy behind TFM and, as a result notional estate
provisions, fails when a time limit is imposed on the recovery
of assets under
notional estate provisions insofar far as any transaction that occurs prior to
the time limit [is concerned]. It
is difficult to reconcile how the legislation
could arbitrarily determine that a time limit applies for the operation of the
estate provisions.
6.7.16 Emeritus Professor Rosalind Croucher has also raised issues with the
period covered by New South Wales’ notional estate
provisions. She too
observes that laws can be avoided by transferring assets outside of the
three-year period prior to death, but
comments that this itself can create
This may get away from a notional estate argument, provided the testator
survives for the three years, but may involve pension issues,
avoid a family dispute that may be brewing in any
Other provisions
6.7.17 One respondent referred to the test imposed in the NSW
for the making of a notional estate order. It was submitted that:
refers to a moral obligation to provide which seems a very broad
concept. I am unclear how that moral obligation is established,
guidelines are or how a finding of such an obligation fits with the obligation
under testators family maintenance
legislation.
6.7.18 A Hobart law firm
clarified that, if Tasmania were to introduce New South Wales’ notional
estate provisions, it should not adopt its legislative
framework more broadly.
Specifically, it highlighted that New South Wales has a broader range of
eligible family provision applicants,
and that Tasmania should not adopt its
eligibility requirements as part of any legislative reform.
Other matters
6.8.1 The Institute invited respondents to advance any other matters that
they felt ought to be considered when determining whether
notional estate
legislation should be introduced in Tasmania:
Are there any other matters in relation to introducing notional estate
legislation in Tasmania that you would like to comment on?
6.8.2 A range of comments were made which have been included in previous
discussions articulating the arguments advanced both for
and against the
implementation of notional estate legislation. Two matters not dealt with
previously are considered in the following
paragraphs.
The need for public education
6.8.3 One matter commented upon was that, if notional estate legislation were
introduced, there would need to be a comprehensive public
education campaign
supporting the reforms.
was noted that notional estate laws have the potential to affect a large
percentage of the population and that there would need
to be broad understanding
amongst members of the community about the potential effect of reforms upon
their estate. One law firm
commented that its lawyers observed that members of the public generally have
limited knowledge of estate and succession laws. It
stated that, given that
notional estate legislation has been expressed as a relatively complex
it would be
difficult to educate the public properly about the nature and effect of notional
estate laws. Difficulties may be exacerbated
by the fact that each jurisdiction
has different laws, leading to community
New South Wales ‘contracting out’ provisions
6.8.4 Sam McCullough submitted that, in any event, a useful reform to the
would be the inclusion of a similar section to the NSW
Succession Act
that enables family members to agree upon the division of
assets in advance of death and forgo rights to apply for further provision
In summary, these
provisions enable parties to apply to the court for its approval of family
arrangements about the transfer or division
of assets and their agreement not to
bring a family provision claim. Obtaining the court’s sanction of an
agreement enables
individuals to then transfer assets without fear or
uncertainty of a potential future challenge. Mr McCullough submitted that this
would be useful where a person has legitimate reasons for wanting to transfer
assets in advance of death, such as to provide for
the succession of a family
farm. He endorsed enactment of a similar provision in Tasmania to minimise
disputes and offset the effect
of notional estate legislation by continuing to
enable parties to plan in advance of death. The VLRC also recommended inclusion
an equivalent provision within Victorian legislation when it reviewed family
provision laws in 2012.
Conclusion and recommendation
6.9.1 This final section outlines conclusions reached about the enactment of
notional estate laws in Tasmania.
6.9.2 The Institute’s consultation and research identifies a
significant degree of difference in opinion and approach to the
question of
notional estate legislation. There are compelling arguments both in support of
and in opposition to notional estate laws.
Whilst discussed in some detail
earlier in this part, for convenience, and to assist to summarise key issues,
the main arguments
advanced on both sides are outlined in Table 2:
Table 2: Key arguments for and against notional estate laws
Arguments for
Arguments against
It advances the objectives of the
and ensures the law is
The need for notional estate law has not been
demonstrated.
There is evidence of claimants being unable to pursue claims due to the
existence of non-estate
The instance of intentional family provision avoidance is
Will-makers do not always act as a ‘wise and just
It interferes with the notion of testamentary
It is consistent to ‘anti-avoidance’ provisions included in
other statutes.
It infringes upon the rights of people to deal with their assets as they
wish during life.
Meritorious claimants may become or remain a burden on the
It creates a lack of
A substantial number of submissions (38%) endorsed notional estate
Testators are best placed to assess the competing claims to their
Different outcomes can occur between the
The courts already consider pre-death gifts when assessing
It can mean claimants have access to joint tenancy properties and
superannuation which are often substantial assets held by a deceased.
Potential adverse consequences would impact a greater proportion of the
population than those who would potentially
Any complexities are not
insurmountable.
Notional estate laws are too
It can sometimes remedy unintended consequences of legal
It may increase the time and cost of estate administration and
litigation.
There is competing evidence about whether the prevalence of claims may
It may increase the prevalence of litigation placing a burden on the court
and having a negative impact upon the
The burden of claims can be shared equally between estate and non-estate
beneficiaries.
There may be an increase in unmeritorious
Some situations are unable to be resolved without notional estate
Other legal remedies exist to resolve some of the matters that notional
estate laws are directed
It can mean individuals in very similar circumstances have unequal assess
to remedies under the
It may result in adverse taxation
consequences.
Individuals have unequal access to legal advice due to social and economic
It undermines estate planning
arrangements.
There is a need to protect
dependants.
It may impact asset protection
arrangements.
It serves as a discouragement to prevent intentional transfers intended to
defeat claims.
It undermines fundamental legal concepts such as joint tenancy, trust law
and property rights.
The effectiveness of the New South Wales scheme has not been
Strategies exist to avoid operation of notional estate
Individuals may move investment assets outside of the
A substantial number of submissions (61%) opposed notional estate
legislation.
It may reduce charitable giving or adversely impact charitable
The NSW provisions are too broad in their application to
6.9.3 Whilst it appears from Table 2 that the arguments for notional estate
laws are fewer in number, this should not itself lead
to a conclusion that
notional estate laws not be introduced. The Institute acknowledges experiences
some respondents shared highlighting
the detrimental impact the absence of
notional estate legislation has had for them or their clients. Arguments for
notional estate
based upon advancing the effectiveness of family provision
legislation are persuasive, especially when viewed in the context of
anti-avoidance
provisions existing within other statutes.
6.9.4 The division amongst respondents, commentators and law reform
commissions and the varied approaches internationally and within
demonstrates that there is no clear or definite answer to the question of
whether family provision laws should contain
notional estate-style provisions
and, if so, the scope of those laws.
6.9.5 The first consideration is the degree to which there is a need for
reform. Submissions demonstrate that there is at least a
certain proportion of
the population who have been unable to pursue claims under the
because assets passed outside of the estate environment or were transferred
prior to death. As noted earlier in this part, the extent
to which this occurs
remains unquantified and has not been demonstrated through empirical evidence.
This means that it is not possible
for the Institute to reach a conclusion about
the extent of the problem that notional estate laws are intended to address.
6.9.6 Accepting that there is at least a certain number of individuals
adversely impacted by the absence of notional estate laws and
that such laws
further the objectives and effectiveness of the
, the question
that follows is what are the potential costs or problems with notional estate
laws? Risks that respondents identified
include a potential increase in legal
costs and the length of estate administration. A lack of certainty for
individuals and the
prospect of an increase in litigation and unmeritorious
claims were also raised as problems. These issues would likely affect a large
proportion of the population as will-makers, beneficiaries or family members of
a deceased. Many of those potentially affected would
be described as
‘innocent’ given respondents’ advice that most will-makers do
not depart from what many may view
as adequate provision for family and that
even fewer still take active steps to structure their affairs to intentionally
avoid claims.
6.9.7 The impact of notional estate laws from a rights perspective also does
not produce straightforward results. On the one hand,
individuals must have
equal access to the law. It could be said that the absence of notional estate
laws precludes equal access for
people to pursue claims under the
and that notional estate laws thus advance equal access to the law.
But as noted previously in this report, the situation is perhaps
more accurately
described as resulting from individuals coming to the law from an unequal
position rather than the law itself creating
unequal outcomes.
6.9.8 Balanced with these considerations were views advanced that individuals
have the right to deal with their assets as they wish
during life and that
notional estate laws restrict a person’s right to do so. Similarly
expressed was the notion of individuals
having the right to testamentary freedom
and the ability to dispose of their assets as they please. This latter argument
has limited weight as the
itself is evidence of a
long-standing qualification upon a person’s absolute freedom of
testamentary disposition.
6.9.9 Several respondents and commentators have expressed the view that
notional estate laws are too complex. This has the potential
consequence of
rendering the law inaccessible to many. Concerns were also raised that notional
estate laws would create great uncertainty,
particularly for individuals
receiving gifts of assets during a person’s life. There is thus a need for
caution before the
enactment of notional estate laws with the risk of them
rendering the law in this area less accessible and thereby breaching the
fundamental human rights principle that the law should be certain and
accessible.
6.9.10 Considering potential issues with the
introduction of notional estate law, a critical question is whether they
adequately resolve
the problem identified. One difficulty is that the
effectiveness of the New South Wales scheme has not been fully evaluated. Many
respondents and commentators, however, submit that there are strategies
available to avoid the operation of notional estate legislation.
One strategy
identified is through taking legitimate advantage of the fact that most
Wales) do not have notional estate
laws, meaning that individuals hold investment assets in those jurisdictions to
avoid the operation
of the law. This creates a significant barrier to the
effectiveness of the law. There is a risk that enactment of notional estate
might create the impression that they provide protections when they too can be
avoided. When balanced with the fact that notional
estate laws may adversely
impact a substantial proportion of the population, their lack of effectiveness
also supports the need for
caution before enacting such a scheme.
6.9.11 A final consideration is the extent to which the issue identified can
be resolved through other means. The availability of
equitable doctrines, for
example, enable individuals to pursue claims to non-estate assets where they
have contributed to a deceased’s
assets or been promised certain property
after a family member’s
Similarly, concerns
that respondents raised about the validity of pre-death transfers of assets
based on undue influence, fraud or
lack of capacity can already be addressed via
existing causes of action. The effect is that remedies already exist which in
address some of the matters respondents raised in support of notional
estate legislation.
6.9.12 Given that the law must be effective and that the lack of nationally
uniform legislation creates a significant barrier to the
effectiveness of
notional estate laws,
viewed together with questions
the Institute has formed
the view that notional estate provisions should not be
enacted in Tasmania in the absence of nationally uniform family provision
and further evaluation.
6.9.13 Given that the absence of national uniformity has been identified as a
barrier to the effectiveness of notional estate laws,
the Institute recommends
that the debate surrounding nationally uniform family provision legislation be
re-energised. This should
include opportunity for national input and
consultation into the question of whether, and if so to what degree, model
legislation
ought to include notional estate provisions. It is a matter that the
State Government may pursue via the Attorney-General’s
position on the
Council of Attorneys-General (‘CAG’). Alternatively, the State
Government may refer coordination of a
national project between law reform
agencies to the Institute. This project should consider the outcomes of reviews
in Victoria and
South Australia and feedback that the Institute received that,
to introduce a substantial change like notional estate legislation,
there should
be empirical evidence of the need for reform, along with a robust evaluation of
the effectiveness of the New South Wales
legislation if this is to be adopted as
the preferred approach.
6.9.14 Noting the strong arguments for notional estate legislation, the State
Government may legitimately conclude that there is a
need for legislative reform
to incorporate notional estate provisions within the
. If notional
estate laws were to be enacted, then reflecting the Institute’s view that
there is a need for caution, introduction
of a more limited scheme would be
appropriate.
6.9.15 One of the concerns that respondents expressed with the New South
Wales approach to notional estate is its
There were concerns
raised about its application to trusts, superannuation, joint tenancy properties
and more broadly, its application
to omissions, or a person’s failure to
act, rather than solely to a person’s positive acts. When compared to
estate-style provisions operating in family provision legislation in
the UK and two provinces of
is arguably the most far-reaching scheme of which the Institute is
aware. This may be one of the underlying reasons why legislation
consistent with
the model legislation (based upon the New South Wales legislation) has not been
enacted elsewhere in Australia.
6.9.16 The Institute notes that several respondents identified the utility of
broadly framing provisions based upon the NSW
Succession Act
availability of existing educational materials and jurisprudence to assist the
court and lawyers in interpreting the scheme.
The Institute therefore suggests
that a framework be broadly drafted based upon the NSW
Succession Act
One variation is, however, proposed to narrow its scope.
6.9.17 The Institute proposes that the scheme be limited only to acts (for
example transfers of assets) rather than omissions (for
example, a failure to
sever a joint tenancy or BDBN). This can be achieved by limiting the definition
of ‘relevant property
transaction’ in the
Succession Act
effect would be to remove its application to failures to sever a joint tenancy
or make or change a nomination for a superannuation
fund or life insurance
policy. It would also exclude trusts, except in situations where, prior to
death, an individual gifted an
asset to a trust within the prescribed period.
This approach provides greater consistency with models operating in
in Canada which deal
with acts rather than omissions. It also limits criticisms of notional estate
laws based upon a view that they
undermine the legal foundations of fundamental
laws including trust law and joint
It is broadly
consistent with the 2006 recommendations of the
and accords with the
thrust of the WALRC’s preliminary views conveyed about the potential
application of notional estate law
6.9.18 The Institute further recommends that, if notional estate laws are
enacted, the following strategies should be deployed to
mitigate any adverse
effect they may have:
• providing that the reforms do not operate retrospectively;
• ensuring that the legislative reforms are complemented by a
comprehensive public education campaign to inform members of the
public of the
effect of laws; and
• consistent with the NSW
a section be
included enabling families to enter into agreements to effectively
‘contract out’ of family provision claims.
This strategy goes some
way to providing certainty for family members who mutually agree upon the
desirability of transferring or
gifting assets before death.
6.9.19 The Institute acknowledges that a more limited framework to that
operating in New South Wales may be criticised on the basis
that it does not
adequately cover the range of issues that the NSW
Succession Act
addresses. This is one of the risks of introducing a more limited scheme,
however, the Institute considers it a more moderate approach
that responds to
concerns identified.
Recommendations
1. That notional estate laws not be introduced in Tasmania in the absence of
nationally uniform family provision laws.
2. That, if notional estate laws are introduced:
2.1 There be a comprehensive public education campaign advising stakeholders
of the effect of legislative reform.
2.2 Reforms not operate retrospectively.
2.3 Legislative reform broadly align with
Succession Act
(NSW), subject to any variations made necessary to ensure consistency
with existing terminology used in the
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act
(Tas) and Recommendation 2.4.
2.4 The term ‘relevant property transaction’ be limited to acts
rather than failures to act.
2.5 The legislative framework incorporates a section consistent with
Succession Act 2006
(NSW) enabling the Supreme Court to
approve agreements between eligible claimants about the transfer of assets and
relinquishment
3. That the State Government advance the national debate surrounding
nationally uniform family provision legislation via the Council
Attorneys-General or by referring the matter to the Institute to advance through
coordination of a national project amongst law
reform bodies.
2. 4. That, if nationally uniform estate dispute laws are progressed, this
matter be revisited, and, following a full evaluation of
the operation of the
New South Wales notional estate scheme, the utility of incorporating notional
estate provisions within national
uniform laws be considered as well as the form
that those provisions might take.
Appendix 1: ‘Notional estate’ style
provisions – New South Wales and England and Wales
New South Wales
England and Wales
Eligible claimants
Former Spouse
 (if not re-partnered)
 (if member of household or grandchild)
Non-estate assets that may be treated as ‘notional
Joint tenancy
Superannuation
 (unless fitting within
(mutual wills
contracts)).
Life insurance
Donatio mortis
 (dispositions made within 6 years of death with the intention of
defeating a claim)
Property distributed pursuant to mutual wills
 (where full valuable consideration not given and deceased entered
into contract with the intention of defeating a claim)
Omissions (failures to
Appendix 2: ‘Notional estate’ style
provisions in Canada
Uniform Act
Eligible claimants
Former Spouse
 (if dependent upon deceased for at least 3 years before
 (if dependent upon deceased for at least 3 years before
 (if under 18, or if an adult, they must demonstrate inability to
earn a living due to disability or that they ought to receive
a greater share
due to need or other circumstance)
 (if under 18, or if an adult, they must demonstrate inability to
earn a living due to disability, or be a student between
18-21 years)
 (if under 18, or if an adult, they must demonstrate inability to
earn a living due to disability or that they were substantially
dependent upon
the deceased at their death
 (if under 16, or if older, they must demonstrate inability to earn
a living due to disability)
 (if grandparent, parent, descendant and dependent for at least 3
years before death)
 (grandchildren under 18 where deceased acted as parent at time of
 (where deceased stood in the shoes of a parent, or substantially
dependant grandchildren, parents, grandparents, siblings)
 (if grandparent, parent, descendant and dependent for at least 3
years before death)
Non-estate assets that may be treated as ‘notional
Joint tenancy
 (to the extent the deceased made a disposition of property to
joint tenancy or a joint account)
 (to the extent the deceased made a disposition of property to
joint tenancy or a joint account)
 (to the extent the deceased made a disposition of property to
joint tenancy or a joint account)
Superannuation
 (to the extent the deceased deposited funds in an account in their
name in trust for another or to a trust to the extent
that the deceased
retained, either alone with another person or persons by the express provisions
of the disposing instrument, a
power to revoke such disposition, or a power to
consume, invoke or dispose of the principal)
 (consistent with the
Uniform Act
 (consistent with the
Uniform Act
Life insurance
Donatio mortis
 (unreasonably large dispositions within 1 year of death as an
immediate gift or where full valuable consideration not given)
 (unreasonably large dispositions within 1 year of death as an
immediate gift or where full valuable consideration not given)
Property distributed pursuant to mutual wills
 (where full valuable consideration not given)
 (where full valuable consideration not given)
 (where full valuable consideration not given)
 (where full valuable consideration not given)
 (where full valuable consideration not given)
 (where full valuable consideration not given)
 (where full valuable consideration not given)
Omissions (failures to act)
Test to award provision
such provision as it considers adequate for the applicant’s proper
maintenance and support
If the deceased has disposed of real or personal property in a manner that
reasonable provision has not been made for the maintenance
of the dependant, the
court may order provision for maintenance in an amount that the court considers
Where the deceased has not made adequate provision for the
proper support of his/her
Where a will does not make adequate provision for the proper maintenance
and support of the spouse or child, the court may order provision
that it thinks
adequate, just and equitable in the
circumstances
Where deceased did not make adequate provision for the proper maintenance
and support of a dependant, the judge may order whatever
provision the judge
deems adequate in the
circumstances
Where adequate provision for the proper maintenance and support of a person
is not made, the court may order any provision it considers
adequate for their
proper maintenance and
If it appears to the court that a dependant is in financial need, the court
may order reasonable provision for their maintenance and
Where a dependant’s resources, taking into consideration everything
they are entitled to under a will, intestacy or otherwise
deceased’s death, are not sufficient to provide adequately for them, the
court may order what it considers adequate
for their maintenance and
If a deceased has not made adequate provision for the proper maintenance
and support of the dependant, the court may order provision
it considers
adequate for their proper maintenance and
Where adequate provision for the proper maintenance and support has not
been made, the court may order that adequate provision be
made for their proper
maintenance and support
Statutory factors to be
Appendix 3: Reported Tasmanian Family Provision
Decisions, April 2009 to April 2019
Size of Estate
‘Notional estate’
Provision awarded
Williams v Williams (No 2)
[2018] TASSC 61
5 December 2018
‘As a result of the testator’s death the applicant also became
entitled to receive a Department of Veterans’ Affairs
pension of about $450 per week and a DVA gold health
the major estate asset, being an apartment complex at St Helens, worth
terms of the will
for the benefit of the daughter and her three children and for the benefit of
the son ... by reason of the Act,
s 11(4), the distribution which occurred prior
to the time of the filing of the application cannot now be
disturbed.’
YES – ‘Provision by way of a flexible life interest in the
couple’s home in substitution for the mere right of occupancy
bequest of a one-third interest in the investment property will be
Booth v Brooks
[2018] TASSC 35
24 July 2018
Adult daughter
‘At the time of his death the testator held 9 of 10 issued shares in
the company Triffett Holdings Pty Ltd, which was registered
in June 1984. The
other share was held by the first respondent. The company acquired 220 hectares
of land at Ouse in May 1997, which
had a government value as at 1 July 2014 of
$1.25 million. The company acquired about 2,000 hectares of farming land in the
Highlands in March 2008 which had a government valuation as at 1 July
2014 of $2.7 million. Shortly after the death of the testator
the company
acquired 246 hectares of land at Ouse which had a government valuation as at 1
July 2014 of $1.15 million. In the estate
inventory no mention is made of the
testator’s shares in Triffett Holdings Pty Ltd and accordingly I infer
that the company’s
assets were held in trust, rather than beneficially for
shareholders.’
YES – $800,000
Nicholas v Tubb
[2016] TASSC 53
13 October 2016
4 adult children
‘In May 2015 the eldest child, Susan Jones, who was an executor, had
been sent by the solicitor for the estate a transfer form
to be signed by her to
facilitate the transfer of the farm to Brodi Nicholas. After a number of
questions under cross-examination
she eventually conceded that she had received
the transfer form in May 2015. By the time of the hearing in September 2016 she
still not signed and returned the form. If she had signed and returned the
form promptly the farm would have been transferred to
Brodi Nicholas well before
her three siblings had brought their claims and so there would have been no
prospect of disturbing the
bequest of the
NO – Claim made out of time and extension not granted.
Thorne v The Public Trustee
[2015] TASSC
25 November 2015
Adult daughter
Mid $300,000s
[2015] TASSC 4
17 February 2015
Rodgers v Tasmanian Perpetual Trustees Limited
[2013] TASSC 73
6 December 2013
Adult daughter
YES – $50,000
Koukias v Koukias
[2012] TASSC 85
12 December 2012
Adult daughter
Trumbull-Ward v Michell and Haley
16 October 2012
Adult daughter
YES – 20% of estate less $25,000
Doddridge v Badenach
[2011] TASSC 34
8 July 2011
Adult daughter
YES – $200,000
Coulston v Tasmanian Perpetual Trustees
[2010] TASSC 22
YES – $25,000
Contencin v Tasmanian Perpetual Trustees Ltd
[2010] TASSC 3
24 February 2010
Two adult children
Undisclosed
YES – son $120,000, daughter $240,000
Dodge v Blissenden
[2009] TASSC 116
18 December 2009
An unencumbered house in Moonah, its contents, a 1997 motor vehicle, and a
bank account with $8,379.91 in it
Tapp v The Public Trustee
[2009] TASSC
31 July 2009
‘A few days prior to her death, her son, Laife Thurstans, withdrew
$36,500 from those funds, thus removing those funds from
the control of the
deceased’s will. Mr Thurstans told the Court he removed those funds at his
mother’s request, and that
he gave $10,000 to each of his siblings, Donna
and Craig, kept $10,000 for himself and used the balance to buy things and pay
things for his nephew
‘The deceased made her will late in 2004. At or around the same time,
she arranged for the joint tenancy in respect of the Claremont
YES – Three quarters of estate property
Appendix 4: Reported New South Wales decisions
involving potential notional estate April 2018 to April 2019
Applicant type
Successful/not successful
McDonald v O’Connor
[2019] NSWSC 261
(14 March 2019)
Adult daughter
Successful in receiving $45,000 payment but not successful in establishing
that there was ‘notional estate’
Re Estate McNamara
[2018] NSWSC 1661
(2 November 2018)
Unsuccessful in establishing notional estate, ordered to receive a legacy
Sreckovic v Sreckovic
[2018] NSWSC 1597
(23 October 2018)
Adult daughter
Unsuccessful
Mekhail v Hana; Mekail v Hana; In the Estate of Nadia Mekhail (No 3)
[2018] NSWSC 1452
(5 October 2018)
Unsuccessful
Re Estate Grant, deceased
[2018] NSWSC 1031
(5 July 2018)
Property designated as notional estate and received $750,000
Beech v Squire
[2018] NSWSC 594
(4 May 2018)
Two adult children
Unsuccessful
Harris v Harris
[2018] NSWSC 552
(1 May 2018)
Unsuccessful
These numbers include eight
members of the Elder and Succession Law Committee, eight members of the
Litigation Committee, nine members
of the Family Law Committee, the joint
submission lodged by Dorothy Lowe on behalf of her eight siblings, and the joint
of Christine Schokman, Dexter Marcenko and Michael Flanagan.
Submissions #1I and #2I.
Without intending any
disrespect, the Institute refers to this joint submission throughout this report
as ‘Dorothy Lowe and
There are three elements that
must exist for a valid
donatio mortis causa
: ‘(1) the gift must be
made in contemplation of the donor’s death, although not necessarily in
expectation of death;
(2) there must be delivery of the subject matter of the
gift to the donee or a transfer of the means or part of the means of getting
the property, or, as has been said, the essential indicia of title; and (3) the
gift must be conditional upon it taking effect
on the death of the donor, being
revocable until that event occurs’:
Public Trustee v Bussell
30 NSWLR 111
, 115 (Cohen J) quoted in
Hobbes v NSW Trustee & Guardian
[2014] NSWSC 570
, [22] (White J). Its effect is to render effective an otherwise
imperfect gift:
Hobbes v NSW Trustee & Guardian
[2014] NSWSC 570
Supreme Court of Tasmania
– Probate and Administration
<https://www.supremecourt.tas.gov.au/probate_and_administration>.
In Tasmania, these laws are
contained within the
Intestacy Act 2010
Testator’s Family
Maintenance Act 1912
Provision Act 1969
Succession Act 2006
Succession Act
Family Provision Act 1970
Succession Act 1981
Inheritance (Family Provision)
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Family Provision Act 1972
Probate Rules
(Tas) require those applying to the Court for a Grant to file an
inventory of the estate with their application: r 35(1). That inventory
contain details of ‘the real and personal estate which the deceased
possessed, or was entitled to, at the time of his
or her death’: r
Succession Act
See for example John Stuart
Principles of Political Economy
(Longman, 1848) Ch 2.
Rosalind Croucher and Prue
Succession: Families, Property and Death
(LexisNexis Butterworths,
2014) 13–14. Emeritus Professor Rosalind Croucher AM is at the time of
writing the President of the
Australian Human Rights Commission and former
President of the Australian Law Reform Commission.
John De Groot and Bruce
Family Provision in Australia
(Lexis Nexis Butterworth,
ed, 2012) 3–4.
Widows and Young Children
Maintenance Act 1906
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act
Testator’s Family Maintenance and
Guardianship of
Infants Act 1916
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act 1918
Guardianship of Infants Act 1920
Administration and
Probate Ordinance 1929
Testator’s Family Maintenance
Ordinance 1929
Inheritance (Family
Provision) Act 1938
1 & 2 Geo 6, c 45. For a brief history of family
provision law see Gino Dal Pont and Ken Mackie,
Law of Succession
Nexis Butterworth, 2
ed, 2017) [15.5]–[15.8].
New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 3 August 1916, 578 (D R
Hall, Attorney General and Minister for Justice).
Lord Justice Simon, for
example, has commented that the intention of family provision was ‘to
prevent family dependants being
thrown on the world with inadequate provision,
when the person on whom they were dependent dies possessed of sufficient estate
provide for or contribute towards their maintenance.’:
[1972] AC 572
, 596, cited in
Barns v Barns
(2003) 214 CLR
169, 173, [2] (Gleeson CJ). Croucher has made similar comments: ‘Family
provision legislation is
, as its name suggests, family
legislation. It was cast as family
maintenance
legislation within strict confines. And it was cast from the perspective of the
testator. It did not impose a restriction upon testamentary
freedom, except in a
broad, minimally corrective sense.’: Rosalind Croucher, ‘Contracts
to Leave Property by Will and
Family Provision after
Barns v Barns
196 ALR 65 — Orthodoxy or Aberration?’ (2005) 27(2)
Malcolm Voyce,
‘Family Provision, the Family Farm and Rural Patriarchy: Three Actors in
Deakin Law Rev
iew 347, 353.
Barns v Barns
214 CLR 169.
White v Barron
[1980] HCA 14
(1980) 144 CLR 431
, 439[7] (Stephen J).
Barns v Barns
214 CLR 169, 212 [132] (Callinan J).
Rosalind Croucher,
‘Conflicting Narratives in Succession Law – A Review of Recent
(2010) 14(2)
Australian Property Law Journal
Justice Roslyn Atkinson,
‘Family Provision in Australia: Addressing Interstate Differences and
Family Provision Law Reform’
(Speech, Queensland Law Society Conference on
Family Provision, 25 July 2014) 18.
Ibid s 2(1) definition of
Defined to mean a child of
the parent’s spouse, and a child whose natural parent was the spouse of
that person at the time
of the natural parent’s death: ibid, s 2(1)
definition of ‘stepchild’.
Ibid definition of
Succession Act 2006
Administration and Probate Act 1958
definition of ‘eligible person’,
Succession Act
(definition of ‘dependant’).
Defined to mean a close
personal relationship (other than a marriage or a de facto relationship) between
two adult persons, whether
or not related by family, who are living together,
one or each of whom provides the other with domestic support and personal care:
Succession Act 2006
s 57(1)(f).
Administration and
Probate Act 1958
, definition of ‘eligible person’;
Family Provision Act 1969
Family Provision Act
Inheritance (Family Provision) Act 1972
Family Provision Act 1970
Inheritance (Family
Provision) Act 1972
This is the so-called
‘twin tasks’ approach. See
Singer v Berghouse
(1994) 181 CLR
201, 15 (Mason CJ, Deane and McHugh JJ).
Bosch v Perpetual Trustee
(1938) AC 463.
Dal Pont and Mackie (n
) [20.3]. See also
Barns v Barns
214 CLR 169, 174
Easterbrook v Young
[1977] HCA 16
(1977) 136 CLR 308
Barns v Barns
214 CLR 169.
Undue influence is
described as ‘an ascendancy by the stronger party over the weaker party
such that the relevant transaction
is not the free, voluntary and independent
act of the weaker party. In other words, it is the actual or presumed impairment
judgment of the weaker party that is the critical element in the grant of
relief on the ground of undue influence’: Sir Anthony
Mason, ‘The
Impact of Equitable Doctrine on the Law of Contract’
Anglo-American Law Review
, 6–8, cited in
Bridgewater v
[1998] HCA 66
(1998) 194 CLR 457
, 478 [75].
Unconscionability, as
distinct from undue influence, has been described as follows:
‘Unconscionable conduct, as the term suggests,
focuses more on the
unconscientious conduct of the defendant. As a ground of relief in England
unconscionable conduct has been confined
largely to “catching
bargains” with expectant heirs and others in particular categories of
disadvantage eg those who
are illiterate. ... In Australia, it has been
recognized that unconscionable conduct is a ground of relief which will be
“whenever one party by reason of some condition or circumstance
is placed at a special disadvantage
another and unfair
or unconscientious advantage is taken of the opportunity thereby
created’”: Mason, (n
6–8, cited in
Bridgewater v Leahy
[1998] HCA 66
(1998) 194 CLR 457
, 478 [75].
[1998] HCA 66
(1998) 194 CLR 457.
Refer to [1.4.15]-[1.4.17]
in relation to when gifts may be ineffective.
See [5.6.11] for discussion
of family law contexts and [5.5.59] for a summary of the application of
equitable doctrines.
There are many authorities
Re Richardson
[1920] SALawRp 9
(1920) SALR 24
[2016] HCA 18
(2016) 257 CLR 440.
This was the amount that the
deceased’s daughter was ultimately awarded following making a family
provision claim: see
Doddridge v Badenach
[2011] TASSC 34.
Calvert v Badenach
[2014] TASSC 61
, [3]–[4] (Blow CJ).
Doddridge v
[2011] TASSC 34.
Statistics: Annual
Superannuation Bulletin
(June 2018, Reissued 22 January 2019) 6.
Metlife Insurance Limited,
Insurance Inside Super: A detailed report into members’ awareness,
attitude and engagement with Insurance
Inside Super
Michael Easson, ‘Super
changes could leave thousands without enough superannuation’,
Morning Herald
(Sydney, 2 September 2018).
Where the nomination
complies with the rules of the particular fund and superannuation
legislation.
The case of
Grundy; La Valette v Chambers-Grundy
[2018] NSWSC 104
provides an example of
circumstances where trusts and companies owed debts to the deceased and which
comprises assets of his estate
and available for the family provision claimant
to seek: see at [66].
See discussion of Justice
Sam Wardy v Gordon Salier & Anor; William Wardy v Gordon Salier
& Anor; Hassiba Wardy v Estate of late Edmond Wadih Wardy
and Ch 3 of the
Succession Act 2006
[2014] NSWSC 473
’) where it was held that the deceased’s
omission to appoint the assets of a trust to himself during his life was covered
by NSW notional estate provisions, enabling the assets of the trust to be
considered as part of the deceased’s ‘notional
Ibid s 11(4). See also
Easterbrook v Young
[1977] HCA 16
(1977) 136 CLR 308.
Williams v Williams
[2018] TASSC 19.
Williams v Williams (No 2)
[2018] TASSC 61.
Williams v Williams
[2018] TASSC 19.
Williams v Williams
[2018] TASSC 61
[2018] NSWSC 302
Soens v Rathborne
[2018] NSWSC 302
(Hallen J), citing
Ernst v Mowbray
[2004] NSWSC 1140
See description of the
Queensland Law Reform Commission (‘QLRC’),
Report to the Standing
Committee of Attorneys General on Family Provision
(Miscellaneous Paper 28,
December 1997) ch 6.
Law Commission (England & Wales),
Second Report on Family Property: Family Provision on Death
(Law Com No 61,
July 1974).
Ibid Part V.
Ibid [191].
Ibid [192].
Ibid [191].
Ibid [211].
Ibid [198].
Ibid [141].
Ibid [205].
Ibid [206]. The Alberta Law
Reform Institute (‘ALRI’) has made similar observations but reached
the opposite conclusion:
Division of Matrimonial Property on Death
(Final Report No 83, May 2000) [434]–[436].
The Law Commission (England
& Wales) (n
Inheritance (Provision for Family and Dependants)
(UK) s 8(1).
Ibid s 8(2).
Ibid s 10, with these
provisions being broadly consistent with the recommendations of the Law
Commission of England.
Defined as follows:
‘Clawback is intended to stop the possibility of individuals evading the
forced inheritance rules by giving
away their property during their
lifetime’: EUC,
The EU’s Regulation on Succession: Report with
(House of Lords Paper No 75, Session 2009–10E) [86].
Law Commission (England
Intestacy and Family Provision Claims on Death
(Law Com No
331, December 2011).
Also known as
donatio mortis causa
Law Commission (England
& Wales) (n
Ibid [7.74].
Law Commission (England
& Wales) (n
Ibid [7.83].
Ibid [7.85].
Inheritance and
Trustees’ Powers Act 2014
(UK) cl 6 sch 2, s 7(2).
Law Commission (England
& Wales) (n
Including the Chancery
Bar Association and the Family Law Bar Association, the Law Society and the
Society of Trust and Estate Practitioners.
Law Commission (England
& Wales) (n
Ibid [7.107].
Ibid [7.108].
Ibid [7.109].
Ibid [7.112].
Ibid [7.120].
See Scottish Law
Commission,
Discussion Paper on Succession
(Discussion Paper No 136,
August 2007); Scottish Law Commission,
Report on Succession
, Scot Law Com
(April 2009).
(Scotland) Act
1985 (Scotland) s 18.
Scottish Law Commission (2009) (n
Dependants’ Relief Act 1974
Details included in
Appendix 2.
Dependants’ Relief Act 1974
(Canada) s 21(1)(a).
Ibid s 21(1)(b).
Ibid s 21(2).
Some provinces, however,
include similar provisions within family law legislation, as explained at
This had been
recommended for British Columbia but has not been enacted: British Columbia Law
Wills, Estates and Succession: A Modern Legal Framework
Report No 45, June 2006) 202.
Barns v Barns
(2003) 214 CLR 169. See discussion at [1.4.14].
The Family Property
, SS 1997, F-6.3, Part VI (Saskatchewan) (‘
The Family Property
Family Property Act
, CCSM, c F25, Part IV
(Manitoba) (‘
Family Property Act
, RSO 1990, c F.3 (Ontario) (‘
Family Law Act
and to a lesser degree, the
Matrimonial Property Act
, RSA 2000, c M-8
(Alberta) – see ss 5(1), 11(2) (‘
Matrimonial Property Act
The Family Property
) s 28. See also
Family Property Act
ss 6(9)–(11);
Matrimonial Property Act
Property Act
Family Property
) s 35(3). This approach
has been broadly endorsed by the ALRI: see ALRI (n
Family Property
See for example
Family Law Act
definition of ‘valuation date’, s 26(1). Note however, that
this jurisdiction includes provisions similar to the Uniform
Act within the
Succession Law Reform Act 1990
(Ontario) Part V (see Appendix 2) and the
Ontario Law Reform Commission has recommended that the two Acts be made
consistent: Ontario
Law Reform Commission,
Report on Family Property Law
(Report, 1993) 108–110.
Ibid [422].
Ibid Rec 29, with the
exemption of funds, such as life insurance proceeds, intended to be used to
satisfy debts or liabilities or
for business purposes: at Rec 30.
With 10 expressing
support, 10 expressing opposition and one commentator suggesting that assets
only be able to be clawed-back where
the third party was aware of the
deceased’s purpose of defeating a claim: ibid [454].
Matrimonial
Property Act
Law Reform Commission of
British Columbia (‘LRCBC’),
Report on Statutory Succession
(LRC 70, 1983) 95–97.
Including transfers of
property to joint tenancy, deposits into joint bank accounts, transfers of
property for nominal or no consideration,
or designations or changes of
beneficiaries of a life insurance policy or pension fund.
See Appendix 2.
Succession Law:
A Succession (Adjustment) Act
(Report 39, August 1997). See for example at
127–135, C176–C191.
[3.7.1]–[3.7.2].
Succession Law
Testamentary Claims: A Discussion Paper
(Preliminary Paper 24, August 1996)
Ibid Draft Testamentary
Claims Act s 48, C156–160.
Ibid s 49, C163.
Ibid s 50, C166.
Draft Succession (Adjustment) Act ss 52, 53.
Ibid [C179].
Ibid Draft Succession
(Adjustment) Act s 52(2).
Ibid s 54(1)(b).
Ibid s 54(1)(c).
Family Protection
(Homicide) Act 2007
(Relationships) Amendment Act 2001
For a critique of this
situation, see Nicola Peart, ‘New Zealand’s Succession Law:
Subverting Reasonable Expectations’
(2008) 37(4)
Common Law World
Refer to discussion at
(Relationships) Act 1976
(NZ) ss 1M(c), 4D, 10B(1), pt 8. Application for
family provision still remains possible in addition to parties’ rights
this Act: s 57.
Ibid s 44(1).
Ibid s 44(2).
Ibid s 44(4).
Ibid ss 8(1)(g),
Uniform Probate
(US) §§ 2-202–2-209. The Uniform Code has been adopted
by 22 states: see Uniform Law Commission (Web Page)
<https://www.uniformlaws.org/committees/community-home?CommunityKey=a539920d-c477-44b8-84fe-b0d7b1a4cca8>
(viewed 16 June 2019).
See ibid §§
R Croucher, ‘Towards Uniform Succession in
Australian Law Journal
Family Provision
Supplementary Report to the Standing Committee of Attorneys General
No 58, July 2004).
Ibid Appendix 2.
Succession Laws: Family Provision
(Report No 110, 2005) 37.
Uniform Succession Laws: A Review of the Recommendations of the National
Committee for Uniform Succession Laws and draft
Bills on Intestacy and Family
(Report No 31, September 2007).
Lindsay Ellison SC,
‘“Through a Glass, Darkly”: The Long Arm of the Notional
Estate Rules: Why Lawyers in All
States Need to Understand them’
(Conference Paper, Wills and Estates Conference, 22 February 2019) [1].
Joint Tenancy
and Tenancy in Common
(Project No 78, Report, November 1994).
The Commission endorsed
provisions then operating in the United Kingdom preventing the use of joint
tenancy property to fund claims
where these claims were made out of time: Ibid
[4.28]. A similar view has been expressed by the NTLRC when evaluating the draft
Bill which would enable notional estate orders to be made where claims
were made out of time ‘questions would arise as to the
fairness of
allowing notional estate orders to be made particularly where many years have
already passed.’: NTLRC (n
) [4.23]–[4.31].
Ibid Rec 10.
– Joint tenancy and tenancy in common
(Web Page, 31 January 2017)
<https://www.lrc.justice.wa.gov.au/P/project_78.aspx>.
Succession Laws:
Family Provision
(Consultation Paper No 12, 2012).
Ibid [2.69]–[2.93].
For the National Committee’s recommendations see [
(Final Report, 2013) [6.180].
Ibid [6.181].
Ibid [6.183].
Ibid [6.185].
Ibid [6.175].
Ibid [6.175] citing
Croucher (n
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 20 August 2014, 2617 (Edward
John O’Donohue).
Distinguishing
Between the Deserving and the Undeserving: Family Provision Laws in South
(Report No 9, December 2017) Part 8.
Looking After
One Another: Family Provision Laws in South Australia
(Background Paper,
February 2017). See also SALRI,
Review of the
Inheritance (Family Provision)
, Factsheet 7 – Notional Estate and Clawback Provisions
(2 February 2017).
) [8.3.16]–[8.3.17].
Ibid [8.4.1].
Ibid [8.4.2]
Recommendation 27.
Testator’s Family Maintenance and
Guardianship of Infants Act 1916
(Report No 28, 1977).
Ibid [2.22.3].
Ibid [2.22.2]. Similar
comments about the need for family provision laws to be effective had previously
been made by the Law Commission
(England & Wales), see (n
) [191]. Croucher has criticised the
NSWLRC’s comments that there was little objection to introduction of
notional estate legislation
in NSW conveyed in submissions it received,
commenting: ‘The Commission expressed surprise that the notional estate
“evoked little opposition” from the commentators, hence
the conclusion in the Report that “...the proposals were
widely accepted
as being right in principle”. “Little opposition” is not,
however, an accurate reflection of the
opposition actually received before the
production of the Report. Although the negative arguments were fewer in number,
such arguments,
when put, were expressed in strong terms: “little”
in volume, perhaps; but not “little” in terms of degree.’:
Croucher, ‘Law Reform as Personalities, Politics and Pragmatics –
Family Provision Act 1982
(NSW): A Case Study’
(2007) 11(1)
Legal History
) [1.7], [2.22.14].
Ibid [2.22.1].
Ibid [2.23.2], Draft
Croucher (n
Including Professor
Woodham of Sydney University and Justice Hutley of the New South Wales Supreme
Court: ibid 6, 21–23.
Succession Act
Notional estate orders, Notes.
Succession Act
s 80(2)(a).
Ibid [141].
Ibid [234].
Succession Act
Including alone, or
jointly or severally.
Succession Act
Ibid div 3.
Soens v Rathborne
[2018] NSWSC 302
, [227] (Hallen J) citing
John v John
[2010] NSWSC 937
J) (as her Honour then was) [118]–[120].
Succession Act
Contencin v
Tasmanian Perpetual Trustees Ltd
[2010] TASSC 3
Nicholas v Tubb
[2016] TASSC 53
there were multiple applicants:
with two applicants and
Nicholas v Tubb
Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
Deaths, Australia, 2017
(Catalogue Number 3302.0, 26
September 2018).
Cheryl Tilse et al,
Having the Last Word? Will Making and Contestation in Australia
University of Queensland, 2015) 17.
Data extracted from the
Supreme Court of Tasmania Annual Reports, available at
<https://www.supremecourt.tas.gov.au/publications/annual-reports/>.
This question was based
upon a question originally formulated by the VLRC. See VLRC (n
) 34 Question FP7.
Susan Baldock, Dorothy
Lowe and siblings, Tony Gray, Essen Bradbury, Heather Dunn, Barry Claridge, Ann
Hamilton, Submission #2I,
Phillipa Alexander, Submission #17, Justin McMullen,
Alice Grubb, Geoffrey Nash, Steven Bishop, Nina Hendy, Elder Law Committee,
joint submission of Christine Schokman, Dexter Marcenko and Michael
Susan Baldock, Dorothy
Lowe and siblings, Tony Gray, Essen Bradbury, Heather Dunn, Barry Claridge, Ann
Hamilton, Submission #2I,
Submission #17, Justin McMullen, Steven Bishop, Nina
Hendy, Elder Law Committee, joint submission of Christine Schokman, Dexter
and Michael Flanagan.
Essen Bradbury,
Submission #2I, Justin McMullen, view of the majority of the Elder Law
Committee, noting that one member of that
Committee abstained from participating
in the submission and another Committee member expressed a dissenting opinion as
in this report.
Justin McMullen suggested this may occur in approximately +/- 2% of clients,
with a Hobart law firm (2I) indicating somewhere in the
range of approximately
Justin McMullen, Alice
Grubb, Ann Hamilton, Elder Law Committee.
Justin McMullen, Essen
Bradbury, Ann Hamilton.
Essen Bradbury,
Submission #17, Alice Grubb, Tony Gray.
Alice Grubb.
Submission #1, Susan
Baldock, Dorothy Lowe and siblings, Barry Claridge, Steven Bishop, Heather Dunn,
Nina Hendy, joint submission
of Christine Schokman, Dexter Marcenko and Michael
Christine Schokman,
Dexter Marcenko and Michael Flanagan.
Submission #3.
Submission #3,
Submission #11.
This question was
originally formulated by the VLRC. See VLRC (n
) 34 Question FP8.
Submission #1, joint
submission of Christine Schokman, Dexter Marcenko and Michael Flanagan, Steven
Bishop, Heather Dunn, Nina Hendy,
Barry Claridge. Whilst Dorothy Lowe and
siblings expressed concerns about the current framework based upon their own
experiences,
in response to this question of the Issues Paper asking whether
people should have the ability to structure their affairs to remove
assets from
challenge, the response was ‘Yes if they are compus mentus
Steven Bishop, joint
submission of Christine Schokman, Dexter Marcenko and Michael Flanagan.
Submission #1, Susan
Baldock, Dorothy Lowe and siblings, Barry Claridge, Steven Bishop, Heather Dunn,
Nina Hendy, joint submission
of Christine Schokman, Dexter Marcenko and Michael
Steven Bishop.
Dorothy Lowe and
siblings, Barry Claridge, Heather Dunn, Nina Hendy, Submission #1, Submission
Submission #1 also
raised concerns about the purchase and transfer of assets to joint tenancy
ownership where there is a second
relationship or marriage, commenting ‘I
think second marriages are a opportunity for deceptive actions, a selfish
gain ... the concept of marriage is a green light to gain a financial
advantage laced with selfish motives.’
This matter was raised
by Phillipa Alexander in her submission. Submission #11 also commented that
legislation relating to theft
might address these types of concerns.
definition of ‘child’.
Christine Schokman,
Dexter Marcenko and Michael Flanagan, Steven Bishop.
Submission #4, Essen
Bradbury, Ann Hamilton, Submission #2I, Phillipa Alexander, Justin McMullen,
Alice Grubb, Geoffrey Nash, Submission
#11, Submission #17, Elder Law
Submission #4, Ann
Hamilton, Submission #2I, Submission #17, Geoffrey Nash, Elder Law Committee,
Submission #11.
Sam McCullough, Essen
Bradbury, Submission #2I, Phillipa Alexander.
Essen Bradbury, Tony
Gray, Sam McCullough, Submission #11.
Submission #10, Alice
Grubb, Justin McMullen, Sam McCullough.
Elder Law Committee.
Phillipa Alexander,
Justin McMullen, Elder Law Committee, Submission #1I.
Phillipa Alexander,
Submission #1I. This view was also expressed by the VLRC: VLRC (n
) 34 [2.89]. See also discussion in VLRC (n
) [6.177]–[6.180], [6.185].
Submission #4, Tony Gray,
Essen Bradbury, Heather Dunn, Ann Hamilton, Submission #2I, Phillipa Alexander,
Justin McMullen, Geoffrey
Nash, Steven Bishop, Elder Law Committee, joint
submission of Christine Schokman, Dexter Marcenko and Michael Flanagan.
Essen Bradbury, Phillipa
Essen Bradbury, Ann
Hamilton, Phillipa Alexander, Justin McMullen, Elder Law Committee.
Justin McMullen, Elder
Law Committee, Ann Hamilton referring to discussion in
Re Estate Grant,
[2018] NSWSC 1031
Essen Bradbury, Phillipa
Alexander, Elder Law Committee.
Submission #2I, Justin
McMullen, Elder Law Committee.
Submission #11, Phillipa
Alexander, Justin McMullen.
Submission #11.
Susan Baldock,
Litigation Committee of the Law Society, endorsing the reasoning of Christine
Schokman, Dexter Marcenko and Michael
Submission #1,
Submission #4, Dorothy Lowe and siblings Barry Claridge, Heather Dunn, Steven
Bishop, Nina Hendy, joint submission
of Christine Schokman, Dexter Marcenko and
Michael Flanagan.
Robert Young, Submission
#5, Submission #1I, Submission #11, Submission #2I.
Submission #3, Tony
Gray, Essen Bradbury, Ann Hamilton, Phillipa Alexander, Submission #17, Justin
McMullen, Alice Grubb, Geoffrey
Nash, Elder Law Committee (with dissenting view
expressed).
Ten from the one
See for example
McDonald v O’Connor
[2019] NSWSC 261
, [279] (Hallen J), quoting his
Goodsell v Wellington
[2011] NSWSC 1232
, [108]. The Elder Law
Committee referred to the following passages from High Court cases by way of
illustration: ‘all authorities
agree that it was never meant that the
Court should re-write the will of a testator. Nor was it ever intended that the
testamentary disposition should be so encroached upon that a
testator’s decisions expressed in his will have only a prima facie
the real dispositive power being vested in the Court. An observer of the course
of development in the administration in Australia
of such statutory provisions
might be tempted to think that, unchecked, that is likely to become the
practical result.’:
Pontifical Society for the Propagation of the Faith
(1962)107 CLR 9 Dixon CJ. The Committee also referred to
[2005] HCA 11
(2005) 221 CLR 191(Gleeson CJ)
who stated that: ‘The
discretionary power of the Court is limited in interfering with the exercise of
freedom of testamentary
disposition.’
(1870) LR 5 QB 549
New South Wales Supreme
Court judge. Justice Lindsay manages the Probate list.
Justice Geoff Lindsay,
A Province of Modern Equity: Management of Life, Death and Estate
Administration
(Estate Administration: A Course of Seminars – The
Protective, Probate and Family Provision Jurisdictions of the Supreme Court
New South Wales, The New South Wales Bar Association and The Law Society of New
South Wales, 26 May 2015) [36].
Croucher (n
See for example
See for example ibid
Submission of Steven
Bishop quoting James MacIntosh, ‘Limitations on Free Testamentary
Disposition and the British Empire’
(1930) 12(1)
Journal of Comparative
Legislation and International Law
Olsen v Olsen
[2019] NSWSC 217
(15 March 2019);
McDonald v O’Connor
[2019] NSWSC
(14 March 2019);
Gail Patricia Stone v Michael John Stone
(8 March 2019);
Detheridge v Detheridge
[2019] NSWSC 183
March 2019);
Neal v Neal
[2018] NSWSC 1669
(1 March 2019);
[2019] NSWSC 82
(12 February 2019);
Rogers v Rogers
(18 December 2018);
Maynard v Maynard
[2018] NSWSC 1961
December 2018);
Re Estate Di Meglio; Di Meglio v Carle
[2018] NSWSC 1690
(4 December 2018);
Wise v Barry; The Estate of Robyn Margaret Wise
(14 November 2018);
Re Estate McNamara
[2018] NSWSC 1661
November 2018);
Sreckovic v Sreckovic
[2018] NSWSC 1597
(23 October
Cringle v Cringle
[2018] NSWSC 1558
(19 October 2018);
v Hana; Mekail v Hana; In the Estate of Nadia Mekhail
[2018] NSWSC
(5 October 2018);
Rogic v Samaan
[2018] NSWSC 1464
(28 September
[2018] NSWSC 1404
(12 September 2018);
[2018] NSWSC 1226
(15 August 2018);
Sergent v Glass
[2018] NSWSC 1100
(18 July 2018);
Steinmetz v Shannon
[2018] NSWSC 1090
(16 July 2018);
Re Estate Grant, deceased
[2018] NSWSC 1031
Gargano v Coves
[2018] NSWSC 985
(3 July 2018);
Katramados v
[2018] NSWSC 948
(22 June 2018);
Cooper v Cooper
[2018] NSWSC
(14 June 2018);
Philpott v Pantos
[2018] NSWSC 852
(14 June 2018);
Justin Barker v Gordon Albert Salier
[2018] NSWSC 798
(24 May 2018);
Sariban v Pocock; Pocock v Peipman
[2018] NSWSC 724
(24 May 2018);
Wright v Burg
[2018] NSWSC 595
(7 May 2018);
Beech v Squire
(4 May 2018);
Harris v Harris
[2018] NSWSC 552
(1 May 2018);
Webster v Strang; Steiner v Strang
[2018] NSWSC 495
(23 April 2018);
Sloboda v Crawford
[2018] NSWSC 483
(17 April 2018).
Re Estate Grant,
[2018] NSWSC 1031
(5 July 2018).
Cited in EUC (n
) 39, cited in Scottish Law Commission (2007)
) [4.15]. The Scottish Law Commission
did not propose that pre-death gifts be able to be disturbed due to the
uncertainties this would
create, endorsing the NSWLRC’s description of
this as the ‘social evil of insecure titles’: Scottish Law
) [6.178]–[6.179].
Alice Grubb, Phillipa
Alexander, Justin McMullen, Elder Law Committee, Submission #1I, Essen
This view was also
expressed by the VLRC:
Justin McMullen.
Essen Bradbury.
Submission #2I, Sam
McCullough.
Tilse et al (n
Alice Grubb, Justin
McMullen, Essen Bradbury.
This point has also been
the LRCBC (n
) 20; and SALRI: SALRI (n
Essen Bradbury, Geoffrey
Nash, Tony Gray, Submission #11, Sam McCullough. This issue was also raised by
some commentators when the
Alberta Law Reform Institute considered reform to its
Matrimonial Property Act
[423]. It has also been considered elsewhere: Scottish Law Commission (2007) (n
) [4.20]; EUC (n
The Chancery Bar Association expressed concerns
transactions
in its submission to the EUC: EUC (n
Submission #11.
Nicola Peart, ‘New
Zealand Report on New Developments in Succession Law’ (2010) 14(2)
Electronic Journal of Comparative Law
1, 22. See also Sylvia Villios and
Natalie Williams, ‘Family Provision Law, Adult Children and the Age of
Entitlement’
[2018] AdelLawRw 11
Adelaide Law Review
Justin McMullen, Elder Law Committee, Submission
#11, Tony Gray.
See comments of
Justice Hutley cited in Croucher (n
) 23. This issue was also considered by the
ALRI which concluded that the need for due diligence enquiries was not an
‘unsurmountable
) [426]. The issue of complexity and delay has
also been noted by the
Scottish Law Commission:
Scottish Law Commission (2007) (n
Justin McMullen.
Justice Lindsay (n
Attorney Act 2000
Although they have
obligations to keep accurate records: ibid
Submission #11.
Galt v Compagnon
(NSWSC, Einstein J, 24
February 1998) 21, cited in
Kelly v Deluchi
[2012] NSWSC 841
(Hallen J).
Re Estate Grant, deceased
[2018] NSWSC 1031
[201]. It was noted that the following sections of the NSW
Succession Act
required consideration:
Of this observation, SALRI has stated that it ‘considers this to be
something of an understatement’:
Treasurer, Tony Gray, Sam McCullough.
Phillipa Alexander.
See for example the case of
Estate Grundy; La
Valette v Chambers-Grundy
[2018] NSWSC 104
where extensive legal costs have
been incurred (in unresolved litigation) by the plaintiff in seeking to identify
all of the assets
that may fall within her family provision claim.
On this point, it has
been commented that: ‘The most radical complications [in the law of
succession by the extension of claims
against the estate] have been introduced
in New South Wales. George Orwell’s Big Brother could not have done better
reformers who entitled the Act which gave claims against the estate to
mistresses and lovers, “The
Family Provision Act 1982
might have been more properly entitled “The Act to Promote the Wasting of
Estates by Litigation and Lawyers
Provision Act 1982”.’: Francis
Hutley, Woodham and Wood
Cases and Materials on Succession
(Lawbook Co, 3
ed, 1984) v, cited in Croucher (n
See [1.4.15] for an
explanation of claims based on undue influence or unconscionability.
See [5.5.59] for an
explanation of claims in equity.
Tony Gray, Submission
#17, Elder Law Committee, Submission #11.
Submission #11.
Submission #17.
Ben White et al,
‘Estate Contestation in Australia: An Empirical Study of a Year of Case
University of new South Wales Law
Ibid 903–904.
Supreme Court of New
South Wales,
2017 Annual Review
[2018] NSWSC 552.
Submission #11, Elder
Law Committee, Sam McCullough.
Submission #17, Sam
McCullough.
Submission #17.
White et al (n
Cheryl Tilse et al,
‘Will-making prevalence and patterns in Australia: keeping it in the
(2015) 50(3)
Australian Journal of Social Issues
references omitted. See also the comments of Justice Hallen in
[2013] NSWSC
where his Honour stated at [1]: ‘
dispute can be bloodier than when the blood, thicker than water, is spilled
copiously in uncompromising and uncompromised litigation
between [siblings] in a
fight over their inheritance’, also referred to in
Sariban v Pocock;
Pocock v Peipman
[2018] NSWSC 724
(24 May 2018) [1] (Hallen J).
For a useful summary of
principles that the courts adopt when assessing claims by adult children, see
McDonald v O’Connor
[2019] NSWSC 261
, [283] (Hallen J). See also
Bowditch v NSW Trustee and Guardian
[2012] NSWSC 275
Submission 2I, Elder Law
Committee, Justin McMullen.
White et al (n
Villios and Williams (n
See for example Peart (n
); Croucher (n
). Croucher has stated that: ‘Family
provision is, in my view, right out of hand. It is on a slippery slope where
concerned. I would clearly distinguish the position of
partners/spouses from that of children. Marriages, or marriage-like
relationships,
are based on different logic than simply being a child (or
analogous relationship) of someone. A good look at family provision legislation
in its real context is needed — namely, what role does, and should,
property play in families. Unless we seriously look at
such questions then we
will continue to tinker with the legislation, a bit this way, a bit that, and
end up writing a blueprint for
bludging.’: Croucher (n
) 200. For further critique of family
provision legislation and the trend of ‘questionable’ cases being
successful, see
Anthony Gray, ‘Family Provision Applications: A
Australian Law Journal
; Villios and
Williams (n
White et al (n
See draft Family
Provision Bill 2004 cl 7.
See Appendix 2.
See for example BCLI (n
) 186. The report comments,
‘[i]nterference with testamentary freedom based on a subjective assessment
of moral obligation to
leave a child a share of an estate, regardless of the
child’s age or circumstances, has been rejected in this Project as a
matter of policy’: at 187.
Vigolo v Bostin
[2005] HCA 11
(2005) 221 CLR 191
, [25] (Gleeson CJ).
Booth v Brooks
[2018] TASSC 35
(24 July 2018) [52]–[56] (Holt AsJ).
Of the limited scope of
this review, the Elder Law Committee commented: ‘The introduction of
notional estates in isolation
(i.e. without reviewing all succession laws and in
particular the TFM Act) is not a well-rounded way of reviewing succession
Christine Schokman,
Dexter Marcenko and Michael Flanagan. See [
] for extract of the example
Submission #1I.
Submission #1I.
Superannuation
Industry (Supervision) Regulations 1994
(Cth) Reg 6.17A.
Submission #2I, Elder Law Committee, Sam McCullough,
James Walker.
Elder Law Committee.
Alice Grubb, Elder Law
Committee, Submission #2I, Justin McMullen, Essen Bradbury, Sam McCullough.
Commission (England & Wales) (n
The issue of avoidance was also considered by the Scottish Law Commission:
Scottish Law Commission (n
Submission #2I, Sam
McCullough.
Submission #11.
Sam McCullough, James
Walker, Essen Bradbury, Elder Law Committee.
Submission #10.
Sam McCullough
referring to the example of
Hitchcock v Pratt
[2010] NSWSC 1508.
This observation has also
been made by the NTLRC: NTLRC (n
Submission #3, Essen
Bradbury, Elder Law Committee.
The difference between
equity and the common law has been described as follows: ‘Equity
supplements the common law, providing
a separate and distinct body of principle
that mitigates its rigours. The common law creates rights; equity relieves
against strict
insistence upon them, when such insistence is against conscience.
The concern of equity with conscience — and particularly
unconscionable insistence on strict legal right — is manifest in many of
its doctrines and remedies. So, in the field
of unconscionable dealings, equity
comes to the relief of those who, labouring under a special disadvantage, are
unconscientiously
exploited by another ... In the law of trusts, equity binds
the conscience of a legal owner, who holds property impressed with a
perform the trusts.’: Hon Justice Brereton, ‘Equitable Estoppel in
Australia: The Court of Conscience in the
Antipodes’ (Speech, Australian
Law Journal Conference: Celebrating 80 Years, 16 March 2007) 1.
Submission #2I.
See for example
[2014] HCA 19
(2014) 251 CLR 505.
[2016] TASSC 4.
See also the decision of
Dennis v Dennis
[2016] TASSC 62
where Justice
Estcourt heard a claim by one of the sons of a
deceased, firstly based on a breach of contract, but in the alternative, a claim
on equitable estoppel. In relation to this second ground, the son argued
that he had entered into a Succession Deed with his father
and mother dealing
with transfer of the ownership of a farming property in reliance upon a
representation by his father that he would
forgive loans that a company and
trust owed to him in his will. There was some evidence from the son that one of
the reasons that
the Succession Deed had been entered into was to avoid a claim
against the parents’ estates if the farming property was instead
via their wills. In that case, his Honour was not satisfied that the evidence
established on the balance of probabilities
that there was an unequivocal or
unconditional promise by the deceased to forgive debts owed to him in his will
so the claim failed.
The case, however, provides a further example of a family
member’s claim to an interest in estate assets pursuant to a constructive
Evans, Sally Lee v Public Trustee (as
Administrator of the Estate of the late Bruno Sirgunas)
[1998] TASSC
[1990] TASSC 67.
Equitable claims are
not, however, limited to family members unlike family provision claims under the
This point was also made by the Institute of
Chartered Accountants in England and Wales, The Law Society of England and
Society of Trust and Estate Practitioners and The Notaries Society of
England and Wales in its submissions to the EUC: EUC (n
Susan Baldock,
Submission #1, Submission #4, Dorothy Lowe and siblings, Barry Claridge, Heather
Dunn, Steven Bishop, Nina Hendy,
joint submission of Christine Schokman, Dexter
Marcenko and Michael Flanagan, Litigation Committee (endorsing the reasoning in
Schokman, Mr Marcenko and Mr Flanagan’s submission).
Christine Schokman,
Dexter Marcenko and Michael Flanagan. The WALRC has expressed a similar view:
Barns v Barns
(2003) 214 CLR 169, 174 [4].
Referring to the
Family Law Act
Bankruptcy Act
]; The Law Commission (England &
) 49; ALRI (n
) [422]; QLRC (n
Tabussi and Tabussi
(As Executor of the Estate of the late Mr Tabussi Senior (deceased)) &
[2015] FCWA 108
It was valued at over
$1m at trial.
Ibid [151].
Ibid [152].
If a relationship has
ended but one of the parties to the relationship dies before an application is
filed with the Family Court,
then the Family Court does not have jurisdiction.
If, on the other hand, one day prior to death, family court proceedings were
then the Family Court retains jurisdiction to make orders in relation to
the division of property irrespective of the later death
of one of the parties
to proceedings:
ss 79(8), 90SM(8).
D R Horton, ‘Proceedings after Death –
the Plight of the Widow’ (4
National Family Law Conference
Handbook (1990) cited in Justice Paul LG Brereton, ‘Where Death and
Divorce Meet: The Intersection
of Family Provision and Family Law’
(Speech, National Family Law Conference, October 2006) 19.
See for example
Brewster, Re Application for Judicial Review (Northern Ireland)
, [13] citing Law Commission (England & Wales),
Cohabitation: The
Financial Consequences of Relationship Breakdown
(Law Com No 307, July 2007)
Justice Brereton (n
Citing the case of
(2012) 247 CLR 108.
Croucher (n
Submission #2I.
This point has also been
made by the Scottish Law Commission: Scottish Law Commission (2007) (n
90MS; ALRC,
Review of the Family Law System
(Discussion Paper No 86,
2018) [3.132], Recs 75, 77.
Joint Select Committee on Certain Aspects of the
Operation and Interpretation of the
Family Law Act
Inquiry into certain
aspects of the operation and interpretation of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Report, November 1992) [9.2].
Family Law for
the Future – An Inquiry into the Family Law System
(Final Report, ALRC
Report 135, March 2019).
Ibid [3.138].
Ibid [6.39].
] in relation to Canada and [
] in relation to New Zealand.
Saskatchewan, Manitoba
and Ontario.
This issue was raised by
the Elder Law Committee and Ann Hamilton.
On this point, SALRI
stated: ‘This effectively means that well advised testators, typically
those with resources and access
to specialist professional advice, enjoy
testamentary freedom and can avoid the application of family provision
laws.’: SALRI
Declaration of Human Rights
, GA Res 217A (III), UN GAOR, 3
Plen Mtg, UN Doc A/810 (10 December 1948) art 17(2).
This point was made by
the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales in its submission to
the EUC: EUC (n
) 73. See also WALRC (n
Law Commission (England
& Wales) (n
Re Estate Grant,
[2018] NSWSC 1031 (Lindsay
Ibid [193].
Robert Young made this
point in his submission.
Re Estate Grant,
[2018] NSWSC 1031.
outlines in
detail the provisions of the NSW
Succession Act
Croucher (n
) 740. Croucher has separately made the
following observation about the passing of the New South Wales Bill:
‘Parliamentary
Counsel and the Commissioner, Gressier, disagreed on
several fundamental issues concerning the Bill, eventually narrowing down to
two, but major, issues: the definition of “eligible person” and the
notional estate provisions, but it dragged the process
of implementation out
over several years. It was like a game of “ping pong”. The
disagreement was eventually resolved
by a compromise, the Commission giving way
on notional estate and Parliamentary Counsel giving way on eligibility
...’: Croucher
Submission #4, Dorothy
Lowe and siblings, Essen Bradbury, Heather Dunn, Ann Hamilton, Phillipa
Alexander, Justin McMullen, Geoffrey
Nash, Steven Bishop, Elder Law Committee,
Alice Grubb, Submission 2I, joint submission of Christine Schokman, Dexter
Marcenko and
Michael Flanagan, Sam McCullough, James Walker.
Submission #4, Dorothy
Lowe and siblings, Essen Bradbury, Heather Dunn, Justin McMullen, Steven Bishop,
Elder Law Committee, joint
submission of Christine Schokman, Dexter Marcenko and
Michael Flanagan.
Sam McCullough made
similar observations about the existence of a body of available jurisprudence
from New South Wales.
Justice Atkinson (n
Ann Hamilton, Alice
Grubb, Essen Bradbury, Justin McMullen, Submission #2I, Phillipa Alexander,
Dorothy Lowe and siblings, Sam McCullough,
James Walker.
Geoffrey Nash.
] for detail of the property that may
be affected by a notional estate order.
Phillipa Alexander,
Geoffrey Nash.
Ann Hamilton, Robert
Young, Sam McCullough.
Ann Hamilton, Submission
#2I, Sam McCullough, James Walker.
Essen Bradbury, Ann
Hamilton, Sam McCullough.
] for explanation.
) [6.181]. It was also considered by ALRI
which noted that it was ‘very difficult’ to determine a
person’s intentions
when entering into what it referred to as a
‘will-substitute’: ALRI (n
[429]. ALRI stated ‘it is often very difficult to prove that the deceased
intended to defeat the claim of the surviving spouse.
For example, if a wife
ensures that everything passes outside her estate and vests in her children from
an earlier marriage, is she
showing her love for her children or her intention
to defeat her husband’s claim? Even if her intention is to defeat the
of her husband, will her children know of this intention or will they just
assume she was showing her great love for them?’:
at [456]. Difficulties
of establishing the relevant intention have also been highlighted by the WALRC:
) [4.9], [4.24].
Geoffrey Nash.
Succession Act
Law Commission (England
& Wales) (n
Scottish Law Commission
Dorothy Lowe and
siblings, Essen Bradbury, Phillipa Alexander, Geoffrey Nash, Ann Hamilton,
Justin McMullen, Submission #2I, Alice
Grubb, James Walker.
Dorothy Lowe and
Essen Bradbury, Phillipa
Alexander. Geoffrey Nash also submitted that the period of time should be
shortened, without specifying
a time limit.
Justin McMullen, Alice
Grubb, Submission #2I, Ann Hamilton.
The WALRC has expressed
similar views: WALRC (n
Rosalind F Croucher,
‘Succession Law Reform in NSW – 2011 Update’
Succession Law Conference, 17 September 2011).
Ann Hamilton.
Submission #2I.
Submission #1I.
Submission #2I.
The EUC also noted this
challenge, remarking that it requires will-makers to realise the difference in
applicable laws when they
move to a jurisdiction with clawback provisions: EUC
Succession Act
Including equitable
remedies and claims under the
where proceedings are commenced before
death: See [
Van Alpen v The
Netherlands
(UNHCR, Communication No 305/1988, UN Doc CCPE/C/39/D/305/1988,
R v Governor HMP Brockhill; Ex Parte Evans (No 2)
[2000] UKHL 48
[2001] 2 AC 19
38 (Lord Hope of Craighead). That the law is clear and accessible is also a core
element of the rule of law: see
Black-Clawson International Ltd v Papierwerke
Waldhof-Aschaffenberg AG
[1975] UKHL 2
[1975] AC 591
, 638 (Lord Diplock);
Fothergill v
Monarch Airlines Ltd
[1980] UKHL 6
[1981] AC 251
See discussion at [
] in relation to discussion about
its application to trusts, [
] about its application to joint
tenancy properties and [
fact that it incorporates omissions as well as acts.
Dependants Relief Act
Succession Law Reform
(Ont) Part V.
Including transfers of
property to joint tenancy, deposits into joint bank accounts, transfers of
property for nominal or no consideration,
or designations or changes of
beneficiaries of a life insurance policy or pension fund.
Inheritance
(Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
(UK) ss 1(1)(a), (1B); NSW
Succession Act
ss 57(1)(a)
Inheritance
(Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
(UK) s 1(1)(b); NSW
Succession Act
s 57(1)(d).
Inheritance
(Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
(UK) ss 1(1)(c), (d); NSW
Succession Act
s 57(1)(c).
Inheritance
(Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
(UK) s 1(1)(e); NSW
Succession Act
s 57(1)(e).
Succession Act
s 57(1)(f).
Inheritance
(Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
(UK) s 9(1); NSW
Succession Act
s 76(2)(b).
Succession Act
s 76(2)(e).
Inheritance
(Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
s 76(2)(c).
Succession Act
s 76(2)(d).
Inheritance
(Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
(UK) s 8(2); NSW
Succession Act
Inheritance
(Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
(UK) ss 10, 12;
Succession Act
Inheritance
(Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
(UK) ss 11, 12; NSW
Succession Act
s 76(2)(f).
Dependants’
1996, c D-25.01 (‘
Dependants’
Succession Law
RSO 1990, c S.26, Part V (‘
Succession Law Reform
Wills, Estates and
Succession Act
2009, c 13, Pt 4, Div 6 (‘
Wills, Estates
Succession Act
Family Maintenance Act
, RSNS 1989, c 465, s 1 (‘
Family Maintenance Act
, SA 2010, c.W 12.2, Part 5 (‘
Succession Act
The Dependants
CCSM 1990, c D37 (‘
The Dependants Relief Act
Provision for
Dependants Act
, RSNB 2012, c 111 (‘
Provision for Dependants Act
Dependants Relief
RSY 2002, c 56 (‘
Dependants Relief Act
Family Relief
, RSNL1990 c F-3 (‘
Family Relief Act
Inheritance
(Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
(UK) s 1(1)(a), (1B);
Uniform Dependants’ Relief Act
(1974) (Canada) ss 1(d)(i), (iv);
Dependants’ Relief Act
) s 2(1) definition of
‘dependant’;
Succession Law Reform Act
) s 57(1) definition of
‘dependant’;
Wills, Estates and
Succession Act
Testators’ Family
Maintenance Act
) s 2(1)(b)
definition of ‘dependant’;
Succession Act
The Dependants
definition of ‘dependant’;
Provision for Dependants Act
) s 1 definition of
‘dependant’;
Dependants Relief Act
) s 1 definition of
‘dependant’;
Family Relief Act
) s 2(c) definition of
‘dependant’.
Inheritance
(Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
(UK) s 1(1)(b);
Dependants’ Relief Act
(1974) (Canada) s 1(d)(v);
The Dependants
definition of ‘dependant’;
Dependants Relief Act
s 1 definition of
‘dependant’.
Inheritance
(Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
(UK) ss 1(1)(c), (d);
Uniform Dependants’ Relief Act
(1974) (Canada) ss 1(d)(ii), (iii);
Dependants’ Relief Act
) s 2(1) definition of
‘dependant’;
Succession Law Reform Act
) s 57(1) definition of
‘dependant’;
Wills, Estates and
Succession Act
Testators’ Family
Maintenance Act
) s 2(1)(b)
definition of ‘dependant’;
Succession Act
ss 72(b)(iii)
, (iv), (v);
Dependants Relief Act
s 1 definition of ‘dependant’;
Provision for Dependants Act
) s 1 definition of
‘dependant’;
Dependants Relief Act
) s 1 definition of ‘dependant’;
Family Relief Act
) s 2(c) definition of
‘dependant’.
Inheritance
(Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
(UK) s 1(1)(e);
Law Reform Act
definition of ‘dependant’;
Succession Act
s 72(b)(vi)
The Dependants Relief
) s 1 definition of
‘dependant’;
Provision for Dependants Act
) s 1 definition of ‘dependant’;
Dependants Relief Act
definition of ‘dependant’.
Succession Law
includes financially dependent parents and siblings within definition of
‘dependant’.
Inheritance
(Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
(UK) s 9(1);
Law Reform Act
) s 72(1)(b);
Dependants Relief Act
s 20(1)(d).
Succession Law
Inheritance
(Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
Dependants’ Relief Act
(1974) (Canada) s 20(1);
Succession Law
Dependants Relief Act
) s 20(1)(e).
Dependants’ Relief Act
(1974) (Canada) s 20(1);
Succession Law
Dependants Relief Act
) s 20(1)(f).
Inheritance
(Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
(UK) s 8(2);
Dependants’ Relief Act
(1974) (Canada) s 20(1);
Succession Law
Dependants Relief Act
) s 20(1)(a).
Inheritance
(Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
(UK) ss 10, 12;
Dependants’ Relief Act
(1974) (Canada) s 21(1);
Dependants Relief
Inheritance
(Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
(UK) ss 11, 12;
Dependants’ Relief Act
(1974) (Canada) s 15;
Succession Law Reform
Testators’ Family Maintenance Act
Dependants’ Relief Act
Succession Act
Dependants Relief Act
Family Relief Act
Note that the BCLI had
proposed inclusion of a clause consistent with those operating in the majority
of other jurisdictions, although
this has not been included in subsequent
legislative reforms: BCLI (n
Dependants’ Relief Act
(1974) (Canada) s 2.
Dependants’
Succession Law
Wills, Estates and
Succession Act
Family Maintenance Act
Succession Act
The Dependants
Provision for
Dependants Act
Dependants Relief
Family Relief
Inheritance
(Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975
Succession Law
Dependants’ Relief Act
Succession Act
The Dependants Relief
Family Relief
Testators’ Family Maintenance Act
Williams v Williams
[2018] TASSC 61
Booth v Brooks
[2018] TASSC 35
Nicholas v Tubb
[2016] TASSC 53
Tapp v The Public
[2009] TASSC 54
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.16 MB)
PDF format (1.25 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter