URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCIP/2002/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:36:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Questioning of complainants by unrepresented accused in sexual assault trials - Issues Paper [2002] NSWLRCIP 22
Issues Paper 22 (2002) - Questioning of complainants by unrepresented accused in sexual assault trials
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
1. INTRODUCTION
PURPOSE OF THE PAPER
STRUCTURE OF THE PAPER
2. EXISTING LEGISLATIVE RESTRICTIONS
NEW SOUTH WALES
General limitation on questioning
Exclusion of evidence relating to sexual experience
Child witnesses
Witnesses with an intellectual disability
Charter of Victims Rights
Use of alternative arrangements
OTHER JURISDICTIONS
Commonwealth
Northern Territory
Western Australia
South Australia
OVERSEAS DEVELOPMENTS
United Kingdom
New Zealand
3. FUTURE DIRECTIONS
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE ACCUSED
Right to answer the charge
Right to legal counsel
Right to represent oneself
Difficulty faced by the unrepresented accused
Impact on the quality of evidence
Problems with a neutral intermediary
The role of the judge
Effect on the jury
Arbitrary criteria for class of witnesses protected
Inappropriate analogy with child witnesses
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE WITNESS
Barriers to giving evidence overcome
Distress minimised
Double victimisation avoided
Victims encouraged to report and proceed with the matter
Special nature of sexual assault trials recognised
Loss of ability to answer accused’s questions in court
EXTENT OF THE RESTRICTION
IMPLICATIONS FOR COURT-APPOINTED LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES
PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
4. ISSUES ARISING FROM THIS PAPER
NATURE OF ANY LIMITATION
AVAILABILITY OF ALTERNATIVE ARRANGEMENTS
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Issues Paper 22 (2002) - Questioning of complainants by unrepresented accused in sexual assault trials
Terms of reference
History of this Reference (Digest)
In a letter to the Commission dated 27 March 2002, the Attorney General, the Hon R J Debus MP referred the following matter for
Whether an unrepresented accused in a sexual offence trial should be permitted to cross-examine a complainant. Specifically, whether
courts should have the power to appoint a person other than an unrepresented accused to cross-examine complainants in sexual offence
cases whether or not the accused consents.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of Contents
Issues Paper 22 (2002) - Questioning of complainants by unrepresented accused in sexual assault trials
Participants
History of this Reference (Digest)
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act
(NSW) the Chairperson of the Commission constituted a Division for the purpose of conducting the reference. The members of the Division
Hon Justice Adams
Associate Professor Jane Goodman-Delahunty
Ms Andrea Durbach
Hon Justice Greg James
Ms Ruth McColl SC
Professor Michael Tilbury
Hon Jeff Shaw QC*
(* denotes Commissioner-in-Charge)
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Legal Research and Writing
Ms Rebecca Kang
Ms Katrina Sanders
Ms Anna Williams
Desktop Publishing
Ms Rebecca Young
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of Contents
Issues Paper 22 (2002) - Questioning of complainants by unrepresented accused in sexual assault trials
Submissions
History of this Reference (Digest)
The Commission invites submissions on the issues relevant to this review, including but not limited to the issues raised in this
Issues Paper.
All submissions and enquiries should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
postal addresses
GPO Box 5199, Sydney NSW 2001 or DX 1227 Sydney
street address
Level 17, 8-12 Chifley Square, Sydney NSW
nsw_lrc@agd.nsw.gov.au
telephone (02) 9228 8230
facsimile (02) 9228 8225
TTY (02) 9228 7676
There is no special form required for submissions. If it is inconvenient or impractical to make a written submission you may telephone
the Commission and either direct your comments to a Legal Officer over the telephone, or else arrange to make your submission in
The closing date for submissions is 31 October 2002.
Use of submissions and confidentiality
If you would like your submission to be treated as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Submissions made to the
Commission may be used in two ways:
Since the Commission’s process of law reform is essentially public, copies of submissions made to the Commission will normally
be made available on request to other persons or organisations. However, if you would like all or part of your submission to be treated
as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Any request for a copy of a submission marked “confidential”
will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
In preparing further papers on this reference, the Commission will refer to submissions made in response to this Issues Paper. However,
requests for confidentiality will be respected by the Commission in relation to the publication of submissions.
Other publication formats
The NSW Attorney General’s Department is committed to fully meeting its obligations under State and Commonwealth anti-discrimination
legislation. These laws require all organisations to eliminate discriminatory practices which may prevent people with disabilities
from having full and equal access to our services.
This publication is available in alternative formats. If you have any difficulty in accessing this document please contact the Law
Reform Commission.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of Contents
Issues Paper 22 (2002) - Questioning of complainants by unrepresented accused in sexual assault trials
List of issues
History of this Reference (Digest)
1. Should the questioning of complainants by an unrepresented accused be limited in sexual assault trials?
2. Should there be an explicit limitation on cross-examination in person, or would greater judicial control of proceedings be sufficient?
3. If an explicit limitation were adopted, should it be mandatory, presumptive or discretionary?
4. If the matter is left to the court’s discretion, what factors should the court take into account?
5. Should the limitation apply only to sexual assault cases, or should it apply to a broader category of offences, for example those
including domestic violence?
6. Should the limitation apply only to alleged victims, or to other vulnerable witnesses?
7. Should the limitation apply in criminal proceedings only, or should it also apply in some civil proceedings, for example in the
case of an alleged personal assault?
8. If a defendant is prevented from cross-examining the witness in person, what procedure should be followed? Should the court have
the power to decide whether or not it is necessary, in the interests of justice, that the witness’ evidence be tested, or should
it in every case provide an alternative means of questioning the witness?
9. If the accused is prevented from asking the questions in person, and the questions are put to the witness by another person, must
this person be a legal practitioner?
10. If the person asking the questions must be a legal practitioner, should the accused automatically receive legal aid?
11. If the person asking the questions need not be a legal practitioner, who else could it be? Should it be the judge? Should the
court have the discretion to disallow certain people from asking the questions, for example a friend or relative of the accused?
12. Where a person other than the accused or a legal practitioner asks the questions, should they use the exact language of the accused,
or should the judge have the discretion to refuse or rephrase the question?
13. Should alternative arrangements, such as the use of closed circuit television or screens, be available for witnesses giving evidence
in sexual offence proceedings? If so, what should they include?
14. Should a witness be entitled to such an arrangement, or should their availability be left to the discretion of the judge?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of Contents
Issues Paper 22 (2002) - Questioning of complainants by unrepresented accused in sexual assault trials
1. Introduction
History of this Reference (Digest)
Purpose of the paper
Structure of the paper
1.1 This discussion paper addresses the questioning of complainants in sexual assault trials. It raises the issue of whether or not
the accused should be allowed to cross-examine the complainant in person, and if not, what alternatives are available.
1.2 A person standing trial for a criminal offence has the right to appear and to test the evidence tendered in the prosecution case
by cross-examining witnesses. If the accused is represented by a lawyer, the defence case, including cross-examination, must be conducted
by that lawyer. Accused persons may however be unrepresented in court, either because they are ineligible for legal aid, or choose
not to engage a lawyer.
1.3 An unrepresented accused who is charged with a sexual offence must, like any other unrepresented accused, be permitted to conduct
his or her case, including the cross-examination of prosecution witnesses. This may cause extreme distress to complainants, who are
asserting that they have already suffered a terrible ordeal. There is also the risk that the quality and accuracy of the complainant’s
evidence will be compromised because of any distress, intimidation or humiliation caused by the accused’s questions. Further,
a jury may feel undue sympathy for the complainant and anger towards the accused. These emotions could affect the jury’s perception
of the accused’s case, a case which may, in fact, have merit. In either case, the due administration of justice may be compromised.
1.4 There is a growing trend in the common law world to recognise the distress that may be caused to all complainants in sexual offence
cases. In several jurisdictions attempts have been made to reduce this distress where possible, without compromising the accused’s
right to a fair trial. This includes limitations on questioning of complainants by an unrepresented accused. In undertaking this
review, the Commission will examine the existing legislative restrictions on such questioning, and consider whether these restrictions
are adequate.
OF THE PAPER
1.5 This paper aims to provide a basis for consulting interested members of the community on the questioning of complainants by an
unrepresented accused in sexual assault trials. It gives a general overview of the area as a starting point for more detailed discussion
following community consultation. The paper asks a number of questions, appearing in
. These questions are designed to direct attention to what the Commission considers to be the main issues concerning questioning of
complainants by unrepresented accused. You are invited to respond to these questions, or to make comments about other issues of concern.
For details on how to make a submission and the closing date for submissions, see
pages vi-vii
. Following a period of consultation, the Commission will prepare a report on questioning of complainants by unrepresented accused,
including recommendations for reform to this area if, based on our consultations, we consider this to be necessary or desirable.
OF THE PAPER
1.6 This paper is divided into four chapters. The first chapter provides an introduction to the subject. The second chapter gives
a brief overview of the current legal framework in New South Wales, and in other jurisdictions around Australia and abroad. The third
chapter looks at future directions and the fourth raises a number of questions for discussion.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of Contents
Issues Paper 22 (2002) - Questioning of complainants by unrepresented accused in sexual assault trials
2. Existing legislative restrictions
History of this Reference (Digest)
New South Wales
Other jurisdictions
Overseas developments
2.1 This chapter provides a summary of the laws limiting the
questioning of complainants by an unrepresented accused, in New South
Wales and in other jurisdictions around Australia and abroad.
SOUTH WALES
2.2 In a criminal trial, prosecution witnesses give evidence
first, and are cross-examined by the defence. Defence witnesses then
give evidence, and are cross-examined by the prosecution. In a sexual
assault trial, the complainant is a witness for the prosecution,
questioned either by the accused or the accused’s legal
representative.
2.3 To ensure the trial is fair, defendants must be allowed to
test the evidence given against them. However, the right of an accused
to cross-examine a witness is limited in some circumstances. There is a
general bar on questions which are unduly harassing, intimidating
Asking questions about sexual experience is prohibited.
There is also legislation limiting the ability of an unrepresented accused to question child witnesses directly.
There is, however, no specific restriction on the questioning of adult complainants in sexual offence cases.
General limitation on questioning
2.4 The right to question a witness is subject to the inherent power of the court to control proceedings.
In particular, the court may make such orders as it considers just in
relation to the way in which witnesses are questioned, and
the presence
and behaviour of any person in connection with the questioning of
The court also has the power to disallow
improper questions in cross-examination. It may disallow a question to
be put to the witness,
or inform the witness that it need not be
answered, if the question is “unduly annoying, harassing,
intimidating, offensive,
oppressive or repetitive.”
This provision restricts the type of questions that an unrepresented
accused may ask during cross-examination, but does not prevent
accused from questioning the complainant in person.
2.5 The rule against improper questioning is limited by the
adversarial nature of the trial process. The role of the judge is to
adjudicate after hearing evidence from both sides, not to investigate
the matter. Both sides are entitled to test the evidence
given against
them. Cross-examination gives the defence an essential opportunity to
attack the evidence given by the prosecution,
and to cast doubt upon
the witness’ testimony. The adversarial nature of proceedings
makes it difficult for the judge to
intervene in order to protect the
witness from undue distress or intimidation.
2.6 The protection is further limited by the qualification
that the question must be “unduly” annoying, harassing,
intimidating,
offensive or repetitive before the judge will intervene.
This suggests that some degree of harassment or intimidation will be
2.7 Empirical evidence from child sexual abuse cases shows that,
in practice, it is difficult for judges to curtail aggressive
cross-examination
in the interest of the witness.
would probably be a stronger reluctance to intervene in the case of
adult witnesses. For this reason, the general limitation
on questioning
contained in the
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) may not afford adequate protection to complainants in sexual assault cases.
Exclusion of evidence relating to sexual experience
2.8 In sexual offence proceedings, witnesses cannot be
questioned on their sexual history. Evidence relating to the
complainant’s
sexual reputation or experience is generally
inadmissible.
However, evidence of sexual experience is
admissible if the alleged activity occurred at or about the time the
offence occurred,
and it forms part of the connected set of
circumstances, or if it relates to a recent relationship between the
accused and the
complainant. Certain evidence is admissible if the
accused denies that the alleged sexual intercourse took place. Where
the prosecution
adduces evidence of the complainant’s sexual
history, cross-examination on the evidence is allowed, if the accused
be unfairly prejudiced if cross-examination were prohibited.
Importantly, evidence relating to sexual experience is only admissible
where its probative value outweighs any distress, humiliation or
embarrassment that the complainant might suffer as a result of
2.9 The accused cannot question the complainant on sexual
experience unless the court has previously decided that the evidence
if given, be admissible.
This provision prevents
the accused from asking distressing or humiliating questions despite
the fact that the evidence will be
inadmissible.
2.10 This restriction recognises the special issues surrounding
sexual assault cases, and the need for witnesses in such proceedings
be protected from unnecessary distress, humiliation or embarrassment.
The provision was reviewed by the Commission in its
Review of Section 409B of the
Crimes Act 1900
Child witnesses
2.11 Under the
Evidence (Children) Act 1997
children may use alternative arrangements to give evidence when the
accused is unrepresented.
sets out a presumptive prohibition
on an unrepresented accused questioning a child witness.
It applies to an unrepresented accused in any criminal proceedings and
an unrepresented defendant in civil proceedings arising
from a personal
assault offence. It requires that a witness who is under the age of 16
years is to be cross-examined by a person
appointed by the court
instead of by the accused. If such a person is appointed, that person
is to ask the child any questions
that the accused requests the person
to put to the child, provided the question is not “unduly
annoying, harassing, intimidating,
offensive, oppressive or
repetitive.”
However, the court may choose not to appoint such a person if it considers that it is not in the interests of justice to do so.
2.12 A recent amendment, not yet in force, clarifies the role of the court appointed intermediary.
The person is appointed merely to ask questions on behalf of the
accused, and is not to give any legal or other advice. The intermediary
is a mere mouthpiece and is not to influence the course of
cross-examination in any way.
Evidence (Children) Act 1997
(NSW) implements many of the recommendations of the New South Wales Children’s Evidence Taskforce in its report,
Taking Evidence in Court
The Taskforce focused specifically on the difficulties faced by
children giving evidence in court. Its recommendation about questioning
by an unrepresented accused was similar to the provision ultimately
included in the Act.
The Taskforce took the view that it
was appropriate to place some limits on the ability of an unrepresented
accused to cross-examine
child witnesses in order to prevent
intimidation of such witnesses. At the same time, it recognised the
difficulties involved in
balancing the need to protect child witnesses
and the need to protect the rights of the accused.
2.14 Arguably, the legislation restricting cross-examination of
child witnesses does not go far enough. There is empirical evidence
that the most distressing part of the court process for children in
sexual abuse cases is cross-examination and, as a result, a
majority of
children would choose not to report such an incident again.
Witnesses with an intellectual disability
2.15 There is currently no prohibition on an unrepresented
accused cross-examining, in person, a witness with an intellectual
disability.
However, the Committee on Intellectual Disability and the
Criminal Justice System recently recommended that there be a
presumption
in favour of a witness with an intellectual disability
having alternative arrangements for giving evidence. Where the accused
unrepresented, this would include the right to be cross examined via
a court-appointed third person.
2.16 The NSW Law Reform Commission has also noted the hurdles
faced by witnesses with an intellectual disability. Such witnesses
be regarded as unreliable, as their credibility, as well as their
capacity to understand the concept of telling the truth,
may be doubted
by the judge or jury.
The Commission recommended that,
if the court is satisfied that a witness with an intellectual
disability may be unable to give
evidence without the use of special
arrangements because he or she is unduly inhibited in giving evidence
in the normal way, the
court may order that special arrangements be
made for taking that witnesses’ evidence.
This might include having a support person sitting with the witness, or using screens or closed circuit television.
Charter of Victims Rights
2.17 The rights of victims of crime are currently recognised and promoted by the
Victims Rights Act 1996
The Act states that “a victim should be protected from
unnecessary contact with the accused and defence witnesses during
course of court proceedings.”
However, the Act creates no legal rights and does not affect the validity of any judicial act or omission.
Use of alternative arrangements
2.18 In some jurisdictions, alternative arrangements are
available to protect certain witnesses from embarrassment or distress.
For example, evidence may be given through the use of closed circuit
television, or a screen or partition may be placed to obscure
witness’ view of the defendant.
In New South
Wales, the use of closed circuit television is available. However, it
is largely to enable evidence to be given by
remote witnesses or
witnesses who are in custody, and not for the purpose of minimising
Again, child witnesses are an exception, as
they have the right to give evidence by closed circuit television in
certain proceedings.
Commonwealth
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) limits the
cross-examination of child witnesses in proceedings for Commonwealth
sex and sex-related offences. An unrepresented
defendant is prohibited
from cross-examining a child complainant in person. Instead, the
questions are put to the child by a person
appointed by the court.
For child witnesses other than the complainant, cross-examination in
person is allowed only with leave, where the court considers
child’s ability to testify will not be adversely affected if the
defendant conducts the cross-examination in person.
If the court
refuses leave, the questions are put to the child through a court
appointed intermediary, as happens with child complainants.
Special facilities and arrangements are available for all child
witnesses in sex offence proceedings. These include closed-circuit
television, screens, alternative seating arrangements and video
recordings of evidence.
2.20 The provisions recognise that child witnesses in sex
offence proceedings are particularly vulnerable because of their age
because of the nature of the alleged crime. They also seek to
reduce the distress and trauma experienced by the witness.
2.21 There is no equivalent legislation for adult witnesses in sex offence proceedings.
Criminal Law Amendment Act 2000
(Qld) introduced
a new scheme to regulate the cross-examination of “protected
witnesses”. Now, the accused is prohibited
from cross-examining
the complainant in person in proceedings for sexual offences and
serious offences of violence.
Further, the court has the
discretion to prevent the cross-examination of complainants in
proceedings for less serious offences,
involving assaults or threats.
For less serious offences, the court must be satisfied that the witness
would be likely to be disadvantaged as a witness or likely
severe emotional trauma if cross-examined by the accused.
2.23 The court must advise accused persons that they are
prohibited from cross-examining protected witnesses in person. The
must advise the court by a particular date that he or she has
arranged for legal representation, or no longer wants to cross-examine
the witness. If the court does not receive such notice, legal
assistance is provided by Legal Aid, for the purpose of
cross-examination
The court must warn the jury
that no adverse inference can be drawn from the fact that the accused
has been prevented from cross-examining
the witness in person.
Criminal Law Amendment Act 2000
(Qld) also prohibits an unrepresented accused from cross-examining children or witnesses who are intellectually impaired.
The Act implemented and expanded the recommendations made by the Queensland Law Reform Commission in its Report 55,
The Receipt of Evidence by Queensland Courts: the Evidence of Children
Northern Territory
2.25 Unrepresented defendants are prohibited from cross-examining complainants in person. The
Sexual Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act 1983
states that in a trial for a sexual offence, an unrepresented defendant
is not entitled to cross-examine the complainant directly.
defendant puts the question to the judge or other approved person, and
that person repeats the question accurately to the complainant.
Where a defendant conducts cross-examination in this way, the judge
must warn the jury that the procedure is routine, no adverse
is to be drawn against the accused, and the evidence of the witness is
not to be given any greater or lesser weight because
of the arrangement.
2.26 Alleged victims of domestic violence are also protected. A recent amendment to the
Domestic Violence Act 1992
sets up a presumption against the direct cross-examination of persons
applying for restraining orders in relation to domestic
Unless the court orders otherwise, the person against whom the
restraining order is sought is not entitled to cross-examine
witness where the couple are in a domestic relationship. Instead,
questions are put to the court or an authorised person, and
repeated accurately to the applicant. The court may order that the
unrepresented respondent may cross-examine the applicant
in person only
“if it is just or desirable to do so”.
This amendment, not yet in force, will ensure that direct cross-examination is the exception rather than the rule.
2.27 The Northern Territory also has legislation providing
alternative arrangements for vulnerable witnesses. “Vulnerable
witness” includes an alleged victim of a sexual assault to which
the proceedings relate. It also includes a witness who is
witness who suffers from an intellectual disability and a witness who
is under a special disability because of the circumstances
of the case
or of the witness.
2.28 A vulnerable witness is entitled to give evidence using
alternative arrangements. The witness may choose to give evidence
the courtroom, which is then transmitted by closed circuit
television. A screen may be placed to obscure the witness’ view
of the accused, or the witness may be accompanied by an appropriate
person for emotional support. Where such arrangements are used,
judge must issue a warning to the jury. No such arrangement may be used
where it is not in the interests of justice to do so.
Western Australia
2.29 In Western Australia,
section 106G
Evidence Act 1906
prohibits an unrepresented accused from cross-examining a child under
16 years of age in criminal proceedings. It provides
that, where an
unrepresented defendant wishes to cross-examine a child, the defendant
is not entitled to do so directly, but may
put any question to the
child by stating that question to the judge (or other person approved
by the court), who then repeats the
question accurately to the child.
2.30 This provision was part of a package of legislative
reforms relating to the evidence of children and other vulnerable
These reforms followed, to a large extent, recommendations
of the Law Reform Commission of Western Australia in its report,
Evidence of Children and Other Vulnerable Witnesses
The Commission took the view that questioning a child in these
circumstances may be stressful for the child, and considered the
an intermediary to be desirable. It likened the use of an intermediary
in this situation to the employment of an interpreter
where a witness
does not speak English.
The focus of the
Commission’s reference was child witnesses, and its
recommendation was therefore limited to the cross-examination
children. It also considered the need for special provisions to allow
other vulnerable witnesses to give evidence, including,
for example,
the use of closed circuit television. It included complainants in
sexual assault cases within its definition of vulnerable
noting that such complainants suffer an unusual degree of stress when
giving evidence in court.
South Australia
Evidence Act 1929
provides for the
protection of vulnerable witnesses, but does not bar an unrepresented
accused from cross-examining the complainant
“Vulnerable witness” includes a witness who is the alleged
victim of a sexual offence to which the proceedings
relate. The court
may make special arrangements for taking evidence from a witness in
order to protect the witness from embarrassment,
distress or
intimidation or for any other reason.
However, the court cannot relieve a witness from the obligation to submit to cross-examination.
DEVELOPMENTS
United Kingdom
Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999
imposes an absolute prohibition on cross-examination of an alleged
victim by an unrepresented defendant charged with rape or
prescribed sexual offence.
The court also has the power
to prohibit unrepresented defendants from cross-examining an alleged
victim in other types of proceedings,
if it is satisfied that the
circumstances of the witness and the case merit it, and it would not be
contrary to the interests of
2.33 If an unrepresented defendant is banned from
cross-examining a particular witness in person, the court will ask the
to appoint his or her own legal representative to conduct the
cross-examination. If the defendant does not appoint a legal
representative,
the court considers whether it is necessary, in the
interests of justice, for the witness’ evidence to be tested. If
necessary, the court will appoint a legal representative to
cross-examine the witness on behalf of the defendant. However,
court-appointed
legal representatives are not instructed by defendants
and are not responsible to them.
Defendants who are
banned from personally cross-examining witnesses may apply for legal
aid on the same means-tested basis as other
defendants in criminal
2.34 If the court appoints a legal representative in this way,
the judge must consider warning the jury first, that the witness’
evidence may not have been tested as fully as it might have been, and
second, that no prejudicial inference should be drawn from
that the defendant was prevented from cross-examining the witness in
2.35 The impetus for these measures came from various
directions. In one prominent rape case, the defendant used the
opportunity
of personally cross-examining the victims of the assault to
humiliate them. The trial judge registered his concern and, on appeal,
the Lord Chief Justice used the opportunity to issue guidelines
encouraging judges to prevent abusive questioning.
Shortly afterwards, the Home Office published a report recommending a
mandatory prohibition on unrepresented defendants personally
cross-examining the complainant in cases of rape and serious sexual
Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999
(UK) repealed and replaced section 34A of the
Criminal Justice Act 1988
(UK), which dealt with cross-examination of child witnesses by an unrepresented accused.
New Zealand
2.37 In New Zealand, section 23F of the
Evidence Act 1908
limits the cross-examination of child witnesses in sexual offence
cases. It provides that an unrepresented accused can question
by stating each question to a person, approved by the judge, who then
repeats the question to the complainant. The Law
Commission of New
Zealand recently reviewed this section as part of a general reference
on evidence law. It took the view that
section 23F should be extended
to apply to all sexual offence cases, and also to cases concerning
domestic violence or harassment,
regardless of the complainant’s
age. It considered that not permitting the accused to cross-examine the
complainant personally
would help reduce the stress for the
complainant, and therefore improve the quality of the evidence. It
noted that all the submissions
received favoured extending section 23F
to include all sexual complainants regardless of age, though there was
some difference
of opinion about whether the trial judge should retain
a discretion to override the prohibition if it was thought desirable to
do so in the interests of justice.
2.38 As part of its general reference on evidence law, the Law Commission published the
Evidence Code and Commentary
in the form of a draft statute. Section 95 of the draft Code sets out
the restrictions on cross-examination by unrepresented parties.
is an absolute bar on cross-examination by unrepresented defendants of
all complainants and child witnesses in sexual cases,
complainants and child witnesses in domestic violence cases. Further,
the judge has the discretion to disallow personal
cross-examination in
all other cases, on grounds including (but not limited to) the age of
the witness, any disability of the witness,
the linguistic or cultural
background of the witness, the nature of the proceedings or the
relationship of the witness to the unrepresented
party. When
considering whether to disallow personal cross-examination, the judge
must ensure that the defendant still has a fair
trial, and balance this
against the need to minimise the stress of the witness.
2.39 Unrepresented defendants who are precluded from personally
cross-examining a witness may have their questions put to the witness
by the judge, or a person appointed by the judge for the purpose.
In its commentary, the Law Commission stated that in considering who to
appoint, it may not be appropriate, for example, for a
relative of the unrepresented party to ask the questions.
The judge also has the discretion to refuse a question or rephrase it before it is put to the witness.
2.40 The draft Code has not yet been implemented in New Zealand.
However, the Ministry of Justice anticipates sending a paper to
in September 2002 seeking approval for the introduction of an Evidence
Bill based on the Law Commission’s
Evidence Code
If passed in its current form, the cross-examination of the complainant
by an unrepresented party in a sexual assault case would
be prohibited
in New Zealand.
2.41 In Canada, the right of an unrepresented accused to
cross-examine a witness is limited in some circumstances. A person
with a sexual offence or offence of violence cannot
cross-examine a witness in person, where the witness is under the age
years, unless in the opinion of the court the proper
administration of justice requires that the accused conduct the
examination
in person. Where the accused is prohibited from conducting
the cross-examination in person, the court appoints counsel for the
purpose of cross-examination.
2.42 The prohibition applies with respect to child witnesses
only. There is no general ban preventing an unrepresented accused from
questioning a complainant in person.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of Contents
Evidence Act 1995
See para 2.4-2.7.
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
See para 2.8-2.10.
Evidence (Children) Act 1997
See para 2.11-2.14.
This power is recognised in the
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
C Eastwood and W Patton,
The Experiences of Child Complainants of Sexual Abuse in the Criminal Justice System
(Queensland University of Technology, 2002) at 122.
Eastwood and Patton at 99-102, 123 and 126.
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Note that this section replaced the former s 409B of the
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Review of Section 409B of the
Crimes Act 1900
(Report 87, 1998).
The original version of this provision appeared as s 405FA of the
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW). Section 405FA was inserted into the
Crimes Amendment (Children’s Evidence) Act 1996
(NSW) Sch 1, which has since been repealed.
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Legislation Amendment Act 2001
(NSW) Sch 2 cl 2.
New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 11 December 2001, The Hon J Hatzistergos, Second Reading Speech at 19903.
NSW Children’s Evidence Taskforce,
Taking Evidence in Court
(NSW Attorney General’s Department, Sydney, 1994). Those recommendations were originally implemented by the
Crimes Amendment (Children’s Evidence) Act 1996
(NSW): see New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 11 September 1996, The Hon J W Shaw, Attorney General, Second Reading Speech at 4054.
The recommendation of the Taskforce was limited
to cross-examination of child witnesses only, rather than examination
and re-examination. It also distinguished between questioning
with and without the use of closed circuit television: see
Taking Evidence in Court
at para 8.1.1-8.1.5 and Recommendation 28.
C Eastwood and W Patton,
The Experiences of Child Complainants of Sexual Abuse in the Criminal Justice System
(Queensland University of Technology, 2002) at 1, 59 and 71.
Committee on Intellectual Disability and the
Criminal Justice System, coordinated by the Criminal Law Review
Division of the NSW
Attorney General’s Department,
People with an Intellectual Disability – Giving Evidence in Court
(Sydney, 2000) at Recommendation 7.11.
NSW Law Reform Commission,
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System
(Report 80, 1996) at para 2.31.
NSW LRC, Report 80 at Recommendation 29.
NSW LRC, Report 80 at para 7.16-20.
Charter of Victims Rights
cl 6.7, in the
Victims Rights Act 1996
Victims Rights Act 1996
For example,
Evidence Act 1939
(NT) s 21A(2);
Evidence Act 1929
See para 2.27-2.28 and 2.31.
Evidence (Audio and Audio Visual Links) Act 1998
Evidence (Children) Act 1997
Crimes Act 1914
Crimes Act 1914
Crimes Act 1914
Explanatory Memorandum to the
Measures to Combat Serious and Organised Crime Act 2001
Evidence Act 1977
Evidence Act 1977
Evidence Act 1977
s 21M(1)(d).
Evidence Act 1977
Evidence Act 1977
Evidence Act 1977
Sexual Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act 1983
(NT) s 5(1).
Sexual Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act 1983
(NT) s 5(2);
Evidence Act 1939
(NT) s 21A(3).
Domestic Violence Amendment Act 2001
Northern Territory,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly,
June 2001, Mr Burke, Attorney General, Second Reading Speech at 7890.
Prior to this amendment, the court could already make an
preventing cross-examination in person, but there was no presumption
against it:
Domestic Violence Act 1992
(NT) s 20AD.
Evidence Act 1939
(NT) s 21A(1).
Evidence Act 1939
(NT) s 21A(2)-s 21A(3).
Law Reform Commission of Western Australia,
Evidence of Children and Other Vulnerable Witnesses
(Project 87, Discussion Paper, 1990 and Report, 1991).
Evidence of Children and Other Vulnerable Witnesses
(Discussion Paper 1990) at para 4.62-4.63.
Evidence of Children and Other Vulnerable Witnesses
(Report 1991) at para 9.37-9.38; (Discussion Paper 1990) at para 5.3-5.5.
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence Act 1929
s 13(4)(b).
Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999
Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999
Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999
Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999
Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999
[1998] 2 Cr App R 364
(Lord Bingham).
United Kingdom,
Speaking Up for Justice:
Report of the Interdepartmental Working Group on the Treatment of
Vulnerable or Intimidated Witnesses in
the Criminal Justice System
(Home Office, 1998) at Recommendation 58.
See New Zealand Law Commission,
(Report 55, 1999) Vol 1 at para 414-419. See also
The Evidence of Children and Other Vulnerable Witnesses: A Discussion Paper
(Preliminary Paper 26, 1996) at para 177-182.
New Zealand Law Commission,
Evidence Code and Commentary
s 95(1)-95(4).
Evidence Code and Commentary
Evidence Code and Commentary
Evidence Code and Commentary
Information supplied by K Belt, New Zealand Ministry of Justice (1 August 2002).
Criminal Code
, RSC 1985, c C46, s 486(2.3).
Issues Paper 22 (2002) - Questioning of complainants by unrepresented accused in sexual assault trials
3. Future directions
History of this Reference (Digest)
Implications for the accused
Implications for the witness
Extent of the restriction
Implications for court-appointed legal representatives
Practical considerations
3.1 Our legal system assumes that parties normally have legal
representation. The High Court has stated that “it is in the
interests not only of the accused but also of the administration of
justice that an accused be so represented, particularly
offence charged is serious.”
However, a significant number of people have no legal representation at
trial. District Court statistics indicate that in 2000,
at least 6.9
per cent of those accused of sexual assault had no legal representation.
While this figure is much lower than some other courts,
it is still significant – in at least 20 cases out of the 289 heard, the accused was unrepresented.
3.2 New South Wales already recognises that personal questioning by
an unrepresented accused is undesirable in the case of child
and imposes restrictions on such questioning. It may be argued that
similar restrictions should be imposed in questioning
complainants in sexual offence cases. Obviously, there needs to be
careful consideration of the nature and extent of such
restrictions in
order to ensure that the fair trial of the accused is not compromised.
It should be possible, however, to achieve
a balance between the
interests of the unrepresented accused and the interests of the
complainant.
IMPLICATIONS
FOR THE ACCUSED
3.3 Empowering a court to appoint an intermediary to
cross-examine adult complainants in sexual offence cases raises
important questions
of civil rights. It is fundamentally important that
a person charged with a criminal offence is presumed innocent until
guilty, and is not convicted otherwise than after a fair trial.
The main objection to the use of an intermediary for the purposes of
cross-examination is that it denies the accused these basic
3.4 In New South Wales law, there is no exhaustive list of the attributes of a fair trial.
The precise content of the right to a fair trial is difficult to
identify because it is more accurately expressed in negative terms,
the right not to be tried unfairly, or an immunity against conviction
otherwise than after a fair trial.
However, the right to
a fair trial is generally recognised, and has been described as
“a central pillar of our criminal justice
Denying a fair trial has undesirable consequences, not only for the
accused, but for the general administration of justice. It
may lead to
a permanent stay of proceedings, or an appeal against the conviction.
3.5 The following issues need to be considered before any
legislative restriction is placed on the questioning of witnesses by an
unrepresented accused.
Right to answer the charge
3.6 The due administration of justice requires that accused
persons know of the case against them and are given sufficient
opportunity
to answer it. In sexual assault trials, the complainant has
made a very serious accusation, which must be tested in an open forum.
The accused has the right to present a defence and, consequently, has
the right to test the evidence by questioning witnesses called
prosecution. It is dangerous to convict an accused who has not been
given the full opportunity to test the evidence in this
way. For this
reason, any restriction on cross-examination in person must preserve
the accused’s right to test unfavourable
3.7 The nature of sexual assault allegations also makes it
imperative to protect the accused’s right to mount a defence. The
role of consent in sexual assault makes proceedings different from
other types of crime. Behaviour which is otherwise perfectly
becomes illegal in the absence of consent. Where the alleged assault
occurs in private, it will be the word of the complainant
against the
word of the accused. Any limitation on the right of the accused to
question the key (and often the only) witness to
the alleged assault
must be carefully framed so as not to impinge upon the accused’s
right to answer the charge.
3.8 The right to confrontation is enshrined in the United States
Constitution
Although Australia does not go this far, the right to confront
one’s accuser is fundamental to a fair trial. The question
whether the right to answer the charge extends to the right to personal
confrontation, or merely the right to confront the complainant’s
accusations. The latter may still be satisfied where the
accused’s questions are directed through an intermediary.
Right to legal counsel
3.9 Accused persons have a right to legal counsel, in that they
cannot be forced to go to trial unrepresented. However, the right
fair trial does not extend to a right to be provided with legal counsel
at public expense.
It may be inappropriate, when legal aid has already been refused, to require a lawyer to conduct the cross-examination.
Right to represent oneself
3.10 The accused may be unrepresented through choice. It is
arguable that the right to represent oneself is inviolable. Where
persons elect to represent themselves, it may be inappropriate
to impose legal representation upon them.
Difficulty faced by the unrepresented accused
McInnes v The Queen
, Justice Murphy emphasised the difficulties faced by accused persons who conduct their own defence:
When an accused is unrepresented, he is disadvantaged, not merely
because almost always he lacks the knowledge and skills of a
professional advocate but also because there is a profound difference
between the conduct of a case by an accused and its conduct
advocate. It appears in the cross-examination of a witness whose
version of the events conflicts with that of the accused.
manifest in the address to the jury: an accused cannot really assume
the role of a dispassionate advocate who may compare
the various parts
of the evidence, including the accused’s, put alternative
conflicting propositions, and advance arguments
that, although on the
evidence the accused is probably guilty, he is not guilty beyond
reasonable doubt. In practice, this can
not be done by the accused who
is forced simply to maintain his innocence, otherwise he risks
destroying his credibility.
Prohibiting the accused from cross-examining a key witness in person
may compound these difficulties, if questions are directed
intermediary such as the judge or other person appointed by the court.
However, the difficulties described above would
be alleviated if the
court appointed a legal representative for the purpose of
cross-examination.
Impact on the quality of evidence
3.13 Arguably, direct confrontation between the accused and the
accuser may increase the likelihood of the witness telling the truth.
Special measures aimed to reduce the witness’ contact with the
accused may make the witness’ credibility more difficult
Problems with a neutral intermediary
3.14 In some jurisdictions, the accused provides a neutral
intermediary with a list of questions, which the intermediary then puts
to the witness. The intermediary may be the judge or associate, or some
other person appointed by the court. This approach is unfair
accused. Effective cross-examination requires responsive questioning,
where the line of questioning is moulded to the witness’
answers. Having to rely on a prepared list of questions means the
necessary flexibility is lost, and the accused’s
confront the prosecution witness is denied.
For this reason, it may be inappropriate for a third party who is not legally trained to conduct the cross-examination.
3.15 Further, appointing a neutral intermediary may not
adequately shield the witness from inappropriate questioning. Where the
intermediary simply acts as a mouthpiece for the accused, there is
nothing stopping the accused from having offensive or intimidating
questions put to the witness. The judge can direct the witness not to
answer improper questions, but the effect on the witness
3.16 This procedure is also quite artificial. The dynamics of
cross-examination are impeded where a third person relays the questions
to the witness. The process is stilted and the impact of the evidence
is altered. Further, where each question is asked first by
the accused
and then repeated by the intermediary, the complainant would have time
to deliberate before answering the questions.
This may put the accused
at a disadvantage.
The role of the judge
3.17 The cross-examination of complainants is already limited by
the court’s inherent control over proceedings and by the
restrictions on improper questions imposed by the
Evidence Act 1995
Arguably, inappropriate questioning in sexual assault cases could be
addressed simply by clarifying the role of the judge and tightening
judicial control over questioning.
3.18 There are potentially serious implications for the
accused if the trial judge is to act as an intermediary. As a general
it is for the parties to question witnesses, and the judge asks
questions only to remove apparent ambiguities.
It may be inappropriate for questions to be asked by or directed through the judge. This was pointed out in
Dietrich v The Queen
[The proposition that] in cases where the accused is unrepresented, the
judge becomes counsel for him or her, extending a ‘helping
hand’ to guide the accused throughout the trial so as to ensure
that any defence is effectively presented to the jury, is
for the same reason that self-representation is generally inadequate: a
trial judge and a defence counsel have such
different functions that
any attempt by the judge to fulfil the role of the latter is bound to
cause problems.
In the context of child witnesses, the Queensland Law Reform Commission
was of the opinion that “it is not appropriate,
context of the adversarial system, for the judge or judge’s
associate to be directly involved in putting to the
witness the
questions that the unrepresented person wishes to ask in
cross-examination.”
3.20 Similarly, the Home Office report on vulnerable witnesses
stated that “the judge’s role is an impartial one, to
ensure that there is a fair trial and essentially to ‘hold the
ring’ between the prosecution and defence.”
The report did not recommend the judge step down from this role and
“enter the affray”. It recommended that where the
is prevented from questioning the complainant directly, the court
should have the power to appoint a person to undertake
The recommendation against the judge acting as intermediary was followed.
Effect on the jury
3.21 It is a fundamental principle of the common law that a
person is presumed innocent until found guilty beyond reasonable doubt.
Arguably, where the arrangements for giving evidence are not standard,
the jury may infer that special measures are required due
personal characteristics of the accused. For example, the use of
screens or closed circuit television may imply that the
menacing or violent. However, prejudice against the accused could be
overcome by issuing an appropriate warning to the
jury, for example
that such procedures are routine and that no adverse inference should
Arbitrary criteria for class of witnesses protected
3.22 Sexual assault covers a very diverse range of behaviour.
For example, it includes both unwanted touching and gang rape. Whether
a ban on cross-examination in person is justified may depend on the
gravity of the alleged offence. A mandatory ban would create
and potentially large class of witnesses receiving automatic
protection.
3.23 It may be arbitrary to single out complainants in sexual
assault proceedings for protection. Alleged victims of other types
crime may face similar obstacles when giving evidence. For example, the
motivated crime and hate crimes against sexual minorities as
“special offences” requiring protection.
The New Zealand Law Commission included sexual offences, domestic violence and harassment.
3.24 In its report on vulnerable witnesses, the Home Office
warned that “by drawing attention to particular offences the real
source of the witness’s vulnerability may be obscured.
Vulnerability may not stem simply from the qualities of the offence
Vulnerability may stem from the personal
characteristics of the witness, for example where a witness is very
young, very old, from
a different cultural background or intellectually
disabled. Alternatively, vulnerability may stem from the relationship
the witness and the accused, especially where there is a power
imbalance. It may be better to target witnesses who, taking into
account all the circumstances of the case, require alternative
arrangements for giving evidence, rather than impose a restriction
cross-examination based purely on the category of offence.
3.25 Further, where fear or intimidation is the obstacle to
giving evidence, it may be arbitrary for the prohibition to be limited
to the questioning of complainants. There are likely to be witnesses
other than alleged victims who will be reluctant to give evidence
knowing the accused may cross-examine them.
Inappropriate analogy with child witnesses
3.26 The basic proposal to extend the current limitations on
cross-examination by an unrepresented accused draws an analogy between
child witnesses and adult complainants in sexual assault cases.
Providing alternative measures for adults raises very different
than providing special measures for children. Children may not
understand the role of cross-examination, and often find
it confusing
and upsetting. They find it particularly distressing that the adult
asking the questions is accusing them of lying.
Arguably, the problems faced by adult complainants in sexual assault
trials may not be addressed simply by extending the current
available for child witnesses.
IMPLICATIONS
FOR THE WITNESS
3.27 Historically, many victims of sexual assault have considered themselves disadvantaged by the criminal justice system.
Complainants have felt that responsibility for the alleged crime is
inverted, where trials have focused on the blameworthiness
complainant rather than the accused.
Evidence of
previous sexual experience was deemed relevant not only to the issue of
consent, but to the complainant’s character
and credibility. The
criminal law protected only certain victims, typically
“respectable women who had physically resisted
their attackers
and promptly complained of their abuse.”
did not conform to this stereotype were less likely to receive
protection. These problems were compounded by a belief
that women were
inherently unreliable witnesses. As one judge commented,
In cases of alleged sexual offences it is really dangerous
to convict on the evidence of the woman or girl alone. This is
because human experience has shown that in these courts girls
and women do sometimes tell an entirely false story which is very
to fabricate, but extremely difficult to refute. Such stories are
fabricated for all sorts of reasons, which I need not now
and sometimes for no reason at all.
Since the 1970s, reform to the law of sexual assault has aimed to
strike a better balance between the rights of victims and
the right of
the accused. For example, evidence relating to sexual experience is now
inadmissible,
and corroboration requirements have been abolished.
However, because the incident will often have occurred in private, and
because consent plays such a pivotal role, the trial still
turns on the
credibility of the complainant. The accused will seek to show the
witness’ testimony is fabricated or at least
unreliable, in order
to raise a reasonable doubt as to the accused’s guilt. The
accused may also allege that the complainant
has ulterior motives for
making the complaint. If complainants in sexual assault proceedings are
still disadvantaged by the trial
process, special measures may be
required to ensure their evidence is heard.
3.29 A restriction on cross-examination by an unrepresented
accused in sexual assault trials would have the following implications
for witnesses.
Barriers to giving evidence overcome
3.30 Placing a restriction on cross-examination by an
unrepresented accused may be necessary for the due administration of
Where the witness makes allegations of sexual assault, fear or
intimidation may make it difficult, if not impossible, for that witness
to give evidence. Where the witness is hectored or harassed, the
quality of evidence may also be affected.
3.31 The rationale for allowing an alleged victim of sexual
assault to use a special arrangement to give evidence is that it is
necessary to enable that witness to give evidence effectively. The use
of the special arrangement is intended to overcome the barriers
giving evidence faced by that particular witness. It aims to put the
witness in the same position as witnesses generally, not
favourable position.
Moreover, the court or jury would
not have to deal with the emotional atmosphere inevitably created by a
personal confrontation
of this kind.
Distress minimised
3.32 Because of the nature of the proceedings, complainants in
sexual offence cases are likely to suffer extreme distress and trauma
in court. The witness has to recount the details of the ordeal in
public, and has to answer direct questions on a very personal
difficult subject. The complainant’s motives for making the
complaint are often called into question. Indeed, having
to testify at
trial can be almost as traumatic for the complainant as the actual
The criminal justice system should do its best to reduce such trauma.
3.33 It is important that any new measure is, realistically,
capable of achieving its end. Alternative arrangements, such as the
of screens or closed circuit television, physically separate the
complainant from the accused and may effectively reduce the
complainant’s distress and embarrassment. Similarly the presence
of a support person may be worthwhile. However, such arrangements
not be enough, if the accused still confronts the complainant in
3.34 Relaying the questions through an intermediary may also be
inadequate, as the complainant would still see and hear the accused
the questions before the intermediary repeats or rephrases them. The
complainant may also have to listen to the accused and
intermediary
discussing the distressing subject matter before the agreed question is
put to the complainant. Appointing a legal
representative would avoid
this and may be the most effective solution.
3.35 A restriction on cross-examination to minimise distress
would be consistent with previous reform to the law of sexual assault.
For example, evidence relating to sexual experience which would
otherwise be admissible under one of the exceptions in the legislation
is excluded where the complainant’s distress, humiliation or
embarrassment outweighs or is equal to its probative value.
Double victimisation avoided
3.36 In a sexual assault trial, the complainant is likely to
find it difficult to give evidence first, because the questions are
such a personal nature, and second, because it is the alleged
perpetrator who is asking them. Aggressive or humiliating
cross-examination
may exacerbate the impact of the original assault,
leading to further victimisation.
Victims encouraged to report and proceed with the matter
3.37 Sexual assault is notoriously under-reported. The
Australian Bureau of Statistics estimated that only one in ten women
were sexually assaulted had reported the most recent incident to
the police, a rate much lower than for other types of assault.
Victims may choose not to report the incident for a variety of reasons.
They may prefer to deal with the incident themselves, or
consider it to be a serious offence. They may not report the incident
because they are ashamed or embarrassed, or may fear
that they will not
be believed. Reporting the offence may appear futile if the victim
doubts the ability of the system to bring
the perpetrator to justice.
3.38 Sexual assault proceedings also have a very high rate of
attrition. This means that only a small number of incidents that are
reported to the police actually result in conviction. Charges may be
dropped because of a perceived lack of evidence, particularly
victim sustains no physical injuries.
Where there is a
prior relationship between the accused and complainant, the latter may
for various reasons decide to retract the
allegation.
3.39 Where the victim is apprehensive about the trial process, a
restriction on cross-examination by the accused in person may provide
an incentive to report or proceed with the matter. Again, this would be
consistent with previous reform to the law of sexual assault.
exclusion of evidence relating to sexual experience encourages victims
to report the offence by reassuring them that they will
not be subject
to humiliating and irrelevant questioning in the courtroom.
Special nature of sexual assault trials recognised
3.40 As discussed above, sexual assault trials are distinctive
because they tend to turn on the issue of consent. If the alleged
assault occurred in private, the complainant’s words, character
and motive will be closely examined. For this reason cross-examination
may be more time consuming than in other trials. Where it is one
person’s word against another’s, the accused simply
raise a reasonable doubt in order to avoid conviction. In trying to
discredit complainants’ evidence, complainants
may feel it is
they who are on trial. Given the difficult nature of sexual assault
trials, alternative measures may be necessary
to put the complainant in
the same position as witnesses generally.
Loss of ability to answer accused’s questions in court
3.41 It must be recognised that a mandatory rule prohibiting
cross-examination in person by an unrepresented accused deprives
of the opportunity of answering questions put to them by the
accused. Witnesses who would value such an opportunity may regard such
a mandatory rule as unreasonable.
OF THE RESTRICTION
3.42 A restriction on cross-examination in person by an
unrepresented accused could be mandatory, presumptive or discretionary.
A mandatory prohibition would afford the greatest protection to
witnesses, but may impinge upon the rights of the accused in problem
cases. Conversely a discretionary prohibition would safeguard the
rights of the accused but may not effectively enable witnesses
3.43 The legislation excluding evidence relating to sexual
experience adopts a rules-based approach. The mandatory exclusion, with
exceptions, has proved more effective in protecting complainants
against distressing questioning than similar legislation in other
admit the evidence. However, it has also been criticised for
restrictive, as it may in problem cases mandate the exclusion of
evidence which is directly relevant to determining the
innocence of the accused.
3.44 The current legislation dealing with the questioning of
child witnesses adopts a presumptive bar on cross-examination in person
by an unrepresented accused. It provides that a child witness is to be
cross-examined by a person appointed by the court instead
accused, but the court may choose not to appoint such a person if it
considers that it is not in the interests of justice
3.45 In considering the extent of any restriction on
cross-examination, it is important to note that the matter is not
whether the
rights of the accused or the rights of the complainant are
more important. The matter is whether, in the public interest, the
is fair. A balance must be struck so the complainant is able to
overcome obstacles to giving evidence, without preventing the accused
from presenting a full and fair defence.
3.46 One view is that in all sexual offence trials, a court
appointed legal representative should conduct cross-examination after
receiving instructions from the accused. If the accused refused to give
instructions, no cross-examination would take place. Those
genuine defence can instruct counsel accordingly. This may be the
fairest approach for all parties.
3.47 An alternative view is that there should be a presumption
against cross-examination in person by an unrepresented accused. The
judge would have a discretion to permit cross-examination in person
only if it is appropriate in the circumstances of the case.
IMPLICATIONS
FOR COURT-APPOINTED LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES
3.48 If a legal representative is appointed for the purpose of
cross-examination, it is important to consider how this arrangement
would actually operate. The role of the lawyer would raise both
practical and ethical issues.
3.49 Lawyers have a duty to act in the best interests of their
clients. However, where legal representation is imposed, the normal
lawyer-client relationship is displaced. There may be communication
problems between the accused and the legal representative.
The accused
may be uncooperative, and may refuse to give instructions. Litigants
can normally dismiss counsel if such problems
arise, but an accused who
is prevented from questioning the complainant in person would be forced
to retain the court-appointed
representative.
3.50 It may be unrealistic to expect legal representatives to
conduct cross-examination effectively where they have only limited
participation in the trial. Injecting a lawyer into a potentially
lengthy trial specifically for the purpose of cross-examination
main witness poses serious problems. Effective cross-examination
requires a broad understanding of the issues raised by
all the evidence
at trial, not just the evidence of the complainant. However, it is a
regular practice in other areas of law to
brief counsel to conduct only
part of a case. Appointing counsel for the purpose of cross-examination
only may in fact be workable.
3.51 Limiting the role of representatives to cross-examination
of the complainant only may put them in a practical and ethical
The representative is not merely a mouthpiece, but has a
positive duty to act in the client’s interests. Representatives
are not able to cross-examine the other witnesses in order to lay the
foundations of a good defence, if one is available, but are
the line of argument the accused has already begun. They may have to
ask questions they know are not in the client’s
interest to ask.
The procedure may be prejudicial to the accused, where the defence
lawyer is appointed specifically in the interest
of the main
prosecution witness. If lawyers were appointed to conduct whole cases,
they could take instructions and prepare a proper
defence. This would
be less ethically compromising.
3.52 In the United Kingdom, a court-appointed legal representative is not responsible to the accused.
This protects the immunity of court-appointed legal representatives,
and recognises that, given a barrister’s professional
duty to put
the case on behalf of the client, there may be difficulties for counsel
who conduct cross-examination only.
In Australia, advocates are immune from liability in negligence at common law.
This immunity would probably extend to a court-appointed legal
representative. In any case, any legislative reform should clarify
legal, professional and ethical obligations of a court-appointed
representative.
CONSIDERATIONS
3.53 The use of an alternative procedure for cross-examination
is likely to delay proceedings. Where the questions are relayed through
an intermediary, the process will take longer. Delays may also be
caused where a legal representative or other third party has
3.54 The cost of legal representation must also be considered.
Where the accused is unrepresented for financial reasons, it would
unreasonable to expect that person to bear the cost of compulsory legal
representation. However, where legal aid has already
been refused, it
may be inappropriate to expect representation to be provided at public
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of Contents
Dietrich v The Queen
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292
at 300 (Mason CJ and McHugh J). See also
McInnis v The Queen
[1979] HCA 65
(1979) 143 CLR 575
at 579 (Barwick CJ), at 582 (Mason J) and at 586-588 (Murphy J).
Information supplied by V Korabelnikoff, New
South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research (2 May 2002). Note
that for 19.7%
of cases, it was not known whether the accused had legal
representation or not, so the actual proportion of unrepresented
persons could be significantly higher.
The Australian Law Reform Commission recently
reported that 41% of cases in the Family Court involved one or more
unrepresented
Review of the Federal Civil Justice System
(Discussion Paper 62, 1999) at para 9.50. In the NSW Local Court, 50.8%
of people had legal representation in 2000: New South Wales
Crime Statistics and Research, “Summary statistics for the NSW
Local Court, 1996-2000” (as at 6 August 2002)
«www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/bocsar1.nsf/pages/lc_stats9600».
Barton v The Queen
[1980] HCA 48
(1980) 147 CLR 75
Jago v District Court (NSW)
[1989] HCA 46
(1989) 168 CLR 23
Dietrich v The Queen
[1992] HCA 57
177 CLR 292.
It has been held, however, that the right to a fair trial
may be curtailed by statute. The courts have no power to stay criminal
proceedings on the basis that legislation operates to cause injustice
to the accused: see
(NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, No 60216/95, 9 October 1995, unreported).
Although the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(1966) identifies and lists the rights of the accused in a fair trial: Art 14.
Jago v District Court (NSW)
[1989] HCA 46
(1989) 168 CLR 23
at 56-57 (Deane J).
Dietrich v The Queen
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292
at 298 (Mason CJ and McHugh J).
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused has the right “to be confronted with the witnesses against him”:
Constitution
(USA) Amendment VI.
Dietrich v The Queen
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292.
McInnes v The Queen
[1979] HCA 65
(1979) 143 CLR 575
Queensland Law Reform Commission,
The Receipt of Evidence by Queensland Courts: the Evidence of Children
(Report 55, 2000) at 292.
Evidence Act 1995
See para 2.4-2.2.7.
[1982] 2 NSWLR 750
at 762-763 (Street CJ);
Galea v Galea
(1990) 19 NSWLR 263
at 280-282 (Kirby ACJ).
Dietrich v The Queen
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292
at 302 (Mason CJ and McHugh J).
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
The Receipt of Evidence by Queensland Courts: the Evidence of Children
(Report 55, 2000) at 291-292.
United Kingdom,
Speaking Up for Justice:
Report of the Interdepartmental Working Group on the Treatment of
Vulnerable or Intimidated Witnesses in
the Criminal Justice System
(Home Office, 1998) at para 9.50 (“Speaking Up for Justice Report”).
Speaking Up for Justice Report at Recommendation 62.
Where the court decides it is necessary in the
interests of justice for the witness to be cross-examined, the court
must appoint
a qualified legal representative, chosen by the court, to
cross-examine the witness in the interests of the accused:
Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999
(UK) s 38(4).
For example, see the
Evidence (Children) Act 1997
Criminal Law Amendment Act 2000
(Qld) s 21R;
Sexual Offences (Evidence and Procedure) Act 1983
(NT) s 5(2);
Evidence Act 1939
(NT) s 21A(3);
Evidence Act 1906
Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999
Speaking Up for Justice Report at 151.
New Zealand Law Commission,
(Report 55, 1999) Vol 1 at para 418.
Speaking Up for Justice Report at 151.
C Eastwood and W Patton,
The Experiences of Child Complainants of Sexual Abuse in the Criminal Justice System
(Queensland University of Technology, 2002) at 123.
See P Easteal (ed),
Balancing the Scales: Rape, Law Reform and Australian Culture
(The Federation Press, Sydney, 1998).
P van de Zandt, “Heroines of
Fortitude”, in Easteal (ed) at 134; see also the Law Reform
Commission of Victoria,
Rape: Reform of Law and Procedure
(Appendices to Interim Report 42, 1991) at 127-128 and 147-170.
See T Henning and S Bronitt, “Rape
victims on trial: regulating the use and abuse of sexual history
evidence”, in Easteal
(ed) at 76.
Henry; Manning
(1969) 53 Cr App R 150
at 153 (Salmon LJ).
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
This section replaced the former s 409B of the
Crimes Act 1900
Evidence Act 1995
However, the judge’s discretion to warn the jury about unreliable evidence is preserved:
See also New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System
(Report 80, 1996) at para 7.15.
See Law Reform Commission of Victoria,
Rape: Reform of Law and Procedure
(Appendices to Interim Report 42, 1991) at 125-132 and 149-152.
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
“Violence Against Women”,
Year Book Australia
(Australian Bureau of Statistics, 1998). See also
Crime and Safety Australia
(Australian Bureau of Statistics, 1999).
See L Russo, “Date Rape: A Hidden Crime”, Australian Institute of Criminology,
Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice
, No 157, 2000 at 4.
See I Freckelton, “Sexual offence prosecutions: a barrister’s perspective”, in P Easteal (ed),
Balancing the Scales: Rape, Law Reform and Australian Culture
(The Federation Press, Sydney, 1998) at 148.
New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 18 March 1981, Mr Wran, Premier, Second Reading Speech at 4761.
See New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Review of Section 409B of the
Crimes Act 1900
(Report 87, 1998) at ch 4. Note that the prohibition of evidence relating to sexual experience is now found in
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Evidence (Children) Act 1997
Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999
(UK) s 38(5).
Speaking Up for Justice Report at para 9.45.
Giannarelli v Wraith
[1988] HCA 52
(1988) 165 CLR 543.
Issues Paper 22 (2002) - Questioning of complainants by unrepresented accused in sexual assault trials
4. Issues arising from this paper
History of this Reference (Digest)
Nature of any limitation
Availability of alternative arrangements
The Law Reform Commission would like to know your views on proposals to limit the questioning of complainants by an unrepresented
accused. We would be interested to hear whether you have had experience of a sexual offence case where the accused cross-examined
the complainant in person, or if you have experience of the current legislation that prohibits cross-examination of a child witness
in person by an unrepresented accused. We would like to hear any comments you may have on this subject, whether or not you respond
directly to the questions below.
OF ANY LIMITATION
1. Should the questioning of complainants by an unrepresented accused be limited in sexual assault trials?
2. Should there be an explicit limitation on cross-examination in person, or would greater judicial control of proceedings be sufficient?
3. If an explicit limitation were adopted, should it be mandatory, presumptive or discretionary?
4. If the matter is left to the court’s discretion, what factors should the court take into account?
5. Should the limitation apply only to sexual assault cases, or should it apply to a broader category of offences, for example those
including domestic violence?
6. Should the limitation apply only to alleged victims, or to other vulnerable witnesses?
7. Should the limitation apply in criminal proceedings only, or should it also apply in some civil proceedings, for example in the
case of an alleged personal assault?
8. If a defendant is prevented from cross-examining the witness in person, what procedure should be followed? Should the court have
the power to decide whether or not it is necessary, in the interests of justice, that the witness’ evidence be tested, or should
it in every case provide an alternative means of questioning the witness?
9. If the accused is prevented from asking the questions in person, and the questions are put to the witness by another person, must
this person be a legal practitioner?
10. If the person asking the questions must be a legal practitioner, should the accused automatically receive legal aid?
11. If the person asking the questions need not be a legal practitioner, who else could it be? Should it be the judge? Should the
court have the discretion to disallow certain people from asking the questions, for example a friend or relative of the accused?
12. Where a person other than the accused or a legal practitioner asks the questions, should they use the exact language of the accused,
or should the judge have the discretion to refuse or rephrase the question?
AVAILABILITY
OF ALTERNATIVE ARRANGEMENTS
13. Should alternative arrangements, such as the use of closed circuit television or screens, be available for witnesses giving evidence
in sexual offence proceedings? If so, what should they include?
14. Should a witness be entitled to such an arrangement, or should their availability be left to the discretion of the judge?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of Contents
Issues Paper 22 (2002) - Questioning of complainants by unrepresented accused in sexual assault trials
Select bibliography
History of this Reference (Digest)
AUSTRALIAN BUREAU OF STATISTICS,
Crime and Safety Australia
AUSTRALIAN BUREAU OF STATISTICS, “Violence Against Women”,
Year Book Australia
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Review of the Federal Civil Justice System
(Discussion Paper 62, 1999)
EASTEAL, P (ed),
Balancing the Scales: Rape, Law Reform and Australian Culture
(The Federation Press, Sydney, 1998)
EASTWOOD, C and PATTON, W,
The Experiences of Child Complainants of Sexual Abuse in the Criminal Justice System
(Queensland University of Technology, 2002)
LAW REFORM COMMISSION OF VICTORIA,
Rape: Reform of Law and Procedure
(Appendices to Interim Report 42, 1991)
LAW REFORM COMMISSION OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA,
Evidence of Children and Other Vulnerable Witnesses
(Project 87, Discussion Paper, 1990 and Report, 1991)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
People with an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System
(Report 80, 1996)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Review of Section 409B of the
Crimes Act 1900
(Report 87, 1998)
NEW SOUTH WALES, Attorney General’s Department, Children’s Evidence Taskforce,
Taking Evidence in Court
(Sydney, 1994)
NEW SOUTH WALES, Attorney General’s Department, Committee on Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System,
People with an Intellectual Disability – Giving Evidence in Court
(Sydney, 2000)
NEW ZEALAND LAW COMMISSION,
Evidence: Reform of the Law
(Report 55, Vol 1, 1999)
NEW ZEALAND LAW COMMISSION,
Evidence: Evidence Code and Commentary
(Report 55, Vol 2, 1999)
NEW ZEALAND LAW COMMISSION,
The Evidence of Children and Other Vulnerable Witnesses: A Discussion Paper
(Preliminary Paper 26, 1996)
QUEENSLAND LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
The Receipt of Evidence by Queensland Courts: the Evidence of Children
(Report 55, 2000)
Date Rape: A Hidden Crime
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice No 157, 2000)
UNITED KINGDOM, Home Office,
Speaking Up for Justice: Report of the Interdepartmental Working Group on the Treatment of Vulnerable or Intimidated Witnesses in
the Criminal Justice System
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of Contents
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter