URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/CLRC/2000/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:33:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
of the Copyright Tribunal
December 2000
The Copyright Law Review Committee is a specialist advisory body established
in 1983 to inquire into and report to Government on
specific copyright law
© Commonwealth of Australia 2000
ISBN 0 642 20981 2
Requests to reproduce this document for commercial purposes should be directed to:
Commonwealth Copyright Officer
Legislative Services
GPO Box 1920
CANBERRA ACT 2601
Tel: (02) 6275 3649
Fax: (02) 6275 3694
email: cwealthcopyright@dofa.gov.au
http://www.ausinfo.gov.au/
Note: The law as contained in this report is stated as at 21 April 2000.
The Committee
Course of the reference
The Terms of Reference
Abbreviations
Section 1 – Consolidated
Recommendations
Section 2 – Background
Chapter 1 – Purpose of the Copyright Tribunal
History and background
Chapter 2 – Australia's
international obligations
Permissible limitations on the abuse of monopoly power
Berne Convention
Rome Convention, WCT, WPPT
Chapter 3 – International models
Regulation by civil courts
Regulation by a specialist tribunal
Regulation by an administrative authority
Chapter 4 – The role of copyright collecting societies
Australasian Mechanical Copyright Owners' Society (AMCOS)
Australasian Performing Right Association (APRA)
Phonographic Performance Company of Australia (PPCA)
Screenrights
Chapter 5 – Nature of cases heard before the Copyright Tribunal
Nature of the applications
Nature of the parties
Size of the proceedings
Duration of proceedings
Chapter 6 – Related inquiries
Section 3 – Jurisdiction of the Copyright Tribunal
Chapter 7 – Constitutional issues
Recent judicial consideration
Chapter 8 – Jurisdiction of the Copyright Tribunal
Non-statutory licences
Statutory licences
Chapter 9 – Effect of the Copyright Amendment (Digital Agenda) Bill 1999
Chapter 10 – Competition policy
Comparison of the Copyright Tribunal with the Competition Tribunal
Chapter 11 – Output arrangements
Definition of 'output arrangements'
Justification for changes to the Tribunal's jurisdiction over output arrangements
Statutory licences
Existing jurisdiction of the Tribunal
Methods of working out equitable remuneration and of record-keeping
Method of working out payment of prescribed royalty for recording of a musical work
Requirements for marking, record-keeping and inspection of records under statutory licences
Remuneration notices under Parts VA and VB
Non-statutory licences
'Transactional licences'
Expansion of the Tribunal's jurisdiction over collectively administered licences
Option 1 – Extension of the Tribunal's jurisdiction to all licence schemes, excluding transactional licences
Option 2 – Extension of the Tribunal's jurisdiction to all licence schemes administered by a collecting society, excluding transactional
Option 3 – Extension of the Tribunal's jurisdiction to all licences administered by a collecting society, including transactional
Definition of 'collecting society'
Use of the term 'collecting society'
Substitution of collectively administered licence schemes and transactional licences
Extension of the Tribunal's jurisdiction to licences agreed between the parties
Chapter 12 – Input arrangements
General jurisdiction over input arrangements
Declaration and revocation procedures under the Act
Contractual remedies
Corporations Law
Fiduciary duties
Judicial review of administrative decisions
The jurisdiction of the ACCC and the Australian
Competition Tribunal
Internal mechanisms of collecting societies
Chapter 13 – Declaration of collecting societies
Chapter 14 – Compulsory
referral of licences
15 – The determination of equitable remuneration
The Tribunal's approach to the determination of equitable
remuneration
Factors for determination of equitable remuneration under
Parts VA and VB
Is prescription of factors necessary?
Equitable remuneration under proposed statutory licences
16 – Guidelines regarding what is 'reasonable in the 'circumstances'
Chapter 17 – Anomalies
in statutory licences
The Tribunal's jurisdiction to determine a record-keeping system
The determination of different amounts in accordance with a
The determination of different amounts under sampling systems
Chapter 18 – Untraceable
Section 4 – Membership, Practice and Procedure of the Copyright Tribunal
Chapter 19 – Membership of the Copyright Tribunal
Appointment of more members
Appointment of members with industry experience
Chapter 20 – Practice and
The Copyright Tribunal's power to determine its own procedure
Case management
A more active role
Incorporating Federal Court case management strategies
Deciding matters on the papers
Preliminary determinations
Should the Tribunal rely on independent expertise?
Controlling the use of experts
Tribunal-appointed experts
Panel of experts
5 – Other Matters Addressed by the Committee
Chapter 21 – Alternative
dispute resolution
Private ADR
Industry-based ADR
Tribunal-annexed ADR
Chapter 22 – Code of conduct
Chapter 23 – Ombudsman
24 – Accessibility and promotion of the Copyright Tribunal
25 – Implementation of the Committee's recommendations
Recommendations to the Government
Recommendations to the Copyright Tribunal
The impact of the Committee's recommendations on the
administration
Review of recommendations made by the Committee
Appendix A – List of submissions
Appendix B – Interests represented at the September forum
Appendix C – Jurisdiction of the Copyright Tribunal
Appendix D – Re Applications by Australasian Performing Right Association
Appendix E – Alternative dispute resolution
Appendix F – Table of decisions of the Copyright Tribunal
The Copyright Law Review Committee was established in 1983 by
the Attorney-General as a specialist advisory body to report to the
on specific copyright law issues referred to it for its consideration.
From 1983 to 1995 the Committee was chaired by the Hon. Justice I.F. Sheppard
AO, then a Judge of the Federal Court of Australia
and President of the
references: the meaning of 'publication'
); the use of copyright material by churches; performers'
protection; moral rights; the importation provisions of the
conversion damages; journalists' copyright; and computer software protection.
In 1995 the then Minister for Justice reconstituted the Committee and asked
it to advise on simplification of the
. Mr Peter Banki, formerly a
member of the Committee, was appointed Chairman. Following the 1996 federal
election, the Attorney-General,
the Hon. Daryl Williams AM QC MP, reviewed the
structure and function of the Committee and relocated its Secretariat to
In May 1996 Mr Banki resigned from the Committee.
In September 1996 the Attorney-General appointed Professor Dennis Pearce as
the Chairman of the Committee. The Committee recently
completed a report on the
simplification of the
in two parts.
Exceptions to the Exclusive Rights of Copyright Owners
was published in September 1998.
Categorisation of Subject Matter and Exclusive Rights, and Other Issues
published in February 1999.
The Committee
Professor Dennis Pearce is Chairman of the Committee. The other members of
the Committee are Ms Maureen Barron, Ms Susan Blackwell,
Ms Mara B�n*, Mr Tom
Cochrane, Mr Chris Creswell and Dr Warwick A. Rothnie.
Enquiries concerning the Committee and its work should be directed to:
Attorney-General's
Robert Garran Offices
National Circuit
BARTON ACT 2600
ph: 02 6250 6076
fax: 02 6250 5989
email: clrc.secretariat@ag.gov.au
* Ms B�n resigned as a member of the Committee on 29 February 2000.
Course of the reference
On 20 April 1999 the Attorney-General asked the Committee to inquire into and
report on the need for changes to the
under Part VI of the
. The Committee's terms of
reference are set out below. In carrying out its reference, the Committee
advertised widely, invited
submissions from a wide variety of interests and
carried out consultations with key interest groups and affected parties. (A list
of those who made submissions to the Committee is at Appendix A.)
On 18 June 1999 the Committee published an issues paper,
. The paper invited submissions on the
matters raised in the Committee's terms of reference. The paper identified and
the key elements of the current Copyright Tribunal regime, and
identified many of the issues associated with an expansion of its
and with any changes to the procedures of the Tribunal. Twenty submissions were
received in response to the issues
On 11 August 1999 the Committee held a meeting in Sydney with Justice
Burchett and former Justice Sheppard, the current and past
respectively of the Copyright Tribunal. The Justices provided valuable insight
based on their experience of serving
on the Tribunal and responded to issues
arising out of the submissions received from interests in relation to the issues
On the same day the Committee also met with Mr Shane Simpson, author of
Review of Australian Copyright Collecting Societies
, to seek his response to
issues raised by interests in response to the issues paper.
Pursuant to paragraph 2(a) of the Committee's terms of reference, the
Chairman of the Committee met with Mr Henry Ergas, the Chairman
Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee (IPCRC), on two
occasions, in September and October 1999, to
discuss the progress of the IPCRC's
reference and that of the Committee.
On 27 September 1999 the Committee held a half-day forum in Sydney (referred
to in this report as the 'September forum') with particular
interests to discuss
issues relevant to its reference. Representatives from copyright industry bodies
and user organisations
attended the forum. (A list of interests represented at
that meeting is at Appendix B.)
On 9 February 2000 the Committee published a draft report on its findings and
proposed recommendations for public comment. Fifteen
submissions were received
by the Committee in response to the draft report. The Committee considers that
the small number of
submissions it received in response to the draft report
indicated that its draft recommendations were largely uncontroversial.
This final report on the
is an amended version of the Committee's draft report. It is the
Committee's intention that readers be able to study this report
without the need
to refer to the draft report.
The Committee's recommendations in this report have remained substantially
the same as those in its draft report. However, in light
of submissions received
in response to the draft report and further consideration, the Committee has
changed some of its draft
recommendations. The most significant of those changes
are those in relation to marking, record-keeping and remuneration notices
(Chapter 11); input arrangements (Chapter 12); and untraceable copyright owners
(Chapter 18).
The Terms of Reference
1. The Copyright Law Review Committee (the Committee) is to inquire into and
report on the need for changes to the jurisdiction
and procedures of the Copyright Tribunal under
. The Committee should
assess the need to increase the Tribunal's capacity to address matters arising
, and related legislation, having regard to new uses of
Committee should also examine ways to facilitate access by parties to the
In so doing, the Committee should consider:
the Tribunal's structure, constitution, rules and practices;
the existing jurisdiction of the Tribunal under
and the scope for any expansion in the Tribunal's role to cover new uses of
any regulatory mechanisms
that may be used to effect that cover;
the consequences of any expansion in the Tribunal's role on its
administration;
the need and desirability for an independent alternative dispute
resolution mechanism to complement the Tribunal's jurisdiction
and procedure;
the costs and benefits on business, consumers and the community as a
whole of any expansion in the Tribunal's role to cover new
uses of copyright
materials, including electronic uses, and of any independent alternative dispute
resolution mechanisms;
could be simplified to incorporate any
proposed recommendations;
whether there is a need to actively promote the Tribunal to
persons who may wish to use the Tribunal;
incidental matters arising from the examination of points (a) to (g),
which are able to be addressed by the Committee within the
time frame for the
reference; and
a strategy to implement and review any recommendations made by the
2. In undertaking the inquiry the Committee will have regard to:
the recommendations and findings made in relevant Government reviews or
inquiries (including the review of the
in 1999­2000 under the
Commonwealth's Legislation Review Program) and any reports by relevant expert or
advisory bodies
including the views of relevant expert or advisory bodies and
other interests;
any relevant amendments to the
or associated regulations
that are introduced into Parliament, or which the Government announces are
proposed to be introduced
or are being considered;
any relevant international copyright obligations including those in
treaties to which Australia is considering becoming a party;
the principle that legislation which restricts competition should be
or new legislation
made only if the benefits to the community as a
whole outweigh the costs; and if the objectives of the legislation can be
only by restricting competition;
domestic and international tribunal models;
the possible effect on the operation and complexity of any future
transitional
provisions relating to
the Government's policy that the compliance costs and paper work burden
on small business should be reduced where feasible.
3. In undertaking the review, the Committee is to advertise
widely and consult with key interest groups and affected parties.
4. In undertaking the review and preparing its report and associated
recommendations, the Committee is to report to the Attorney-General
by 30 April
[Return to contents]
Abbreviations
Administrative Appeals Tribunal
Australian Broadcasting Corporation
Australian Copyright Council
Australian Competition and Consumer
Australian Digital Alliance
alternative dispute resolution
Arts Law Centre of Australia
Australian Libraries Copyright Committee
Australian Law Reform Commission
Australasian Mechanical Copyright Owners'
Australasian Performing Right Association
Australian Recording Industry Association
Berne Convention
Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works
Council of Australian State Libraries
Digital Agenda Bill
Commonwealth Department of Communications,
Information Technology and the Arts
Don't Stop the Music!
Don't Stop the Music! Report of the Inquiry
into Copyright, Music and Small Business (1998)
Federation of Australian Commercial Television
Federation of Australian Radio
Broadcasters
Intellectual Property and Competition Review
Law Council of Australia
Ministerial Council on Employment, Education,
Training and Youth Affairs
National Competition Council
non-statutory licence
A licence agreed, or offered on the basis of
agreement, between the owner and a user of copyright (or their agent)
the doing of an act comprised in the copyright
Phonographic Performance Company of
Performing Right Society, UK
regulation/ rule
regulations/ rules
Rome Convention
International Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organisations
Special Broadcasting Service
Screenrights
Audio-Visual Copyright Society Ltd (trading
Simpson Report
Review of Australian Copyright Collecting Societies
Spicer Committee Report
Report of the Committee Appointed by the Attorney-General of the Commonwealth to Consider What Alterations are Desirable in the Copyright
Law of the Commonwealth
statutory licence
A licence under a provision in the
allowing the doing of an act comprised in the copyright without the
permission of the copyright owner, subject to terms set
transactional licence
A licence for any copyright use, including a multiple use, in respect
(a) a single work or other subject matter;
(b) the works of a single author;
(c) the films, sound recordings or broadcasts of a single
each of those subject matter; or
(d) the published editions of a single publisher. Such
a licence is
distinct from a licence scheme. (The
Committee has also set out this
definition at
paragraph 11.44.)
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
Visual Arts Copyright Collecting Society
WIPO Copyright Treaty
World Intellectual Property Organisation
WIPO Performances and Phonograms
[Return to contents]
Section 1 – Consolidated recommendations
Chapter 10 – Competition policy
10.16 The Committee considers that the Copyright Tribunal is functioning well
and that it performs a role that would not be as
effectively performed by
another existing body. However, the Committee considers that its function would
be enhanced by the
adoption of the Committee's recommendations set out in the
following chapters of this report.
Chapter 11 – Output arrangements
11.12 The Committee recommends that the Act be amended so that the
(whether statutory or non-statutory licences) concerning all types of copyright
material and copyright uses. (The
Committee's particular recommendations to give
effect to this recommendation are set out below.)
11.20 The Committee recommends that
ss. 55(1)(d)(ii)(B)
(5) (and the
regulations made under those provisions) be repealed and the Tribunal's
which the royalty is payable in the
absence of agreement between the parties be the basis for determining a dispute
the parties.
11.31 The Committee recommends that the Copyright Tribunal's jurisdiction be
extended to allow it to determine a dispute about
any matter relating to an
agreement between an 'administering body' and the declared collecting society
or VB, which is outside the terms of the statutory licence. (The
Committee notes that this recommendation is consistent with its
recommendation at paragraph 11.100 below, in relation to non-statutory licences,
for the Tribunal's jurisdiction to
extend to all licence schemes and
transactional licences administered by a collecting society.)
11.32 The Committee recommends that the detailed requirements for marking,
record-keeping and inspection under s. 47A be repealed
in favour of a single
provision that those details should be left to the agreement of the parties or,
failing agreement, determination
by the Copyright Tribunal.
11.67 The Committee recommends that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal over
non-statutory licences be confined exclusively to the
review of licences
administered by a collecting society, and that the Act be amended accordingly.
11.94 The dissenting member recommends that the Act be amended to extend the
schemes, but not transactional
licences, administered by a collecting society.
11.100 The majority of the Committee recommends that the Act be amended to
extend the jurisdiction of the Copyright Tribunal to
all licence schemes and
transactional licences administered by a collecting society.
11.101 (The majority of the Committee further notes its recommendation at
paragraph 11.67 that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal be confined
exclusively to the review of licences administered by a collecting
11.108 The Committee recommends that no amendment be made to the Act to
establish a register of collecting societies for the purpose
of determining the
11.121 The Committee recommends that the definition of 'licensor' in
of the Act be amended so that it applies to a person or a body of persons, if
the Tribunal is satisfied that the person or
body collectively administers
rights in respect of a substantial number of works or other subject matter in a
class. Additionally,
the Committee recommends that the definition of 'licensor'
apply to a person or body of persons that administers a licence scheme,
or not that person or body also administers transactional licences or carries on
some other type of activity.
11.129 The Committee recommends that the Tribunal have
party, in addition to its existing jurisdiction to vary or confirm a scheme or
specify charges and conditions in relation
to licence schemes. Likewise, the
majority of the Committee recommends that the Tribunal have a power to
substitute, vary or
confirm a transactional licence put forward by a party.
Chapter 12 – Input arrangements
12.21 The Committee recommends that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal not be
amended to include a power to review input arrangements
generally, subject to
the Committee's recommendation at paragraph 12.22 below.
12.22 The Committee recommends that a declared collecting society have the
ability to make an application to the Tribunal for an
order confirming, varying
or substituting an existing or proposed scheme of distribution.
Chapter 13 – Declaration of collecting societies
13.15 The Committee recommends that the Attorney-General retain the power to
declare a collecting society for the purposes of
and VB (and under the
proposed statutory licence for retransmission of free-to-air broadcasts set out
in the Digital Agenda
Bill), in the first instance, and to revoke such a
declaration.
13.16 The Committee further recommends that the Act be amended so that the
Attorney-General may exercise a discretion to refer
an application for
declaration to the Tribunal if s/he considers it appropriate in the
circumstances. Consistent with that
recommendation, the Committee recommends
that the Attorney-General have the power to refer a question of a revocation of
declaration of a collecting society under Part VA or VB to the Copyright
Tribunal if s/he considers it appropriate in the circumstances.
Chapter 14 – Compulsory referral of licences
14.15 The Committee recommends that there be no change to the Tribunal's
of licence disputes.
Chapter 15 – The determination of equitable
remuneration
15.13 The Committee recommends that the Act not prescribe factors to which
the Tribunal may have regard in determining remuneration
under the various
statutory licences. The Committee does not intend by this recommendation that
there be any change to the
approach of the Tribunal in deciding issues which it
has developed to date.
15.14 In accordance with that recommendation, the Committee recommends that
ss. 153A(3)(b) and 153C(3) of the Act, and the regulations
made under those
provisions, be repealed.
15.18 In relation to the Digital Agenda Bill, the Committee recommends that:
no factors be prescribed for the Tribunal to have regard to for the
determination of the equitable remuneration payable by retransmitters
underlying copyright holders for the retransmission of free-to-air broadcasts;
no factors be prescribed for the Tribunal to have regard to in relation to
the determination of equitable remuneration for copying
and transmitting
material in electronic form.
Chapter 16 – Guidelines regarding what is 'reasonable in the
circumstances'
16.14 The Committee recommends that no change be made to the Act to codify
factors for the Tribunal to take into account when determining
'reasonable in the circumstances' in relation to licences.
Chapter 17 – Anomalies in statutory licences
17.06 The Committee recommends that ss. 135H and 135ZV of the Act not be
amended to extend the Copyright Tribunal's jurisdiction
to include the power to
determine a record-keeping system.
17.13 The Committee recommends that ss. 135H(2) and 135ZV(2) be omitted from
17.15 The Committee recommends that ss. 135J(4) and 135ZW(4) be omitted from
Chapter 19 – Membership of the Copyright Tribunal
19.10 The Committee recommends that more presidential and non-presidential
members be appointed to the Tribunal. The non-presidential
members should be
people with relevant industry experience and care should be taken to ensure that
there is an even representation
of people from both copyright owner and user
backgrounds among appointees.
Chapter 20 – Practice and procedure
20.29 The Committee recommends that, where appropriate, the Tribunal employ
the case management mechanisms of the Federal Court.
It should also use other
strategies, such as deciding matters on the papers, if appropriate.
20.30 The Committee does not recommend that the Tribunal be required to hand
down preliminary determinations.
20.31 The Committee recommends that the Tribunal be given the same express
power to control the use of expert evidence as the Federal
Court, including
power to appoint experts to assist it in dealing with technical evidence and to
receive expert evidence by
using the panel approach.
20.32 In order to ensure flexibility, the Tribunal should
retain a wide discretion as to its procedures.
20.33 The Committee recommends that r. 40D of the Copyright Tribunal
(Procedure) Regulations 1969 be amended to allow the Tribunal
to continue to
hear a matter where a discrete question of law is referred to the Federal Court.
However, the regulation should
prevent a final decision by the Tribunal pending
the decision of the Federal Court on the question of law.
Chapter 21 – Alternative dispute resolution
21.23 The Committee recommends that collecting societies adopt ADR for the
resolution of their disputes with copyright users and
potential users, as well
as their disputes with members.
21.24 In keeping with the earlier recommendation (at paragraph 20.29) for the
Tribunal to adopt a more active case management approach,
the Committee
recommends that the Copyright Tribunal should encourage parties to explore ADR
and should have the power to compel
them to do so where the Tribunal thinks it
is appropriate.
21.25 The Committee recommends that the Copyright Tribunal utilise the
Federal Court mediation service as an effective form of
ADR. It should also be
able to refer matters for private mediation.
Chapter 23 – Ombudsman
23.05 The Committee does not recommend the establishment of an ombudsman of
collecting societies by the Government. The Committee
notes that this
recommendation is no barrier to collecting societies establishing their own
industry ombudsman.
Chapter 24 – Accessibility and promotion of the Copyright
24.06 The Committee recommends that collecting societies notify parties that
they may take up a dispute with the Copyright Tribunal
(including an outline of
its procedures and functions) at the time of sending out notifications of
decisions regarding licence
applications. The Committee acknowledges that this
may not always be necessary, depending on the constituency of the particular
collecting society.
[Return to contents]
Section 2 –
Chapter 1 – Purpose of the Copyright
History and background
1.01 The Copyright Tribunal is a specialist administrative body established
primarily for the purpose of dealing with disputes
regarding statutory licences
and particular non-statutory licences. The Copyright Tribunal is established
under Part VI of
and its jurisdiction is provided for in
Division 3 of
1.02 While the jurisdiction provided for is complex, the Tribunal generally
speaking has the function of determining remuneration
payable under the
statutory licence schemes provided for in the Act, and has jurisdiction in
respect of licence schemes falling
within the definition of a 'licence scheme'
, where the scheme has been referred to it by a party.
1.03 Pressure for a tribunal arose in Australia after the formation of the
Australasian Performing Right Association (APRA) in
1926, which first licensed
the public performance right in musical works. Similar concerns were expressed
in the UK about the
equivalent position of the Performing Right Society (PRS)
and that of Phonographic Performance Limited, which was established
record industry in 1934 to exploit the performing right in sound recordings.
1.04 In 1932 a Royal Commission (the Owen Commission) was formed to inquire
into and report on the exploitation of the performing
rights in response to
those concerns.
The Owen Commission concluded that APRA performed
its functions to the benefit both of owners, 'who individually cannot
effectively
protect their interests', and of the users of copyright.
It recommended the establishment of a tribunal to counterbalance the position of
APRA which it described as 'a super-monopoly
controlling, or claiming to
control, most of the music which users in public must use and is able to dictate
own terms'.
However, that recommendation was not acted upon because of
doubts about whether an enactment providing for compulsory arbitration
disputes between APRA and other bodies would be consistent with the Berne
Convention.
1.05 In Australia the Copyright Tribunal was established by
in response to the perceived need to control the exercise by
collecting societies or other organisations of the rights given to
musical works and sound recordings. To
a large extent, the current limited
notable that
the current jurisdiction of the Copyright Tribunal (with the
significant exceptions of the statutory licences under
, VB and Division
of the Act) centres on statutory and non-statutory licensing
matters relating to the public performance and broadcasting of sound
and of literary, dramatic or musical works (or an adaptation thereof) and the
recording of musical works.
1.06 The jurisdiction and nature of the Copyright Tribunal, as it is today,
was largely built on the recommendations of the 1959
Report of the Committee Appointed by the Attorney-General of the Commonwealth to Consider What Alterations are Desirable in the Copyright
Law of the Commonwealth
(the Spicer
Committee Report). One of the major problems which the Spicer Committee was
called on to solve was whether or not
the provisions of the UK
should form the basis of an Australian Copyright Act. As the rationale for
the Australian Copyright Tribunal's current jurisdiction
arose substantially
from that report, and from the UK model to which the Spicer Committee had
regard, it is instructive for
the Committee to outline that model and the
relevant recommendations of that report.
1.07 Part IV of the UK
, which established the UK
Performing Right Tribunal, implemented recommendations by the 1951 UK Board of
Trade Committee (the
Gregory Committee) for the establishment of a standing
tribunal with binding powers of determination in cases where conditions
monopoly or quasi-monopoly obtained, for example, disputes with PRS or in
respect of rights owned by a limited number of
companies, such as the performing
right in sound recordings. It recommended that licences granted or refused
except on certain
conditions by individual authors for the performance of their
work should not be subject to the Tribunal's jurisdiction.
1.08 The Spicer Committee agreed with that recommendation and
recommended that the Australian Copyright Tribunal should, in relation
performing and broadcasting rights (the 'performing rights'), have jurisdiction
to determine disputes between persons
or organisations requiring licences and
the following bodies:
(a) organisations which have as one of their main objects the negotiation or
granting of licences to perform or broadcast literary,
dramatic or musical
(b) in the case of licences to perform or broadcast a sound recording, the
owner of copyright in the recording or any person or
body authorised to grant or
negotiate the granting of such licences; and
(c) in the case of licences to perform publicly television broadcasts to a
paying audience, the owner of copyright in the broadcast
or any person or body
authorised to grant or negotiate the granting of such licences.
1.09 In relation to paragraph (a), the Committee further recommended that:
the same limitation as appears in the proviso to section 24(3) of the 1956
Act, namely, that it shall not extend to an organisation
by reason that its
objects include the negotiation or granting of individual licences, each
relating to a single work or the
works of a single author, if they do not
include the negotiation or granting of general licences, each extending to the
of several authors. The purpose of this is to exclude publishers and
producers whose practice is to grant individual licences
in respect of
particular plays or musical works.
1.10 While the Committee's general recommendations in relation to the
performing rights and the statutory licence for the recording
of musical works
(among others) were ultimately enacted, its recommendation for a limitation on
the scope of paragraph (a)
was not. The then Attorney-General, the Hon. Nigel
Bowen QC, in the Second Reading Speech to the Copyright Bill 1967 noted that,
instead, the jurisdiction of the Copyright Tribunal in this regard was to follow
the provisions of the New Zealand
. It is not clear to the
Committee why the Australian Government of the day took that approach.
1.11 Thus, while the Tribunal was principally established under the Copyright
Act to counterbalance the monopoly position of particular
collecting societies,
it was also granted jurisdiction to determine particular disputes between users
and copyright owners
in respect of licences for use of a single work or other
subject matter. Despite this, the great majority of matters heard before
Tribunal have involved disputes between large institutional users of copyright
material and collecting societies in relation
to licence schemes. In relation to
the Tribunal's jurisdiction over non-statutory licences, there have not been any
applications
regarding the failure or refusal to grant a licence in respect of a
single work or sound recording.
1.12 The Committee has had regard to this background in determining the
nature of the extension to the Copyright Tribunal's jurisdiction,
recommends in Section 3.
[Return to contents]
Chapter 2 – Australia's
international obligations
2.01 Australia is a party to a number of international
agreements which impose obligations regarding the nature of the rights that
to be granted to copyright owners and the permissible limitations on those
rights. Accordingly, any proposal for an extension
to the jurisdiction of the
limitation on the
exclusive rights of copyright owners, must have regard to the
permissible limitations open to Australia under those treaties.
2.02 Paragraph 2(c) of the Committee's terms of reference instructs it to
have regard to any relevant international copyright obligations
including those
in treaties to which Australia is considering becoming a party. In that regard
the following treaties of which
Australia is a member are relevant for the
purpose of considering changes to the jurisdiction of the Copyright Tribunal:
Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works
Berne Convention);
International Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organisations
(the Rome Convention); and
the World Trade Organisation (WTO)
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPs). TRIPs relevantly provides that members
shall comply with the substantive provisions of the Berne Convention, other than
relating to moral rights.
2.03 Also, the Committee understands that the Government is considering
whether Australia should become a party to the World Intellectual
Organisation (WIPO) Copyright Treaty (WCT) and the WIPO Performances and
Phonograms Treaty (WPPT) adopted at the Geneva
Diplomatic Conference on
Australia until Australia
ratifies them. The Government has recently introduced
amendments to the Copyright Act in the form of the
Agenda) Bill 1999
. In the Second Reading Speech to that Bill, the
Attorney-General stated that the enactment of the Bill 'will be a major step
towards aligning our copyright laws with the obligations imposed by the [WCT and
Accordingly, the Committee has also had regard to the
obligations under those treaties in making its recommendations.
Permissible limitations on the abuse of monopoly power
Berne Convention
2.04 The Berne Convention provides that authors of literary and artistic
works shall enjoy a number of exclusive rights. Concerns
that exercise of those
rights may amount to an abuse of monopoly power were expressed at an early stage
in the development
of the Berne Convention, particularly in relation to the
performing and broadcasting rights. Those concerns were expressed at
(1928) and Brussels (1948) Revision Conferences. Australia shared those concerns
and associated itself, along with
a number of other countries, with a
declaration of the British delegation to the Brussels Revision Conference that,
in relation
to art. 11 of the Berne Convention (which was amended at that
Convention to become a general right of public performance):
it [is] understood that the Government of His Majesty remains free to
promulgate any legislation that it thinks necessary in the
public interest to
prevent or remedy any abuse of the exclusive rights belonging to a copyright
owner by virtue of the laws
of the United Kingdom.
2.05 While indicating that some States adopted different views at the
Brussels Conference as to the extent of measures that may
be taken to restrict
abuses of monopoly power, Professor Ricketson has summarised the general
principle accepted at that Conference
to be that:
Berne Members are free to take all necessary measures to restrict possible
abuses of monopoly, and this will not be in conflict
with the Convention so long
as this is the purpose of the measures, even if, in some instances, this means
that the rights
of authors are restricted. All private rights have to be
exercised in accordance with the prescriptions of public law, and authors'
rights are no exception to this general principle. This therefore would not
exclude the imposition of such measures as compulsory
licences or price controls
where this provided the most effective way of controlling the abuse in
2.06 The issue of the permissible limitations on abuse of monopoly power
discussed at the Rome and Brussels Revision Conferences
led to a general
agreement that members of the Berne Convention had broad freedom to regulate
such potential abuses. This general
principle was also accepted at the Stockholm
Revision Conference (1967) and, as stated by Australia, was noted at the 1996
Geneva Diplomatic Conference on Copyright. Accordingly, it appears that
proposals to include a specific exception in this regard
at the Stockholm
Revision Conference (including such a specific proposal made by Australia) were
not adopted on the basis,
in part, that they were unnecessary.
2.07 Further, the Berne Convention provides for limitations on a number of
rights, for the purpose of balancing those private rights
with the broader
public interest.
Article 9(2) of the Berne Convention, concerning the
reproduction right in literary and artistic works, provides that:
It shall be a matter for legislation in the countries of the Union to
permit the reproduction of such works in certain special
cases, provided that
such reproduction does not conflict with a normal exploitation of the work and
does not unreasonably prejudice
the legitimate interests of the author.
2.08 Articles 11
(2) and 13 of the Convention provide that
members may determine the conditions under which the broadcasting right and the
of recording of musical works may be exercised. Those articles explicitly
contemplate the role of a body such as the Copyright
Tribunal as a rate-setting
body, where the parties cannot agree on what amounts to equitable remuneration.
Thus both of the
articles include the formula that those conditions shall not be
prejudicial to the author's right to obtain equitable remuneration
the absence of agreement, shall be fixed by the competent authority'.
2.09 More generally, the Committee considers that the Copyright Tribunal's
role in relation to the statutory licences under the
Act is permitted by other
articles of the Convention which provide that it is a matter for the legislation
of member States
to place particular restrictions on the exercise of authors'
rights (arts. 2
(2), 10, 10
2.10 Like the Berne Convention, it is clear that TRIPs provides scope for
member States to impose measures to prevent abuses of
intellectual property
rights. A number of articles of TRIPs are relevant in that respect. Article 7
provides that the protection
and enforcement of intellectual property rights
should promote social and economic welfare and a balance of rights and
obligations.
Under the heading 'Principles', art. 8(2) states that:
Appropriate measures, provided that they are consistent with the provisions
of this Agreement, may be needed to prevent the abuse
of intellectual property
rights by right holders or the resort to practices which unreasonably restrain
2.11 In relation to copyright and related rights, TRIPs permits the
qualification of exclusive rights in particular cases, including
provision for
limitations or exceptions to those rights in accordance with art. 13, which is
worded similarly to art. 9(2)
of the Berne Convention.
2.12 Further, art. 40(2) of TRIPs provides that:
Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent Members from specifying in their
national legislation licensing practices or conditions
that may in particular
cases constitute an abuse of intellectual property rights having an adverse
effect on competition in
the relevant market. As provided above, a member may
adopt, consistently with the other provisions of this Agreement, appropriate
measures to prevent or control such practices.
2.13 The Committee also notes its agreement, expressed in Part 1 of its
Simplification of the
with the report
of the WIPO International Bureau which examined the relationship between art. 13
of TRIPs and the exceptions
to authors' rights permitted under the Berne
Convention.
That study commented that generally and normally there
is no conflict between the Berne Convention and TRIPs as far as exceptions
limitations to exclusive rights are concerned. This suggests that the
Committee's observations above in relation to the
limitations permissible under
the Berne Convention in respect of abuses of monopoly would be similarly
applicable under TRIPs.
Rome Convention, WCT, WPPT
2.14 Unlike TRIPs, the Rome Convention does not include provisions dealing
explicitly with limitations to prevent 'abuses' of the
rights in relation to
performers, producers of phonograms and broadcasting organisations provided by
the Convention. Likewise,
no such explicit provisions are included in the WCT or
2.15 Article 15 of the Rome Convention allows member countries to provide for
exceptions in relation to private use, using short
extracts to report current
events, ephemeral fixations for broadcasting and for teaching and scientific
research. Member countries
can also impose the same types of limitations as are
permitted for copyright works. However, compulsory licences may only be provided
in a manner compatible with the Rome Convention.
2.16 The exceptions provided for in the WCT (art. 10) and WPPT (art. 16) are
worded similarly to art. 13 of TRIPs. Accordingly,
the Committee understands
that, to the extent that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal would be permitted
under the limitations
provided for by art. 13 of TRIPs, and under the compulsory
licences permissible under the Berne Convention (which is incorporated
reference into TRIPs), the Tribunal's jurisdiction would also generally be
compatible with the permissible limitations under
the Rome Convention, and the
WCT and WPPT. The Committee notes that the agreed statement at the Diplomatic
Conference regarding
art. 10(2) of the WCT was that it 'neither reduces nor
extends the scope of applicability of the limitations and exceptions permitted
by the Berne Convention'. This agreed statement was applied by the conference
mutatis mutandis to art. 16 of the WPPT.
2.17 More importantly, it appears to the Committee that the general principle
accepted in relation to the Berne Convention that
all private rights have to be
exercised in accordance with the prescriptions of public law would apply
similarly to permit
restrictions on abuses of rights provided under the Rome
Convention, or the WCT and WPPT.
2.18 The prevention of the abuse of monopoly power is today a feature of the
However, the Committee notes
that there does not appear to be any consistent international approach to the
manner in which
countries place restrictions on possible monopoly abuses of
Chapter 3.) In Australia, that function is performed, in particular cases, by
the Copyright Tribunal and, more generally,
by the operation of
Trade Practices Act 1974
Trade Practices Act
) other than conditions
in some licences and assignments of intellectual property rights that are
exempted from some provisions
of that Part by
of that Act. (A short
discussion of the relevant provisions of the
Trade Practices Act
is at paragraph
10.07.) Those limitations on the exclusive rights of copyright owners appear to
operate under the general principle
that countries may limit the exclusive
rights under the treaties referred to above in the public interest.
2.19 It is notable that proposals in relation to the collective
administration of rights were put forward by WIPO to the committee
considering a possible Protocol to the Berne Convention (ultimately adopted at
the WIPO Diplomatic Conference in
1996), to prevent 'discrepancies of views that
have surfaced, or may surface in the future'.
One proposal was that
the Protocol include a provision that 'government intervention in the
determination of fees and conditions
of authorizations given by a collective
administration organization is only allowed if, and to the extent that, such
intervention
is indispensable for prevention or elimination of actual abuse
(particularly abuse of a de facto monopoly position) by a collective
administration organization'.
This proposal was not accepted as one
of those to be considered by the committee of experts. The failure of the
committee of
experts to address this proposal suggests that there remains no
clear international consensus about the manner in which permissible
limitations
may be imposed on the licensing activities of collecting societies.
2.20 Accordingly, it appears to the Committee that the establishment of a
to regulate monopoly
conduct in respect of the various rights that Australia is obliged to protect,
does not conflict with
Australia's international obligations, or potential
future obligations under the WCT or WPPT.
[Return to contents]
Chapter 3 – International models
3.01 In accordance with paragraph 2(e) of its terms of
reference, the Committee has had regard to different international models
the resolution of copyright disputes.
3.02 In its issues paper, the Committee invited comments on the suitability
or desirability of adopting aspects of any of the approaches
embodied in foreign
legislation as a model for Australia and, particularly, how those approaches
work in practice. At the September
forum, the Arts Law Centre drew the
Committee's attention to the functioning of collective administration in the
Nordic countries.
With that exception, the Committee did not receive any
submissions (either in writing or through direct consultations) which provided
information on models that regulate the licensing of copyright in other
3.03 The Committee notes that the establishment of specialist copyright
tribunals is not a universal practice and that other models
for the resolution
of copyright disputes have been adopted in various overseas jurisdictions.
Broadly, the supervision of collective
administration organisations and the
management of copyright disputes may take three forms: regulation by civil
courts; adjudication
by specialist tribunals or other arbitration bodies
established for this purpose; and the official supervision or approval of
fees and terms of a licence by an administrative authority.
features of each of the three models, and examples of each model, are set out
Regulation by civil courts
3.04 Many countries have not found it necessary to establish specialist
tribunals, including Belgium, Greece, Italy, Japan, Spain,
Sweden and France. In
those cases, the activities of copyright collecting societies are regulated by
civil courts (for example,
in accordance with unfair competition law) or by a
form of officially provided mediation.
3.05 For example, in Sweden, questions concerning remuneration
for exploitation of copyright works are settled by means of contract
subject to regulation by the courts. However, licences in some areas, such as
the performing rights, may be subject
to scrutiny under the Unfair Competition
3.06 In the United States, disputes concerning the rate or fee of a licence
agreement offered by performing rights associations
may, in some instances, be
brought before the courts. As a result of anti-trust actions, the two main music
performing rights
associations in the US, the American Society of Composers,
Authors and Publishers (ASCAP) and Broadcast Music Inc (BMI), entered
consent decrees with the US Department of Justice. One of the main features of
these consent decrees was the establishment
of a mechanism for the fixing of
licence fees where a licensee and the performing right association are unable to
terms. This mechanism is known as the 'Rate Court'.
Regulation by a specialist tribunal
3.07 The Committee understands that copyright tribunals similar in varying
degrees to the Australian model have been adopted in
other countries with a
common law tradition, borrowing from the precedent of the UK Performing Right
Tribunal or its successor,
the UK Copyright Tribunal. Those countries include
New Zealand, Canada, India, Singapore, South Africa and Ireland. (However,
South Africa and Ireland this jurisdiction is conferred on one person: the
Commissioner of Patents and the Controller of
Industrial and Commercial
Property, respectively.) The Committee also understands that other countries,
including Denmark and
Germany, have adopted a form of tribunal.
3.08 The United States also operated a tribunal model from 1976 to 1993 when
that tribunal was abolished by the
and replaced with a system of ad hoc Copyright Arbitration Royalty Panels
established by the Librarian of Congress. The panels
adjust the copyright
compulsory licence royalty rates and distribute the royalties collected by the
Licensing Division of the
3.09 In Denmark, disputes about the level of remuneration payable under
particular statutory licences may be referred to the Copyright
Licence Tribunal.
Applications can also be made to the Tribunal in regard to certain licences. For
example, if consent to record
a broadcast is refused or the parties are unable
to agree on conditions, the Tribunal can determine these matters.
3.10 In Germany, copyright disputes are referred to an Arbitration Board. The
Board include those in
which a collecting society is a party if it concerns the use of copyright works
or performances or the
conclusion or amendment of a contract for use of
the parties which, if not disputed, forms the basis of a contract between the
parties. If the settlement is disputed, the
claims may be heard in civil court
proceedings.
3.11 The Committee understands that Austria and Switzerland operate
arbitration boards which perform a function similar to that
of the Australian
In Switzerland, tariffs set by collecting
societies have to be submitted to the Federal Arbitration Board for the
Exploitation
of Authors' Rights and Neighbouring Rights for approval. The Board
has the power to modify the tariffs as it deems appropriate.
It is to be noted,
however, that any litigation in a specific case regarding, for example,
remuneration based on a tariff,
or remuneration based on contract, has to take
place before a civil court.
3.12 While some of these tribunals perform functions broadly similar to those
of the Australian Copyright Tribunal, it appears,
so far as the Committee is
aware, that procedures for official arbitration in relation to copyright
licences may vary significantly
between those countries.
Regulation by an administrative authority
3.13 In Japan, all licensing tariffs set by JASRAC (the authors' society
administering public performance and reproduction rights
in musical works) have
to be submitted in advance to the Commissioner of the Agency for Cultural
Affairs and cannot come into
force until they have been approved. If a dispute
arises in relation to any of the rights provided for in the
parties concerned may apply to the Commissioner for mediation.
3.14 In the Netherlands, a Commissioner, appointed by the
Ministry of Justice, exercises general supervision over the operation
conduct of the Dutch performing right society (BUMA). The Committee notes that
the Ministry of Justice in the Netherlands
is currently giving consideration to
other models, including the creation of a specialist tribunal, and, in that
respect, has
requested information on the operation of the Australian Copyright
3.15 The Committee notes that this survey of some international models has
revealed that there is a variety of methods for resolving
and it is often the case that elements of more than one model are employed
within a single country.
3.16 The Committee is of the view that the resolution of copyright disputes
requires a form of specialist management. However,
it notes that it did not find
any of the various models discussed above particularly instructive for its
consideration of the
need for changes to the jurisdiction and procedures of the
Australian Copyright Tribunal. That the Committee did not receive submissions
regarding any of these models and how they work in practice reinforces that
impression.
[Return to contents]
Chapter 4 – The
role of copyright collecting societies
4.01 Collecting societies offer advantages to both copyright
owners and users. The collective administration of copyright can reduce
transaction costs associated with the use of copyright material. For copyright
owners, collective administration facilitates
the commercial exploitation of
their copyright by alleviating the potentially prohibitive financial and
administrative burdens
that would be incurred by individuals. Collecting
societies are often effective in preventing unauthorised use of copyright and
promoting awareness of copyright in the community. For copyright users,
collecting societies provide relatively easy access
to an extensive repertoire
without the need to identify and locate individual authors or copyright owners.
4.02 As noted above, the Copyright Tribunal's work to date has principally
been in the resolution of complex disputes between copyright
societies and large institutional users regarding licence schemes administered
by the collecting societies. For
the reasons set out in Chapter 11, the
Committee has made recommendations about the Copyright Tribunal's jurisdiction
collectively administered licences. In determining what is 'collectively
administered', among other matters it has considered,
the Committee has had
regard to the nature of the societies concerned with the collective
administration of copyright in Australia.
4.03 The nature of each of the main copyright collecting societies and their
licensing activity in Australia (with the exception
of Vi$copy which was
subsequently established) was addressed at length by the 1995
Review of Australian Copyright Collecting Societies
by Mr Shane Simpson (the Simpson
Report). Accordingly, the Committee describes them here only in summary. Some
particular features
of the principal copyright collecting societies in Australia
are set out below. The following summary particularly sets out the
some of the licence schemes (sometimes known as 'blanket licences') administered
by the collecting societies, which
are, or would be, if the Committee's
recommendations on the Tribunal's jurisdiction were adopted, the principal focus
Tribunal's function. Licence schemes are typically standard licences for
a particular industry or other collectively identifiable
group which require the
payment of a standard fee regardless of the level of use.
4.04 Under s. 136 of the Act, 'licence scheme' is defined as:
a scheme ... formulated by a licensor or licensors and setting out the
classes of cases in which the licensor or each of the licensors
is willing, or
the persons on whose behalf the licensor or each of the licensors are willing,
to grant licences and the charges
(if any) subject to payment of which, and
the conditions subject to which, licences would be granted in those classes of
4.05 It is notable that the variety of the licence schemes administered by
the societies is very broad. Many licensees, particularly
licensees of the
public performance right in musical works, administered by APRA, and the right
to cause a sound recording
to be heard in public, administered by PPCA, are
currently able to make applications to the Copyright Tribunal in accordance with
its jurisdiction under the Act (summarised at Appendix C). However, a number of
users, such as those who are party to non-statutory
licences with CAL, are
currently excluded from the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
Australasian Mechanical Copyright Owners' Society
4.06 AMCOS represents music publishers in relation to licences for the
mechanical (ie, for reproduction on to records) and photographic
reproduction of
musical works. AMCOS is the exclusive licensor in Australia of the reproduction
right in musical works that
are under its control. However, under the Mechanical
music publishers for the licensing of records. AMCOS, therefore, does not have
the right to collect the majority of mechanical
collects the income that is unprofitable for the publishers to collect
individually.
4.07 While it is difficult to estimate the percentage of music publishers
represented by AMCOS in Australia, it is evident that
a large number of music
publishers are members of the society. Further, most music composers are members
of APRA and therefore
have access to membership of AMCOS through APRA. AMCOS
also appears to represent the majority of music publishers and composers
Australia, through its reciprocal arrangements with societies overseas.
4.08 Some examples of significant licence schemes administered by AMCOS for
the reproduction of musical works are:
the radio station blanket licence (ie, licences for the use of production
music recordings in commercials. AMCOS has licence agreements
in this regard
with the majority of commercial and community radio stations);
the film and video 'synchronisation licence' (ie, licences for the
incorporation of musical works into film soundtracks); and
the television blanket licence (ie, licences to make reproductions of
musical works for the purposes of television broadcasting.
AMCOS has licence
agreements in this regard with the ABC, SBS and commercial television stations,
including those that transmit
free-to-air and by subscription).
Australasian Performing Right Association (APRA)
4.09 APRA represents composers, songwriters and publishers of musical works
for the purpose of administering licences for the broadcasting
performance of those works. It was noted in the Simpson Report that, by
reference to the logs APRA receives from
both radio and television stations,
APRA assumes that it represents over 99 per cent of all writers whose works are
disseminated in Australia.
APRA takes an assignment of a
portion of the rights in the musical works of its members for that purpose.
However, in accordance
with the recent decision of the Australian Competition
Tribunal in
Re Applications by the Australasian Performing Right Association
the Committee understands that APRA is instituting a
'license-back' mechanism, under which members may license back the rights
particular class of musical works previously assigned to APRA.
4.10 The licensees under the licence schemes that APRA administers are in
many cases also licensees under the licence schemes administered
(described below).
4.11 CAL represents the owners of copyright in published literary works,
principally authors and publishers, in administering copyright
licences with
users for the reproduction of copyright material. However, as the declared
collecting society under s. 135ZZB
for the purpose of the statutory licence for
educational and other institutions and under
s. 153F for the purposes of the
Crown use of statutory licences (Division 2 of Part VII), CAL also administers
the reproduction
rights of other copyright owners, such as those in artistic and
musical works.
4.12 Membership in CAL is voluntary. It was noted in the Simpson Report that
CAL estimates that, in regard to the licensing of
educational institutions, it
represents over 90 per cent of copyright owners whose works have been
The Committee notes that CAL was initially established to
administer that statutory licence in respect of print works.
4.13 The Committee understands that the majority of CAL's members generally
license their copyright to CAL on an exclusive basis,
although some members also
license CAL on a non-exclusive basis. That is, a copyright user may, in some
cases, be free to deal
directly with a CAL member (such as a publisher) to
negotiate a licence for a copyright use of that member's copyright material.
From CAL's submission and the September forum, the Committee understands that
CAL administers both licence schemes and 'transactional
licences' (the Committee
defines the nature of 'transactional licences' at paragraph 11.44).
4.14 Some licence schemes that CAL administers include:
crown copyright licences (CAL administers those licences under the
statutory licence for the use of copyright material for the
Crown under Division
2 of Part VII of the Act. Accordingly, CAL has agreements in place with various
Commonwealth and State/Territory
government departments and agencies);
educational copying licences (these licences are administered under the
statutory licence in Part VB of the Act for the copying
of works etc by
educational and other institutions);
corporate copying licences (CAL administers a number of
non-statutory licences with generally large corporations for their copying
published print copyright material);
media monitoring licences (these are non-statutory licences with for-profit
media monitoring organisations); and
church copying licences (these are non-statutory licences for copying done
by churches).
Phonographic Performance Company of Australia
4.15 PPCA's membership comprises over 1,500 labels, including the six major
record producers, and over 1,000 individual artist
members, as owners of
broadcast and public performance
of sound recordings and music videos on the
basis of a non-exclusive licence of rights from its members. PPCA estimates that
it represents 95 per cent of copyright owners of sound recordings in
4.16 Some of the licence schemes that PPCA administers are licences with
businesses in respect of the public performance of sound
recordings in:
commercial or professional premises (eg, retail stores, clubs, hotels);
restaurants or cafes;
public vehicles (eg, tourist buses, aircraft or taxis); and
fitness centres.
4.17 PPCA also administers licence schemes for the broadcasting of sound
recordings and music videos by television stations and
for the broadcasting of
sound recordings by radio stations. Further, PPCA is currently a party to an
application to the Tribunal
to determine a proposed licence for the broadcast of
sound recordings included in films, following on from the High Court's decision
PPCA v FACTS
Screenrights
4.18 The Audio-Visual Copyright Society Ltd (trading as Screenrights)
represents owners of copyright in films, sound recordings
and works included in
audiovisual products. The rights of those owners are licensed to Screenrights on
a non-exclusive basis.
4.19 In Australia, Screenrights principally administers the Part VA statutory
licence for educational and other institutions. The
licence schemes that
Screenrights administers under Part VA include those in relation to off-air
copying by universities, schools,
TAFE and other colleges. In addition,
Screenrights is currently an applicant to the Tribunal to be declared under the
licence for the use of copyright material for the Crown under Division
2 of Part VII of the Act.
4.20 Vi$copy represents particular owners of copyright in artistic works. The
rights of those owners in their works are licensed
to Vi$copy on an exclusive
basis, though members can choose to exclude certain works from that licence. The
Committee understands
that Vi$copy principally administers transactional
licences on behalf of its members.
4.21 Vi$copy estimates that it represents over 750 Australian painters and
sculptors and approximately 200­300 Australian photographers
and graphic
designers. Through its reciprocal arrangements with collecting societies in
Europe, Scandinavia and the United
States, Vi$copy also represents a large
number of owners of copyright in artistic works in Australia.
[Return to contents]
Chapter 5 – Nature of cases heard before the Copyright Tribunal
5.01 Since its creation, 32 applications have been made to the
Tribunal. Table A (at the end of this chapter) is a summary of all
applications that have been made to the Tribunal, in descending order from the
provisions of the Act under which the largest
number of applications were made
to those under which the least number of applications
Nature of the applications
5.02 The majority of applications have required the Tribunal to:
determine a rate of equitable remuneration payable under a statutory
licence (the relevant applications in that regard have been
made under ss. 135J,
135ZJ, 135ZK, 135ZL, 135ZW, 152, 183 and the repealed s. 53B);
confirm or vary a proposed or existing licence scheme (under ss. 154, 155
and 156) as the Tribunal considered reasonable in the
circumstances; and
review a failure or refusal to grant a licence or the offer of a licence on
charges or conditions that were alleged to be not reasonable
circumstances (under s. 157).
Nature of the parties
5.03 It is notable that the majority of applications made to the Tribunal
have involved parties that are large institutional licensors
of copyright
material, principally collecting societies and record companies, and large
institutional licensees, principally
universities and broadcasters.
Size of the proceedings
5.04 It is evident that many of the cases that the Tribunal has heard have
involved determinations regarding large sums of money.
Many of those
applications have involved the determination of equitable remuneration payable
under the statutory licences for
educational and other institutions under Parts
VA and VB of the Act. In their submission to the Committee, the AVCC noted that
the university sector is currently paying total annual amounts by way of
statutory licence fees under Parts VA and VB in excess
Similarly, MCEETYA (which said that it represented the
majority of providers of primary and secondary education in Australia)
that, in 1998, schools that it represented paid annual amounts of approximately
$9 million to CAL and $8.4 million to
Screenrights under those statutory
Universities and a number of primary and secondary
education providers have been parties to a number of applications to the
Duration of proceedings
5.05 Because of the size and complexity of the matters heard before the
finalise from the date
of application. Excluding those matters that are currently on foot and those
matters discontinued, the
average time taken to finalise matters (including
those heard together) appears to be about 22 months.
5.06 The matter that was resolved by the Tribunal most quickly was CAL's
unopposed application to be declared as a collecting society
under s. 153F of
the Act (CT3/98). The application was filed on 27 October 1998 and the order
entered on 18 January 1999. The
matter that took the longest period to resolve
was the recently decided case of
Australasian Performing Right Association Limited v Federation of Australian Radio Broadcasters Ltd
the application was filed on 7 December 1995 with the decision handed down on 17
September 1999 (a major delay in
resolving that case occurred because it was
stood over pending the outcome of the separate case before the Australian
Competition
Tribunal in
Re Applications by Australasian Performing Right Association
Table A – Overview of applications made to the Copyright
Application under...
licensors who were
applicants or respondents †
respondents * †
Reference of licence schemes to Tribunal and refusal to
grant licence or unreasonable terms
(ss. 154, 156, 157)
1/98; 1/97;
2/95; 2/93;
1/93; 1/92;
APRA; PPCA; Festival Records
AMA; Registered Clubs of NSW; Fitness Industry
Confederation of Australia; Victorian Fitness Industry Association;
Clubs Association of NSW; YMCA; Quality Health & Fitness
Centres; FARB; SBS; ABC; Fair Fitness Music Association; MCM Networking
Pty Ltd; FACTS; Tasmanian Television
Applications made in respect
of matters under
statutory licences for educational and other institutions
Parts VA and
(ss. 135J, 135ZN, 135ZV, 135ZW and s. 149A, s. 53B now repealed)
45­73/94; 3/97;
5/97; 4/97;
5/96; 6/96;
2/98; 1/89;
NSW Department of Education & Ors; University of
Newcastle; Australian Catholic University & Ors; University of
Adelaide & Ors; Queensland Department of Education & Ors; ANU;
UNSW; University of Qld; UTS; NSW Department of Education;
University; NSW Institute of Technology
Statutory licence for use of copyright material by the
2/90; 1/95;
2/96; 3/96;
Gradient Modelling Pty Ltd; Seven Dimensions;
Technology; Marine Engineering & Generator Services Pty Ltd; Harold
Thomas; K. Allanson
National Parks & Wildlife Service of NSW; Department
of Conservation & Environment; State of New South Wales; State of
Queensland; Commonwealth; State of Queensland (Fire Service)
Application to Tribunal to declare collecting society for
government copies
Broadcasting of published sound recordings
EMI Music & Ors; WEA Records; CBS; EMI; Festival &
Determination of amount of royalty payable for recording
musical works, order determining manner of paying royalty
EMI Music Publishing & Ors
Making a copy of a sound recording for the purpose of
broadcasting
(s. 107(3))
Festival Records
MCM Networking Pty Ltd
(application dismissed following
declaration by the High Court that Part VC was unconstitutional)
BMG; Mushroom; AMCOS
ATMA; ACFOA; ACA
The list of copyright user applicants or respondents is
indicative only of those who have been parties to Tribunal matters. In
where there were a large number of applicants/respondents of a class to the same
matter (eg, where a large number of
universities have been party to an
application, such as
CAL v University of Adelaide & Ors
[1999] ACopyT 1
(1999) 42 IPR 529
in which a large number of universities were respondents), only one such party
is listed for that matter.
A number of applicants/respondents listed have been party to a number of
applications under the same provision of the
, particularly the
collecting societies and the universities.
[Return to contents]
Chapter 6 – Related
6.01 This Committee has addressed the need for changes to some
aspects of the jurisdiction of the Tribunal as part of its previous
references.
In its 1995 report on Computer Software Protection,
this Committee
recommended that the
be amended to extend the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal to enable it to consider licence agreements involving the use of
materials in electronic databases.
of its report on Simplification of the
this Committee addressed outstanding issues from
the report of the Copyright Convergence Group (CCG)
Highways to
The CCG had noted that an issue which had been raised with
it was the appropriateness of extending the jurisdiction of the Copyright
Tribunal to include all forms of collective licensing and that, in this regard,
attention would need to be paid to Australia's
obligations under the Berne
Convention which prohibit fettering of some exclusive rights. Noting that this
was a complex and
controversial issue, the CCG had recommended that the
detailed review of its operations.
6.03 In the
report (at paragraph 7.51) this Committee was, like the
CCG, minded to recommend an extension to the jurisdiction of the Copyright
Tribunal in accordance with clear support for such an extension in submissions
made to it under that reference. However, the
Committee supported a more general
review of the Tribunal's jurisdiction and, if that were to occur, recommended
an extension be considered more fully in that context.
6.04 Previous inquiries that have considered the jurisdiction and role of the
an extension to its
the Copyright Tribunal should have jurisdiction over all
collectively administered licence schemes. It should be the appropriate
for the variation, approval and interpretation of all licensing schemes,
proposed or negotiated by collecting societies;
alternatively, that the definition of 'licence' in s. 136(1) of the Act
should be amended to cover all licences, in a way similar
to s. 116(3) of the UK
that the procedures of the Tribunal be examined to see how matters might be
dealt with faster and more cheaply.
6.05 The Simpson Report further recommended that the Copyright Tribunal have
of Collecting Societies,
an appointment which was also recommended in that report.
6.06 In May 1998 the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs tabled its report
Don't Stop the Music! Report of the
Inquiry into Copyright, Music and Small Business
. That report included
recommendations that:
the Copyright Tribunal should have as wide a jurisdiction as possible in
respect of licences and licence tariffs including the
variation, approval and
interpretation of all licensing schemes; and
mediation between parties in a dispute over a licensing scheme should be
available through the Copyright Tribunal.
6.07 More recently, the Intellectual Property and Competition Review
Committee (IPCRC) was established by the Government under
the National
Competition Principles Agreement to inquire into and report on the effects on
competition of Australia's intellectual
property laws, including the
. The IPCRC released a discussion paper in September 1999 which invited
submissions on a wide variety of matters, including submissions
on 'any of the
conclusions and recommendations' in the Simpson Report and the
Don't Stop the
The IPCRC released an interim report on 6 April
2000. The IPCRC is to report to the Attorney-General and the Minister for
Science and Resources by 30 June 2000.
6.08 On 6 December 1999 the House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs (CLCA) tabled its
Advisory Report
. Some issues raised in
that report are also addressed in this report. The Government is yet to respond
to the CLCA's report.
[Return to contents]
Section 3 – Jurisdiction of the Copyright Tribunal
Chapter 7 – Constitutional issues
7.01 Australia's constitutional system of government is founded on the
doctrine of separation of powers. Hence, power is divided
between the Executive,
the Legislature and the Judicature.
7.02 As an administrative body, the Copyright Tribunal may not exercise
judicial power. It is, however, not always easy to determine
what is an exercise
of judicial power. A range of factors may be looked at, such as who the parties
are, the subject matter
of the dispute, whether new rights are created, and
whether the determination is susceptible to collateral attack. Where such
indicators are equivocal, an activity is said to be an exercise of judicial
power if it leads to an enforceable determination.
Recent judicial consideration
7.03 The constitutional validity of the Copyright Tribunal has yet to receive
detailed consideration by the courts. However, the
constitutional validity of
other administrative bodies has been examined in a series of cases.
7.04 The meaning of enforceability was reviewed by the
High Court in Brandy v
There the Court considered legislation providing that the
filing of an order of the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Federal Court of Australia had the effect of making the order enforceable as an
order of the Federal Court. The provisions
setting up this procedure were struck
down as an improper conferral of judicial power on an administrative body. This
acted as a catalyst for the reform of the way many administrative
bodies functioned.
7.05 More recently, in
Wilkinson v Clerical Administrative and
Related Employees Superannuation Pty Ltd
the Full Federal Court,
in a 2:1 decision, suggested that the meaning of enforceability may be extended
to a situation where
the order of an administrative body is indirectly enforced
by a court of competent jurisdiction granting injunctive relief or
prescribing
criminal sanctions. If this were so, there might have been significant
consequences for the validity of the Copyright
Tribunal. That is because
provides for the recovery of licence fees set by the
Tribunal as a debt due in a court of competent jurisdiction. It also provides
for injunctive relief and criminal sanctions in certain instances.
7.06 The High Court has since overruled the decision in the Wilkinson case in
Attorney-General of the
Commonwealth v Breckler
The court held
unanimously that although injunctive relief could be sought to enforce the
determinations of the Superannuation
Complaints Tribunal, this would require an
independent exercise of judicial power by a court of competent jurisdiction.
the determinations of the Superannuation Complaints Tribunal were not
enforceable in themselves and the legislative scheme in
question was not beyond
7.07 This decision appears to limit any danger to the constitutional validity
of the Copyright Tribunal. That is because decisions
of the Copyright Tribunal
are not directly enforceable but may be enforced only through the courts.
Furthermore, as administrative
decisions, they are subject to judicial scrutiny
and so do not constitute final determinations. The fact that parties generally
submit voluntarily to the Copyright Tribunal's jurisdiction also reinforces the
constitutional validity of the Tribunal's power.
That is because, to the extent
that its determinations are enforceable, that enforceability is derived from the
parties' undertakings
and not from a conferral of power by Parliament.
7.08 On the basis of the case law in this area, problems would arise if
legislation compulsorily referred disputes to a tribunal
for the purpose of
making binding determinations as to existing rights and duties and, in so doing,
purported to oust the jurisdiction
of the courts.
[Return to contents]
Chapter 8 – Jurisdiction of the Copyright Tribunal
8.01 The jurisdiction of the Tribunal is provided for in
Division 3 of
of the Act. Generally speaking, the Tribunal has the
function of determining the remuneration payable, and associated matters,
the statutory licence schemes in the Act. In respect of non-statutory licences,
the Tribunal also has jurisdiction in
relation to a 'licence scheme' (as defined
in s. 136), and licences or proposed licences where a licence scheme does not
and where an application has been made to it by a party.
Non-statutory licences
8.02 In accordance with the definition of 'licence' in s. 136, the Tribunal's
is generally limited to
licences or proposed licences and licence schemes for the public performance or
broadcast of literary,
dramatic or musical works or an adaptation thereof, or of
sound recordings.
8.03 A 'licensor' is defined as the owner or prospective owner of the
(whether corporate
or unincorporate) acting as agent for the owner or prospective owner in relation
to the negotiation or granting
of such licences. While that definition would
clearly include licences administered by collecting societies, it is not limited
to them. It would also include small licensors who are administering a licence
scheme or a licence where a licence scheme does
Statutory licences
8.04 The Act provides for a number of statutory licences whereby acts that
would otherwise constitute an infringement of copyright
are permitted in
specified circumstances.
A number of these statutory licences are subject to the payment
of equitable remuneration for the exercise of the right. The amount
payable may
be determined by agreement between the person exercising the right and the
holder of that right. In the context
of the statutory licences in respect of
which the Tribunal has jurisdiction, the relevant rights will often, although
not invariably,
be under the control of a collecting society. In the absence of
agreement between the user and owner of the copyright, the Act
provides that an
application may be made to the Tribunal for an order determining the equitable
remuneration to be paid to
the owner of the copyright for the exercise of the
8.05 The matters in respect of which applications may be made to the Tribunal
are set out in Division 3 of Part VI of the Act.
The provisions of Part VI are
extremely detailed. A comprehensive description of the Tribunal's jurisdiction
is included at
Appendix C.
8.06 In summary, applications may be made to the Tribunal for an order
determining the amount of equitable remuneration payable
in respect of statutory
licences provided in the Act for:
the making of a recording or film of a work or of an adaptation of a work
for the purpose of broadcasting the work (s. 149);
the broadcast of a literary or dramatic work by the holder of a print
disability radio licence (s. 149A);
the making of a copy of a sound recording for the purpose of broadcasting
the recording (s. 150);
causing a sound recording to be heard in public (s. 151);
broadcasting of a published sound recording (s. 152);
the manufacture of a record of a musical work (s. 152A);
the making of a copy of a broadcast by a body administering an educational
or other specified institution (s. 153A);
the making of copies of works by a body administering an educational or
other institution (s. 153C); and
the doing of an act comprised in a copyright where the act is
done for the services of the Crown (s. 153E).
8.07 An application may also be made to the Tribunal for matters related to
the payment of remuneration, being:
an order determining the manner of payment of royalty payable by the
manufacturer of a record of a musical work (s. 152B);
an order apportioning the amount of royalty payable in respect of a record
between the owner of the copyright in the musical work
and the owner of the
an order determining a sampling system in respect of statutory licences for
copying of transmissions by educational institutions
an order determining a sampling system in respect of a statutory licence
for the copying of works by educational institutions (s.
a declaration that a company be a collecting society for the purposes of
Part VII, Crown use of copyright material (s. 153F);
the revocation of a declaration made under s. 153F that a company is a
collecting society (s. 153G);
a method for working out payment for government copies (s. 153K); and
a review of a declaration that an institution is an educational institution
within the meaning of the Act (s. 153L).
[Return to contents]
Chapter 9 – Effect of the Copyright Amendment (Digital Agenda) Bill 1999
9.01 As part of its current reference, the Committee is
required to consider any relevant amendments to the
introduced into Parliament.
(the Digital Agenda
Bill) was introduced into Parliament on 2 September 1999 and referred to the
House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs.
The Committee tabled its report on the Digital Agenda Bill on 6 December 1999.
The Government is currently considering the Committee's report.
9.03 For the purposes of this reference, the key features of the Bill
the introduction of a new technology-neutral right of communication to the
public. The Bill provides that 'communicate' means make
available online or
electronically transmit (whether over a path, or a combination of paths,
provided by a material substance
or otherwise) a work or other subject matter.
The new right will replace and extend the existing technology-specific
broadcasting
right which currently applies only to 'wireless' broadcasts. In
addition, the new right will replace the current limited right
to transmit to
subscribers to a diffusion service;
the extension of the existing statutory licence scheme for educational and
other institutions to permit those institutions to make
electronic copies of
works and to communicate them to students for educational purposes, subject to
the payment of equitable
remuneration to the copyright owner; and
the implementation of a new statutory licence for retransmitters for the
retransmission of free-to-air broadcasts without the permission
of the copyright
owner subject to the payment of equitable remuneration by the retransmitter to
the underlying rights holders.
9.04 The Committee notes that the Bill, if passed in the form
in which it was introduced into Parliament, will extend the jurisdiction
in relation to the following matters:
the determination of the equitable remuneration payable by retransmitters
to underlying copyright holders for the retransmission
of free-to-air broadcasts
(under proposed
the determination of a record system for the retransmission of free-to-air
broadcasts (under proposed
the determination of the equitable remuneration payable in relation to the
reproduction and communication of copyright material
in electronic form under
(under proposed Division 2A of
the determination of matters and processes, and any other related matters,
constituting an electronic use system established for
the determination of the
amount of equitable remuneration payable under an electronic use notice for
licensed copies and communications
(under proposed Division 2A of
the determination of the division of royalties between the respective
an article or
other work that is reproduced or communicated in electronic form (under proposed
Division 2A of
the arbitration of disputes in relation to the grant and terms of licences
for the subscription broadcasting of sound recordings
(under proposed amendments
9.05 The introduction of the new right of communication to the public may
prompt applications to the Copyright Tribunal where the
parties cannot agree on
matters not previously subject to the provisions for statutory licences.
9.06 The Committee also notes that submissions to it reflected an expectation
from interests that the workload of the Tribunal
would increase significantly in
the future as a consequence of the reforms proposed in the Digital Agenda Bill.
[Return to contents]
Chapter 10 –
Competition policy
10.01 Paragraphs 2(a) (in relation to relevant Government
reviews and inquiries) and (d) of the Committee's terms of reference
instruct it
to have regard to competition issues.
Accordingly, the Committee
has considered the interaction of competition regulators particularly the
Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission (the ACCC) and the Competition
Tribunal with the specialist role of the Copyright Tribunal.
10.02 As the Competition Tribunal recently acknowledged:
a legislative purpose of the Copyright Tribunal in Australia is to act as a
curb on potential abuse of the monopoly power or near
monopoly power gained by
a voluntary collecting society by aggregating the rights of individual
10.03 As the Committee discussed in Chapter 3, some jurisdictions other than
Australia also have specialist bodies (tribunals or
administrative bodies) to
regulate the monopoly or potential monopoly position of collecting societies,
while others rely on
competition law. The
National Competition Policy: Report by
the Independent Committee of Inquiry
(the Hilmer Report) touched on the need for
specialist industry regulators in addressing the essential facilities doctrine.
Essential facilities are facilities deemed so important that it is necessary to
provide a public access regime. Common examples
are telecommunications and
utilities such as gas, water and electricity. The policy basis of the essential
facilities doctrine
is similar to that of the statutory licence in the copyright
10.04 In considering how the public access regime for essential facilities
should be regulated, the Hilmer Report started with
the proposition that
competition policy across all Australian industries should desirably be
administered by a single body.
The Report acknowledged that each industry had
its own specific issues but did not see that as a bar to regulation by an
economy-wide
body. The Report envisaged that the enforcement of access
declarations could be dealt with by binding arbitration of the competition
regulator, which could appoint experts if necessary.
This has been
transposed to the current legislative framework under which the ACCC, and
accordingly the Australian Competition
Tribunal, have jurisdiction over access
disputes in relation to matters such as telecommunications.
10.05 The Copyright Tribunal was, of course, established long before the
Hilmer Report and has continued to operate effectively
after most of the Hilmer
recommendations have been put in place. In the context of the Hilmer Report's
recommendations, it
is appropriate to compare the role of the Copyright Tribunal
with Australia's economy-wide competition regulators, and in particular
Competition Tribunal.
10.06 The Competition Tribunal hears applications to review determinations of
the ACCC in relation to authorisations and notifications
which, broadly
speaking, provide protection from an action for breach of the
Trade Practices
It is therefore necessary to look at the decisions it reviews
in order to obtain an accurate picture of its jurisdiction.
Trade Practices Act
regulates restrictive trade
practices. For example,
prevents a corporation from entering a contract,
arrangement or understanding which has the purpose or likely effect of
substantially
lessening competition.
prevents a corporation from
engaging in exclusive dealing. Other provisions regulate resale price
maintenance
and misuse of market power
Trade Practices Act
recognises that some of society's broader obligations
may be served by non-competitive markets, it provides certain exceptions
restrictive trade practices provisions. An example of such a provision is
, which contains certain exemptions in relation to some conditions of
licences or assignments of intellectual property rights.
10.08 A party dissatisfied with a determination or a notification handed down
by the ACCC may apply for review by the Competition
While the Competition Tribunal reviews the merits of the ACCC's decisions in
terms of competition, the ACCC's decisions
are subject to review under the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
(Cth) (the ADJR Act).
Comparison of the Copyright Tribunal with the Competition
10.09 A detailed discussion of the Copyright Tribunal's jurisdiction is found
in Appendix C. To the extent that the licences with
which the Copyright Tribunal
deals contain provisions that offend Part IV of the
Trade Practices Act
example, if they are not covered by
and are likely to substantially
lessen competition), they may be subject to the authorisation and notification
processes of
the ACCC and so may come within the jurisdiction of the Competition
10.10 The Committee notes that the Competition Tribunal and the Copyright
Tribunal share several features in terms of both their
structure and policy
basis. They both have Justices of the Federal Court as their president and
deputy presidents, as well
as other non-presidential members with appropriate
qualifications. They both have a wide discretion as to their practice and
procedure and are administered by staff of the Federal Court Registry.
Furthermore, they both have a role as competition regulators,
whether that it is
explicit, as in the case of the Competition Tribunal, or implicit, as in the
case of the Copyright Tribunal.
10.11 Unlike the Competition Tribunal, the Copyright Tribunal is a tribunal
of first instance. Further, while the
and regulations made under
the Act set out factors to be taken into consideration by the Tribunal in making
a determination,
it does not have to apply a formal public benefit/detriment
competition test as does the Competition Tribunal. This may be because
of a statutory licence in the first place is the result of a balancing process.
10.12 Although the Competition Tribunal is a review body, its procedures are
similar to those of the Copyright Tribunal.
Section 146
Trade Practices Act
in giving the Copyright Tribunal
discretion as to its procedures, providing that the Tribunal is not bound by the
evidence and that matters are to be conducted with as little formality
and as expeditiously as possible. Notably, however, there
is no specific
provision that enables the Copyright Tribunal to request assistance from an
expert body, such as the ACCC, as
and (7) of the
Trade Practices
10.13 The main distinction between the two tribunals was identified by the
Competition Tribunal. Namely, the Copyright Tribunal's
to licences, and thus 'output arrangements'. It is therefore up to the
Competition Tribunal to look
at 'input arrangements' and so to determine the
structure under which the 'output arrangements' falling under the Copyright
Tribunal's jurisdiction are made.
(The Committee discusses the
nature of output and input arrangements at paragraphs 11.02­11.03, and
10.14 The Committee believes that the jurisdictions of the Competition
Tribunal and the Copyright Tribunal are complementary. While
the Hilmer Report
raised, at a broad level, the issue of whether there should be a single
economy-wide regulator, from a practical
point of view, there is no reason why
the Copyright Tribunal should not continue to perform its separate, specialist
This view is consistent with submissions received by the Committee,
none of which expressed support for the abolition of the Copyright
10.15 The Committee notes that the Copyright Tribunal has an established
history and expertise in dealing with matters within its
performs these functions well. The Committee believes that there would not be
any added efficiency or fairness
to the parties for the functions of the
Tribunal to be taken on by an economy-wide regulator, such as the Competition
Given that the Competition Tribunal and the Copyright Tribunal both
operate out of the Federal Court, such a change may even lead
problems in securing hearing dates. Further, the Committee believes that the
absorption of the Copyright Tribunal's
functions into the Competition Tribunal
may create further inefficiencies by exposing applications to a two-stage
determination by the ACCC and then review by the Competition
Recommendation
10.16 The Committee considers that the Copyright Tribunal is functioning well and that it performs a role that would not be as effectively
performed by another existing body. However, the Committee considers that its function would be enhanced by the adoption of the Committee's
recommendations set out in the following chapters of this report.
[Return to contents]
Chapter 11 – Output
arrangements
11.01 In this Chapter, the Committee addresses the question of changes to the
relating to:
statutory licences, in particular:
the Tribunal's jurisdiction to determine methods of working out equitable
remuneration under
and VB of the Act, and the requirements
for marking, record-keeping and inspection of records under s. 47A, and Parts VA
and VB of the Act; and
the Tribunal's jurisdiction to determine equitable remuneration and matters
related to the payment of equitable remuneration;
non-statutory licences, in particular:
the Tribunal's jurisdiction in relation to licences for single works or
subject matter, or the works of a single author or subject
matter of a single
maker ('transactional licences'); and
an expansion of the Tribunal's jurisdiction in relation to collectively
administered licences generally.
Definition of 'output arrangements'
11.02 The Committee summarised the recent decision of the Australian
Competition Tribunal in
Re Applications by Australasian Performing Right Association
at Appendix D. In that decision, the Competition Tribunal outlined
the nature of APRA's 'input' and 'output' arrangements, and
its 'distribution'
and 'overseas' arrangements in considering whether to grant authorisation in
respect of each of those arrangements.
For the purpose of this part of this
report, the Committee has adopted the term 'output' arrangements in considering
for changes to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. The Committee
addresses the Tribunal's jurisdiction over 'input' arrangements
Chapter 12). While those terms were used by the Competition Tribunal,
particularly in relation to the arrangements
of APRA, the Committee uses them
more broadly in this part in relation to the collective administration of rights
by collecting
societies generally.
11.03 In keeping with the use of that term by the Competition Tribunal, the
Committee uses the term 'output arrangements' to describe
the licensing
arrangements between a body collectively administering copyright and its
licensees, or potential licensees, of
1.11, the jurisdiction of the Tribunal has almost exclusively been invoked to
in matters regarding the output arrangements of collecting societies.
Justification for changes to the Tribunal's jurisdiction over output
arrangements
11.04 The Committee's detailed recommendations in respect of the Tribunal's
Overall, the Committee
is in favour of an expansion of the Tribunal's jurisdiction to cover all
collectively administered licences
(whether administered under a statutory or
non-statutory licence) concerning all types of copyright material and copyright
uses. The Committee is also in favour of reducing the Tribunal's current
claims relating to licences
in respect of a single work or subject matter, the works of a single author or
the subject matter
of a single maker of that subject matter, other than where
collectively administered.
11.05 As the Committee noted at paragraph 1.05, the fundamental rationale for
the establishment of the Copyright Tribunal was to
counterbalance the monopoly
or potential monopoly position of collecting societies administering rights in
musical works or
sound recordings. The Committee considers that this rationale
would similarly apply to the collective administration of rights
in respect of
other works or subject matter.
11.06 At the time of the Tribunal's establishment in 1969 (at
the commencement of the
), APRA was perhaps the most prominent
example of the operation of a monopoly administration of the performing rights
works. Since that time, a number of collecting societies have been
established to collectively administer rights in relation to
particular classes
of copyright material.
Relevantly, the Simpson Report noted that:
whenever a number of exclusive rights owners join together to form a
licensing system, there is a potential for abuse and there
is no doubt that
each of the five collecting societies [APRA, PPCA, CAL, Screenrights, AMCOS]
do have a dominant position in
the market-place with respect to the types of
rights that each controls.
11.07 The Committee agrees with that observation, particularly as it applies
as a justification for the role of the Copyright Tribunal.
The Committee also
notes that, in addition to the five principal collecting societies referred to
in the Simpson Report, Vi$copy
represents a substantial number of owners of
regard at paragraphs 4.20­4.21). Accordingly, the Committee considers that
each of those collecting societies has at least
the capacity to exercise a
11.08 Submissions made in response to the Committee's issues paper generally
favoured an expansion of the Tribunal's jurisdiction
to all collectively
administered statutory and non-statutory licences.
11.09 As the Committee noted at paragraphs 6.04­6.06, similar proposals
for an expansion of the Tribunal's jurisdiction were
made by the Simpson Report
and the Don't Stop the Music! report. In particular, the Simpson Report
suggested that, in principle,
the Tribunal should have as wide a jurisdiction as
possible in respect of licences including:
the setting of licence fees;
the setting of any non-financial terms of agreements with licensors; and
the equity or otherwise of sampling schemes and other methods for the
quantification of payments.
11.10 The Simpson Report further recommended that those principles apply
regardless of whether the relevant rights are administered
under a statutory or
non-statutory licence.
11.11 For the reasons set out at paragraph 11.05, the Committee
agrees with the submissions made to it, and the conclusions of
the Simpson
Report and the
Don't Stop the Music!
report in this regard. The Committee
believes that it is illogical that the Tribunal's jurisdiction in relation to
non-statutory
licences continues to depend (because of the limited definitions
of 'licence' and 'licensor' under
on the nature of the copyright
material and the type of use. That is, the actual or potential problem presently
regulated by
the Tribunal in respect of non-statutory licences the exploitation
of a monopoly position over licences for the public performance
or broadcasting
of literary, dramatic or musical works and sound recordings is a problem that
may occur equally
in relation to the collective licensing of other types of
Recommendation
11.12 The Committee recommends that the Act be amended so that the
(whether statutory or non-statutory licences) concerning all types of
Committee's particular
recommendations to give effect to this recommendation are set out below.)
[Return to contents]
Statutory licences
Existing jurisdiction of the Tribunal
11.13 In the case of the statutory licences under the Act, the Tribunal's
Further, the
Committee notes that the Digital Agenda Bill will, if passed, introduce a new
statutory licence for the retransmission
of broadcasts, and make a number of
amendments to the existing statutory licences.
11.14 The jurisdiction of the Tribunal in relation to those existing
statutory licences is broadly concerned with two matters.
determination of equitable remuneration payable for the doing of an act
comprised in the copyright. The second is
the determination of matters closely
associated with the payment of remuneration under the statutory licences (eg,
of payment of a prescribed royalty under s. 55, failing agreement by
a person who makes a record of a musical work and the owner
of the copyright in
the musical work).
11.15 The Tribunal's specialist role in determining equitable remuneration is
fundamental to the operation of the statutory licence
schemes. The Committee
considers that, in the absence of agreement between the parties, the Tribunal is
the appropriate body
to make that determination. The determination of equitable
remuneration is a difficult function particularly suited to a specialist
It appears to the Committee that the Copyright Tribunal has performed that
function effectively. Accordingly, the Committee
considers that the Tribunal, as
a specialist body with expertise in making such determinations, should continue
to exercise
that function. For similar reasons, the Committee considers that the
Tribunal should also retain its jurisdiction in respect of
those matters closely
associated with the determination of equitable remuneration.
Methods of working out equitable remuneration and of record-keeping
11.16 The Committee's starting point was that the Tribunal's jurisdiction in
respect of particular statutory licences could usefully
be extended as part of a
simplification of aspects of the Act. Greater emphasis should be placed on
agreement being reached
between the parties, with recourse to the Copyright
Tribunal failing that agreement. However, objections raised by parties affected
by the provisions that the Committee thought were able to be simplified have led
the Committee to recommend relatively minor
changes to the statutory licences.
11.17 The Committee considers that the Tribunal's jurisdiction could usefully
be extended in relation to the following.
Method of working out payment of prescribed royalty for recording of a
musical work
11.18 Division 6 of Part III of the Act permits the making of a recording of
a musical work, for the payment of a prescribed royalty.
This statutory licence
provides for detailed and prescriptive requirements in relation to the manner in
which the prescribed
royalty is to be paid, in the absence of agreement by the
parties or a determination by the Tribunal (ss. 55(1)(d)(ii)(B) and
59(5)). The
Committee understands that the relevant industry groups operate under a
non-statutory agreement for determining
the manner for payment of the prescribed
royalty. As such, it is apparent that the legislative complexity introduced into
Act by ss. 55(1)(d)(ii)(B) and 59(5) does not serve any useful purpose.
However, the Committee did not receive any representations
11.19 The Committee is in favour of the repeal of those provisions and, in
their place, provision for a somewhat broader jurisdiction
for the Tribunal. The
Committee believes that, consistently with the formula adopted elsewhere in the
Act, the fallback position,
in the case of a failure by the parties to agree,
should be only to the Copyright Tribunal rather than to the scheme imposed by
regulations made under ss. 55(1)(d)(ii)(B) and 59(5).
Recommendation
11.20 The Committee recommends that ss. 55(1)(d)(ii)(B) and 59(5) (and
the regulations made under those provisions) be repealed
Tribunal's jurisdiction to determine the manner in which the royalty is
payable in the absence of agreement between
the parties be the basis for
determining a dispute between the parties.
Requirements for marking, record-keeping and inspection of records under
statutory licences
11.21 The following statutory licences have detailed provisions in relation
to marking, record-keeping and inspection of records:
the statutory licences under Parts VA and VB for the copying by educational
and other institutions of transmissions and the copying
of works, etc (ss. 135K,
135L, 135ZQ(3)­(4), 135ZT(3)­(4), 135ZX, 135ZY);
the statutory licence for sound broadcasts by holders of a
print disability radio licence (s. 47A).
11.22 Also, the Digital Agenda Bill proposes a statutory licence for the
reproduction and communication of works in electronic
form, based loosely on
aspects of Parts VA and VB of the Act. The Explanatory Memorandum to the Bill
notes that the new scheme
will be less prescriptive with the parties responsible
for agreeing to its details. However, the Act will provide a set of minimum
requirements to protect copyright material reproduced and communicated in
electronic form. As with the current scheme, if the
parties fail to agree on
certain issues they will have recourse to the Copyright Tribunal.
11.23 MCEETYA submitted that the provisions for record-keeping under Parts VA
and VB allow little flexibility and are onerous for
parties seeking to comply
with the scheme. MCEETYA submitted that the detailed record-keeping requirements
should be removed
from the regulations and that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal
should be extended to permit it to determine the records to be
educational institutions, if the parties cannot reach agreement on the issue.
11.24 In its draft report the Committee recommended that the detailed
requirements for marking, record-keeping and inspection of
records under Parts
VA and VB and s. 47A be repealed, in favour of a provision that those details
should be left to the agreement
of the parties or, failing agreement,
determination by the Copyright Tribunal. The Committee made that recommendation
grounds that the Act would be simplified if these detailed requirements
under Parts VA and VB and under s. 47A were left to the
agreement by the parties
or, failing that, determination by the Copyright Tribunal. The Committee
envisaged that an approach
which encouraged broad agreement between the parties
would result in fewer matters being brought before the Tribunal, and thereby
alleviate some of the burden on its resources. The Committee also observes that
similar details are not a feature of some other
statutory licences under the Act
(eg, the statutory licence for the use of copyright material for the Crown) and
does not appear to have been any problem in the administration of
those licences as a result.
11.25 Submissions in response to the draft report supported the Committee's
general approach of seeking to simplify the statutory
schemes and encourage
broader agreement between the parties through an expansion of the Tribunal's
AVCC opposed the draft recommendation for the removal
of provisions for record-keeping under Parts VA and VB. The AVCC noted that
requirements were necessary as they ensure that a school or university can have
the benefit of the statutory licence provided
that it keeps certain records
without the need to reach agreement with the monopoly collecting
11.26 CAL and Screenrights also opposed the Committee's draft recommendation
on the basis that those provisions represent minimum
requirements for collecting
societies administering the statutory schemes. CAL also argued that provisions
for marking and
record-keeping were necessary to ensure that records were kept
prior to an agreement being reached, because an educational institution
prior to such an agreement under Part VA or VB.
11.27 While the Committee was initially in favour of removing the detailed
requirements for marking, record-keeping and inspection
of records, it has
reconsidered this matter in the light of these late submissions to it from
Screenrights, the AVCC and CAL
(APRA and AMCOS also expressed agreement with
CAL's submission on this point). The Committee considered it important that
interests, which would be primarily affected by the proposed change, did
not support the removal of those requirements. The Committee
recognises that the
provisions under Parts VA and VB are a matter of some sensitivity between the
parties that rely on them
and that, despite their complexity, the provisions are
at least well known to the parties.
11.28 The Committee notes that CAL supported a provision specifying minimum
requirements for marking and inspection, subject to
a provision that those
details could be varied by the agreement of the parties or by an order of the
Tribunal. The Committee
observes that, in relation to the current legislative
scheme, it is open to the parties to agree to a system for the determination
equitable remuneration outside the scope of the statutory scheme. However, it
would not generally be within the current
arbitrate disputes in relation to such an agreement. The Committee considered
that there was
value in such an extension of the Tribunal's jurisdiction, and
that it might encourage parties to reach an agreement without recourse
detail of the statutory scheme. The Committee also considered that such an
extension would address a current limitation
on the Tribunal's jurisdiction
pointed to by the AVCC in its submission in response to the draft report. The
AVCC noted that
there may be a question as to whether the Copyright Tribunal has
dispute by the
parties, where the system is required solely to assist the collecting society to
distribute the equitable remuneration
that it receives. The Committee agreed
with the AVCC's submission that the Tribunal's jurisdiction should enable it to
and determine sampling (or other) systems for a wider variety of
purposes other than determining equitable remuneration only.
Committee considered that such an extension might give further impetus to the
parties reaching an agreement outside
the terms of the statutory scheme, without
losing the benefit of being able to refer a matter in dispute to the Tribunal.
11.29 Further, the Committee notes its recommendation in Part 1 of its report
Simplification of the
that the duplicated provisions of
and VB of the Act be combined, which would include provisions relating
to the Tribunal's jurisdiction under those Parts.
11.30 It does not appear to the Committee that the same sensitivities apply
for s. 47A. No submissions received in response to
the draft report touched
specifically on this provision. Accordingly, the Committee considers that the
provisions for marking,
record-keeping and inspection under s. 47A should be
deleted, and substituted with a single provision that those details should
left to the agreement of the parties or, failing agreement, determination by the
Recommendations
11.31 The Committee recommends that the Copyright Tribunal's
matter relating to an agreement between an 'administering body' and the
declared collecting society under Part VA or VB,
which is outside the
terms of the statutory licence. (The Committee notes that this
recommendation is consistent with its majority
recommendation at paragraph
11.100 below, in relation to non-statutory licences, for the Tribunal's
to all licence schemes and transactional licences
administered by a collecting society.)
11.32 The Committee recommends that the detailed requirements for
marking, record-keeping and inspection under s. 47A be repealed
of a single provision that those details should be left to the agreement
of the parties or, failing agreement, determination
by the Copyright
Remuneration notices under Parts VA and VB
11.33 Under Parts VA and VB of the Act, a body administering an institution
may undertake to pay equitable remuneration to the
relevant declared collecting
society by a 'remuneration notice', and may specify in that notice whether the
amount of equitable
remuneration is to be assessed on the basis of a records
system or a sampling system (ss. 135G and 135ZU). In this respect, the
provisions of Parts VA and VB are similar.
11.34 Sections 135J(3) and 135ZW(3) provide that the extent of copying,
and any other matters that are necessary or convenient
to be assessed by use of
a sampling system, shall be assessed by use of a sampling system determined by
agreement between the
administering body and the relevant collecting society or,
failing agreement, by the Copyright Tribunal. (The Tribunal does not
equivalent power to determine a record-keeping-system. It was submitted to the
Committee that this is an anomaly and
the issue is discussed at paragraphs
17.02­17.07.)
11.35 In effect, ss. 135G and 135ZU provide for the method of determining
equitable remuneration under the Parts VA and VB statutory
licences (ie, either
sampling or record-keeping) to be chosen by the body administering the relevant
institution, without regard
to the agreement or opposition to that method by the
relevant declared collecting society. It is apparent that this legislative
scheme provides a fallback position for institutions if they are unable to agree
on the method of determining equitable remuneration
with the declared collecting
society. Nevertheless, once an institution has chosen to assess equitable
remuneration by means
of a sampling system or a record-keeping system (under s.
135G or 135ZU), the details of those systems would need to be worked
out between
the institution and the declared society because the Act does not (and, in any
event, could not) attempt to set
out the considerable detail that comprises such
11.36 As noted above in relation to marking and record-keeping,
the Digital Agenda Bill proposes a new statutory licence for educational
other institutions to copy and communicate copyright works in electronic form.
Under the proposed scheme, a remuneration
notice may be given for the exercise
of the reproduction right and the right to communicate copyright material in
form, in a similar way to which such a notice may be given for the
exercise of rights to make copies of copyright material in
hard copy or analogue
11.37 In its draft report, the Committee considered the repeal of the
provisions for remuneration notices, in favour of a single
provision for the
parties to agree on both the level of equitable remuneration and the method for
assessing it. In the absence
of agreement, either party could make an
application to the Copyright Tribunal to determine any matter in dispute. The
suggested that such a change would provide a more flexible, open-ended
11.38 The Committee's draft recommendation in this respect was opposed by the
AVCC. The AVCC submitted that such an approach failed
to take into account the
difficulty universities encounter in reaching an agreement with monopoly
collecting societies, and
also the value of record-keeping systems which
remuneration notices allow educational institutions to choose, without the need
for the agreement of the declared society.
11.39 The draft recommendation was, however, supported by Screenrights, CAL
(the latter also supported by APRA and AMCOS) and the
ACC. Screenrights
submitted that such a change, if implemented, would promote a culture of
negotiation and agreement by placing
the onus on the parties to reach a
consensus on a model for the administration of the statutory licences.
11.40 The Committee notes that the provisions under Parts VA and VB for
remuneration notices are closely related to the provisions
for marking,
record-keeping and inspection of records. For example, where an administering
body undertakes, by a remuneration
notice, to pay equitable remuneration on the
basis of a records notice, the requirements for marking and record-keeping will
apply under s. 135K or 135ZX. Similarly, the provisions for inspection of
records apply once an administering body gives a remuneration
11.41 Accordingly, the Committee considers that it would be
artificial to retain the detailed provisions for marking and record-keeping
the Act, but not retain a requirement for marking or record-keeping which would
arise in accordance with a relevant remuneration
notice. The Committee therefore
considers that there ought to be no change made in the Act in relation to
remuneration notices.
(However, the Committee notes, and reaffirms,
recommendation 9.09 in Part 1 of its report on
Simplification of the
that provisions duplicating each other in
and VB of the Act be
[Return to contents]
Non-statutory licences
11.42 In relation to non-statutory licences, the Committee has noted above
(at paragraph 8.02) that the Tribunal currently has
a limited jurisdiction. In
broad terms, it has jurisdiction to hear applications regarding licences, or
proposed licences,
for the public performance or broadcasting of a literary,
dramatic or musical work (or adaptation thereof) or of a sound recording.
11.43 In recommending changes to the Tribunal's jurisdiction over
non-statutory licences, the Committee was mindful that the purpose
Tribunal should be to counterbalance monopoly licensing activity. Accordingly,
the Committee considered that any changes
to the Tribunal's jurisdiction should
maintain, but not extend beyond, that purpose. The Committee therefore took this
account in addressing the following issues, and in addressing options for
an expansion of the Tribunal's jurisdiction in respect
of non-statutory
'Transactional licences'
11.44 For the purpose of the following discussion in this chapter, the
Committee uses the term 'transactional licence' to describe
a licence for any
a single work or other subject matter;
the works of a single author;
the films, sound recordings or broadcasts of a single maker
of each of those forms of subject matter;
the published editions of a single publisher.
11.45 The term 'transactional licence' was used by CAL in its submission to
the Committee. CAL submitted that the Tribunal's jurisdiction
should not extend
to transactional licences negotiated, granted or refused by a collecting
society. CAL noted that its transactional
licences are 'arrangements for one-off
copying of one member's material'.
In its further submission in
response to the draft report, CAL added that a transactional licence is 'an
individual transaction
to provide permission to copy a work or a small number of
works usually for a specified time and a specified purpose'.
Committee has adapted the definition used by CAL to make it applicable to all
works and subject matter and copyright uses,
and on the assumption that the term
thus adapted would be relevant to use in relation to the licensing activities of
collecting societies.
11.46 The Committee considers it reasonable to anticipate that the use of
transactional licences will accelerate in the digital
environment. In that
respect, the Committee notes the commentary of the Centre for Copyright Studies
Ltd that, with digitisation,
there is 'increased scope for tailoring licences to
suit owners and users'.
The Committee considered that an important
feature of a transactional licence is that it is one tailored to the specific
circumstances
of a user. In that respect, a transactional licence is distinct
from a licence scheme.
11.47 It is notable that the current jurisdiction of the Copyright Tribunal
in relation to non-statutory licences would extend
to almost all disputes
concerning licences in respect of the public performance and broadcast of
literary, dramatic or musical
works or of sound recordings. The principal
provisions under which applications may be made in that regard are ss.
of the Act.
11.48 Accordingly, an application could be made to the Copyright Tribunal in
respect of some transactional licences. In that regard,
a person who requires a
licence (as defined in s. 136) in a case where a licence scheme does not apply,
could make an application
to the Tribunal under s. 157(3) of the Act. (Section
157(4) of the Act provides for a similar application to be made by a
representative
organisation.)
11.49 For example, a promoter intending to stage a musical play or opera in
which the copyright was owned by an individual music
publisher could make an
application to the Tribunal under s. 157(3). It has been suggested by one
commentator that the reason
that no such application has been made to the
Tribunal has been a 'failure on the part of those commercially concerned to
the significance of this rather obscure provision of a complex
It was further noted by that commentator that the Tribunal's
in the case of collecting societies.
It is probably also reasonable
to surmise that perceptions of cost and delay in seeking the Tribunal's
intervention have discouraged
the bringing of applications in respect of
transactional licences.
11.50 It has already been noted (at paragraphs 1.07­1.10) how the
Australian Act departed from the UK Act in this respect and,
instead, followed
the example of the NZ
. Relevantly, the definition of
'licensor' in s. 36(1) of the NZ
included in its terms:
the owner of copyright in any literary, dramatic or musical work or sound
recording or cinematograph film; or
any person or body of persons (whether corporate or unincorporate) acting
as agent for the owner in relation to the negotiation
or granting of licences.
11.51 However, under the NZ
, which replaced the NZ
, the NZ Copyright Tribunal now has jurisdiction in respect of
a 'licensing scheme' operated by a 'licensing body'. Section 2(1)
defines 'licensing body' to mean a body of persons (whether
incorporate or unincorporate) which, as copyright owner or agent for
a copyright
owner, negotiates and grants copyright licences, including licences that cover
the works of more than one author
(emphasis added).
11.52 It therefore appears to the Committee that the NZ
narrowed the jurisdiction of the NZ Copyright Tribunal so that it did not extend
to licences in respect of single works or
the works of one author. (The
Committee notes that s. 5 of the NZ Act defines 'author' in relation to all
categories of copyright
material. That is, the NZ Act differs from the
Australian Act's division between the ownership of copyright in works by an
author and ownership of copyright in other subject matter by the person who made
it, subject to exceptions regarding commissioned
works and other subject matter
and works of employees.) In that respect, the NZ
was largely
based on the UK
Scope of permissible limitations
11.53 In its written submission, the ACC suggested that it is arguable that
s. 157(3) and (4) of the Act are not consistent with
Australia's international
treaty obligations, as they may not comply with the three-step test under art.
13 of TRIPs.
At the September forum, the ACC further suggested that
there may be scope to reduce the Tribunal's jurisdiction under s. 157,
as it may apply beyond the licensing activities of collecting societies.
11.54 Similarly, Michael Freegard and Jack Black, in their study on
Decisions of the UK Performing Right and Copyright Tribunal
(1997), have
suggested that it is highly questionable whether the jurisdiction of the
Australian Copyright Tribunal, in so
far as it applies to 'licences offered or
granted by individual copyright owners', conforms to the requirements of the
Convention.
Freegard and Black note that in debates on the UK
extending the UK Tribunal's jurisdiction to licences covering the works of a
single author on the basis that this would come
near to subjecting all copyright
ownership to compulsory licensing in breach of that country's obligations under
Convention.
11.55 The Committee addressed above (at Chapter 2) Australia's international
obligations in this regard. Australia's international
obligations provide for
various grounds to place limitations on possible abuses of monopoly. It is
apparent that those permissible
limitations focus on the nature of the conduct
to be regulated (ie, 'abuses' of the rights), rather than the nature of the
party that may commit it. Thus, the Committee understands that the scope of
those permissible limitations would allow States to
regulate the conduct of any
party, whether a collecting society or an individual author, in cases where the
exercise of a right
is or has the potential to be an anti-competitive abuse.
11.56 Nevertheless, the Committee believes that the
(subject to its majority recommendations at paragraph 11.100). The Committee
took that view for two reasons.
11.57 Firstly, it is clear that Australia can, in particular cases,
consistently with its international obligations, provide for
limitations on
potential abuses of monopoly power, including the activities of societies
administering rights in a substantial
number of copyright works in a class. Such
bodies by their nature exercise monopoly power or have the potential to exercise
such power. (The Committee addressed the nature of copyright collecting
societies in that regard at Chapter 4.)
11.58 The Committee notes that the nature of a monopoly in the context of
intellectual property rights was referred to generally
by the National
Competition Council as follows:
The existence of a monopoly depends on whether substitution between
products or by producers is feasible and whether the intellectual
owner can raise prices by reducing output. Intellectual property laws do not
create monopolies in markets because
viable substitutes to products made using
intellectual property are normally available.
11.59 The Committee considers that a monopoly arises 'automatically' from the
nature of a collecting society because in Australia
the society will typically
administer licences in relation to a substantial number of works or other
subject matter in a particular
class, thereby restricting the possibility for
users to seek to substitute an alternative product. Indeed, it is a necessary
precondition to the successful operation of a collecting society for it to
administer rights in respect of, at least, a substantial
number of works or
other subject matter.
11.60 In contrast, the Committee considered that the potential for an
anti-competitive abuse to occur in the case of a transactional
licence is very
limited. That is, the Committee considered that a body (other than a 'collecting
society') or natural person
administering a transactional licence would rarely
have the capacity to exercise a monopoly in the relevant market. The
circumstances
in which a single product would comprise a 'market', for the
purpose of determining whether there had been a breach of the
Trade Practices
, was addressed in
Mark Lyons Pty Ltd v Bursill Sportsgear Pty
In that case (which was concerned with a trade mark), Wilcox J
observed that a single product would constitute a market (and therefore
market power) only where it is 'so distinctive that no other product or brand is
seen by consumers as a possible substitute
... Perhaps more frequently other
products or brands present realistic alternatives'.
While that case
concerned a particular brand of ski boots (ie, not copyright material), the
Committee notes that this principle
has been similarly applied in relation to
Broderbund Software Inc v Computermate Products
(Australia) Pty Ltd
11.61 It is apparent, from the Committee's outline of the background to the
Tribunal, that the Tribunal's jurisdiction in relation
to non-statutory licences
was principally developed to regulate possible abuses of monopoly by APRA, which
was, and continues
to be, a monopoly licensor of the performing rights in
musical works. In other words, the jurisdiction of the Tribunal was largely
justified in order to regulate possible abuses of a pre-existing monopoly. As
the Committee noted above (at paragraph 11.11),
that justification would equally
extend to the licensing activities of other collecting societies which are, by
their nature,
a form of monopoly. Conversely, that justification sits uneasily
with the Tribunal's current jurisdiction in relation to particular
transactional
licences, which would rarely constitute a monopoly.
11.62 Secondly, the Committee considered that, for the rights of copyright
owners to be maintained, limitations on those rights
should be confined as far
as possible to those clearly provided for under the relevant international
treaties. In respect of
those treaties, countries have taken different views
regarding the extent of measures that can be taken to regulate the licensing
the works of a single author.
As noted above, the UK did not extend
the jurisdiction of its Copyright Tribunal in respect of the works of a single
because it considered that such an extension would be in breach of its
obligations under the Berne Convention. However, other
Members of the same
convention, such as Australia and South Africa (and New Zealand prior to its
1994 Act), have so extended
the jurisdiction of their copyright tribunals.
11.63 The Committee notes that the WIPO study on
Collective Administration of
(1990) addressed the kinds of supervision that
may be justified to prevent abuses of a monopoly by collective administration
organisations. The study noted that:
It follows from the very notion of exclusive rights that the owner of such
a right is free to decide about the use of his work
and, inter alia, free to
determine the fees to be paid for, and the conditions of, every use. In
general, there is no reason
and no legal basis whatsoever for restricting this
right of an individual owner of rights.
In certain cases, however, the possibility does exist, that a collective
administration organization, being in a de facto monopoly
position, may abuse
that position.
11.64 The study noted that of the three general types of supervision of
collective administration organisations (ordinary courts,
tribunals or
administrative authorities), supervision by the court system is most consistent
with the nature of exclusive rights.
In relation to the justification for
supervision of those organisations by a tribunal, the study went on to note
[it] follows from the Berne Convention itself and more precisely from the
fact that, although it was agreed at the Stockholm Revision
Conference (and
reflected in its report on Article 17 of the Convention) that the member
countries of the Berne Union may maintain
it was also made clear that such tribunals may only serve the purpose of
taking measures
against possible abuses of monopolies.
11.65 The Committee notes that, under the Copyright Act, the Copyright
Tribunal does not need to decide whether rights in a single
work or works of a
single author etc amount to a monopoly, as a precondition to exercising its
in respect to those rights. An application
could therefore be made to the Tribunal in cases that do not involve questions
abuse of a monopoly. Consequently, the Committee is of the view that the
Tribunal's jurisdiction may extend beyond the limitations
allowed under
Australia's international obligations. (However, as the Committee has already
noted, the Tribunal's jurisdiction
has not, so far, been invoked in respect of
non-statutory licences for a use of a single copyright work or sound recording.)
11.66 The Committee believes that it would be onerous on the Tribunal to
remedy this by conferring a power on the Tribunal to determine
monopoly does in fact exist, as a precondition to reviewing a transactional
licence. In particular cases, the provisions
of Part IV of the
Trade Practices
not exempted by
of that Act may operate as an alternative
restraint, and it is the courts which have been invested with the function of
adjudications in that respect.
Also, if the Committee's
recommendation (at paragraph 11.12) to broaden the jurisdiction of the Tribunal
is taken up, the conferral
of such a power would have the potential to involve
the Tribunal in a cumbersome process of evidentiary determination, and so
detract from the principal function it has performed of reviewing licences
administered by collecting societies.
Recommendation
11.67 The Committee recommends that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal
over non-statutory licences be confined exclusively to the
licences administered by a collecting society, and that the Act be amended
accordingly.
[Return to contents]
Expansion of the Tribunal's jurisdiction over collectively
administered licences
11.68 The Committee has already noted (at paragraph 11.15) that the Tribunal
should retain its specialist jurisdiction in relation
to the statutory licences
under the Act, and in particular the licensing activity of the societies
'declared' under Parts VA
and VB of the Act to administer those statutory
schemes. A declared collecting society exercises a monopoly by virtue of its
declared status. The exercise of those monopolies by the declared collecting
societies therefore provides further justification
for the extension of the
Tribunal's jurisdiction in respect of the non-statutory licences that are
currently, or that may in
the future be, administered by those societies.
11.69 In accordance with its discussion above, the Committee has considered
the further extension of the Tribunal's jurisdiction
in relation to collectively
administered non-statutory licences. Submissions to the Committee that commented
on this matter
unanimously favoured such an extension of the Tribunal's
11.70 In its issues paper the Committee invited comment from interests as to
what should constitute a 'collectively administered
licence scheme' for the
purpose of such an extension to the Tribunal's jurisdiction.
11.71 The Act does not currently contain a definition of 'collective
administration'. A definition of 'collecting society' is set
out in ss. 135A,
135ZB and 182B of the Act in relation to statutory licences for educational and
other institutions and for
the use of copyright material by the Crown. Broadly,
those definitions provide that a company is a collecting society if it is
declared as a collecting society by the Attorney-General under s. 135P or 135ZZB
in relation to the statutory licences for
educational and other institutions, or
by the Copyright Tribunal under s. 153F in relation to the use of copyright
by the Crown. Sections 135P(3) and 135ZZB(3) provide that a body shall
not be declared to be a collecting society unless it meets
particular criteria,
principally related to its corporate structure and rules. For example, s.
135P(3) provides that:
The Attorney-General shall not declare a body to be the collecting society
it is a company limited by guarantee and incorporated under a law in
force in a State or Territory relating to companies;
all relevant copyright owners, or their agents, are entitled to become
its members;
its rules prohibit the payment of dividends to its members; and
its rules contain such other provisions as are prescribed, being
provisions necessary to ensure that the interests of the collecting
members who are relevant copyright owners or their agents are protected
adequately, including, in particular, provisions
the collection of amounts of equitable remuneration payable by
administering bodies under section 135H or 135J;
the payment of the administrative costs of the society out of amounts
collected by it;
the distribution of amounts collected by it;
the holding on trust by the society of amounts for relevant copyright
owners who are not its members; and
access to records of the society by its members.
11.72 Section 153F(6) provides that the Copyright Tribunal may declare an
applicant to be a collecting society only if it is satisfied
of a number of
factors similar to those set out in ss. 135P(3) and 135ZZB(3).
11.73 Thus, the Act does not provide for a functional definition of a
collecting society. Under the Act a body may be declared
to be a 'collecting
society' only if it conforms with the requirements of s. 135P(3), 135ZZB(3) or
153F(6). Only CAL (which
is separately declared in relation to both Part VB and
Division 2 of Part VII of the Act) and Screenrights (principally in relation
Part VA) are presently declared under the Act. Screenrights is presently an
applicant to be declared for Division 2 of Part
VII of the Act.
11.74 The Copyright Act does not refer to 'collecting societies' for the
purposes of the Tribunal's jurisdiction in relation to
non-statutory licences,
which under ss. 154­159 currently covers 'licences' and 'licence schemes'
operated by 'licensors'
(as those terms are defined in s. 136). The Committee
discussed the extent of the Tribunal's jurisdiction in that regard in Chapter
(and in more detail at Appendix C). That jurisdiction clearly applies to the
bodies that are commonly identified (and which
identify themselves) as
collecting societies, but would potentially apply to any copyright owner or body
of persons acting
as agent for the copyright owner operating, or proposing to
operate, a 'licence' or 'licence scheme'.
11.75 However, the Committee notes that, thus far, in respect of its
almost exclusively
been concerned with disputes between the collecting societies APRA and PPCA and
a wide number of users of
the type of copyright material licensed by those
societies. That is, in practice, the Tribunal has been mainly concerned with
licensing activities of collecting societies, rather than other bodies or
persons who may administer rights in copyright
11.76 Few submissions made to the Committee commented in detail on what
should amount to a collectively administered licence scheme.
With that caveat,
submissions to the Committee were apparently divided between three broad options
for an extension of the
Tribunal's jurisdiction, which the Committee has
considered. Consistent with its recommendation at paragraph 11.12, all of these
options would apply in respect of all types of copyright material and all types
of copyright use. In summary, those options
are to extend the Tribunal's
all licence schemes administered by any person or body of persons,
excluding transactional licences;
all licence schemes administered by a collecting society, excluding
transactional licences; or
all licence schemes and transactional licences administered by a
collecting society.
11.77 Those options are described in more detail as follows. In
discussing those options, the Committee notes that it uses the
term 'licence scheme' in the
same sense that the term is defined in s. 136 of the Act. (The Committee set out
that definition
at paragraph 4.04.)
Option 1 – Extension of the Tribunal's jurisdiction to all licence
schemes, excluding transactional licences
11.78 The Committee envisages that this option would have the following
principal features:
the Tribunal's jurisdiction would apply to all
licence schemes administered by a 'licensor';
the definition of 'licensor' for this purpose would be broadly framed, to
capture any person or body of persons administering rights
in a number of works
or subject matter;
the Tribunal's jurisdiction would not apply to transactional licences.
11.79 That is, any person or body of persons administering rights in a number
of works or other subject matter and which operated
a licence scheme for a type
of copyright use would be treated as collectively administering copyright for
the purpose of attracting
the Tribunal's jurisdiction.
11.80 The difference between this option and Options 2 and 3 (considered
below) turns on the definition of the 'licensor' who administers
the licence
scheme. Essentially, this is a matter of degree, as the definition the Committee
considered under this option could
be framed broadly to apply to the licensing
activity of persons or bodies administering rights in a relatively small number
of works or other subject matter in addition to those, such as the principal
collecting societies, that administer rights in
a large number of works or other
subject matter. For example, under this option, the licensing activity of
literary agents
collectively administering rights on behalf of a small number of
authors would potentially come within the Tribunal's jurisdiction.
In contrast,
the definition of 'licensor' that the Committee considered under Options 2 and 3
would apply only in respect of
bodies collectively administering rights in a
substantial number of copyright works or subject matter.
11.81 The Committee considers that the provisions of the UK and
NZ Copyright Acts provide a guide to the potential scope of Option
11.82 Relevantly, under the UK Act, the equivalent of a licensor is defined
in s. 116(2) in the following way:
In this Chapter, a 'licensing body' means a society or other organisation
which has as its main object, or one of its main objects,
the negotiation or
granting, either as owner or prospective owner of copyright or as agent for
him, of copyright licences,
and whose objects include the granting of licences
covering works of more than one author.
11.83 The UK Act also qualifies the definition of licensing scheme under s.
116(4), so that:
references in this Chapter to licences or licensing schemes covering the
works of more than one author do not include licences or
schemes covering only —
a single collective work or collective works of which the authors are
the same, or
works made by, or by employees of or commissioned by, a single
individual, firm, company or group of companies.
11.84 Under the NZ Act, the term 'licensing body' does not, unlike the
similar definition in the UK Act, include the requirement
that the body have the
licensing of copyright as one of its main objects. The definition (set out at
paragraph 11.50) appears
to focus more on the function of the body, rather than
its formal aims. The definition of 'licensing scheme' in the NZ Act is
to the definition of 'licence scheme' in the Australian Act.
11.85 However, the Committee considers that the limitations in this regard
under both the NZ and the UK Acts, which appear to confine
their tribunals'
potentially apply to licences
in cases where there would be no clear exercise of
monopoly power. It appears that the Copyright Tribunal in NZ and in the UK
have jurisdiction to hear a dispute regarding a licence where the licensor was a
body collectively administering rights
in only a small number of works. In those
cases the Committee believes that there would rarely be a monopoly, for reasons
to those discussed at paragraphs 11.53­11.66, and therefore there is
not sufficient justification for the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal to extend to
those cases. That is, the Committee considers that it is possible that such an
extension would unreasonably
limit the exclusive rights of copyright owners and
therefore be in conflict with Australia's international obligations.
11.86 Additionally, the Committee feels that this option, if implemented,
would have the potential to overburden the Tribunal.
It is notable that the
Tribunal's jurisdiction in relation to non-statutory licences has not yet been
invoked in cases involving
a body administering rights in a small number of
works or other subject matter of a particular class. Such disputes have almost
exclusively been concerned with the licensing activities of APRA and PPCA. Those
societies claim to administer rights in the
majority of musical works or sound
recordings published in Australia. Accordingly, the possibility that a dispute
referred to the Tribunal regarding a licence in respect of rights in a
musical work or sound recording not administered by those
societies appears
relatively low.
11.87 While the other established collecting societies in Australia appear to
administer rights in respect of a substantial number
of copyright works or
subject matter, it does not appear to the Committee that they exercise the same
degree of power in the
relevant market as do APRA and PPCA. Both Screenrights'
and CAL's licensing activity is principally concerned with the administration
the statutory licences under Part VA or VB of the Act respectively and, in the
case of CAL, the Crown use statutory licence.
Vi$copy's licensing activity
appears to be principally concerned with the administration of transactional
licences in respect
of particular artistic works. AMCOS's licensing activity is
largely concerned with the administration of the statutory licence
recording of musical works, and the Committee understands that in a number of
cases that statutory licence is administered
directly by music publishers.
11.88 The Committee considers that, if the Tribunal's jurisdiction in
relation to non-statutory licences were extended in accordance
with this option
and the Committee's recommendation at paragraph 11.12, significant numbers of
applications might be made to
the Tribunal in respect of licence schemes
administered by licensors who are not in a position to exercise monopolistic
This might significantly add to the workload of the Tribunal. The
Committee also has doubts that such an extension to the Tribunal's
would be consistent with Australia's international obligations. Accordingly, the
Committee does not favour this
[Return to contents]
Option 2 – Extension of the Tribunal's jurisdiction to all licence schemes
administered by a collecting society, excluding
transactional licences
11.89 The Committee envisages that this option would have the following
the Tribunal's jurisdiction would apply to all licence schemes administered
by a 'licensor';
the definition of 'licensor' for this purpose would be narrowly framed, to
capture only organisations collectively administering
rights in a substantial
number of works or subject matter, and which would therefore have the capacity
to exercise a monopoly;
the Tribunal's jurisdiction would not apply to transactional licences.
11.90 Under this option, the jurisdiction of the Tribunal would be extended
only in relation to disputes over licence schemes administered
by a 'licensor'.
The Committee envisages that the definition of this term could be framed
narrowly so that, in practice, the
principally concerned with the non-transactional licensing activities of
collecting societies
(the Committee's discussion of a possible definition of a
'collecting society' is at paragraphs 11.102­11.121).
11.91 This option represents the most conservative extension to the
Tribunal's jurisdiction of the three options considered. The
majority of the
Committee considered that this approach has some advantages, but that it is
generally outweighed by its disadvantages.
Its advantages are that it would
maintain the jurisdiction of the Tribunal over its principal focus of activity,
that is, in
relation to the review of licence schemes administered by collecting
societies. Providing that there were a confined definition
of 'collecting
society', this option would have less potential to increase the workload of the
Tribunal if it were implemented.
11.92 The majority of the Committee believes that the disadvantage of this
approach is that it would not apply to transactional
licences administered by
collecting societies. The Committee considers that the monopoly position of
collecting societies justifies
the extension of the Tribunal's jurisdiction to
both transactional licences and licence schemes in respect of a number of works
or other subject matter that may be administered by those societies.
Accordingly, the majority of the Committee did not favour
this option.
11.93 One member does not share the view of the majority, and
favours an extension of the Copyright Tribunal's jurisdiction in
accordance with
this option. The dissenting member makes this recommendation based on the view
that it is not possible to act
monopolistically with respect to licensing of a
single work or other subject matter and therefore the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal may not be justifiable according to Australia's international
obligations.
Recommendation
11.94 The dissenting member recommends that the Act be amended to
extend the jurisdiction of the Copyright Tribunal to licence
schemes, but
not transactional licences, administered by a collecting society.
[Return to contents]
Option 3 – Extension of the Tribunal's jurisdiction to all
licences administered by a collecting society, including transactional
11.95 The Committee envisages that this option would have the same features
as Option 2, except that it would also extend the Tribunal's
review of transactional licences administered by a collecting society.
Transactional licences administered by a collecting society
11.96 In relation to the Tribunal's jurisdiction over transactional licences,
as suggested under this option, the Committee was
mindful of the constraints
that may be imposed by Australia's international obligations, which it discussed
in Chapter 2.
11.97 However, the majority of the Committee considers that the potential for
a transactional licence to have an adverse effect
on competition within a
relevant market is higher in the case where the right is licensed, even on an
agency basis, by a body
which also collectively administers rights of that kind.
Accordingly, the majority considers that Australia's international obligations
would permit it to extend the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to any licence,
including transactional licences, administered by
a collecting society.
The problem of transparency
11.98 In broad terms, copyright owner interests proposed that the Tribunal
should have jurisdiction over a transactional licence
only if the collecting
society had a power to grant, refuse or set the terms of the licence, but not
where the collecting society
acts merely as a conduit to bring the rights owner
and user together. A number of copyright owner interests, including APRA,
appeared to accept such a proposed expansion of the Tribunal's jurisdiction on
that condition. Such an expansion was opposed
by the ACC and CAL.
11.99 The majority of the Committee considers that such a distinction between
a transactional licence where the collecting society
sets the terms or where the
individual member sets the terms and the collecting society acts as an agent
lacks transparency.
It would not always be obvious to a user whether the terms
were being set by the collecting society, or whether those terms were
by the member. Further, the majority of the Committee considers that where a
collecting society acted as an agent
in such a case, the terms of a
transactional licence might evolve, or have regard to, the 'going rate' for a
similar type of
use otherwise licensed by that collecting society. Thus, a
potential problem with such an approach is that a transactional licence
negotiated by a collecting society (as an agent) could, in practice, become a
Recommendations
11.100 The majority of the Committee recommends that the Act be amended
to extend the jurisdiction of the Copyright Tribunal to
all licence
schemes and transactional licences administered by a collecting society.
11.101 (The majority of the Committee further notes its recommendation
at paragraph 11.67 that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal
be confined
exclusively to the review of licences administered by a collecting
[Return to contents]
Definition of 'collecting society'
11.102 The implementation of either Option 2 or Option 3 would require an
identification of what is a 'collecting society' (although,
for the purpose of
an amendment to the Act, the Committee prefers the term 'licensor' for the
reasons set out at paragraph
11.122). In this respect, the Committee considers
that it would be important to arrive at a confined definition of 'collecting
society', to avoid the jurisdiction of the Tribunal extending more generally to
all copyright licensing activity.
11.103 The difficulty of arriving at a confined definition of 'collecting
society' has been noted in previous reports. Commenting
in relation to
collecting societies both in Australia and overseas, the Simpson Report noted
that 'there is no single satisfactory
definition of a collecting society except
one that vaguely describes an organisation that "administers copyrights or
neighbouring
rights on behalf of a group of owners and collects and distributes
income in relation to the use of such rights"'.
A similarly broad
definition of collective administration was provided by WIPO in
Administration of Copyright and Neighboring Rights
, as a system where:
owners of rights authorise collective administration organisations to
administer their rights, that is, to monitor the use of the
works concerned,
negotiate with prospective users, give them licenses against appropriate fees
and, under appropriate conditions,
collect such fees and distribute them
amongst the owners of rights.
11.104 The Committee considers that neither of those general definitions
would be sufficiently confined. In many cases, they would
apply to the licensing
activities of a very large number of bodies.
11.105 The Committee considered the following alternatives for a definition
of 'collecting society'.
One alternative was for there to be a register of collecting societies. The
any licence administered by a
body included on the register.
11.106 At the September forum, interests generally appeared to favour a
proposal by APRA that a register of collecting societies
be established. The
proposal appeared to be that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal would apply only
to applications made in
relation to licences administered or proposed by a
registered body. This proposal was put forward in the context of the difficulty
of arriving at a sufficiently contained definition of 'collecting society'.
11.107 On its face, this proposal would appear to avoid the difficulties of
arriving at a definition of 'collecting society'. However,
the Committee
considers that there would need to be some criteria used in determining whether
a body would be included on such
a register. The problem of formulating such
criteria would be likely to mirror the problem of determining an appropriate
of 'collecting society'. This proposal might also suffer from the
problem of not operating flexibly.
Recommendation
11.108 The Committee recommends that no amendment be made to the Act to
establish a register of collecting societies for the purpose
determining the jurisdiction of the Tribunal under the
Another alternative is to seek to arrive at a sufficiently descriptive
definition of 'collecting society' so that the definition
would include the
activities of each of the principal collecting societies in Australia (currently
AMCOS, APRA, CAL, PPCA,
Screenrights and Vi$copy), but go no further.
11.109 On the basis of written submissions to it and the September forum, it
appeared to the Committee that interests generally
favoured an extension of the
collecting societies
in Australia. For example, in commenting on a broad
definition of 'collective administration' at the September forum, Screenrights
suggested that such a definition should avoid including bodies such as writers'
agents, which may negotiate royalty rates and
hold royalties on behalf of
authors, in a manner similar to the licensing activities of collecting
societies, but presumably
on a smaller scale.
11.110 In its first written submission, FACTS suggested that the licensing
activity of organisations that meet the following general
description should be
subject to the Tribunal's jurisdiction:
Traditionally, collecting societies have been purpose oriented,
non-profit organisations, restricted under their constitution to
the activity of
licensing copyright material of a particular description or form, owned or
licensed by various third parties.
Essentially, they have been cooperatives to
facilitate access to an extensive range of copyright which would otherwise be
to administer.
11.111 While that general description may apply to the principal collecting
societies as they are currently structured, and is
consistent with the
requirements of the Act for 'declared' collecting societies, the Committee
believes that such a proposal
places too much weight on the structure of the
licensing body rather than its function. Fundamentally, the purpose of the
Tribunal is to regulate monopoly power regardless of the formal
structure of the body (eg, as a non-profit society) which may
exercise that
A third alternative considered by the Committee was to define 'collecting
society' as 'a body which administers rights in respect
of a substantial number
of copyright works or subject matter of a particular class'.
11.112 The ALCA drew the Committee's attention to the operation of bodies
that collectively administer copyright in Nordic countries.
Those countries
provide a scheme of 'Extended Collective Licence' which may be invoked by users
who have made an agreement
on a particular exploitation of a work with:
an organisation representing a large number of [national] authors in a
certain field (see eg, s.11a of the Finnish Copyright Act).
11.113 The Committee is aware that a similar formulation is adopted under s.
50 of the Danish Copyright Act. It appears that organisations
encompassed by
that definition would typically be collecting societies. A description of the
scheme of Extended Collective
Licence in the Nordic countries is provided at http://www.kopinor.no/english/remun.html, which further notes that such an organisation
must be 'nationally
representative in its field'.
11.114 The Committee regards that definition (as used in s. 11a of the
Finnish Copyright Act) as providing a simple and flexible
model. The Committee
considers the following adaptation of that model to be appropriate in the
context of the Australian Copyright
Act, and for the purpose of addressing the
proposed extension to the Copyright Tribunal's jurisdiction:
'licensor' means, in relation to a class of works or other
subject matter, a person or body of persons, whether incorporated or
collectively administering rights in a substantial number of works or other
subject matter in that class.
11.115 The Committee considers that such a definition would generally operate
to confine the jurisdiction of the Copyright Tribunal
to the licensing activity
of collecting societies. As the Committee noted at paragraphs 11.06­11.07,
each of the principal
collecting societies in Australia administers rights in
relation to a substantial number of works or subject matter. As a functional
definition, the formulation would also appear to be sufficiently flexible to
capture the licensing activity of any person or
body of persons who exercises a
monopoly or potential monopoly by collectively administering copyright licences,
and therefore
would provide sufficient justification for the application of the
Tribunal's jurisdiction. The Committee considered that an organisation
collectively administering rights in a substantial number of works or other
subject matter in a class would, necessarily, have
the capacity to act in a
monopolistic manner.
11.116 Importantly, the Committee considered that the term 'collectively
administering', in this context, should apply to a person
or body of persons
administering a licence scheme, whether or not that person or body also
administers transactional licences
or carries on some other type of activity.
The Committee notes that this would appear to be consistent with the
recommendation
of the Spicer Committee referred to at paragraph 1.09. In
submissions in response to the draft report, Screenrights, CAL and ACC
that a definition encompassing only a body 'administering rights in a
substantial number of works', as proposed in
the draft report, would potentially
apply to bodies that are not collecting societies, such as large publishers or
The Committee considers that the anti-monopoly justification for the
Tribunal's jurisdiction particularly arises where a person
or body administers,
at least, a licence scheme. That is, the aggregation of the rights of a number
of copyright owners, administered
through a licence scheme, would prevent a user
from seeking to negotiate an alternative licence.
11.117 The Committee also notes that it would be inappropriate for the
definition to refer to the representation by the particular
organisation of
Australian (ie, national) authors along the lines of the definition set out in
paragraph 11.112. In many cases,
collecting societies in Australia may
administer rights in a greater number of overseas works than Australian works.
it appears that the requirement under the Nordic model, that a body
represent a large number of national authors, operates particularly
with regard
to the requirements for the scheme of 'Extended Collective Licence', under which
a society may grant licences in
respect of non-members for particular purposes.
In any case, the purpose of the Tribunal's jurisdiction is to regulate abuses
potential abuses of monopoly. The Committee considers that such a monopoly may
operate regardless of whether a body administers
rights in respect of Australian
or overseas works or other subject matter.
11.118 Accordingly, the Committee preferred its adapted formulation over the
wording of the Nordic model.
11.119 The Committee was mindful that the term 'substantial number', as used
in its adapted formula, may give rise to interpretative
difficulties in some
cases. However, the Committee notes that the Copyright Tribunal has, to date,
been concerned with disputes
involving particular collecting societies as bodies
which collectively administer rights in substantial numbers of works or other
subject matter. Given that all of the principal collecting societies in
Australia appear to represent rights in substantial
numbers of works or other
subject matter, the Committee does not envisage that there would be any
significant change to the
bodies appearing before the Tribunal in this respect.
The Committee envisages that the term 'substantial number' would be interpreted
against this background and so would typically apply to organisations
collectively administering rights in many thousands of
works or other subject
matter of a large number of authors or makers of those works or other subject
matter. Accordingly, the
Committee does not foresee that the implementation of
its recommendation on this matter would, taken by itself, put a substantially
greater strain on the Tribunal's resources.
11.120 The Committee notes that the Tribunal is not bound by the rules of
evidence and that its procedure is subject to its own
discretion (s. 164).
Accordingly, the Committee does not believe that the interpretation of the term
'substantial number' would
necessarily involve the Tribunal in a complicated
investigation as to the membership and nature of a particular 'licensor', as
Tribunal could hear an application if satisfied that a person or body of persons
represented rights in relation to a substantial
number of works or other subject
matter. Nevertheless, to lessen the risk that complications may arise in
proceedings before
the Tribunal on this point (for example, on an appeal of law
as to the scope of such a term), the Committee considers that its
definition of 'licensor' be qualified by the express requirement that the
Tribunal need only be satisfied that the
particular organisation collectively
administers rights in a substantial number of works or other subject matter.
(The Committee
notes that such an approach is already adopted in the Act. For
example, s. 153F(6) provides that the Tribunal may declare a collecting
if the Tribunal is satisfied of a number of matters. Section 157(5) provides
that the Tribunal may, if it thinks fit,
make an organisation or person a party
to an application if it is satisfied that the organisation or person has a
'substantial
interest' in the matter in dispute.)
Recommendation
11.121 The Committee recommends that the definition of 'licensor' in s.
136 of the Act be amended so that it applies to a person
or a body of
persons, if the Tribunal is satisfied that the person or body collectively
administers rights in respect of a
substantial number of works or other
subject matter in a class. Additionally, the Committee recommends that the
of 'licensor' apply to a person or body of persons that
administers a licence scheme, whether or not that person or body also
administers transactional licences or carries on some other type of
[Return to contents]
Use of the term 'collecting society'
11.122 For the purpose of its discussion above, the Committee has preferred
the term 'licensor' to the term 'collecting society'.
The Committee does not
consider that the term 'collecting society' should be included in the Act, other
than in relation to
a collecting society declared for the purpose of the
statutory licences. To be declared in respect of a statutory licence, the
Committee has noted that a body must conform to particular requirements, which
the Committee considers would be appropriately
fulfilled by a body described as
a 'society'. However, if the Committee's recommendation at paragraph 11.121 is
adopted, the
Tribunal's jurisdiction in respect of non-statutory licences would
potentially apply to bodies that are not structured in that
way, even though the
licensing activities of such bodies are likely to be the principal focus of the
Tribunal's jurisdiction.
Accordingly, the Committee favours the term 'licensor'
in keeping with the current usage of that word (though not its substantive
definition) in the Act.
Substitution of collectively administered licence schemes and
transactional licences
11.123 Sections 154, 155 and 156 of the Act provide that, where a licence
scheme is referred to the Tribunal under any of those
sections, the Tribunal
shall consider the matter in dispute and, after giving the parties to the
reference an opportunity of
presenting their cases, shall make such an order,
confirming or varying
the scheme, as the Tribunal considers reasonable in
the circumstances. On an application in relation to a licence under s. 157
Tribunal may make an order specifying the charges, if any, and the conditions
that it considers are reasonable in the circumstances
in relation to the
11.124 FACTS and FARB submitted that the Tribunal should have a broader
(eg, one put forward by a
licensee) in relation to applications made under ss. 154, 155 and 157 of the
Act. The Committee notes
that the suggestion arises from comments by Sheppard J
Re Reference by APRA; Re ABC
that the Tribunal's jurisdiction to
confirm or vary a licence scheme under s. 154 does not include a power to
substitute a
licence scheme in respect of an application made under those
provisions. Instead the Tribunal found that 'the Tribunal's power
scheme under that provision will be limited to making variations in the sense of
amendments or alterations, but not
so to change it as to substitute an entirely
different scheme for the one referred'.
There appeared to be
general agreement at the September forum that the Tribunal's jurisdiction should
be extended in this way.
11.125 The Committee considers that such an extension to the Tribunal's
confirm or vary a licence scheme as it considers reasonable in the circumstances
under ss. 154(4), 155(5) and
156(4) or to specify charges and conditions that it
considers reasonable in the circumstances under s. 157(6).
11.126 APRA and AMCOS, in their joint submission in response to the draft
report, suggested that the concerns raised by FACTS and
FARB could be met by the
capacity for applications to be made under s. 157 of the Act. APRA and AMCOS
submitted that ss. 154,
155 and 156 of the Act intentionally limit the
the Committee disagrees with APRA's observation that s. 157 provides an
opportunity for any licensee or intending licensee
to propose an alternative
scheme to the Tribunal. That provision would not appear to allow a party to
propose an alternative
licence scheme in a case to which a licence scheme
already applies. In this respect, the Committee notes that the definition of
'licence scheme' in s. 136 means a scheme 'formulated by a licensor or
licensors'. (In a case where a licence scheme does not
apply, the Tribunal has
that the Tribunal
considers reasonable in the circumstances.)
11.127 A further issue which arises is whether the Tribunal should have a
power to substitute only a licence scheme put forward
by a party or,
additionally, a power to substitute a licence scheme devised by the Tribunal. In
this respect, the Committee
was conscious of the need to avoid burdening the
Tribunal with details that would more appropriately be put forward by the
parties. Also, the Committee considers that if neither party has sought a
particular form of a licence scheme, it may be inappropriate
for the Tribunal to
impose an entirely new scheme. Accordingly, the Committee considers that the
Tribunal's power to substitute
a licence scheme should be confined to one put
forward by a party.
11.128 Consistent with the Committee's majority recommendation at paragraph
11.100, for the Copyright Tribunal's jurisdiction to
extend to transactional
licences administered by a collecting society, the Committee considers that the
Tribunal's jurisdiction
should also extend to the substitution of a
transactional licence, in addition to it having a power to confirm or vary such
a licence if put forward by a party.
Recommendation
11.129 The Committee recommends that the Tribunal have jurisdiction to
substitute a licence scheme if such a scheme is put forward
by a party, in
addition to its existing jurisdiction to vary or confirm a scheme or
specify charges and conditions in relation
to licence schemes.
Likewise, the majority of the Committee recommends that the Tribunal
have a power to substitute, vary or confirm a transactional
licence put
forward by a party.
[Return to contents]
Extension of the Tribunal's jurisdiction to licences agreed
between the parties
11.130 FACTS and FARB separately submitted to the Committee that a
collectively administered licence agreement, entered into voluntarily
parties, is not subject to the Tribunal's jurisdiction because of the operation
of s. 162. FACTS and FARB submitted
that, in the case of a dispute regarding a
non-statutory agreement, the parties would rely principally on remedies in
Section 162 of the Act provides that:
Nothing in this Part [VI] affects the operation of any agreement or of any
award made by an arbitrator, whether the agreement or
award was made before, or
is made after, the commencement of this Act.
11.131 FACTS and FARB submitted that the Tribunal should have jurisdiction in
relation to disputes about the terms of such licence
agreements, excluding
matters related to fees. In relation to broadcasting, FARB, for example,
envisaged circumstances where
the terms of a licence agreement, which appeared
acceptable at the outset of an arrangement, become the subject of different
interpretations by the parties or were no longer appropriate as a result of
changed circumstances, in particular, changes in
the law of copyright or in
technology. The Committee understands that FACTS and FARB submitted that this
would be different
in the case of the terms setting fees, because it would not
be possible for the fee to itself become a matter about which the
parties could
legitimately have different interpretations once the agreement was made.
11.132 In effect, it appears that FACTS and FARB interpreted s. 162 as a type
of limitation on the Copyright Tribunal's jurisdiction
under Part VI of the Act.
The Committee has not found any commentary that would assist in the
interpretation of s. 162, either
in debates surrounding its enactment, or in
academic commentary or case law.
11.133 Despite this, the Committee agrees that the Tribunal may
not have jurisdiction in relation to non-statutory licences, where
scheme does not apply, agreed between the parties. The Committee has already
noted above that, in relation to non-statutory
licences, applications may be
made to the Tribunal in relation to both licence schemes and licences. A
'licence scheme' is
defined under s. 136 to mean a scheme 'formulated by a
licensor or licensors'. In other words, the definition appears to relate
schemes formulated unilaterally by the licensor. It could be argued that a
licence scheme would not therefore be a type
of agreement between the parties,
or an award by an arbitrator.
11.134 In contrast, a 'licence', where a licence scheme does not apply, could
be a type of agreement between the parties. However,
applications to the
Tribunal in respect of licences, where a licence scheme does not apply, may be
made only under s. 157(3)
or (4) of the Act. Applications under those provisions
may be made where the licensor has refused the grant of a licence or proposes
grant a licence subject to charges, or to conditions, that an applicant may
contend are unreasonable. That provision would
not appear to allow an
application to the Tribunal in respect of the terms or conditions of a licence,
where a licence scheme
does not apply, which has been agreed by the parties and
which is on foot.
11.135 Accordingly, it appears to the Committee that the Tribunal may not
have jurisdiction in relation to licences agreed between
the parties because no
such jurisdiction is provided generally under Part VI. The Committee does not
consider that s. 162 operates
as a type of limitation on the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal. That provision merely appears to clarify that the jurisdiction of
Tribunal otherwise conferred under Part VI does not affect the operation of any
agreement or award made by an arbitrator.
The terms 'agreement or award made by
an arbitrator' are more general than the terms 'licence' and 'licence scheme',
used elsewhere
in Part VI. As a matter of statutory interpretation, the
Committee did not therefore consider that the latter specific terms would
read down by the more general terms.
11.136 The Committee agrees with the submissions of FACTS and FARB that the
regarding the terms of a
collectively administered licence established by agreement between the parties.
The Committee notes
that its majority recommendation at paragraph 11.100, if
implemented, would effect such an extension to the Tribunal's jurisdiction,
including an extension of its jurisdiction to terms regarding rates of
remuneration.
11.137 In that respect, the Committee does not agree with the submissions of
FACTS and FARB that an extension to the Tribunal's
extend to disputes over terms setting rates of remuneration previously agreed
between the parties.
For similar reasons outlined by FARB in relation to the
other terms of such licences, the Committee considered that a genuine
might arise regarding a previously agreed rate of remuneration because of
changed circumstances, such as changes to
the law of copyright or changes in
technology. The Committee considered that the Tribunal should have a similar
to review all terms of a licence that is collectively administered.
[Return to contents]
Chapter 12 – Input
arrangements
General jurisdiction over input arrangements
12.01 Competing views were put to the Committee regarding whether the
Tribunal should have jurisdiction over the rights and obligations
collecting societies and their members ('input arrangements').
12.02 User interests generally supported such an extension. The LCA submitted
that the Tribunal's jurisdiction should be generally
extended to all input
arrangements because most copyright owners have no choice but to become members
of a particular collecting
society. FACTS submitted that the Tribunal's
societies, where those societies are not subject to statutory
prescription. The AVCC and MCEETYA supported the Tribunal having
supervisory role over input arrangements.
12.03 On the other hand, collecting societies argued that it would be
inappropriate and unnecessary for the Tribunal to have such
an expanded
grievances.
12.04 The Committee has received little evidence of the need to extend the
Tribunal's jurisdiction to input arrangements, other
than general statements
made by a limited number of interests in support of this extension. Apart from
submissions made by
PPCA and Vi$copy (discussed below), the Committee did not
receive any submissions from members of collecting societies on this
matter. The
Committee considers that such an expansion would be warranted only if existing
mechanisms were inadequate to provide
a safeguard for the rights of members of a
particular collecting society, and if there were sufficient demand for such an
as an alternative remedy. The Committee considered the following
existing mechanisms in that regard.
Declaration and revocation procedures under the
12.05 The Committee notes that the Tribunal already has a limited
s. 153F deals with
applications to declare a collecting society for government copying. Under s.
153F(6)(e), the Tribunal may
declare the applicant to be a collecting society
only if it is satisfied that the applicant's rules contain adequate provision
for the protection of its members in relation to matters including the
collection of remuneration payable under s. 183A, the
payment of administrative
costs, the distribution of remuneration, trust arrangements for copyright owners
who are not members
of the society, and access to the society's records by
members. Section 153G sets out the procedure for revocation of a declaration
made under s. 153F. An application for revocation may be made by the collecting
society itself, a member of the collecting
society or a government. Under s.
153G(5) the Tribunal may revoke the declaration of a company as a collecting
society only
if it is not functioning adequately as a collecting society, is not
acting in accordance with its rules or in the best interests
of its members, has
altered its rules so that they no longer comply with s. 153F(6)(b) or (f), or
has contravened s. 183D or
183E (which deal with reporting and accounting and
alteration of rules). The Attorney-General has similar powers to review the
input arrangements of a collecting society declared under Part VA or VB (see ss.
135P, 135Q, 135ZZB, 135ZZC).
Contractual remedies
12.06 The Committee is also aware that various contractual remedies may be
open to aggrieved members of a collecting society. That
is because, upon joining
a collecting society, each member enters a contract with the society, embodied
in the society's Articles
of Association. There may also be other contracts
between a member and a collecting society, such as those effecting a licence
assignment of rights. To the extent that the conduct of a collecting society may
contravene those contracts, it will be
possible, in theory at least, for an
individual member to take action against a collecting society. The procedure for
is to happen in that situation may be set out in the contract itself.
Alternatively, a member may have recourse to common law
remedies such as damages
or equitable remedies including orders for specific performance or injunctions.
Corporations Law
12.07 The Committee notes that the Corporations Law also provides an avenue
of redress for members of a collecting society. Section
246AA of the
Corporations Law entitles a member to apply to the relevant State court for an
order where he or she believes
that the affairs of the company are being
conducted in a manner that is oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to or unfairly
discriminates
against a member or members or is contrary to the interests of the
members as a whole. This also applies in relation to acts or
omissions or
proposed acts or omissions by or on behalf of the company and resolutions or
proposed resolutions by a class of
members. If the court is satisfied that the
conduct in question is oppressive or discriminatory, it may make an order, for
example, regulating the conduct of the affairs of the company in the future or
requiring a person to do a specified act or thing.
Fiduciary duties
12.08 A collecting society is required to make provision for holding money on
trust for copyright owners who are not its members.
The scope of a collecting
society's fiduciary duty has been examined in a recent decision by the New South
Wales Supreme Court.
Audio-Visual Copyright Society Ltd v Australian Record
Industry Association Ltd & Ors
Simos J held that the equitable
remuneration collected by Screenrights was subject to a trust in favour of the
relevant copyright
owners. This construction was held to be consistent with both
Screenrights' Articles of Association and with the intent of the
legislature as
expressed in s. 135P (being the section relevant to Part VA licences). Given the
similarity between that provision
and the provisions applying to licence schemes
under Parts VB and VI (ss. 135ZZB, 153F), the same construction could apply in
relation to the other 'declared' collecting societies as well. On this basis,
the Committee considers it reasonable to suggest
that collecting societies stand
in a fiduciary relationship to copyright owners on behalf of whom they collect
remuneration.
This includes its own members as well as those outside its
membership. This is significant because it may provide a remedy to
owners who are not in a formal contractual relationship with a collecting
society and a further means of protection
for those who are.
Judicial review of administrative decisions
12.09 In its submission following the draft report, Screenrights submitted
that it considered that decisions of its board of directors
distribution policy are administrative decisions which are reviewable under the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
(Cth) (the ADJR Act). Its
advice was that a decision by Screenrights to determine a scheme of allocation
would be a decision
of an administrative character as it is a decision made by
Screenrights in its capacity as a body declared under a statute (and
decision is not judicial or legislative).
12.10 The Committee notes that Screenrights' opinion regarding the
application of the ADJR Act has not been tested before a court.
Nevertheless,
the Committee notes that the remedies available under the ADJR Act would apply
only in the case of an error of
law, and would not be available for review of
the merits of a decision.
The jurisdiction of the ACCC and the Australian Competition
12.11 The Committee endorses the statement made by the Competition Tribunal
Re Applications by Australasian Performing Right Association
to the effect that the input arrangements of collecting
societies were a matter for it and not for the Copyright Tribunal. This
that to the extent that the input arrangements of a collecting society might
constitute a contravention of Part IV of
Trade Practices Act
, it would be
liable to action by the ACCC, or a member of the public, including one of its
own members. This includes liability
for damages (which might be an appropriate
form of redress for an aggrieved copyright owner). Under
Practices Act
, a person who has suffered loss or damage as a result of conduct
in contravention of
or V of the Act may recover damages. The Act
recognises that it may not always be practical for an individual to institute
such proceedings and so gives the ACCC power to make a representative
application for damages under s. 87(1B).
12.12 A collecting society might try to safeguard against such liability by
seeking authorisation or notification in relation to
its input arrangements. In
this situation, the ACCC or, if the decision is reviewed, the Competition
Tribunal will have to
balance the public benefit of the arrangements against the
likely detriment. A discussion of this process is included at Appendix
Internal mechanisms of collecting societies
12.13 The Committee is aware that some collecting societies have internal
procedures to deal with disputes, including disputes
with members. For example,
Screenrights has developed a draft Complaints Handling Procedure based generally
on the Standards
Australia model. On the other hand, Vi$copy has indicated that
it would be likely to use an external process such as the mediation
offered by the Arts Law Centre. The Committee considers that the use of an
external mechanism is likely to enhance
the parties' confidence in the
independence of the process. In this regard, the Committee notes that APRA is in
the process
of developing an ADR model according to the Competition Tribunal's
recommendations.
12.14 It is interesting to note that the Competition Tribunal recommended
that APRA's ADR model should be able to deal with complaints
by members as well
as those by licensees and potential licensees. If such a system were to be
established, the Committee considers
that its success will largely depend on the
extent to which it is seen as being independent.
[Return to contents]
12.15 At the September forum, and in their submissions in response to the
draft report, PPCA and Vi$copy expressed support for
the Copyright Tribunal
having jurisdiction over the input arrangements of a declared collecting
society. Apart from PPCA and
Vi$copy, the Committee considers that it is
significant that it received no other representations from members of collecting
societies on this issue.
12.16 Vi$copy and PPCA contended that the input arrangements of the declared
societies should be subject to the Tribunal's jurisdiction
because rights owners
or their agents have no choice but to have their rights administered by the
declared societies. The general
concern of those societies, in their capacity as
members of other societies such as Screenrights, appeared to be that societies
may advantage the predominant class of copyright owner members to the
disadvantage of members in a minority class, and that
the existing remedies
(outlined above) are inadequate. PPCA and Vi$copy therefore submitted that the
Tribunal's jurisdiction
should be extended to the determination of disputes
regarding a scheme of distribution between collecting societies and their
members, where the collecting society accounts to three or more different
classes of copyright owners.
12.17 In its submission following the draft report, Screenrights opposed
those submissions and reiterated the availability of a
number of remedies which
the Committee has referred to above. Further, Screenrights submitted that, if an
application were
able to be made to the Tribunal regarding distribution
arrangements, all members of a collecting society may be detrimentally
by delays in distributions pending a decision of the Tribunal on such a matter.
[Return to contents]
12.18 The Committee recognises the potential for disputes relating to input
arrangements of the kind referred to above. However,
the Committee considers
that the submissions made to it did not demonstrate sufficient concerns on
behalf of the broader membership
of the declared societies to justify an
extension to the Tribunal's jurisdiction in this respect.
12.19 The Committee acknowledges that, apart from any internal mechanisms
established by collecting societies, the existing mechanisms
require court
proceedings to be taken. Those proceedings may not be appropriate to deal with
grievances by members of collecting
societies, other than large organisations or
representative bodies. In this respect the Committee notes Vi$copy's submission
in response to the draft report, that the expense of those proceedings would be
prohibitive for a small organisation. The Committee
has some reservations in any
case about whether the Copyright Tribunal would provide a feasible alternative
to court proceedings.
It considers that the better way to deal with such
disputes is through an internal complaint resolution mechanism established
the society. The Committee notes that these are based on, or are being developed
as, a form of alternative dispute resolution,
on which the Committee has made
recommendations in Chapter 21. Accordingly, the Committee is not inclined to
recommend that
the Tribunal's jurisdiction extend to input arrangements
12.20 The Committee notes Screenrights' submission that
involving a court or the Tribunal in disputes regarding input arrangements
collecting society would have the potential to cause disruption and delay in
payments to the members of the society. In
relation to court proceedings, the
Committee considered that this concern might be addressed to some extent if a
society had the ability to make an application to the Tribunal in
relation to a proposed, or existing, scheme of distribution
for an order
confirming, or varying, that scheme. In that respect, the terms of ss. 154 and
155, which would allow the reference
to the Tribunal of proposed or existing
licence schemes, provide a relevant precedent (subject to the Committee's
recommendation
that the Tribunal should have an ability to substitute a licence
scheme). The Committee considered that such an additional mechanism
would enable
a declared collecting society to invoke the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to
determine the equity of its proposed
or existing distribution scheme and,
thereby, potentially pre-empt disruption to its distributions to members.
Recommendations
12.21 The Committee recommends that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal
not be amended to include a power to review input arrangements
subject to the Committee's recommendation at paragraph 12.22 below.
12.22 The Committee recommends that a declared collecting society have
the ability to make an application to the Tribunal for an
confirming, varying or substituting an existing or proposed scheme of
distribution.
[Return to contents]
Chapter 13 – Declaration
of collecting societies
13.01 The Act provides for a monopoly to be conferred on a
collecting society which is declared for the compulsory licences under
and Parts VA and VB of the Act. Where a body applies to be declared for the
purposes of those compulsory licences, the
Attorney-General or the Tribunal,
whichever is relevant, must be satisfied that the collecting society has met the
requirements
for declaration set out in the Act.
13.02 In relation to government copying, the relevant collecting society is
one that is declared for this purpose by the Copyright
Tribunal under s. 153F in
relation to all government copies or in relation to a specified class of
government copies (s. 182C).
CAL was declared a collecting society for
government copying by the Copyright Tribunal in January 1999. The Tribunal,
than the Attorney-General, has the power to declare a society under that
provision to avoid the potential for a conflict of interest,
Attorney-General to exercise the function in relation to government copying.
13.03 Under Part VA, the Attorney-General may declare a body to be the
collecting society (s. 135P(1)). Only one body may be named
in a declaration at
any one time (s. 135P(2)). In June 1990 Screenrights was declared as the
collecting society for the purpose
of Part VA.
13.04 Under Part VB, the Attorney-General may declare a body to be the
collecting society for a specified class of copyright owners
(s. 135ZZB(1)).
Provision is made for different collecting societies to be declared for various
classes of owners. However,
only one collecting society may be declared at any
one time in relation to a specified class of owners (s. 135ZZB(2)). Screenrights
was declared under Part VB in 1990 as the collecting society in relation to the
relevant copyright owners in sound recordings
and cinematograph films. CAL was
declared to be the collecting society in 1990 for the purposes of Part VB for
each owner of
cinematograph film.
13.05 The Committee also notes that the proposed amendments in the Digital
Agenda Bill would confer on the Attorney-General an
additional power to declare
a collecting society for the proposed statutory licence for the retransmission
of free-to-air broadcasts.
13.06 CAL submitted that the power to declare a collecting society in
relation to Parts VA and VB of the Act be transferred from
the Attorney-General
to the Copyright Tribunal, for the sake of consistency with the Tribunal's
under s. 153F in relation to government
This suggestion was supported by PPCA at the September
forum. The Committee also understands that it would be consistent with this
proposal for the Tribunal to have a power to declare a society under the
statutory licence for retransmission of free-to-air
broadcasts proposed in the
Digital Agenda Bill, rather than the Attorney-General as currently proposed in
13.07 At the September forum, other interests, including Screenrights, AVCC
and APRA, opposed this suggestion on the grounds that
the process of seeking a
declaration from the Tribunal would be more complex and time-consuming than a
similar application
to the Attorney-General.
13.08 No evidence was submitted to the Committee on whether the process of
declaration of a collecting society would be slower,
or more complex, if handled
by the Tribunal, instead of the Attorney-General. The Committee considers that
it is unlikely that
an application for declaration as a collecting society made
to either the Attorney-General or the Tribunal would, if unopposed,
be a lengthy
process (especially as interests themselves have generally acknowledged that
delays before the Tribunal are largely
the responsibility of the parties). In
this regard, the Committee notes that, to date, the matter dealt with in the
time by the Tribunal was CAL's unopposed application to be declared
under s. 153F, which was filed on 27 October 1998, with the
order entered on 18
January 1999.
13.09 However, difficult problems may arise where an application to the
Attorney-General is opposed, although no such case has
yet arisen. If such a
case did arise, the Attorney-General may need to exercise a power of
determination and in some cases
may need to reach an opinion on a question of
law. For example, the Committee is aware that a question of law has arisen in
Screenright's current application to the Copyright Tribunal, opposed in part by
ARIA, to be a declared society under s. 153F.
It is clear that the Tribunal may
express opinions on questions of law and/or state a case to the Federal Court.
Further, if
an application to the Attorney-General were opposed, there is no
reason to suppose that it would not take the same length of time
to resolve as a
similar matter would take before the Tribunal.
13.10 The Committee also notes that there is an issue of transparency in
relation to opposed applications being heard by the Attorney-General.
does not set out any procedure for open hearings for each party to put its case
to the Attorney-General. (However,
the Committee notes that under s. 195B of the
Act the declaration of a collecting society by the Attorney-General under Parts
VA and VB may be reviewable under the ADJR Act.)
13.11 On balance, interests did not appear to favour an extension of the
Tribunal's jurisdiction to include a power to declare
a society for the purposes
of Parts VA and VB of the Act. It seems to the Committee that there are three
courses of action
open in regard to the power to declare a collecting society
under Parts VA and VB of the Act and in relation to the power to declare
collecting society for the statutory licence for retransmission of free-to-air
broadcasts proposed in the Digital Agenda
expand the Tribunal's jurisdiction to include the power to declare a
collecting society under Parts VA and VB of the Act and for
the proposed
statutory licence for retransmission of free-to-air broadcasts;
make no change to the Tribunal's jurisdiction regarding declaration of
collecting societies; or
leave the power of declaration with the Attorney-General but provide a
discretion for the Attorney-General to refer an application
to the Tribunal.
13.12 The Committee considers that there are advantages in the
Attorney-General having the discretion of referring an opposed application
the Tribunal, if appropriate in the circumstances. Also, the Committee believes
that this approach has the advantage of
avoiding the problems referred to above.
The exercise of this discretion would be particularly useful if a fact-finding
were required.
13.13 The Committee's recommendation on this matter has not changed from that
in its draft report. In response to the draft report,
Screenrights, CAL and the
ACC opposed, at least in part, the Committee's draft recommendation.
Screenrights suggested that
the Attorney-General could make a reference to the
Tribunal or to the Federal Court where a question of law arose, but should
have as broad a discretion as suggested by the Committee. CAL and ACC supported
the Attorney-General having such a power,
but only in specified circumstances.
CAL argued that the term 'appropriate in the circumstances' was too vague.
13.14 The Committee does not agree that such a broad discretion is
inappropriate. It notes that the Attorney-General already has
a broad discretion
in relation to the declaration of a collecting society or the revocation of such
a declaration. For example,
s. 135ZZB provides that the Attorney-General may
declare a collecting society, subject only to that society meeting particular
criteria set out in s. 135ZZB(3) (which is in similar terms to s. 135P in
relation to a declaration under Part VA). However
a society which meets those
criteria is not entitled to a declaration as a result. That is, the
Attorney-General may choose
not to exercise that discretion in a broad
(undefined) range of cases. The Attorney-General also has a wide discretion to
the declaration of a collecting society under Part VA or VB if it is not,
for example, 'functioning adequately as the collecting
society' or if it is not
acting 'in the best interests of its members' (ss. 135Q, 135ZZC).
Recommendations
13.15 The Committee recommends that the Attorney-General retain the
power to declare a collecting society for the purposes of Parts
(and under the proposed statutory licence for retransmission of
free-to-air broadcasts set out in the Digital Agenda
Bill), in the first
instance, and to revoke such a declaration.
13.16 The Committee further recommends that the Act be
amended so that the Attorney-General may exercise a discretion to refer
application for declaration to the Tribunal if s/he considers it
appropriate in the circumstances. Consistent with that
recommendation, the
Committee recommends that the Attorney-General have the power to refer a
question of a revocation of a
declaration of a collecting society under
Part VA or VB to the Copyright Tribunal if s/he considers it appropriate
in the circumstances.
[Return to contents]
Chapter 14 – Compulsory
referral of licences
14.01 At the September forum, the ALCA proposed the
consideration of a system of compulsory referral of a dispute regarding a
licence to the Copyright Tribunal if negotiations between the parties were not
successfully concluded within a specified period.
14.02 ALCA referred the Committee to a system of referral to a tribunal under
the scheme of collective administration of rights
for the retransmission of
broadcasts in Norway. Various groups of rights owners, amounting to a
substantial proportion of Norwegian
authors and rights owners, are represented
by the collecting society NORWACO. NORWACO conducts negotiations with
rebroadcasters
or cable operators on behalf of rights owners and the agreement
concluded by NORWACO binds all Norwegian and foreign right owners
and also film
14.03 It was submitted that, if the rebroadcaster or cable operator and
NORWACO are unable to reach agreement either on the rate
of remuneration or on
the conditions of the licence within a six-month period after the beginning of
negotiations between the
parties, either party may submit the matter to a
tribunal for decision. However, the Committee notes that this system appears
set a mandatory six-month period of negotiations, at the expiration of which
either party may apply to a tribunal to determine
the terms of the licence. In
this sense, it does not appear to be an example of a compulsory referral
14.04 ALCA submitted that provision could be made under the Copyright Act for
compulsory referral to the Copyright Tribunal in
the event that negotiations
between a user or prospective user and a collecting society were not
successfully resolved within
a specified period. A range of non-statutory
licences, including collective licensing agreements, could be the subject of
a compulsory referral system.
14.05 Presently there are no time restrictions or limitations
regarding applications to the Tribunal. In the case of a non-statutory
a licensee or prospective licensee can apply to the Tribunal at any time after a
licence scheme is established or,
in the case of a proposed licence scheme, at
any time after a refusal or failure to grant the licence or after the imposition
of terms that the licensee would contend are unreasonable.
14.06 In the case of the statutory licences under the Act, an application may
be made at any time following the parties' failure
to agree on a rate of
equitable remuneration or a matter related to the licence.
14.07 In other words, in regard to both non-statutory and statutory licences
that fall within the Tribunal's jurisdiction, at any
point in negotiations
either party can make an application to the Tribunal.
14.08 The Committee notes that an expansion of the Copyright Tribunal's
could potentially
involve a significant increase in the Tribunal's workload. Further, the
Committee notes that there may be
legitimate reasons why negotiations that have
been in progress over an extended period of time have not been referred to the
Tribunal by either party. In such a case, to have a system whereby the
Tribunal's jurisdiction can be compulsorily invoked after
a specified
negotiation period has elapsed could result in the Tribunal becoming involved in
disputes in circumstances where
neither party is seeking its assistance. In
addition, such an expansion may represent an unjustified erosion of the
owner's right to refuse to license the use of their material and
possibly be a breach of Australia's obligations under the Berne
Convention.
14.09 The Committee notes that there may also be constitutional constraints
regarding a compulsory referral mechanism. As discussed
in Chapter 7, recent
case law suggests that such concerns may arise where legislation provides for
the compulsory referral
of disputes to a tribunal for the purpose of making
binding determinations as to existing rights and duties.
14.10 Further, if consideration were given to implementing a compulsory
referral mechanism in relation to negotiations for existing
and proposed licence
schemes, provision would need to be made for determining when negotiations were
deemed to have formally
commenced. It is likely that a system of notification or
registration of negotiations would need to be considered in this context,
the Committee believes would impose a significant additional burden on the
Tribunal, particularly if the Committee's
recommendations regarding the
Tribunal's jurisdiction were implemented.
14.11 Accordingly, the Committee does not believe that there are any
convincing reasons for the implementation of a system of compulsory
referral of
a licence dispute to the Copyright Tribunal.
14.12 The Norwegian model referred to above raises the issue of whether the
Act should prescribe a period, from the beginning of
negotiations between the
parties, before which parties could not make an application to the Tribunal.
This appeared to the
Committee to be the approach adopted in Norway. The
possible advantages of such an approach might be to encourage parties to
negotiate on a matter, or to set a 'cooling off' period, as a means of reducing
the likelihood that a matter would be referred
to the Tribunal.
14.13 The disadvantages of such an approach might be that it would delay a
matter going before the Tribunal in cases where there
was a genuine,
unresolvable dispute between the parties. The delay might have the effect of
unfairly disadvantaging a party.
In that regard, the Committee notes concerns
expressed by interests in submissions about perceived delays in matters brought
to the Tribunal. For example, the AVCC expressed concern that delays in matters
being resolved by the Tribunal raised problems
for universities which 'are
unable to use copyright material in the meantime with any certainty as to the
amount they have
to pay'. It might be expected that the insertion of a provision
to require a period for negotiation would only exacerbate these
concerns. A further difficulty might arise in determining the time at which
parties would be deemed to have begun
negotiations.
14.14 The Committee acknowledges that the possible employment of delaying
tactics by one or both parties in the course of negotiations
in relation to
licences represents a potential problem. However, this is best addressed by the
parties making use of the capacity
of the Tribunal to seek an early hearing.
Recommendation
14.15 The Committee recommends that there be no change to the
Tribunal's jurisdiction to adopt a mechanism for compulsory referral
licence disputes.
[Return to contents]
Chapter 15 – The
determination of equitable remuneration
15.01 The Tribunal's role in determining equitable remuneration is
fundamental to the operation of the statutory licences. In the
agreement between the parties, the Tribunal has a jurisdiction to determine the
amount of 'equitable remuneration'
payable in relation to licences for:
the making of copies of works and other subject matter for the purposes of
broadcasting (ss. 47(3), 70(3) and 107(3));
sound broadcasts by holders of print disability radio licences (s. 47A(8));
the public performance of sound recordings (s. 108);
copying by educational and other institutions (Parts VA and VB).
15.02 The Copyright Act does not in all cases include a reference to
'equitable remuneration' when specifying the objective of
determining the amount
payable by a licensee to a licensor in relation to different statutory licences
(in the absence of agreement
between the parties). For example:
the Tribunal may fix the 'terms' for the use of copyright material by the
(s. 183(5)) or determine a method for working
out equitable
remuneration payable by the Crown (s. 183A(2));
under s. 152(2), the Tribunal may determine the 'amount payable' in respect
of the statutory licence for the broadcasting of sound
recordings (s. 109); and
the Tribunal may determine an amount of royalty payable for recording
musical works (s. 152A).
15.03 The determination of equitable remuneration and similar
determinations under these licences is a fundamental but difficult
aspect of the
Tribunal's specialist role. There is no explicit guidance in the Act as to the
meaning of the expression 'equitable
remuneration', although regulations made
for the purpose of Parts VA and VB do prescribe factors (described below) to
the Tribunal may have regard in that respect. It was stated by Sheppard P
Audio-Visual Copyright Society Ltd v New South Wales Department of School
Education & Ors
in reaching a conclusion upon what equitable
remuneration should be, that the Copyright Tribunal 'has a wide jurisdiction and
a wide discretion'.
The Tribunal has indicated on many occasions
the difficult nature of the task of determining the level of equitable
remuneration.
The Tribunal's approach to the determination of equitable
remuneration
15.04 The principles involved in reaching a determination of equitable
remuneration were discussed by the Copyright Tribunal in
Limited v Department of Education (NSW) and Ors
where Sheppard P
observed that the appropriate approach involves:
determining if there is a normal rate of profit or royalty for comparable
licences which could establish a 'going rate' indicative
of what the parties
would have agreed upon if they were treated as a willing, but not anxious,
licensor, and a willing, but
not anxious, licensee;
if the Tribunal is unable to discern a 'going rate', it might nonetheless
be able to approach the issue on the basis of a hypothetical
bargain if there is
sufficient evidence that, in the circumstances, willing but not anxious parties
would have agreed upon
a certain amount for a licence; and
if neither of these approaches is appropriate in the circumstances, then
based on the available evidence, the task becomes one
of 'judicial estimation'.
15.05 In the circumstances where it has been required to use judicial
estimation to arrive at a determination of equitable remuneration,
the Tribunal
has taken a range of factors into account. Those factors include:
previous agreements between parties;
negotiations between the parties preceding the application to the
comparison of determinations under similar legislative regimes in other
comparison between royalties set by other licensors/collecting
the capacity of the licensee to pay;
the value to the licensee of the use of the copyright
the general public interest and the interest of consumers;
the administrative costs of a licensing body.
Factors for determination of equitable remuneration under
Parts VA and VB
15.06 In relation to the statutory licence schemes provided by Parts VA and
VB, the Act does not specify the basis upon which the
amount of equitable
remuneration is to be fixed by the Tribunal. However, in making a determination,
the Tribunal may have
regard to such matters (if any) as are prescribed (ss.
153A(3)(b) and 153C(3)). The prescribed matters are set out in rr. 25A
of the Copyright Tribunal (Procedure) Regulations 1969. Regulations 25A and 25B
are similar provisions. The factors
set out in those regulations, which the
Tribunal has taken into account in a number of decisions, are as follows:
the nature of the works, or eligible items other than works copied, and the
nature of the sound recordings or cinematograph films
included in the broadcast
(rr. 25A(1)(a) and 25B(1)(a));
the institutions for which the copies and the copies of the broadcasts are
made (rr. 25A(1)(b) and 25B(1)(b));
any matters that have been assessed by use of a sampling system determined
under ss. 135ZW(3) and 135J(3) (rr. 25A(1)(c) and 25B(1)(c));
the need to ensure adequate incentive for the production of
educational works, eligible items other than works, educational sound
and educational cinematograph films in Australia (rr. 25A(1)(d) and
25B(1)(d));
the purpose and character of the copying (rr. 25A(1)(e) and
25B(1)(e));
the effect of the copying on the market for, or value of, the material
copied or the material included in the broadcast (rr. 25A(1)(f)
25B(1)(f));
the special circumstances of external students including any difficulties
faced by those students in meeting the requirements of
the fair dealing, library
copying for users and insubstantial copying provisions of the Act (rr. 25A(1)(g)
and 25B(1)(g));
any unremunerated contribution by institutions to the creation of the
material copied or the material included in the broadcast
(rr. 25A(1)(h) and
25B(1)(h)).
15.07 The Committee notes that ss. 153A(3)(b) and 153C(3) do not make it
mandatory for the Tribunal to have regard to the matters
prescribed in rr. 25A
and 25B: the Tribunal may have regard to such matters when making an order.
Is prescription of factors necessary?
15.08 It is apparent from the Tribunal's decisions that it has taken the
prescribed factors under rr. 25A and 25B into account
as it has deemed
appropriate in each given case. The Committee is concerned, however, that the
prescription of any factors
in relation to these licences may imply that the
Tribunal is in some way restricted to a consideration of those factors only.
Further, the existence of the prescribed factors for the purpose of those
statutory licences raises the issue of whether a
list of factors should be
similarly prescribed to give guidance to the Tribunal in respect of its
statutory or non-statutory licences.
15.09 The Committee notes that, in relation to the statutory licences other
than those under Parts VA and VB of the Act, the Tribunal
has taken into account
a range of factors in determining the rate of remuneration payable by a licensee
to a licensor. In relation
to these determinations, there are no 'prescribed
factors' that the Tribunal may take into account similar to those set out in
25A and 25B. The Tribunal has not restricted itself to the consideration of
factors similar to those listed in rr. 25A
and 25B, either for the purpose of
determining equitable remuneration under Parts VA and VB, or in relation to
similar determinations
it has made under other statutory licences. On the
contrary, it has sought to give due consideration to whichever factors are
specifically relevant to the case at hand. The Committee notes that the Tribunal
appears to have given adequate weight to all
relevant factors, without the
guidance of 'prescribed factors'.
15.10 The Committee is of the view that the prescription of factors for the
Tribunal to refer to when determining the remuneration
payable under a licence
is not necessary. The range of factors that may be relevant to such a
determination may vary significantly
from one application to the next. The
applicability of factors will vary in relation to each application and in
the different statutory licences. The Committee notes that any
attempt to provide a list of factors, whether or not it purports
exhaustive, could not possibly include all the different issues that may be
relevant. Such a prescription may therefore
have the potential to mislead
parties about matters that may be relevant to a particular case before the
Tribunal. Further,
as noted above, the prescription of particular factors may
incorrectly suggest some limitation on the Tribunal's discretion to
consider all
relevant matters to the case at hand.
15.11 The Committee notes that it did not receive any submissions from
interests expressing concern that the Tribunal had failed
to take into account
relevant factors in any of the decisions made by the Tribunal to date. It is for
this reason that the
Committee considers it unnecessary for factors to be set
out as the Copyright Tribunal has successfully identified appropriate
determining disputes without the aid of guidelines. The Committee also notes
that its recommendations on this matter
would be consistent with the Tribunal's
Act does not prescribe factors to which the Tribunal may have regard in
determining disputes over non-statutory licences.
15.12 With the exception of submissions from CAL and DoCITA (and FACTS:
addressed below at paragraph 16.10), submissions in response
to the draft report
appeared generally to support the Committee's approach in this respect. DoCITA
opposed the Committee's
draft recommendation (adopted as a final recommendation
at paragraph 15.18 below) as being 'inconsistent with the principles underlying
the Digital Agenda Bill'. CAL submitted that the prescribed factors provide a
useful guide to the Tribunal and to parties appearing
before it in preparing
their evidence. The Committee disagrees with those submissions for the reasons
set out above.
Recommendations
15.13 The Committee recommends that the Act not prescribe factors to
which the Tribunal may have regard in determining remuneration
various statutory licences. The Committee does not intend by this
recommendation that there be any change to the
approach of the Tribunal in
deciding issues which it has developed to date.
15.14 In accordance with that recommendation, the Committee recommends
that ss. 153A(3)(b) and 153C(3) of the Act, and the regulations
those provisions, be repealed.
Equitable remuneration under proposed statutory
15.15 The Committee notes that the Digital Agenda Bill will, if passed,
introduce the following statutory licences for which the
have jurisdiction to determine equitable remuneration:
the determination of the equitable remuneration payable by retransmitters
to underlying copyright holders for the retransmission
of free-to-air
broadcasts; and
the determination of the equitable remuneration payable in relation to the
reproduction and communication of copyright material
in electronic form under
Part VB of the Act.
15.16 The Explanatory Memorandum to the Digital Agenda Bill indicates that a
similar set of prescribed factors as those set out
in r. 25B of the Copyright
Tribunal (Procedure) Regulations 1969 will be set out for the Tribunal to have
regard to when making
a determination of equitable remuneration in relation to
the proposed statutory licence for the reproduction and communication
15.17 In keeping with the recommendations made above, in the
view of the Committee it is not necessary to provide a list of prescribed
factors for the Tribunal to have regard to in determining a rate of remuneration
Recommendation
15.18 In relation to the Digital Agenda Bill, the Committee recommends
no factors be prescribed for the Tribunal to have regard to for the
determination of the equitable remuneration payable by retransmitters
underlying copyright holders for the retransmission of free-to-air
broadcasts; and
no factors be prescribed for the Tribunal to have regard to in
relation to the determination of equitable remuneration for copying
and transmitting material in electronic form.
[Return to contents]
16 – Guidelines regarding what is 'reasonable in the
circumstances'
16.01 The Tribunal has jurisdiction to assess, where a licence
scheme applies, if a person requires a licence but the grant of
a licence in
accordance with the scheme would, in that case, be subject to the payment of
charges or to conditions that are
not reasonable in the circumstances (s.
157(2)). The Tribunal also has jurisdiction to assess whether a licensor, where
scheme does not apply, has unreasonably refused or failed to grant or
procure the grant of such a licence or has proposed to grant
it subject to the
payment of charges or to conditions that are unreasonable (s. 157(3)).
16.02 The Act does not provide any guidance as to how the Copyright Tribunal
is to determine whether the payment of charges or
the conditions under a licence
are 'not reasonable'. Nor does it provide assistance in relation to determining
whether a licence
has been 'unreasonably refused'.
16.03 The United Kingdom
provides, in
relation to similar provisions of the Australian Act for the review of licensing
schemes, that the UK Copyright
Tribunal is to have regard to all relevant
considerations and should make such orders as are reasonable in all the
circumstances
(s. 135). Further assistance is given as to what is reasonable, by
providing that the Tribunal shall have regard to the availability
and the terms
of other schemes or licences to other persons in similar circumstances (s. 129).
The Tribunal is under an obligation
to ensure that there is no unreasonable
discrimination between the actual or prospective licensees making the
application and
licences already being operated or granted by the same licensor
(s. 129). Similar factors are set out in the New Zealand
which was modelled on the UK Act.
16.04 These provisions were introduced into the UK Act by the 1988 amendments
which expanded the jurisdiction of the UK Copyright
Tribunal. The measures were
designed to improve the functioning of the Tribunal and to prevent copyright
owners from abusing
their monopoly (or near-monopoly) power when dealing with
licensees or prospective licensees wishing to exploit copyright
16.05 In Australia, the Copyright Tribunal has discussed the appropriate
approach to adopt in determining whether the rates or
conditions of a licence
are unreasonable in several decisions.
Re Applications by MCM Networking Pty Ltd and Others
the Tribunal held that it had jurisdiction under s. 157(3)(b) of the Act only if
the applicant was able to establish that the
royalty rate demanded by the
respondent was unreasonable. To determine whether the royalties demanded were
unreasonable, the
Tribunal first determined what was a reasonable royalty. To
arrive at a determination of what was a reasonable royalty, the Tribunal
required to decide whether there was a 'going rate' and what this was. A 'going
rate' could not be based on a few random
samples, but was established with
reference to 'a multiplicity of similar and directly relevant
transactions'.
In Fair Fitness Music Association v Australasian Performing Right
Association
the Tribunal rejected an application under s. 157(2)
for review of a licence under an established scheme which had previously
received the confirmation of the Tribunal. The confirmed scheme did not bind
other parties (including the applicant); however,
it did serve to establish a
'going rate' that was generally accepted in the fitness and aerobics industry.
The Tribunal indicated
that it was relevant in an inquiry regarding whether a
licence was subject to charges or to conditions that were not reasonable
consider the 'going rate' for comparable licences. In that case the Tribunal
rejected the application because of the failure
of the applicant to provide any
evidence that it had been treated differently under the scheme from any other
fitness centre.
16.08 The Committee has considered the issue of whether there should be
legislative prescription to assist the Copyright Tribunal
in determining what is
'reasonable', along the lines of the United Kingdom and New Zealand provisions.
It is the Committee's
view that it is not necessary to specify factors that the
Tribunal can take into account when determining what is reasonable in
to the terms of a licence. As the cases referred to above indicate, if the
Tribunal is satisfied that a 'going rate'
exists in regard to licences similar
or identical to the licences that it is considering under an application, the
conditions of these similar or identical licences will serve as a guide
to what is considered reasonable.
16.09 The Tribunal is already taking into account relevant factors when
determining what is reasonable and the Committee does not
feel it is necessary
to codify any specific factors. In any event, a legislative prescription of
factors could not be exhaustive
and could not exclude the requirement for the
Tribunal to determine factors relevant to the matter at hand. Accordingly, the
prescription of factors along the lines of those set out in the United Kingdom
and New Zealand Acts may add detail to the Act
without necessarily providing
guidance to the Tribunal.
16.10 The Committee notes that FACTS submitted that the Tribunal should be
empowered to consider all matters relevant to the case,
including an express
power to consider 'competition issues'.
DoCITA made a similar
submission in response to the draft report. While the Committee considers that
the Tribunal does have
the general power to consider all matters relevant to a
case, there is currently no express power for it to consider 'competition
issues'. Those submissions did not set out what was meant by 'competition
issues'. In this respect, the Committee had regard
to advice from the Office of
General Counsel to the ACCC, which was referred to by the Competition Tribunal
Re Applications by Australasian Performing Right Association
That advice noted that what was meant by 'competition issues' was not clear, but
it assumed that 'the term refers to broad issues
applying across a range of APRA
licensees'.
16.11 The issue of the power of the Copyright Tribunal to take into account
and reflect 'competition issues' was discussed by the
Competition Tribunal in
Re Applications by Australasian Performing Right Association
noted in its submission to the Competition Tribunal
issues when determining whether a licence
scheme was reasonable. The ACCC
submitted that under the relevant provisions of the Copyright Act, it is
possible for the Copyright
Tribunal to make a determination that a scheme is
reasonable, even if it is in some respects anti-competitive.
16.12 The Competition Tribunal expressed the view, with which
the Committee agrees, that while the Copyright Tribunal was not compelled
provisions of the Act to specifically refer to competition issues when
determining what constitutes a reasonable licence
we cannot accept that it would not take them into account and strive to
determine what constitutes reasonable charges and conditions
having regard to
the wider public interest, as well as to the interests of the immediate parties
16.13 The Committee has noted previously that the fundamental reason for the
existence and role of the Copyright Tribunal is to
restrict monopoly power in
relation to the licensing of copyright. As discussed above, the Committee is of
the view that the
Tribunal has given adequate attention to all relevant issues
where appropriate. Following the general approach of keeping prescription
Act to a minimum, the Committee does not believe that a specific reference to
'competition issues' (even if that term
could be more precisely defined) or
other matters should be included in the Act as factors for the Copyright
Tribunal to consider
in a determination of whether a licence is reasonable in
the circumstances.
Recommendation
16.14 The Committee recommends that no change be made to the Act to
codify factors for the Tribunal to take into account when determining
is 'reasonable in the circumstances' in relation to licences.
[Return to contents]
Chapter 17 – Anomalies in
statutory licences
17.01 In submissions to the Committee, several interests drew
attention to minor anomalies in regard to the provisions in Parts
VA and VB of
the Act for records notices and record-keeping.
The Tribunal's jurisdiction to determine a record-keeping
17.02 Under Parts VA and VB of the Act, the Copyright Tribunal has
sampling system
(ss. 135J(1) and 135ZW(1)) and to determine a sampling system in the absence of
agreement between the parties
(ss. 135J(3) and 153ZW(3)). This is to be
contrasted with the Tribunal's jurisdiction in relation to record-keeping
under both Parts VA and VB. The Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine
the rate of remuneration payable under a record-keeping
system (ss. 135H(1) and
135ZV(1)), but it does not have the power to determine a record-keeping system
in the absence of agreement
between the parties.
17.03 In its written submission to the Committee, Screenrights argued that a
workable record-keeping system and a workable sampling
system were equally vital
to the successful operation of the Part VA scheme.
Accordingly,
Screenrights proposed that this anomaly be corrected by the extension of the
to include the power to determine 'any matters
that are necessary or convenient to be assessed by use of a record-keeping
This would require an amendment to s. 135H to give the Copyright
Tribunal the power to determine a record-keeping system, in the
agreement between the parties. At the September forum, CAL noted the limitation
on the Copyright Tribunal's jurisdiction
in relation to the determination of
record-keeping systems also existed in relation to Part VB. Accordingly, s.
135ZV would
also require amendment to give the Copyright Tribunal the power to
determine a record-keeping system, in a similar manner to Screenrights'
in relation to Part VA. The Committee agreed with those submissions against the
background of its draft recommendation
for the removal of the detailed
requirements (where a records notice is given) for marking and record-keeping in
Parts VA and
17.04 In its response to the draft report, the AVCC submitted that the lack
of any need for agreement over the records is consistent
with the scheme of
Parts VA and VB, and is not an anomaly.
The AVCC commented that
the provisions for record-keeping have operated satisfactorily, and there is no
need to give the Copyright
Tribunal an extended role.
17.05 If the detailed provisions for marking and record-keeping are retained
under Parts VA and VB, the Committee agrees with the
submission put to it by the
AVCC. It is apparent that the provisions for record-keeping under Parts VA and
VB are intended
to avoid potential disputes by specifying the records that an
institution must keep if it wishes to rely on the statutory licence.
Committee considers that it would be inconsistent if an application could be
made to the Tribunal in relation to a dispute
purpose of including those details in the Act is to avoid dispute.
Recommendation
17.06 The Committee recommends that ss. 135H and 135ZV of the Act not
be amended to extend the Copyright Tribunal's jurisdiction
to include the
power to determine a record-keeping system.
The determination of different amounts in accordance with a
records notice
17.07 At the September forum, the AVCC expressed concern that the Tribunal
had determined different amounts of equitable remuneration
for different classes
of works under Part VB. The AVCC's concern in this regard appears to arise from
the Tribunal's decision
In that case, the Tribunal held that the values to be
attributed to different kinds of copying, or copying which may serve different
purposes, are relevant to the determination of the equitable remuneration
payable for the copies made.
Burchett P noted that there are no
provisions in the Act that preclude the Tribunal from identifying categories of
and fixing separate rates for each category.
17.08 A case was stated to the Federal Court from that decision in which the
universities challenged the power of the Tribunal
to determine different rates
for different types of copying.
Although s. 135H(2) in Part VA
specifically refers to different classes of works etc, for which different
amounts may be determined,
s. 135ZV in Part VB, which otherwise mirrors s. 135H,
makes no such reference.
17.09 The Federal Court affirmed the view of Burchett P that the Tribunal may
determine different values for different types of
copying. The Federal Court
The very notion of 'equitable' remuneration suggests that in the absence of
statutory restraints, the Tribunal should be at liberty
to take into account
different classes of works unless the statute evinces a contrary
17.10 The Court held that there were no such statutory restraints in regard
to records notices, as well as sampling notices.
17.11 The Committee is of the view that an open-ended approach should be
adopted in the Act in relation to the Tribunal's determination
of equitable
remuneration under Parts VA and VB. As the Committee similarly noted at
paragraph 15.10, it is not practical to
provide an exhaustive list of all the
factors the Tribunal may take into account when determining equitable
remuneration. The
Committee believes that a better approach is for the Act to
avoid specifying that different amounts may be determined by the Tribunal
relation to different classes of works, etc.
17.12 The Committee notes that both s. 135H(2) and s. 135ZV(2) also provide
that different amounts may be determined in relation
to different institutions
administered by the administering body and different classes of students of an
institution. The Committee
is of the opinion that an open-ended approach also
requires that reference to these factors be omitted from the Act, to make it
clear that the Tribunal has a wide discretion in determining equitable
remuneration as it is relevant to the case before it.
Recommendation
17.13 The Committee recommends that ss. 135H(2) and 135ZV(2) be omitted
from the Act.
The determination of different amounts under sampling
17.14 A similar issue arises in relation to the determination of equitable
remuneration by use of a sampling system. Sections 135J(4)
and 135ZW(4) note
that, for the purposes of determining equitable remuneration, different annual
amounts may be determined
in relation to different institutions administered by
the administering body. For the same reasons advanced above in relation
record-keeping systems, the Committee feels that such a provision is not
Recommendation
17.15 The Committee recommends that ss. 135J(4) and 135ZW(4) be omitted
from the Act.
17.16 The Committee wishes to emphasise that, by these recommendations, it in
no way wishes to inhibit the Tribunal's ability to
determine different amounts
of equitable remuneration for different classes of works in relation to
applications under ss.
135H and 135ZV, and ss. 135J and 135ZW. The Committee
supports an open-ended approach in the Act to ensure the competence of the
Tribunal to determine whether it is appropriate or not in a particular case to
determine different amounts for different types
of copying.
17.17 The Committee notes the view expressed by the Federal Court in
Since copyright material used by educational institutions varies almost
infinitely in respect of cost, value, rarity, and demand
generated (to name but
a few factors) it would be rational and understandable for parties in
negotiation to consider differential
rates for different categories of
17.18 The Committee also notes that its recommendations in this
regard are generally in keeping with the Committee's other recommendations
reduce the amount of prescription in the Act.
[Return to contents]
18 – Untraceable copyright owners
18.01 Presently, the Act does not include a provision for the
use of copyright material where the owner of the copyright cannot
be located.
The issue of developing a mechanism to allow for the use of copyright material
in circumstances where the owner
is untraceable has previously been considered
by the Committee in Part 2 of its report on
Simplification of the
Simplification Report).
18.02 In that report, the Committee considered several options to deal with
this issue, including a statutory licence scheme similar
to that established
under the Canadian
, a registration scheme, a system based on s.
115(3) of the Act regarding innocent infringement and an extended licence scheme
involving collecting societies, based on a Scandinavian model. The Committee
notes the views it expressed in that report on
the problems with each of those
18.03 In regard to the options in that report, the Committee recommended that
no amendments be made to the Act to establish a mechanism
for the use of
Committee did, however, suggest
that the issue be considered in the course of a
comprehensive review of the jurisdiction of the Copyright
18.04 Accordingly, under its current reference, the Committee has
reconsidered this issue. The Committee received submissions from
CAL and ACC on
these issues. The ACC requested the Committee to reconsider the submission it
made on this issue in response
to the Committee's recently completed
simplification reference. In its submission in response to the draft report, the
noted that it receives many enquiries from members of the public wanting to
use copyright material in circumstances where it is
extremely unlikely that the
enquirers start
by wanting to comply with copyright law, but finish with some
disillusionment about its application in their situation'.
supported some mechanism to address this only if there were a rigorous
requirement for the identification and location of
the copyright owner to be
pursued, and a requirement to pay a licence fee. CAL noted its previous
submission to the Committee
on the simplification of the Act, and requested that
the Committee give further consideration to whether the Scandinavian scheme
might provide a model for the Copyright Tribunal to issue licences to use works
where a copyright owner cannot be traced.
18.05 Under the Scandinavian scheme, a collecting society which represents a
substantial proportion of rights holders as regards
a certain right, is deemed
to represent all rights holders in that group, unless an owner specifically
advises that s/he does
not wish to be represented. Therefore the collecting
society may license the use of material, which has a binding effect on all
owners, including untraceable copyright owners.
18.06 As noted in its Part 2 Simplification Report, the Committee believes
that the introduction of such a scheme would significantly
expand the role of
collecting societies, enabling them to enter into licence agreements that are
binding on copyright owners
who are not represented by the collecting society.
Furthermore, such a scheme would not guarantee that the untraceable copyright
owner received remuneration for use of their copyright material. However, on its
face, the implementation of a similar scheme
in Australia would not be one 'set
up' by the Copyright Tribunal, and thus appears to be outside the Committee's
current terms
of reference.
18.07 Reiterating its previous submission to the Committee, CAL noted that
under s. 77 of the Canadian
, the Copyright Board can issue a
licence to use copyright material if the Board is satisfied that the applicant
has made reasonable
efforts to locate the owner and the owner cannot be found.
The Copyright Board may issue a licence authorising the use of published
fixed performances, published sound recordings and fixed communication signals
(s. 77(1)(a)
­(d)). A licence issued is non-exclusive and is subject to such
terms and conditions as the Copyright Board may set
(s. 77(2)).
A licence is
valid only in Canada and the owner has five years after the expiration of the
licence to collect the royalties
fixed in the licence
(s. 77(3)).
18.08 In its
Annual Report for 1998­1999
, the Copyright Board noted that
the Board had issued 57 licences for the period 1989 (when the Board was
established) to the
year 1997­1998 and that, in 1998­1999, 11 licences
were issued. While this is not a significant number of licences, it
noted that some licences covered the use of multiple works, with three licences
issued to the Canadian Institute
for Historical Micro-reproductions authorising
the use of 621,551 and 1,152 works respectively.
18.09 The Committee understands that the Copyright Board has entered into a
Memorandum of Understanding with the Canadian Copyright
Licensing Agency
(CANCOPY) in relation to licences issued under
If the published work
which is the subject of the application is of the type that CANCOPY usually
licenses, and the owner cannot
be located, the matter will be referred to
CANCOPY. While the Board retains the ultimate power to authorise a licence and
set terms and conditions, the Board will consider recommendations from
CANCOPY in regard to these issues. CANCOPY has also acted
as a repository for
royalties set aside in the event that the copyright owner comes forward to
collect payment for use of their
18.10 The Canadian scheme initially applied only to published works. In 1997
the Canadian Act was amended to allow the Copyright
Board to authorise licences
in relation to the use of fixed performances, published sound recordings and
fixed communication
signals, in addition to published works, if the copyright
owner is unlocatable.
18.11 In relation to the Canadian scheme, the Committee observed in its Part
2 Simplification Report that:
While the Canadian scheme balances the needs of copyright owners and users
by requiring diligent searching and payment of royalties,
any introduction of
a similar scheme in Australia would require a high level of administrative
resources and the Committee
believes that the costs are likely to outweigh the
benefits, considering the size of the problem.
18.12 The Committee acknowledges that the issue of untraceable copyright
owners represents a recurring problem for users, particularly
in the electronic
and multimedia environment, where it seems reasonable to assume that the amount
of unsourced material and
increase. The Committee is aware that the absence of some type of regulatory
scheme to deal with the issue of untraceable copyright owners is a matter of
concern for some interests, although few such
concerns were expressed directly
to the Committee. However, the Committee remains mindful of arguments that a
statutory scheme
could result in the reduction of the nature of copyright from
an exclusive right to merely a right to remuneration. Further, the
Committee is
concerned that the right of owners of unpublished material to prevent their
material being published, or otherwise
exploited, should not be overridden by
the establishment of a scheme to enable the use of copyright material where the
are untraceable. In that latter respect, the Committee notes that the
Canadian scheme principally applies to the licensing of
has been publicly disseminated.
18.13 The Committee previously recommended in its Part 2 Simplification
Report that the Government consider whether a scheme similar
to the Scandinavian
model would be feasible in Australia. However, if the Government were to
consider the implementation of
a scheme to be set up by the Copyright Tribunal,
the Committee believes that the Canadian scheme represents a relevantly
model. Nevertheless, the Committee maintains some reservations about
the necessity for such a mechanism in Australia or, if there
were such a
mechanism, the appropriateness of it involving some administration by bodies
other than the Tribunal (eg, similar
to the role of CANCOPY referred to at
paragraph 18.09).
18.14 The adoption of such a scheme would involve extending the Copyright
Tribunal's jurisdiction to allow it to consider applications
for a licence where
the copyright owner is unknown or untraceable, and to determine the rate payable
for, and terms and conditions
of, such a licence. It would also be necessary for
a trust account to be opened for monies collected from users. Alternatively,
Committee notes that the Act could provide for a person to give an undertaking
to pay the owner of copyright, if they were
located, an amount agreed between
them or, in the absence of agreement, such an amount as determined by the
In this respect, ss. 108 and 109, for example, provide a
precedent in the Act for the giving of undertakings to a copyright owner.
18.15 In its draft report, the Committee included a recommendation that the
Government consider the adoption of a mechanism for
the granting of licences by
the Copyright Tribunal for the use of copyright material where the copyright
owner is unknown or
untraceable, based on the mechanism used in Canada. The
following qualifications were added to that draft recommendation, to take
account the issues that the Committee raised above, and relevant issues raised
in its Part 2 Simplification Report:
Applications could be made for any type of copyright use and in respect of
any type of copyright material, provided that the work
or subject matter has
been published, or otherwise publicly disseminated.
Such a scheme could be administered by the Copyright Tribunal or the
Applications could be made 'on the papers'.
Applications should be subject to a cost-recovery fee for the
administration of the service (including the cost of the hire of
extra staff,
and associated costs, if the additional demand on the Tribunal's resources
required it).
To simplify determinations of the Tribunal or Registrar and to give
guidance to applicants, guidelines should be developed setting
out matters to be
taken into account by the Tribunal or Registrar:
in determining whether an applicant has undertaken an adequate
for a copyright owner;
for the payment and retention of royalties;
in determining terms and conditions of a licence.
18.16 The Committee stressed in its draft report that it would be minded to
make a final recommendation to this effect only if
clear support was
demonstrated for it by interests.
18.17 The Committee received submissions from Screenrights and CASL following
the draft report, which opposed the Committee's draft
recommendation on this
issue. Screenrights expressed serious doubts about the necessity for a mechanism
for the granting of
licences by the Tribunal for the use of copyright material
where the copyright owner is unknown or untraceable. Screenrights also
that such a mechanism would constitute an unwarranted exception to the exclusive
rights of copyright owners. CASL
also opposed the draft recommendation, and
stated that the Tribunal would effectively become another collecting society for
this purpose, if the draft recommendation were taken up. CASL noted that it is
not uncommon for the copyright owners of material
held in State or Territory
libraries to be unknown or untraceable. However, it noted that, for example, the
State Library of
New South Wales has an established procedure to identify and
trace copyright owners where the Library or a user wishes to reproduce
material. It also noted that 'decisions are made on a case by case basis on
whether material for which the copyright
owner is unknown or untraceable will be
reproduced'.
18.18 Following the release of the draft report, the Committee received
submissions from CAL, ACC and APRA/AMCOS which supported
recommendation on this issue.
18.19 On balance, the Committee has decided to make no recommendation for
extending the Copyright Tribunal's jurisdiction to allow
it to consider
applications for
a licence where the copyright owner is unknown or
untraceable. Notwithstanding the submissions from ACC, CAL and APRA/AMCOS,
Committee considered that insufficient support has been expressed for such a
mechanism by interests that could be thought
to be affected by the difficulties
of tracing copyright owners which are described above. If interested parties
consider that
a case can be made out for the adoption of such a scheme, they
should submit their case to the Attorney-General.
[Return to contents]
Section 4 – Membership, Practice and Procedure
of the Copyright
Chapter 19 – Membership of the Copyright Tribunal
19.01 Submissions made to the Committee acknowledged the
breadth of the criteria for membership of the Tribunal but at the same
a need for matters to be determined by at least one presidential (judicial)
While Screenrights and ALCA supported the current
structure of the Copyright Tribunal, many of the other interests thought that
there was a need for some change to the way the Copyright Tribunal is
constituted. The Committee has considered changes to
the number of members
appointed to the Tribunal and the qualifications for appointment. A discussion
of these issues is set
Appointment of more members
19.02 The Copyright Tribunal, as presently constituted, consists of a
President (Burchett J), a Deputy President (Finkelstein J)
non-presidential members. The number of Deputy Presidents and non-presidential
members is not prescribed by the Act.
The Act does, however, set out the number
of Tribunal members required for a quorum.
19.03 The Act provides that the Tribunal shall be constituted by a single
member unless a party to an application or reference
requests that the Tribunal
be constituted by more than one member. In that instance, the Tribunal must be
constituted by no
less than two members of whom one must be the President or a
Deputy President (s. 146(2) and (3)). This situation reflects comments
the Spicer Committee that some of the delay on the final determination of
matters in the UK Performing Right Tribunal
was due to the difficulty in fixing
times for hearing convenient to all members of the Tribunal.
Comments along the same lines were made to this Committee. For example, in
its submission, MCEETYA thought that, in order to allow
matters to progress with
speed and unless the parties requested a full Tribunal, the Tribunal should be
constituted by the
President sitting alone.
19.04 Delay seemed to be a matter of general concern to interests familiar
with the Copyright Tribunal. The AVCC, in particular,
was concerned about delay
by collecting societies in bringing proceedings before the Tribunal and the
consequent uncertainty
this created for universities in relation to
retrospective payments for use of copyright material. It is to be noted that it
appears that this concern relates more to delay by the parties than to delay by
the Copyright Tribunal itself. This is consistent
with representations made to
the Committee at the September forum, which indicated that the problem of delay
is often more
perceived than real. According to information received by the
Committee, delays are often associated with the size of proceedings,
availability of counsel and other external factors. The Committee considers that
the same priority as matters in the
Federal Court. It is the Committee's view that concerns about delay, to the
extent that
they exist, can be dealt with by the Tribunal adopting a more
rigorous case management approach to proceedings in the Copyright
Tribunal. This
issue is explored further in Chapter 20.
19.05 The Committee is in favour of the appointment of more members to the
Tribunal, at both presidential and non-presidential
levels. The Committee
considers this recommendation to be in line with expectations that the workload
of the Tribunal will
continue to increase. Consultations with the President and
the Secretary of the Copyright Tribunal highlighted the marked increase
number of matters coming before the Tribunal in recent years. Interests
suggested that this was likely to continue in
the future, especially with the
changes proposed by the Digital Agenda Bill.
19.06 The Committee acknowledges that it is important to consider how the
appointment of more members to the Tribunal would work.
Many interests supported
the idea of establishing a panel of members of the Copyright Tribunal who could
sit on a rotating
The Committee is in favour of
establishing such a panel. A panel of presidential members could be made up of
Justices of the
Federal Court who hear intellectual property matters. The
Committee is of the view that the ability to draw on a panel of members
not only increase the Tribunal's capacity, but also afford it greater
flexibility. For example, it could sit with the
President alone or as a full
tribunal, it could benefit from the expertise of different members, or it could
hear matters concurrently.
Having a larger pool of members to draw
on would also minimise the perception of a tendency, commented on by some
that the Tribunal operates as a 'club'.
Appointment of members with industry experience
19.07 The Committee is in favour of the appointment to the Tribunal of people
with relevant industry experience. There was strong
support for this in
submissions made to the Committee. At a practical level, the Committee notes
that it is often difficult
to find individuals who do not have a prior interest
in the general subject of the proceedings or who will not be seen as biased
toward either the copyright owner or user perspective. The Committee has
received submissions suggesting that the potential
for bias could be balanced by
an even representation of people from both copyright owner and user backgrounds
among appointees.
The Committee endorses this suggestion.
19.08 Section 140(2) of the Act provides a broad scope for the appointment of
non-presidential members with relevant industry experience.
acknowledged by APRA, CAL and the ACC in their submissions. The Committee notes
that the only possible means for expanding
the criteria for appointment to the
Tribunal would be to remove the requirement in ss. 140(1) and 140(1A) that
presidential
members of the Tribunal be judges. This proposal was expressly
rejected by most interests, who saw the participation of judicial
members of the
Tribunal as not only essential to the Tribunal's authority, but also appropriate
given the complexity of matters
coming before the Tribunal. This being so, the
Committee does not make any recommendation for changing the requirements for
membership of the Tribunal.
19.09 In this respect the Committee notes CAL's submission in response to the
draft report which questioned the benefit of having
non-presidential members
appointed to the Tribunal.
The Committee considers that having
members with broad industry experience sitting on the Tribunal in appropriate
cases is beneficial
for the reasons set out above.
Recommendation
19.10 The Committee recommends that more presidential and
non-presidential members be appointed to the Tribunal. The
non-presidential
members should be people with relevant industry
experience and care should be taken to ensure that there is an even
representation
of people from both copyright owner and user backgrounds
among appointees.
[Return to contents]
Chapter 20 – Practice and procedure
The Copyright Tribunal's power to determine its own
20.01 Within the bounds of procedural fairness, the Copyright Tribunal has
extremely wide discretion as to its own procedures.
Section 164 of the Act sets
out, in broad terms, what the Tribunal may do:
the procedure of the Tribunal is, subject to this Act and the
regulations, within the discretion of the Tribunal;
the Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence; and
the proceedings shall be conducted with as little formality, and with as
much expedition, as the requirements of this Act and a
proper consideration of
the matters before the Tribunal permit.
20.02 Under the Copyright Tribunal (Procedure) Regulations 1969, the Tribunal
has the power to give directions as to the procedure
to be followed in
connection with a matter before it (r. 36A). It may also, in special
circumstances, exempt a person from
compliance with any procedural requirement
in the regulations (r. 48). This is in addition to the Tribunal's discretion in
relation to specific matters as provided in the Act and the Regulations, for
example, who may appear before the Tribunal (s. 169),
service of documents (r.
12(2)), notice requirements (r. 18) and what particulars are to be contained in
applications or references
to the Tribunal (r. 17(2)). Any failure to comply
with the Regulations does not render a proceeding or order of the Tribunal void.
Instead, the Tribunal may set aside, amend or otherwise deal with such a failure
as it sees fit (r. 49).
20.03 The breadth of the Copyright Tribunal's power to
determine its own procedure means that, in many cases, changes to how
proceedings are conducted in the Tribunal may be effected without legislative
intervention. It also means that the Tribunal can
adapt its procedures according
to the nature of the parties and the matter before it.
Regulation 40D of Copyright Tribunal (Procedure) Regulations 1969
20.04 In its submission following the draft report, CAL drew attention to the
effect of this regulation, which limits the Tribunal's
discretion over its
procedure to a small extent. Regulation 40D provides:
Where the Tribunal refers a question of law arising in proceedings before
it for determination by the Federal Court of Australia
under subsection 161(1)
of the Act, being proceedings in which the Tribunal has not given its
decision, the Tribunal shall
adjourn its hearing of those proceedings until
the question referred has been heard and determined by the Federal Court of
20.05 CAL noted that the practical effect of this regulation has been
considered in recent proceedings before the Copyright Tribunal.
On the basis of
discussion in those proceedings, CAL suggested that r. 40D would be interpreted
to require the Tribunal to
adjourn proceedings whenever a question of law was
referred to the Federal Court, including in cases where a discrete or
self-contained
question of law has been referred which, presumably, should not
affect the discretion of the Tribunal to continue to hear unrelated
the proceedings.
20.06 The Committee considers that it would be appropriate, and consistent
with the Tribunal's otherwise broad discretion to determine
its own procedure,
for the Tribunal to have the discretion to continue to hear proceedings where a
question of law has been
referred to the Federal Court. In those cases, the
Committee contemplates that the Tribunal would exercise such a discretion where
the question of law is unrelated to other matters that might be heard in
proceedings. Such a discretion may also enable the
more timely determination of
particular matters by the Tribunal. However, the Tribunal should not give a
final decision until
the Federal Court has ruled on the question referred to it.
Case management
20.07 The concept of case management has existed for over 50
However, concerns about the escalating costs of litigation
and delays in the court and tribunal system have seen an increasing
energy devoted to developing effective case management systems in recent times.
20.08 The Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) identified two basic models
of case management.
The first is the individual docket system in
which a case is assigned to an individual judge, who has responsibility for the
matter from the time of filing until its disposition. This system was adopted in
the Federal Court in 1997 after an initial
pilot scheme in the Court's Victorian
registry. The other model is the master list system in which the registry
retains control
over all matters, uniformly referring them to different judicial
officers for different milestone events. Some systems fuse aspects
these models. For example, the differential case management system of the New
South Wales Supreme Court uses a master
list system but assigns matters to
different tracks according to their complexity.
A more active role
20.09 A feature of case management, particularly in the individual docket
system model, is a more active role for judges.
This approach is
consistent with comments received by the Committee which expressed support for
the Copyright Tribunal applying
a more rigorous approach to the conduct of
proceedings before it. An example of such an approach is the way the Australian
Competition Tribunal conducts proceedings. It is usual for the Competition
Tribunal to conduct preliminary hearings at which it
will determine the way a
case is to proceed. Generally speaking, the Tribunal will make directions in
relation to a list of
relevant topics prepared by the Tribunal, filing of source
documents by the ACCC, preparation by the ACCC of relevant facts and
statistics,
preparation by the parties of summaries of background facts, outlines of
submissions, lists of proposed witnesses
and witness statements.
20.10 While it is acknowledged that the early identification of
major issues may be somewhat easier for the Competition Tribunal
as a review
body than for a first instance tribunal, the Committee notes that there seem to
be no procedural barriers preventing
the Copyright Tribunal from adopting a
similar approach. Indeed, r. 17(5) of the Copyright Tribunal (Procedure)
Regulations
gives the President of the Copyright Tribunal power to order a
preliminary hearing for the purpose of dealing with matters connected
applications or references made to the Tribunal (other than an application to be
made by a party to a proceeding under
r. 34 or an application for an order under
r. 35 where the Tribunal decides not to hold a hearing).
20.11 The individual docket system in the Federal Court also places an
emphasis on the early assessment of cases through directions
hearings at which
orders may be made about matters such as discovery, interrogatories, refining
the issues, joinder, service,
amendments, costs, preserving evidence, that
evidence be given of a particular fact, that expert evidence be restricted or
given in a particular form or exchanged, or that a court expert be appointed or
that the proceedings or part thereof be referred
to a mediator or
arbitrator.
Other features of the individual docket system
provided for in the Court guidelines are case management conferences, evaluation
conferences and trial management conferences. The ALRC has endorsed many
features of the Federal Court's case management initiatives.
Incorporating Federal Court case management
20.12 The Committee notes that, as presently structured, the Copyright
Tribunal already has its own
individual docket system, in the sense
that matters are dealt with by the President or Deputy President of the Tribunal
are also Justices of the Federal Court. The Committee believes that the
to apply the same
case management principles to matters coming before it as those that apply to
matters in the Federal Court.
20.13 Many of the submissions received by the Committee referred to case
management mechanisms already in place in the Federal
Court. For example, the
limitation of discovery
and the phasing out of interrogatories,
except with leave of the Court. Other case management mechanisms used in the
Court include hearing management through restricting the number of
witnesses and limiting the time allowed for evidence-in-chief,
cross-examination
and re-examination, as well as putting restraints on the time for making oral
submissions, for a party to
present its case and for the hearing as a
The Committee is in favour of such mechanisms being
incorporated into Copyright Tribunal proceedings as appropriate.
Deciding matters on the papers
20.14 Another mechanism proposed for consideration by the Committee was the
option of determining small matters on the papers in
a similar manner to the way
in which costs are assessed under O. 62, r. 46 of the
Federal Court Rules
The Committee notes that other tribunals such as the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT), the Refugee Review Tribunal, the
Immigration Review Tribunal and the Social Security Appeals Tribunal all have
power to make determinations on the papers.
For example, under s.
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth), the AAT can review a
decision by considering the documents before it, providing it is satisfied that
the issues can
be adequately dealt with on the papers and the parties consent.
This is consistent with the recommendation of the Administrative
While the Committee acknowledges that the Administrative
Review Council was principally concerned with merit review tribunals
Better Decisions: Review of Commonwealth Merit Review Tribunals
Council stated that 'it should be possible in all cases for tribunals to make
decisions on the papers, provided that the
applicant gives informed consent to
such an approach being taken'.
20.15 The Committee is in favour of the Copyright Tribunal being able to
decide matters on the papers where appropriate and where
the parties consent.
The Committee considers that this would enhance the Tribunal's ability to
dispose of weak or simple cases
expeditiously without compromising procedural
fairness. Not only is this consistent with the procedures of other
administrative
bodies, it also conforms with the ALRC's recommendation to amend
Federal Court Rules
to allow the power to enter a judgment summarily to be
used more flexibly.
Moreover, the Committee notes that this would
be consistent with the Federal Court's power to determine single
Preliminary determinations
20.16 The Committee also received a submission from the AVCC proposing that
the Tribunal be given an express power to make preliminary
determinations.
According to the proposed model, interested parties could make submissions
within 28 days of the preliminary
determination being handed down, after which
time the Tribunal would make a final determination. Such a procedure is similar
to the procedure followed by the ACCC under s. 90A of the
Trade Practices Act
This proposal did not receive support during the Committee's consultations at
the September forum. The Committee notes that
already requires the
Tribunal to conduct proceedings with as much expedition as possible, and that in
certain instances a time
limit for deciding applications is imposed on the
Tribunal (s. 153H). In this context and given the potential of this proposal
increase the workload of the Tribunal and the lack of demonstrated support from
interests, the Committee is not inclined
to recommend the introduction of a
preliminary determination mechanism into the procedures of the Tribunal. The
Committee does,
however, acknowledge that there may be potential for the
Tribunal to utilise such a mechanism according to its own discretion.
Should the Tribunal rely on independent expertise?
20.17 The technical nature of much of the evidence in matters coming before
the Copyright Tribunal has led the Committee to look
at the ways in which expert
evidence is used in the Tribunal. In particular, the Committee has looked at
ways of controlling
the use of experts by litigants, the use of
Tribunal-appointed experts or assessors, and the use of panels of experts.
Controlling the use of experts
20.18 A problem often associated with the use of experts by parties in an
adversarial system is that 'the court hears not the most
expert opinions, but
those favourable to the respective parties'.
Other problems
associated with the use of experts are delay and increased costs.
20.19 As a response to these problems, courts and tribunals
have developed mechanisms to control the use of expert evidence by
For example, the
Federal Court Rules
enable the Court to make orders with
respect to the disclosure or exchange of expert reports, the number of expert
and the time for examining a witness, whether by way of
evidence-in-chief or cross-examination.
The Court also recently
introduced rules dealing with the situation where two or more parties call
expert witnesses to give
evidence in relation to the same matter. In that
instance, the Court may order that the experts confer, that they produce a
document setting out the matters in relation to which they agree or differ, or
that they be empanelled together.
At the same time, the Federal
Court issued guidelines for the use of expert witnesses in the form of a
Practice Direction.
20.20 In line with its recommendation that the Copyright Tribunal adopt the
case management mechanisms of the Federal Court where
appropriate, the Committee
recommends that the Copyright Tribunal be given the same express power as the
Federal Court in relation
to the use of expert evidence.
Tribunal-appointed experts
20.21 Another way of limiting partisan expert evidence is through the
appointment of experts agreed by the parties or the appointment
of an expert to
assist the Tribunal. The ALRC has acknowledged that 'agreed or court appointed
experts could be particularly
effective in civil disputes over quantum rather
than over liability and where valuation of assets is in issue'.
20.22 The Federal Court has the power, upon its own motion or on application
of a party or a Registrar, to appoint an expert witness
as a Court-appointed
This may not be dissimilar to the role played by the ACCC
in proceedings before the Competition Tribunal. However, in the Federal
the remuneration of the expert witness is fixed by the Court and, unless it
orders otherwise, the parties are jointly
and severally liable to pay the expert
20.23 As part of its inherent powers, the Federal Court has been able to
appoint an assessor to assist the Court in understanding
expert evidence. The
Committee understands that the Federal Court has recently amended its Rules to
expressly provide for the
appointment of expert assistants with the consent of
the parties.
Under O. 34B the Court may make an order for the
payment of reasonable remuneration to the expert assistant and may order that
the amount be paid by two or more parties jointly.
20.24 The Committee recognises that the Copyright Tribunal is in a different
position from the Federal Court in that it may already
be constituted to include
a non-presidential member who is an expert in the relevant field. The Committee
is sensitive to concerns
voiced by interests about the appointment of court
experts or assessors. On balance, however, the Committee is of the view that
with technical evidence, providing it is done
with the parties'
Panel of experts
20.25 An alternative to the use of experts in an adversarial setting is to
use each party's expert witnesses in a panel setting.
This approach has been
used by the Competition Tribunal in a process known as 'hot tubbing'. According
to this model, experts
provide written statements to the Tribunal which may be
modified or supplemented orally at the hearing. They are sworn in simultaneously
and provide an oral exposition of their opinion and comment on the opinions of
the other experts. Counsel cross-examine the
experts one after the other and may
put questions to all or any of them in relation to a particular issue. The net
this is the presentation of evidence in a manner resembling a panel
discussion rather than one that is adversarial. The main benefit
approach is said to be that:
at the end of the exercise the Tribunal knows what the economists [as the
experts invariably are] perceive as being the real issues,
and areas of
agreement and disagreement between them.
20.26 The 'hot tub' approach has been referred to favourably in a recent
Competition Tribunal decision.
The Federal Court has amended its
Rules to accommodate this approach to the reception of expert
and the ALRC has recommended that the Family Court and
the AAT follow suit.
20.27 While the Committee is aware of concerns raised at the September forum
approach, it does not believe
that these implications should be overstated.
In presenting their
evidence, parties need to be responsive to the requirements of the Tribunal. The
Committee considers the
panel approach simply provides a more direct method of
doing this, while avoiding some delays of adducing evidence in a formal
Accordingly, the Committee is of the view that the Copyright Tribunal should be
able to receive expert evidence using
a panel approach and that the amendments
should be made along the lines of O. 34A of the
Federal Court Rules
in order to
facilitate such a model.
20.28 Given the extent of the Tribunal's power over procedural matters, there
are a number of options open to it in deciding how
to handle a particular
matter. The Committee is in favour of the mechanisms discussed above being 'on
the menu' of options
available to the Tribunal.
Recommendations
20.29 The Committee recommends that, where appropriate, the Tribunal
employ the case management mechanisms of the Federal Court.
It should also
use other strategies, such as deciding matters on the papers, if
appropriate.
20.30 The Committee does not recommend that the Tribunal be required to
hand down preliminary determinations.
20.31 The Committee recommends that the Tribunal be given the same
express power to control the use of expert evidence as the Federal
including power to appoint experts to assist it in dealing with technical
evidence and to receive expert evidence by
using the panel approach.
20.32 In order to ensure flexibility, the Tribunal should retain a wide
discretion as to its procedures.
20.33 The Committee recommends that r. 40D of the Copyright Tribunal
(Procedure) Regulations 1969 be amended to allow the Tribunal
to continue
to hear a matter where a discrete question of law is referred to the
Federal Court. However, the regulation should
prevent a final decision by
the Tribunal pending the decision of the Federal Court on the question of
[Return to contents]
Section 5 – Other Matters Addressed by the Committee
Chapter 21 – Alternative
dispute resolution
21.01 Alternative dispute resolution (ADR) is playing an
increasingly important role in the resolution of disputes. This is because
is seen as a more accessible, efficient and cheaper alternative to litigation.
Submissions received by the Committee made
a uniform call for the integration of
some form of ADR into the Copyright Tribunal process. Divergent views were
21.02 The Committee notes its discussion at Chapter 7 in respect of possible
constitutional constraints on changes to the jurisdiction
of the Tribunal.
Against that background, the Committee believes that it would be possible for
to provide for dispute resolution in a number of other ways
without running into constitutional difficulties. For example, it might:
require parties to undergo mediation;
set up a mechanism by which recommendations can be made for the resolution
of a dispute (eg, by an ombudsman or other body whose
powers do not include the
making of determinations);
set up a mechanism by which parties voluntarily submit to an arbitral body
for the purpose of making decisions that, by prior agreement
of the parties, are
binding between them;
set up a mechanism by which determinations are made by an arbitral body,
such determinations being indirectly enforceable by a
court pursuant to an
independent exercise of judicial power (as is the situation with determinations
of the Copyright Tribunal).
21.03 Important issues in considering a model of ADR are whether it should be
compulsory or voluntary, when it should occur, who
should pay and whether
parties should be allowed to have legal representation. The Committee has
examined different approaches
to these issues. Generally speaking, the
Committee's views on these issues may be summarised as follows:
ADR should be available both before and after an application is lodged with
the Copyright Tribunal;
it is desirable to contain the costs of ADR;
the Committee is aware, however, that where ADR occurs after proceedings
have commenced, parties are more likely to want legal
representation, although
this should not be a requirement;
the Committee acknowledges that it is important that all parties have a
stake in the ADR process and that, therefore, some of the
expenses should be
borne by both parties; and
although interests were against the idea of compulsory ADR, the Committee
is aware that other courts and tribunals do possess the
power to order parties
to engage in ADR. The Committee considers that there is merit in the Tribunal
having the power to order
parties to engage in ADR in certain situations.
21.04 ADR processes may be facilitative (such as mediation, conciliation or
facilitation), advisory (expert appraisal) or determinative
determination or arbitration) in nature. These models are outlined in Appendix
E. The Committee notes that in its existing
role the Copyright Tribunal already
acts as an arbitrator. If the main function of the Tribunal remains confined to
determining
equitable remuneration, and matters closely associated with that
function, the Committee considers that mediation is likely to
be the most
relevant alternative to proceedings in the Tribunal. ADR may also be
industry-based, court or tribunal-annexed,
or conducted by private
organisations.
Private ADR
21.05 There are many private ADR service providers to whom disputes may be
referred. Some of these are large organisations which
can call on a panel of
experts whose skills range across many disciplines. Other service providers
operate within a particular
profession, such as services operated by law
societies. Others, still, are industry-specific.
For example, the Arts Law Centre provides a mediation service
based on the NSW Law Society model, which is designed to resolve
related disputes likely to affect arts practitioners. In addition to their
service-provider role, many private
organisations perform an educative and
training role and offer accreditation to those who have completed their courses.
Committee is in favour of the Copyright Tribunal being able to utilise the
resources of these organisations by referring matters
to them in situations
where tribunal-annexed mediation is not appropriate and by using their training
facilities.
Industry-based ADR
21.06 It is common for industries and individual organisations to operate
their own ADR services. The advantage of this model is
that organisations are
able to design a system of ADR that meets their particular needs. One of the
major disadvantages of
an in-house ADR system is that it may be perceived as
21.07 While many collecting societies have procedures for handling internal
disputes, only one of them has a formal ADR mechanism.
That is PPCA, which
provides for the resolution of disputes between licensees and PPCA as licensor
by a Board of Review.
This mechanism was established by PPCA as a
condition of its authorisation by the ACCC. As outlined at Appendix D, APRA put
forward a similar model in its applications for authorisation. That model was
rejected by the Australian Competition Tribunal
which, instead, proposed an ADR
model along the following lines:
the model should not be limited to resolving disputes between parties to
existing licences as this would not provide for disputes
with potential
licensees as to whether an activity is a public performance or whether a
particular kind of licence applies
to an activity. The licensee or potential
licensee should have the option of using ADR on condition that the result will
binding on both parties. This is particularly important where the Copyright
Tribunal may not have jurisdiction over such disputes;
there should be an adjudication that provides a decision, rather than
mediation which will not necessarily lead to a result;
adjudication should be by a single arbitrator, rather than a panel which
would be expensive to convene and create delays in arranging
costs of the adjudicator should be borne by APRA, but other
administrative costs (eg, room hire, stenographer) should be shared
the parties. This would ensure that both parties had a vested interest in the
speedy resolution of the dispute;
legal representation should not be permitted unless the parties agree
otherwise. Also, if there is a representative body, that
body should be allowed
to represent its members;
questions of law and fact should be amenable to the ADR process,
particularly where the adjudicator is a retired senior judicial
in so far as a dispute relates to a matter over which the Copyright
Tribunal has jurisdiction, the ADR process should not oust
the Copyright
Tribunal's jurisdiction. If the Copyright Tribunal did have jurisdiction and
either party applied to it, the
decision of the adjudicator would give way to
the decision of the Copyright Tribunal (or court); and
APRA may want the ADR process to take in disputes with members in the same
way as, in the USA, ASCAP has a Board of Review to deal
with disputes between
ASCAP management and members.
21.08 The Competition Tribunal left the precise form of the new ADR mechanism
to be developed by APRA and adjourned the matter
for nine months to allow that
process to take place. The Committee understands that the model being developed
by APRA will
take the form of expert determination and will not apply to the
society's disputes with its members.
21.09 The Committee notes the potential utility of collecting societies such
as APRA developing their own dispute resolution mechanisms
as a quicker, cheaper
alternative to proceedings in the Copyright Tribunal. The Committee thinks that
this may be particularly
useful in providing a forum for individuals and small
businesses to air their grievances and in managing the case flow to the
Tribunal. At the September forum, APRA suggested that once its ADR mechanism is
established, other collecting societies could
use it and thereby avoid the
substantial costs of setting up their own ADR mechanism. The Committee makes no
specific recommendation
in this regard but encourages collecting societies to
adopt ADR and to give consideration to how this can best be achieved.
21.10 The Committee has some reservations about the extent to
which determination by a single arbitrator would provide a true alternative
the Copyright Tribunal, given that the Tribunal already acts as an arbitrator.
However, the Committee acknowledges that
some interests expressed the view that
there is a need for an ADR mechanism separate from the Copyright Tribunal.
21.11 The Committee is aware that while a less formal approach to dispute
resolution has advantages in that it avoids much of the
expense and delay
associated with the judicial system and with formal models of ADR such as
arbitration by the Copyright Tribunal,
it also has some disadvantages. In moving
towards a less formal process there is the risk of losing features that
fairness and justice, such as procedural and evidentiary rules and the
requirements of natural justice. A related issue is the
question of standards in
ADR and how to ensure that people providing ADR services are properly
The Committee notes that it is essential that, whatever
form of ADR is adopted, the independence of the ADR body must be beyond
for all the parties involved. As noted above, there is always the concern that
an ADR body established and operated by
a collecting society may not be
perceived as providing a credible independent avenue for resolution of a dispute
collecting society.
21.12 As noted above, the Australian Competition Tribunal raised the
possibility of ADR being used for the resolution of disputes
between collecting
societies and their members. The Committee notes its recommendation made in
Chapter 12 not to extend the
power to review input arrangements. This recommendation was made on the basis
that the Committee did not identify any compelling arguments to justify such an
expansion of the Tribunal's jurisdiction. However,
the Committee is of the view
that the remedies currently available to members (as discussed in Chapter 12) in
the event of
a dispute with a collecting society are not always adequate for an
individual member or copyright owner. The Committee is of the
view that recourse
to some form of ADR to facilitate the resolution of such disputes would be an
appropriate option and should
be strongly encouraged.
Tribunal-annexed ADR
21.13 The Committee acknowledges that, even with a commitment to ADR by the
collecting societies, some matters will inevitably
still come before the
incorporated into the processes
of the Tribunal once an application has been
21.14 The Committee notes that there has been an increasing trend for courts
and tribunals to establish their own ADR services
and to refer matters to
private ADR service providers. The ALRC noted in its Discussion Paper that, in
most federal courts
and tribunals, ADR occurs by way of 'negotiation between the
parties, generally conducted by lawyers, and conciliation conducted
by court or
tribunal registrars'.
For example, although the Federal Court does
not have a conciliation program, it does use both private mediation and
court-annexed
mediation. It also has power to refer proceedings for arbitration
Federal Court Rules
). Under this system, the Federal Court may refer
matters to mediation at the request of the parties or where a judge thinks it
appropriate. Since 1997, judges have also had the power to compel parties to
mediate, although the Committee understands that
this power is rarely used in
21.15 Court-annexed mediation consists of reference to a Federal Court
Registrar (trained in mediation) who sits as a mediator
in a confidential
conference with the parties. Under O. 72 r. 7, such conferences must be
conducted in accordance with any
directions given by the Court or judge and must
take the form of a structured process in which the mediator assists the parties
by encouraging and facilitating discussion with the parties. If mediation is
successful, the parties may then have their agreement
embodied in a consent
21.16 During consultations, the Secretary of the Copyright Tribunal, Mr
Tesoriero, indicated to the Committee that there was scope
for the Copyright
Tribunal to refer matters to the Federal Court's mediation service. While there
is currently no filing fee
for the Copyright Tribunal, the parties would be
required to pay a fee if they were to make use of the Federal Court's mediation
21.17 The Secretary of the Copyright Tribunal advised the Committee that the
Federal Court's mediation service is working well
with the number of cases it
currently deals with and believed that the service has the capacity to
accommodate the referral
of Copyright Tribunal matters.
21.18 Taking into consideration the fact that the Federal Court's mediation
service is already established and functioning well,
the Committee believes use
of that scheme would be the most efficient way for the Copyright Tribunal to
incorporate ADR into
its procedures. The Committee believes that the Tribunal
should also have the power to refer matters to private mediation in certain
instances, such as where a matter is too large or complex for the Federal
Court's mediation service. In that situation, the
Committee envisages that
parties would share the cost of the mediator and associated expenses and would
each bear their own
legal costs.
21.19 Some submissions in response to the draft report raised concerns about
conferring a power on the Tribunal to require parties
to undertake ADR. CAL
submitted that the very nature of ADR requires that the parties are willing
participants.
However, the Committee notes that it envisages that
the Tribunal would exercise such a power where the Tribunal considers that
would be necessary or useful. The Committee considers that such a power would
also provide more room for the Tribunal to
reduce pressure on its resources in
some cases.
21.20 Before leaving this discussion, something should be said of the
Federal Magistrates Act 1999
(Cth) which envisages a more integrated system of ADR.
Under the Act, the Federal Magistrates Court will be obliged to consider
to advise parties about ADR processes and, if it considers that such a process
may help the parties to resolve a dispute,
it will have to advise the parties to
use that process (ss. 22, 23).
Similarly, legal practitioners
acting for parties in the Federal Magistrates Court or parties considering
instituting proceedings
in the Court will be obliged to advise their clients
be obliged to advise parties about ADR processes.
21.21 The Committee considers that placing a positive obligation on the
Tribunal to consider ADR would be an unnecessary fetter
on the discretion of the
Tribunal. The Committee considers that this approach may be inappropriate given
the complex nature
of the matters that generally come before the Copyright
Tribunal as compared with the role envisaged for the Federal Magistrates
The Committee does, however, advocate an active use of ADR as part of the
Tribunal's case management strategy.
21.22 The success of facilitative ADR processes depends to a large degree on
the goodwill of the parties. The Committee is aware
that the effectiveness of
ADR may be limited in relation to many of the large and complex disputes with
which the Copyright
Tribunal deals. If ADR is to be used as a means of dealing
with smaller matters, then service providers should be aware of the
problems that exist where there is an imbalance of socio-economic power between
the parties. Notwithstanding these
shortcomings, the Committee considers that
the Tribunal should encourage the parties to explore ADR where appropriate, and
should have the power to compel them to use ADR where necessary.
Recommendations
21.23 The Committee recommends that collecting societies adopt ADR for
the resolution of their disputes with copyright users and
potential users,
as well as their disputes with members.
21.24 In keeping with the earlier recommendation (at paragraph 20.29)
for the Tribunal to adopt a more active case management approach,
Committee recommends that the Copyright Tribunal should encourage parties
to explore ADR and should have the power to compel
them to do so where the
Tribunal thinks it is appropriate.
21.25 The Committee recommends that the Copyright Tribunal utilise the
Federal Court mediation service as an effective form of
ADR. It should
also be able to refer matters for private mediation.
[Return to contents]
Chapter 22 – Code of
Don't Stop the Music!
report recommended the
establishment of a voluntary code of conduct for collecting societies, to
outline standards of acceptable
licensing practices and activities. The
Committee understands that APRA has prepared a draft code of conduct in response
that recommendation. The code will deal with matters such as the collection
and distribution of moneys, the granting of exemptions,
dealings with small
business and the referral of disputes to an informal dispute resolution
22.02 Comments made to the Committee by Screenrights and CAL indicated that
they apply the Attorney-General's guidelines for the
declaration of collecting
societies as a form of code in relation to the statutory licences they
administer and, in the case
of CAL, non-statutory licences as well. Those
guidelines essentially outline the matters adopted under Parts VA and VB of the
Act for the Attorney-General to declare a collecting society, and matters that
may give rise to the withdrawal of a declaration.
22.03 The Committee considers that this issue is outside its terms of
reference, although it is generally in favour of there being
a code of conduct
for collecting societies. It observes that most collecting societies are either
developing a code of conduct
or already consider themselves to be bound by such
a code. To the extent that sanctions exist for non-compliance with the
Attorney-General's
guidelines, the Committee notes that the guidelines may be
more effective than a purely voluntary code. The Committee does not
pre-empt the work being done by the collecting societies towards developing a
code of conduct and so makes no recommendation
as to what form such a code
should take.
[Return to contents]
Chapter 23 – Ombudsman
23.01 The Simpson Report recommended the establishment of an
ombudsman of collecting societies. In consultations with the CLRC
on 11 August
1999 Mr Shane Simpson outlined a number of advantages in establishing an
it establishes an authority figure, independent of the societies but
it would provide an outlet for grievances;
it would take pressure off the court-based processes;
it could be responsible for the administration of the ADR mechanisms, and
could have the power to refer matters to ADR; and
it is not anticipated that the cost of the function would be onerous.
23.02 This proposal received limited support from interests making written
submissions and no support was expressed for it at the
September forum.
23.03 It is the Committee's view that the proposal to establish an ombudsman
is largely aimed at achieving the same results as
ADR. The Committee is aware
that a number of collecting societies have, or are developing, mechanisms to
deal with disputes
with licensees. This report encourages such initiatives and
recommends the use of ADR mechanisms for Copyright Tribunal matters.
recommends that, where relevant, collecting societies inform licence applicants
that they may take a dispute to the
recommendations and the existing power of parties to make complaints to the
Tribunal about the conduct of collecting societies, the Committee
doubts whether there is sufficient need for the establishment
of an ombudsman by
the Commonwealth.
The Committee notes that this recommendation is
no barrier to collecting societies establishing their own industry ombudsman.
23.04 The Committee is in favour of the issue of an ombudsman
of collecting societies being revisited at a later stage if its recommendations
in relation to ADR and accessibility and promotion are not effective in
achieving the desired outcome of the efficient resolution
of copyright disputes.
Recommendation
23.05 The Committee does not recommend the establishment of an
ombudsman of collecting societies by the Government. The Committee
that this recommendation is no barrier to collecting societies
establishing their own industry ombudsman.
[Return to contents]
Chapter 24 – Accessibility and promotion of the Copyright Tribunal
24.01 The Committee notes that submissions to it generally
expressed support for measures to improve the accessibility and promotion
require expense to implement, would be
for collecting societies to notify
parties that they may take up a dispute with the Copyright Tribunal (including
of its procedures and functions) at the time of sending out
notifications of decisions regarding licence applications.
24.02 This proposal received in-principle support from collecting societies
at the September forum, although some did not consider
it relevant to their
particular organisation (in cases where the collecting society administers a
licence which does not presently
fall within the Tribunal's jurisdiction). The
Committee notes that PPCA already follows such a procedure of notifying its
of their avenue to appeal to the Tribunal. The Committee understands
that CAL does not, as a matter of course, notify parties
of their right to take
a matter to the Tribunal, but that this is because the relevant parties would be
universities or governments,
which are already well aware of the Tribunal's
role. Similarly, Screenrights contends that its licensees are all large bodies
which are already aware of the existence of the Tribunal. At the other end of
the scale, Vi$copy states that the nature of
the licences it administers (which
are generally transactional licences which involve small sums of money) also
makes it unnecessary
for them to provide such information to their licensees
(who would not, in any case, have the ability to refer a matter to the
under its current jurisdiction). Some of APRA's brochures contain some
information about the Tribunal although it
does not generally advise licensees
understands that
APRA plans to focus its energy on informing licensees about its
new ADR system rather than promoting the Copyright Tribunal.
24.03 The Committee is generally in favour of collecting
societies notifying parties that they may take a dispute up with the Copyright
Tribunal (including notifying parties of the Tribunal's procedures and
functions) at the time of sending out notifications
of decisions regarding
licence applications. However, the Committee understands that this may not
always be necessary, depending
on the constituency of the particular collecting
24.04 Submissions in response to the draft report from CAL, APRA/AMCOS and
the ACC expressed some concern that the notification
of such a requirement might
arouse a negative reaction from some licensees or potential licensees.
APRA/AMCOS's submission
(also referred to by CAL and ACC) noted that various of
its licensees have interpreted such notifications in the past as 'somehow
threatening or otherwise inappropriate'.
24.05 The Committee emphasises that the way such a notification might be
received by a licensee, or potential licensee, is likely
to depend on the way in
which it is presented. There are many different ways open for collecting
societies to present such
a notification. The Committee considers that it would
not be difficult for collecting societies to present that information in
that is not threatening or otherwise inappropriate.
Recommendation
24.06 The Committee recommends that collecting societies notify parties
that they may take up a dispute with the Copyright Tribunal
(including an
outline of its procedures and functions) at the time of sending out
notifications of decisions regarding licence
applications. The Committee
acknowledges that this may not always be necessary, depending on the
constituency of the particular
collecting society.
[Return to contents]
Chapter 25 – Implementation of the Committee's recommendations
25.01 In considering and making recommendations on the matters
raised in this reference, the Committee has advertised widely and
consulted with
key interest groups and affected parties, in accordance with paragraph 3 of its
terms of reference.
25.02 Paragraph 1(i) of the Committee's terms of reference direct it to
consider a strategy to implement and review any recommendations
made by the
Committee. In addressing this term of its reference, the Committee has divided
the matters addressed in this report
into the following categories.
Recommendations to the Government
25.03 The Committee notes that, in the course of its reference, many of the
issues it addressed were generally agreed with by interests
or were not the
subject of strongly conflicting views. The Committee received generally uniform
support in response to the
recommendations it made in its draft report, most of
which are similarly included in this report. A small number of the
recommendations
in the Committee's draft report were the matter of some
contention. However, with few exceptions, the Committee has maintained
recommendations in this report. The recommendations the Committee has made on
those contentious matters represent the Committee's
considered view after taking
account of the representations of all parties affected and balancing the
competing interests.
This has on occasions resulted in choices having to be
made. The Committee considers that it has made the correct choice in its
recommendations to the Government and that action should be taken to implement
the recommendations.
25.04 The recommendations to Government set out in the
following table require legislative change. (The Committee notes that its
recommendations to the Government, if accepted, would not require legislative or
other action.)
Recommendations
Chapter 11 – Output arrangements
Paragraphs 11.12, 11.20, 11.31, 11.32,
11.67, 11.100,
11.121, 11.129
Chapter 12 – Input arrangements
Paragraphs 12.21, 12.22
Chapter 13 – Declaration of collecting societies
Paragraphs 13.15, 13.16
Chapter 15 – The determination of equitable remuneration
Paragraph 15.14
Chapter 17 – Anomalies in statutory licences
Paragraphs 17.13, 17.15
Chapter 20 – Practice and procedure
Paragraphs 20.31, 20.33
25.05 If the Government accepts those recommendations made to it, the
Committee considers that the Government could proceed directly
drafting instructions to the Office of Parliamentary Counsel for amendments to
. The Committee considers that the proposed amendments could be
usefully released as an exposure draft for industry comment, prior
introduction of such amendments into Parliament, because it is likely that at
least some of the proposed amendments
would be technical. As such, prior
industry comment on the detail of the proposed amendments would ensure the
effective implementation
of the policy underlying the proposals.
Recommendations to the Copyright Tribunal
25.06 The following table lists recommendations that do not require
legislative change, but could be effected by an exercise of
the Tribunal's
discretion. The Committee is of the view that the Tribunal should be invited to
exercise its discretion to adopt
the measures set out in these recommendations,
as it deems appropriate.
Recommendations
Chapter 20 – Practice and procedure
Paragraph 20.29
Chapter 21 – Alternative dispute resolution
Paragraphs 21.24, 21.25
The impact of the Committee's recommendations on the
25.07 Paragraph 1(c) of the Committee's terms of reference requires it to
consider the consequences on its administration of any
expansion in the
Tribunal's role.
25.08 The Committee notes that interests expressed the view that the workload
of the Tribunal was increasingly heavy and that the
enactment of the Digital
Agenda Bill was likely to further increase its workload.
the Committee acknowledges that its proposed expansion of the Tribunal's
burden on the Tribunal's resources.
25.09 The Committee believes that it is difficult to gauge the extent to
which the implementation of its recommendations alone
would result in greater
demands on the Tribunal. In some cases, the implementation of its
recommendations would allow the Tribunal
more flexibility in dealing with
matters (eg, its recommendation for the appointment of more members) and would
put more emphasis
on agreement being reached between the parties and on ADR. The
Committee also notes its observation in Chapter 21 that there is
capacity for the Tribunal to utilise the ADR mechanisms of the Federal Court.
Review of recommendations made by the Committee
25.10 In the Second Reading Speech to the Digital Agenda Bill, the
Attorney-General, the Hon. Daryl Williams AM QC MP, undertook
to conduct a
review of the amendments contained in the Bill three years after their
The Committee is of the view that it would likewise be
appropriate to undertake a review of the impact of some of the recommendations
contained in this report, including their impact on the Tribunal's
administration, if implemented sufficiently prior to the
date for the review of
the Digital Agenda reforms.
25.11 In addition, the Committee is of the opinion that the issue of ADR may
need to be reinvestigated, once there has been an
opportunity to assess the
effectiveness of the model developed by APRA (discussed in paragraphs
21.07­21.09). The Committee
has made no specific recommendations regarding
the adoption of a particular model of ADR for the resolution of copyright
preferring to leave this to the relevant collecting societies.
However, if the model developed by APRA, or any other collecting
society, is not
successful in providing an accessible forum for copyright users to have their
grievances dealt with, it may
be necessary to consider legislative action to
prescribe a model for collecting societies to adopt.
[Return to contents]
Appendix A – List
of submissions
Submissions in response to the issues paper
Submission number
Date received
Australian Vice-Chancellors' Committee
Arts Law Centre of Queensland Incorporated
ScreenSound Australia
Australasian Performing Right Association Limited
MCEETYA Taskforce on Copyright
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
Federation of Australian Radio Broadcasters Limited
Federation of Australian Commercial Television Stations
Law Council of Australia
Screenrights
Australian Subscription Television and Radio Association
Australian Digital Alliance
Arts Law Centre of Australia
Australian Libraries Copyright Committee
Australian Copyright Council
Attorney-General for Western Australia
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (No. 2)
Submissions in response to the draft report
Submission number
Date received
Phonographic Performance Company of Australia
Confidential
Commonwealth Department of Transport and
Regional Services
MCEETYA Taskforce on Copyright (No. 2)
Federation of Australian Commercial Television
Stations (No. 2)
Council of Australian State Libraries
Phonographic Performance Company of Australia (No. 2)
Screenrights (No. 2)
Attorney-General for Western Australia (No. 2)
Vi$copy (No. 2)
Commonwealth Department of Communications,
Information Technology and the Arts
Australian Vice-Chancellors' Committee (No. 2)
Australasian Performing Right Association /
Australasian Mechanical Copyright Owners' Society
(Joint submission)
Australian Copyright Council (No. 2)
[Return to contents]
Appendix B –
Interests represented
Arts Law Centre of Australia
Arts Law Centre of Queensland
Australasian Performing Right Association Limited
Australian Copyright Council
Australian Digital Alliance
Australian Hotels Association
Australian Record Industry Association
Australian Subscription Television and Radio Association
Australian Vice-Chancellors' Committee
Federation of Australian Commercial Television Stations
Federation of Australian Radio Broadcasters Limited
MCEETYA Taskforce on Copyright
Phonographic Performance Company of Australia
Screenrights
ScreenSound Australia
Visual Arts Copyright Collecting Agency
[Return to contents]
Appendix C –
Applications for determination of equitable
remuneration
C.01 Applications may be made to the Tribunal for an order determining the
amount of equitable remuneration payable in respect
of selected statutory
licences. The licences in respect of which such an application may be made are
outlined below.
Reproduction of a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic
work or adaptation for the purpose of broadcasting – s. 149
C.02 Sections 47(1) and 70(1) of the Act provide that where it would not be
an infringement in the copyright of a literary, dramatic,
musical or artistic
work or adaptation to broadcast the work, it is not an infringement to make an
ephemeral recording or film
of the work or adaptation for the purposes of
broadcasting the work. Where the broadcast is made by a person other than the
maker of the reproduction, ss. 47(3) and 70(3) provide that the maker must pay
the copyright owner equitable remuneration for
the making of the recording or
C.03 A licence of this type might be exercised by, for example, a television
network seeking to broadcast a recording made by another
broadcaster. In this
situation, the maker of the recording or film will be required to pay the
for the making of the reproduction. In
the absence of agreement between the copyright owner and the maker of the
or film, an application may be made to the Tribunal pursuant to ss.
47(3) or 70(3) for the determination of the remuneration to
be paid. Section 149
provides that, where such an application has been made, the Tribunal shall make
an order determining the
amount of equitable remuneration to be paid.
Broadcast of a work or of an adaptation of a work by the
holder of a print disability radio licence – s. 149A
C.04 The holder of a print disability radio licence may, without infringing
adaptation thereof. In these
circumstances,
s. 47A(8) provides that the licence holder is required to pay
the copyright owner equitable remuneration for the making of the
sound broadcast
where the copyright owner has requested such payment. The section further
provides that, in the absence of
agreement on the amount to be paid, an
application may be made to the Tribunal for a determination of the amount
payable. Under
s. 149A, the Tribunal shall then make an order determining the
amount payable by way of equitable remuneration to the owner of
the copyright in
respect of the broadcast.
C.05 In its September 1998 report,
Simplification of the
Exceptions to the Exclusive Rights of Copyright Owners
recommended that the statutory licence granted by s. 47A be framed so as to
apply in respect of sound broadcasts
and other sound transmissions and the
making available to the public of programs and materials only if the purpose of
the service
or program is to communicate with people who, by reason of old age,
disability or literacy problems, are unable to handle books
or newspapers or to
read or comprehend written material.
The recommendation is
intended to address the removal of the distinction between print-handicapped
radio licensees and other
broadcasters effected by the
Broadcasting Act 1992
(Cth). The recommendation, if implemented, will not however impact on the
so far as the provision
refers back to s. 47 itself, rather than referring to the particular terms.
Moreover, the matters dealt
with by the Tribunal under s. 149A will not change
because the licence remains available in respect of the same class of persons
and on the same terms.
Reproduction of a sound recording for the purpose of
broadcasting – s. 150
C.06 Section 107(1) of the Act provides that where it would not be an
infringement in the copyright of a sound recording to broadcast
the work, it is
not an infringement to make a copy of the sound recording for the purposes of
broadcasting the recording. Where
the broadcast is made by a person other than
the maker of the copy, s. 107(3) provides that the maker of the copy must pay
the owner of copyright in the sound recording equitable remuneration for the
making of the copy. In the absence of agreement between
the copyright owner and
the maker of the copy, an application may be made to the Tribunal pursuant to s.
107(3) for the determination
of the remuneration to be paid. Section 150
provides that, where such an application has been made, the Tribunal shall make
an order determining the amount of equitable remuneration to be paid.
Causing a published sound recording to be heard in public – s.
C.07 Section 108(1) of the Act provides that the copyright in a published
sound recording is not infringed by causing the recording
to be heard in public
provided equitable remuneration is paid to the copyright owner. In Australia,
the relevant collecting
society is the Phonographic Performance Company of
Australia Ltd (PPCA), which controls public performance and broadcast rights
sound recordings. PPCA collects and distributes remuneration in respect of the
public performance and broadcasting of sound
recordings on behalf of the owners
of those rights who have conferred licensing authority on the PPCA.
C.08 A common example of the exercise of this statutory licence might be the
playing of a sound recording of chart music at a nightclub
or the like. In this
situation, the playing of the music will not constitute an infringement of the
recording if equitable remuneration is paid to the
remuneration to copyright owners on whose behalf it acts. Should the PPCA and
the person causing the music to be heard in public
be unable to reach agreement,
either party may apply to the Tribunal under s. 151 for a determination of the
amount payable
for causing the record to be heard in public.
Broadcasting of published sound recordings – s. 152
C.09 Section 109 provides that it is not an infringement of the copyright in
a published sound recording to broadcast it by free-to-air
broadcast provided
the maker of the broadcast gives a written undertaking to the copyright owner to
pay the amount determined
by the Tribunal or, where there is an order of the
Tribunal in force, the maker of the broadcast complies with that order. Under
152, an application may be made to the Tribunal for an order determining, or
making provision for determining, the amount
payable by a broadcaster to the
owners of the copyright in the published sound recordings during a specified
period. Again,
the PPCA is the relevant collecting society to which licensing
authority with respect to a broadcasting right may be conferred
by the copyright
Manufacture of a record of a musical work or of an adaptation
of a musical work – ss. 152A and 152B
C.10 Section 55 of the Act provides that the copyright in a musical work is
not infringed by the making of a record of the work
in certain circumstances.
Sections 152A and 152B of the Act give the Tribunal jurisdiction upon
application to determine the
amount of royalty payable for the recording of the
musical works and the manner of paying the royalty in the absence of agreement
between the manufacturer and the owner of the copyright in the musical work.
C.11 In Australia the Australasian Mechanical Copyright Owners' Society
(AMCOS) operates as a licensing office for rights to reproduce
musical works in
various forms. By agreement, AMCOS acts on behalf of music copyright owners in
some circumstances, and is
thereby able to collect remuneration payable under
the statutory licence.
Copying by educational or other institutions of broadcast
transmissions – s. 153A
C.12 Part VA of the Act establishes a statutory licence for the copying of
transmissions (being sound broadcasts or television
broadcasts, including those
transmitted for a fee, and television transmissions to subscribers to a
diffusion service) by educational
and other institutions. Section 135E provides
that the copyright in a transmission is not infringed by the making of a copy of
the transmission by the administering body of an educational or other listed
institution in certain circumstances, including
the giving of an undertaking to
pay equitable remuneration to the relevant collecting society.
C.13 Under s. 135G(2), that undertaking must specify whether
remuneration is to be assessed on the basis of a records system or
system. Where a records notice or sampling notice has been given and is in
force, the equitable remuneration payable
to the collecting society is
determined by agreement between the administering body and the collecting
society. In the absence
of agreement, an application may be made to the Tribunal
under s. 153A for the determination of the amount of equitable remuneration
payable to the collecting society by the administering body for the making of a
copy of a broadcast.
C.14 Screenrights collects royalties on behalf of copyright owners in respect
of the copying by educational institutions of radio
and television broadcasts
for teaching purposes. The society enters into agreements with educational
institutions for the rate
of payment to be made. Screenrights was declared by
the Attorney-General to be the body responsible for the administration of
all claims for off-air educational copying are
to be made through Screenrights.
Copying of works by educational or other institutions – s.
C.15 Divisions 2, 3 and 4 of Part VB of the Act variously provide that the
not infringed by the making
of a copy of the work by an educational institution, an institution assisting a
person with a print
disability, or an institution assisting persons with an
intellectual disability in specified circumstances. In some instances,
licence to copy is dependent upon the giving of a remuneration notice by which
the administering body of the institution
undertakes to pay equitable
remuneration to the relevant collecting society. Under s. 135ZU(2), that
undertaking must specify
whether remuneration is to be assessed on the basis of
a records system or a sampling system. Where a records notice or sampling
has been given and is in force, the equitable remuneration payable to the
collecting society is determined by agreement
between the administering body and
the collecting society. In the absence of agreement, an application may be made
to the Tribunal
under s. 153C for the determination of the amount of equitable
remuneration payable to the collecting society by the administering
body for the
making of copies under the statutory licence.
Applications for other orders
C.16 Applications may also be made to the Tribunal for the following matters:
Apportionment of royalty in respect of a record – s.
C.17 Section 59(3)(b) provides that, where a record is made of a song and the
the lyrics are owned by
different persons, the royalty that would have been payable in respect of the
musical work is to be
apportioned between the copyright owners. The relevant
collecting society for the reproduction right in the musical work is AMCOS
it has been given authority by the copyright owners. In the absence of
agreement, an application may be made under
s. 153 for an order apportioning
the amount between the parties in an equitable manner.
Determination of a sampling system for copies of
transmissions by educational and other institutions – s. 153B
C.18 Where a sampling notice referred to in paragraph C.13 is given, s.
135J(3) provides that the extent of copying of transmissions
shall be assessed
by use of a sampling system determined by agreement between the administering
body and the collecting society.
In the absence of agreement, an application may
be made to the Tribunal for the determination of the system to be used. The
Tribunal may then, under s. 153B, make an order determining the sampling system.
Determination of a sampling system for copies of works by
educational and other institutions – s. 153D
C.19 Where a sampling notice referred to in paragraph C.15 has been given, s.
135ZW(3) provides that the number of licensed copies
made shall be assessed by
use of a sampling system determined by agreement between the administering body
and the collecting
society. In the absence of agreement, an application may be
made to the Tribunal for the determination of the system to be used.
Tribunal may then, under s. 153D, make an order determining the sampling system
to be used.
Fixing of terms for the doing of acts comprised in copyright
for the services of the Crown – s. 153E
C.20 Section 183(1) provides that the copyright in a literary, dramatic,
musical or artistic work or a published edition of such
a work, or in a sound
recording, cinematograph film, television broadcast or sound broadcast is not
infringed by the doing
of acts comprised in the copyright where the acts are
done for the services of the Commonwealth or a State or Territory. Pursuant
s. 183(5), such acts are done on such terms as agreed between the Commonwealth
or State or Territory and the owner of the
agreement, the terms for the doing of the acts are to be fixed by the Tribunal,
which shall, under
s. 153E(2), make an order fixing the terms for the doing of
Declaration that a company is a collecting society – s.
C.21 Section 153F(1) provides that a company limited by guarantee may apply
to the Tribunal for a declaration that it be a collecting
society for the
purposes of Division 2 of Part VII Use of copyright material for the Crown. Upon
the making of an application,
the Tribunal has jurisdiction under s. 153F(4)
either to declare the applicant to be a collecting society, or to reject the
application. Copyright Agency Limited (CAL) is the copyright collecting society
declared by the Copyright Tribunal to administer
the statutory licence for the
copying of works and published editions of works by Commonwealth, State and
Territory government
departments and agencies. Remuneration payable in respect
of such copying by the Crown is therefore payable to CAL.
Revocation of a declaration that a company is a collecting society – s.
C.22 Pursuant to s. 153G, the collecting society, member of the collecting
society or a government may apply to the Tribunal for
the revocation of a
declaration that a company is a collecting society. The Tribunal must then,
under s. 153G(4), revoke the
declaration or dismiss the application.
Determination of method for working out payment for government copies – s.
C.23 Section 183A has the effect of providing that, where a company is the
relevant collecting society in relation to copies of
subject matter made for the
Crown pursuant to the statutory licence conferred by s. 183(1), the government
must pay the relevant
collecting society equitable remuneration using a method
arrived at by agreement or determined by the Tribunal under s. 153K.
practice, this means that CAL, having been declared as the collecting society
for government copying of works and published
editions of works, is to be paid
for the doing of acts comprised in those copyrights by a government department
Review of declaration made by administering body stating function of
educational institution – s. 153L
C.24 Section 10(1) of the Act provides for the definition of 'educational
institution' for the purposes of the Act. Paragraphs
(g), (h) and (i) provide
that institutions in respect of which a notice containing specified declarations
with respect to the
functions of that institution has been published fall within
the definition of 'educational institution'. The body administering
institution may cause such notice to be published in the
Commonwealth Government
under s. 10A(4).
C.25 Under s. 153L, an application may be made to the Tribunal for review of
a declaration included in a notice published under
s. 10A(4) where the notice
was published for the purposes of paragraph (g), (h) or (i) of the definition of
'educational institution'.
C.26 In Part 1 of its report on
Simplification of the
CLRC recommended the removal of the definition of 'educational institution',
thereby transferring the onus of establishing
credentials onto those
institutions seeking to use the applicable exceptions and remove the complexity
of the existing definitions.
Should this recommendation be adopted by the
Government, it will no longer be necessary for the Tribunal to review such
declarations,
and a copyright owner would be able to challenge in the courts the
actions of a body claiming the right to the benefit of the
educational copying
provisions.
Referral of licence schemes to the Tribunal and refusal to grant a licence
or unreasonable terms –
a licensor of a proposed licence scheme may refer it to the
Tribunal. Under
either the licensor of an operative scheme or a person
requiring a class licence (or an organisation representing such persons)
refer a dispute over the scheme to the Tribunal. Section 157 of the Act provides
the Tribunal with jurisdiction in respect
of a refusal to grant a licence or a
challenge to the conditions of a licence.
C.28 The licences and licence schemes to which Part VI, and hence ss. 154,
155 and 157, apply are defined in s. 136. Broadly speaking,
the sections apply
in relation to licences and licence schemes providing for the performance or
broadcast of literary, dramatic
and musical works or adaptations thereof, and
sound recordings thereof. The effect of these sections is to extend the
of the Tribunal beyond the realm of statutory licences, giving it
application may be made to the Tribunal under s. 157 in the following
circumstances:
Where a licence scheme applies, an application may be made to the Tribunal
under s. 157(1) where the licensor operating a licensing
scheme has refused or
failed to grant or procure a grant of a licence to an applicant.
An application may also be made to the Tribunal where a licence scheme
applies but the grant of the licence in accordance with
the scheme is claimed to
be unreasonable in the circumstances of the case under s. 157(2).
Where a person or organisation requires a licence in a case to which a
licence scheme does not apply and the licensor has refused
or failed to grant a
licence, or the licensor proposes the grant of a licence subject to unreasonable
charges or conditions,
an application may be made to the Tribunal under s.
157(3) or (4).
C.29 Where an application is made under s. 154 or 155, the Tribunal shall
make an order either confirming or varying the scheme
referred. Upon the making
of an application under s. 157, the Tribunal shall make an order specifying the
charges and conditions
that are applicable or reasonable in the circumstances of
the particular case.
[Return to contents]
Appendix D – Re Applications by Australasian Performing Right Association
D.01 The Competition Tribunal's decision in this matter is
significant, as it discussed the role of the Copyright Tribunal in relation
controlling the exertion of monopoly power by a collecting society, in this
instance, APRA. In the course of its deliberations,
the Competition Tribunal
made various observations regarding the role and power of the Copyright
Tribunal, which are discussed
D.02 After an unsuccessful application for authorisation to the ACCC, APRA
implemented certain changes to its system of collective
administration. It then
lodged fresh applications for authorisation with the ACCC, regarding its:
input arrangements (under which public performance, broadcasting and
transmission rights (the performing rights) in musical works
are assigned to
output arrangements (under which APRA licenses users of musical works);
distribution arrangements (under which APRA distributes the fees collected
to its members); and
arrangements with overseas collecting societies.
D.03 One relevant change to APRA's Articles concerned art. 17(b), which
modified the obligations of members to grant APRA an exclusive
assignment of the
performing rights. The amended art. 17(b) would allow a member to withhold, or
to obtain a reassignment of,
entire categories of works from APRA's repertoire,
although it still would not be possible for a member to withhold or obtain
reassignment of a single work under these arrangements.
D.04 FACTS put submissions to the ACCC to the effect that APRA
had a monopoly on the supply of performing rights in music. According
this gave rise to anti-competitive detriment because APRA's Articles and
distribution rules had the effect of preventing
a member from licensing works
directly to a user, even if the works were commissioned by that user.
D.05 The ACCC made a determination in January 1998 granting authorisation in
respect of APRA's overseas arrangements, but otherwise
refused authorisation. It
proposed three modifications to the APRA system which would be sufficient to
enable authorisation:
the introduction of an opt-out system which would permit members to opt out
of the APRA system on a work-by-work basis and by categories
the introduction of a dispute resolution procedure for small disputes to
avoid the requirement to go to the Copyright Tribunal;
the modification of the 50 per cent rule so that it did not apply where a
member assigned a work to a third party (the 50 per cent
rule is a distribution
rule where APRA allocates no less than 50 per cent of performing rights
royalties to the writer).
D.06 APRA appealed to the Australian Competition Tribunal against the ACCC's
decision. FACTS and the ACCC intervened in the proceedings,
opposing APRA's
application for authorisation.
The Australian Competition Tribunal's decision
D.07 The Competition Tribunal found that APRA's system of collective
administration was a natural monopoly and that it was imperative
that there be
appropriate regulation of its power.
D.08 In so far as aspects of APRA's system were essential for it to function
effectively, the Competition Tribunal considered that
authorisation should be
granted. Notwithstanding the fact that there were anti-competitive detriments,
the public benefits
arising from APRA's operation outweighed those detriments.
On the other hand, in so far as aspects of APRA's operation that were
as anti-competitive could be modified to remove or lessen the potential for
detriment without impairing essential
aspects of APRA's operation, the
Competition Tribunal considered that authorisation should be granted on terms
which brought
D.09 Accordingly, the Competition Tribunal held that:
the output and distribution arrangements should be authorised;
it would not be impossible for the parties or the Copyright Tribunal to
arrive at a method or formula for determining licence fees,
and to arrive at a
result which was not influenced by an inappropriate exercise of monopoly power
by either side;
the requirement for an exclusive assignment of works was essential to the
operation of a collecting society, and great caution
is called for if the rule
is to be modified at all;
the requirement for an opt-out system on a work-by-work basis, which
permitted a member to either withhold assignment of a work,
or to obtain a
reassignment of a work already in APRA's repertoire, should not be required as a
condition of authorisation.
However, the introduction of a non-exclusive
license-back scheme, under which a member could obtain a non-exclusive licence
from APRA for a particular work, containing the features suggested by the ACCC,
could be introduced without damaging essential
features of the APRA system. This
should be restricted at this stage to Australian performances; and
a simplified dispute resolution scheme should be introduced.
D.10 The Competition Tribunal held that authorisation should be withheld
until these two aspects of APRA's system (that is, modifications
to the input
arrangements to allow for a non-exclusive license-back scheme and the
introduction of a dispute resolution mechanism)
were remedied.
(i) Competition Regulator
D.11 The Tribunal noted that the parties' submissions revealed divergent
views about whether the jurisdiction of the Copyright
Tribunal was broad enough
to control anti-competitive conduct. In particular, it noted the ACCC's view
that the Copyright Tribunal
did not have the power and was not such an
accessible resource as to enable it to regulate the activities of collecting
such as APRA so as to remove any ability they had to abuse their
monopoly position. It also noted that the ACCC had before it
advice from the
Office of General Counsel suggesting that, in relation to
, the Copyright Tribunal could have regard to competition issues in
considering what was reasonable, however it was not bound to
consider those
issues as paramount in deciding what orders to make.
D.12 Notwithstanding these criticisms, the Competition Tribunal thought that
it was for the Copyright Tribunal and ultimately for
the Federal Court or High
Court to determine the limits on the powers of the Copyright Tribunal to take
into account and reflect
competition issues in its decisions. Accordingly, while
it noted that the power
of the Copyright Tribunal might be restricted to
some extent, it saw this as having limited significance.
D.13 The Competition Tribunal held that, subject to complaints about its
accessibility, the Copyright Tribunal was the appropriate
body to deal with
complaints about the charges demanded by collecting societies such as APRA. The
Competition Tribunal did
acknowledge, however, that as the jurisdiction of the
output arrangements. It was therefore for the Competition Tribunal to look at
the input arrangements and so to 'determine the
structure' under which the
output arrangements falling under the Copyright Tribunal's jurisdiction would be
D.14 The Competition Tribunal noted that there had been criticism in relation
to the expense and the complexity of the procedures
of the Copyright Tribunal,
but considered this inevitable in any tribunal hearing where the amount at stake
is high, the issues
are complex and there is a lot of technical and expert
evidence. The Competition Tribunal did, however, recognise that there was
place for a simple, quick procedure, particularly in relation to small users.
D.15 Both the ACCC and APRA put forward alternative dispute resolution
models. The ACCC advocated the establishment of an independent
appeal mechanism
to handle complaints from users along the lines of that in the standard PPCA
licence agreement. Although APRA
contended that the primary means of resolving
disputes between it and licensees was the Copyright Tribunal, it did acknowledge
that there was room for a more informal ADR process. It proposed a model whereby
its licence agreements would contain provisions
allowing for mediation. The
Competition Tribunal rejected both proposals and instead outlined desirable
features for a new
mechanism. These are discussed in paragraph 21.07.
[Return to contents]
Appendix E – Alternative
dispute resolution
E.01 Paragraph 1(d) of the Committee's terms of reference
requires it to consider the need and desirability for an independent
alternative
dispute resolution (ADR) system to complement the Tribunal's jurisdiction and
E.02 It is important to understand what is meant by ADR. The word
'alternative' suggests that ADR provides something other than
the traditional
arbitral form of resolving disputes. This alternative is said to provide a
cheaper, quicker and more accessible
way of resolving disputes compared with the
court system. In 1995 the National Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisory
(NADRAC) was formed to advise the Attorney-General on a range of issues
associated with ADR. The first task of NADRAC was to produce
Alternative Dispute Resolution Definitions
. The aim of the paper was to promote
consistency of understanding of terminology in ADR. NADRAC identified three
broad types
of ADR process: facilitative, advisory and determinative. A brief
explanation of these processes is given below. A more detailed
discussion can be
obtained from the NADRAC paper, available at the NADRAC website:
http://www.nadrac.gov.au
Facilitative processes
E.03 Mediation is defined as 'a process in which the parties to a dispute,
with the assistance of a neutral third party (the mediator),
identify the
disputed issues, develop options, consider alternatives and endeavour to reach
an agreement. The mediator has
no advisory or determinative role in regard to
the content of the dispute or the outcome of its resolution, but may advise on
or determine the process of mediation whereby resolution is attempted'.
Conciliation
E.04 Conciliation is defined as 'a process in which the parties to a dispute,
with the assistance of a neutral third party (the
conciliator), identify the
disputed issues, develop options, consider alternatives and endeavour to reach
agreement. The conciliator
may have an advisory role on the content of the
dispute or the outcome of its resolution, but not a determinative role. The
conciliator may advise on or determine the process of conciliation whereby
resolution is attempted, and may make suggestions
for terms of settlement, give
expert advice on likely settlement terms, and may actively encourage the parties
to reach an
agreement'.
Facilitation
E.05 Facilitation is defined as 'a process in which the parties, with the
assistance of a neutral third party (the facilitator),
identify problems to be
solved, tasks to be accomplished or disputed issues to be resolved. Facilitation
may conclude there,
or it may continue to assist the parties to develop options,
consider alternatives and endeavour to reach agreement. The facilitator
advisory or determinative role on the content of the matters discussed or the
outcome of the process, but may advise
on or determine the process of
facilitation'.
Advisory processes
Expert appraisal
E.06 Expert appraisal is 'a process in which a third party, chosen on the
basis of his or her expert knowledge of the subject matter
of the dispute (the
expert appraiser) investigates the dispute and provides advice as to the facts
of the dispute and advice
regarding possible, probable and desirable outcomes
and the means whereby these may be achieved'.
Determinative processes internally enforceable
Adjudication
E.07 Adjudication is 'a process in which the parties present arguments and
evidence to a neutral third party (the adjudicator)
who makes a determination
which is enforceable by the authority of the adjudicator'. In general,
adjudication also implies
that judgment will be rendered according to objective
standards, rules or laws. A common form of internally enforceable adjudication
is determination by authorities empowered to enforce decisions by law within the
traditional judicial system, for example,
courts and tribunals.
Determinative processes externally enforceable
Expert determination
E.08 Expert determination is 'a process in which parties to a dispute present
arguments and evidence to a neutral third party chosen
on the basis of their
specialist qualification or experience in the subject matter of the dispute (the
expert) who makes a
determination'.
Arbitration
E.09 Arbitration is 'a process in which the parties to a dispute present
arguments and evidence to a neutral third party (the arbitrator)
who makes a
determination'. While arbitration was originally less structured and complex
than litigation, the tendency has
been for arbitration to become more like
private judging. Most commonly, the parties select the arbitrator and are bound
that person's decision either by statute or by prior agreement.
[Return to contents]
Appendix F - Table of decisions of the Copyright Tribunal
University of Adelaide & Ors
Date of Decision:
[1999] A CopyT 1/42
University of Newcastle & Ors
v Audio-Visual Copyright Society Limited
Date of Decision:
s. 135J; r. 23B Copyright Tribunal
(Procedure) Regulations 1969
[1999] A CopyT 2/43
University of Adelaide & Ors
Date of Decision:
[1999] A CopyT 3/45
Australasian Performing Right
Association v Federation of Australian Radio Broadcasters
Burchett P, Professor Pearce & Ms
Date of Decision:
ss. 136 and 154
[1999] A CopyT 4
Reference by: Copyright Agency
Limited; Respondents: University of Adelaide & Ors
Date of Decision:
[1998] A CopyT 1
Allanson v State of Queensland
Date of Decision:
[1998] A CopyT 2
Reference by: Copyright Agency
Limited; Respondents: University of Adelaide & Ors
Date of Decision:
[1998] A CopyT 3
Fair Fitness Music
Association v Australasian Performing Right Association
Burchett P, Professors Ricketson &
Date of Decision:
[1998] A CopyT 4
Application by Copyright Agency
Limited under
Date of Decision:
File No. CT3 of 1998
Audio-Visual Copyright Society Ltd v New South Wales Department of
School Education & Ors
Date of Decision:
[1997] A CopyT 1/37
Marine Engineering and
Generator Services Pty Ltd v The State of Queensland (Queensland Emergency
Date of Decision:
[1997] A CopyT 2
Application by: Copyright Agency Ltd under section 153C of the
; The University of Adelaide & Ors
Date of Decision:
[1997] A CopyT 3/38
Marine Engineering and Generator Services Pty Ltd v The State
of Queensland (Queensland Emergency Services)
Date of Decision:
[1997] A CopyT 4
Seven Dimensions Pty Ltd v State of New South Wales
Date of Decision:
Australasian Performing Right
Association Limited v Federation of Australian Commercial Television
Stations & Anor
Sheppard P, Professor S. Ricketson, Mr L.J.
Date of Decision:
[1995] A CopyT 2
Australasian Performing Right Association Limited v Fitness
Industry Confederation & Others
Sheppard P, Ms M. Barron, Dr J.
Date of Decision:
[1995] A CopyT 3
Reference by Australasian
Performing Right Association Limited under
; Application by Federation of Australian Commercial Television
Stations under
; Applications by Tasmanian
Television Limited and others under
Sheppard P, Professor S. Ricketson, Mr
L.J. Curtis
Date of Decision:
Application by BMG Arista Ariola Limited & Ors; Australian Tape
Manufacturers' Association Limited & Ors
Date of Decision:
[1993] A CopyT 2
Reference brought by Australasian Performing Right Association
Limited under
section 154
Sheppard P, Mr A. Horton, Professor S. Ricketson
Date of Decision:
[1992] A CopyT 2/ 25 IPR 257
Re Applications by MCM Networking Pty Ltd and Others
Sheppard P, Mr A. Horton, Professor S. Ricketson
Date of Decision:
s. 157(3)(b)
Wales & Ors
Date of Decision:
ss. 53B and 149A
[1985] A CopyT 1/4
Reference by Australasian Performing Right Association Ltd; Re
Australian Broadcasting Corporation
Sheppard J, Mr A. Horton
Date of Decision:
WEA Records Pty Ltd and Others v Stereo FM Pty Ltd
Lockhart J, Mr R. Purvis, Mr D. Malcolm
Date of Decision:
[1983] A CopyT 1/1
Applications under
by WEA Records Pty Ltd &
Date of Decision:
Not recorded
[1982] A CopyT 1
Reference under
by the Australasian Performing Right
Association Limited; Re Australian Broadcasting Commission
Date of Decision:
[1982] A CopyT 2
Re WEA Records Pty Ltd & Ors
Lockhart J, Mr R. Purvis, Mr D. Malcolm
Date of Decision:
Report of the Inquiry by the Copyright Tribunal into the Royalty
Payable in Respect of Records Generally 24 December 1979
St John J, Mr R. Purvis, Mr D. Malcolm
Date of Decision:
[Return to contents]
Hon. Mr Justice Owen, 1933, Report of the Royal
Commission on Performing Rights, Canberra.
Ibid., p. 45.
Ibid., p. 44.
Spicer Committee, para. 357.
Spicer Committee, para. 358.
Hansard, House of Representatives, 2 September 1999, p. 9749.
S. Ricketson, 1987, The
Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works
: 1886­1986, Centre for Commercial Law
Studies/Kluwer, London, p. 548.
Simplification of the
Exceptions to the Exclusive Rights of Copyright Owners
, Attorney-General's Department, Canberra, p. 3.
World Intellectual Property Organisation, 1997, Implications of
the TRIPs Agreement on the Treaties Administered by WIPO, Geneva.
See the agreed statement concerning art. 16 of the WPPT.
World Intellectual Property Organisation, 1992, Copyright,
Geneva, p. 81.
World Intellectual Property Organisation, 1990, Collective
Administration of Copyright and Neighboring Rights, Geneva, p. 78.
M. Freegard and J. Black, 1997, The Decisions of the UK
Performing Right and Copyright Tribunal, London, p. 45, fn. 2.
Simpson Report, para. 5.1.2.
[1999] ACompT 3
(1999) 45 IPR 53.
Simpson Report, p. 32
Simpson Report, p. 33
[1999] HCA 17
(1998) 40 IPR 225.
AVCC submission, p. 1.
MCEETYA submission, para. 3.3.
[1999] ACopyT 4.
[1999] ACompT 3
(1999) 45 IPR 53.
Protection, Attorney-General's Department, Canberra, para. 14.19.
Simplification of the
Categorisation of Subject Matter and Exclusive Rights, and Other Issues
, Attorney-General's Department, Canberra.
Simpson Report, Chapter 32.
House of Representative Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs, 1998, Don't Stop The Music! A Report of the Inquiry
Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee, 1999,
Issues Paper, Canberra.
[1995] HCA 10
(1995) 183 CLR 245.
[1998] FCA 51
(1998) 79 FCR 469.
[1999] HCA 28
(1999) 163 ALR 576.
Paragraph 2(a) instructs the Committee to have regard to the
review of the
under the Commonwealth's Legislation Review Program
now being undertaken by the Intellectual Property and Competition Review
Committee. Paragraph 2(d) instructs the Committee to have regard to the
principle that legislation that restricts competition
should be retained or new
legislation made only if the benefits to the community as a whole outweigh the
costs; and if the
objectives of the legislation can be achieved only by
restricting competition.
Re Applications by Australasian Performing Right Association
[1999] ACompT 3
(1999) 45 IPR 53
at 73, para. 62.
Hilmer Report, 1993, p. 327.
Authorisation provides protection from action by the ACCC or
any other party for potential breaches of provisions in
Practices Act
(other than those that prohibit misuse of market power). A party
applying for authorisation under
Trade Practices Act
must satisfy
the ACCC that the conduct would result in a benefit to the public which would
outweigh any detriment to the public
caused by the lessening of competition.
Notification is available in respect of exclusive dealing and differs from
authorisation in that it takes effect upon lodgment
of the details of the
conduct (except in the case of exclusive dealing involving third-line forcing).
Trade Practices Act
provides that the notification remains in
force until the ACCC provides notification that it is satisfied that the conduct
constitutes a substantial lessening of competition and that it does not result
in any public benefit which outweighs the public
It should be noted, however, that the Competition Tribunal does
not have jurisdiction over conduct that amounts to misuse of market
power. This
is because offences under
Trade Practices Act
are not capable of
either authorisation or notification.
Re Applications by Australasian Performing Right Association
[1999] ACompT 3
(1999) 45 IPR 53
at 113, para. 218.
Similar reasons led to the insertion of s. 13A in the Copyright
Act 1912. Section 13A provided for voluntary arbitration in disputes
far as it was aware, no use was made
of that provision.
The nature of the output arrangements of those various
collecting societies was summarised by the Committee at Chapter 4. An historical
background to the formation of AMCOS, APRA, Screenrights (then trading as AVCS),
CAL and PPCA was set out at Chapter 3 of the
Simpson Report.
Simpson Report, at 33.3.
, Explanatory
Memorandum, para. 235.
AVCC submission (No. 2).
CAL submission, para. 38.
CAL submission (No. 2), para. 6.2.
Protection and Access, September 1999 (written by the Australian Copyright
Council for the Centre for Copyright Studies Ltd), p. 12.
Colin Marks, 'The Copyright Tribunal in Australia', Journal of
the Copyright Society of the USA (1987) 34, p. 226.
Butterworths, 1999, Intellectual Property in New Zealand:
ACC submission, para. 7.
Freegard and Black, 1997, p. 48, para. 4.9, fn. 2.
Ibid., p. 35, para. 3.13.
National Competition Council Review of Sections 51(2) and 51(3)
of the Trade Practices Act, 1999, Melbourne, pp. 157­158.
(1987) 75 ALR 581.
(1991) 22 IPR 215.
Ricketson, 1987, Berne Convention, p. 548.
World Intellectual Property Organisation, Geneva, pp.
See further the Committee's discussion of the relevant
provisions of the Trade Practices Act in Chapter 10.
Simpson Report, para. 2.2.
World Intellectual Property Organisation, Geneva, p. 6, para.
FACTS submission, para. 39.
(1986) 5 IPR 449.
Ibid. at 458.
This is in accordance with the principle of
statutory interpretation that general terms give way to more specific terms.
[1999] unreported, NSWSC 947 (17 September 1999).
[1999] ACompT 3
(1999) 45 IPR 53
CAL submission, para. 60.
(1997) 37 IPR 495.
Ibid. at 521.
(1985) 4 IPR 5
In WEA Records Pty Ltd and Others v Stereo FM Pty Ltd
at 38, the Tribunal held that the fact that arrangements were entered into
in 1970 between record companies and AM broadcasters
and were still afoot was a
relevant matter. The fact that the record companies were seeking to
substantially alter those arrangements
was also a relevant matter.
In Audio-Visual Copyright Society Ltd v New South Wales Department of School
Education & Ors
(1997) 37 IPR 495
at 506, the Tribunal held that a
previously agreed rate between the parties was a matter to take into account.
However, it
was noted that neither party should be indefinitely bound by the
existing terms and rate.
In Audio-Visual Copyright Society Ltd v New South Wales
Department of School Education & Ors
(1997) 37 IPR 495
at 508, the Tribunal
held that the preceding negotiations between the parties could provide guidance
as to the appropriate
range within which the Tribunal could make its
determination. However, in that instance Sheppard P determined that the previous
negotiations were not capable of providing a definite guide to the respective
positions of each of the parties to the application.
In Report of the Inquiry by the Copyright Tribunal into the
Royalty Payable in Respect of Records Generally (1979) at 48­50,
Tribunal looked at similar statutory licence schemes in the US, UK and France
and the royalty rates determined in those
countries. It indicated that while
overseas comparisons were extremely helpful by providing an international
perspective, it
was not possible to draw any specific conclusions from the
international comparisons.
In WEA Records Pty Ltd and Others v Stereo FM Pty Ltd
(1983) 1 IPR 6
the Copyright Tribunal indicated that the payments made by broadcasters in other
countries were of some assistance to
the Tribunal. In Copyright Agency Limited v
University of Adelaide & Ors
[1999] ACopyT 1
(1999) 42 IPR 529
at 539, the
Tribunal was provided with evidence regarding rates for copying charged under
compulsory licensing schemes applicable
to overseas universities. The Tribunal
noted that the differences in the schemes in countries such as Great Britain and
reduced the value of such comparisons.
In WEA Records Pty Ltd and Others v Stereo FM Pty Ltd
at 39­40, when making a determination of the amount payable by
broadcasters to the PPCA, the Tribunal held that it was relevant
to consider the
royalty paid by broadcasters to APRA.
In Audio-Visual Copyright Society Ltd v New South Wales
Department of School Education & Ors
(1997) 37 IPR 495
at 518, the Tribunal
noted that, as it was dealing with a compulsory licence, the parties had no
choice but to deal and the
Tribunal had no choice but to fix equitable
remuneration. But equitable remuneration must be fixed 'not in a vacuum but in
the setting and context of all the surrounding circumstances' (at 518). The
Tribunal acknowledged that it was relevant and appropriate
to take into account
realities such as the capacity of the schools to pay.
In Copyright Agency Limited v Department of Education (NSW) & Ors
at 33, the Tribunal explicitly rejected the idea that copyright owners
should subsidise the educational sector by accepting lower
In WEA Records Pty Ltd and Others v Stereo FM Pty Ltd
at 25, it was accepted by all parties that the inquiry to be undertaken by
the Tribunal under
s. 152 was to determine, after considering all relevant
matters, the value to the radio station of the right to broadcast protected
recordings.
In Report of the Inquiry by the Copyright Tribunal into the
Royalty Payable in Respect of Records Generally (1979) at xix, the
stated that while the basic question is 'what rate of royalty would provide
equitable remuneration to the copyright
owner?', it may be relevant to also have
regard to the interest of the public generally and consumers in particular.
In Copyright Agency Limited v Department of Education (NSW)
(1985) 4 IPR 5
at 33, the Tribunal acknowledged that the collecting
costs of the collecting agency could be taken into account, although it was
prepared to place a great deal of weight upon this.
That decision was made when CAL was a new society and it was
unable to provide detailed evidence of collection costs. In Copyright
Limited v University Of Adelaide & Ors
[1999] ACopyT 1
(1999) 42 IPR 529
at 542, the
Tribunal acknowledged that by that stage there was sufficient evidence that
CAL's collection costs had risen to
a significant level (19 per cent of sums
collected) and accordingly it was appropriate to take this cost into account
determining equitable remuneration.
In Copyright Agency Limited v University of Adelaide & Ors
[1999] ACopyT 1
(1999) 42 IPR 529
at 533­534, the Tribunal determined that the nature of the
material being copied was relevant to the amount of equitable remuneration
payable for that copying.
The Copyright Tribunal has made allowance for the type of
institutions undertaking copying and differentiated accordingly when
rate for remuneration. In University of Newcastle v Audio-Visual Copyright
Society Ltd
[1999] ACopyT 2
(1999) 43 IPR 505
at 514, the Tribunal acknowledged the fact that
different rates were set in the licences Screenrights operated with schools and
those they operated with universities under the Part VA statutory licence.
In University of Newcastle v Audio-Visual Copyright Society Ltd
[1999] ACopyT 2
(1999) 43 IPR 505
at 521, the Tribunal held that the equitable remuneration to
be assessed must bear a relationship to the actual copying done,
whether this is
ascertained by reference to a sampling system or a record-keeping system.
The Committee notes that all statutory licences share the same
fundamental purpose to prevent a copyright owner from withholding
permission for
use of their copyright material so that the public interest can be served (eg,
in the case of Parts VA and VB)
or the recognised needs of a particular industry
which depends on that use are met. If the remuneration payable for that use were
unreasonably high, then the purpose of the statutory licence would be
frustrated. Nonetheless, the remuneration must be sufficiently
adequate to
ensure that there is incentive for the creation or production of works or
subject matter that can be copied, broadcast,
performed or recorded under the
statutory licences. This was acknowledged by the Tribunal in University of
Newcastle v Audio-Visual
[1999] ACopyT 2
(1999) 43 IPR 505
at 518­519.
In University of Newcastle v Audio-Visual Copyright Society Ltd
[1999] ACopyT 2
(1999) 43 IPR 505
at 524­525, the Tribunal took note of the fact that it was
common for academics to
make copies of some broadcasts for the purpose of retaining
them for possible future reference. It was not always the case, however,
these copies were put to use and the inability of university administrations to
develop procedures to deal with wasteful
copying was relevant.
This factor represents a recognition of the legitimate
interests of the copyright creator. It is to be noted, however, that the
imposition of a statutory licence in effect replaces the 'real' market for the
work or subject matter. Therefore an assessment
of the effect of the copying on
the market is a somewhat artificial inquiry. Nonetheless, the Tribunal noted, in
of Newcastle v Audio-Visual Copyright Society Ltd
[1999] ACopyT 2
(1999) 43 IPR 505
at 518, that the provision for 'equitable remuneration' reflects the
legislature's intent that copyright owners are fairly
remunerated.
In WEA Records Pty Ltd and Others v Stereo FM Pty Ltd
(1983) 1 IPR 6
53­54, a determination regarding the 'amount payable' in respect of the
statutory licence for the broadcasting of sound
recordings under s. 109, the
Tribunal took into account the risk of a reduction of sales of sound recordings
due to the substitution
of listening to the radio for the purchase of records
and the over-exposure on the radio of some sound recordings. In Report of
Inquiry by the Copyright Tribunal into the Royalty Payable in Respect of Records
Generally (1979) at 55, the Tribunal indicated
that the impact on the market for
records of an increase in the royalty rate was a matter to which the Tribunal
should have
regard when formulating a recommendation for an equitable rate.
In Copyright Agency Limited v University of Adelaide & Ors
[1999] ACopyT 1
(1999) 42 IPR 529
at 546, Burchett P discussed the issue of the relevance of
copying undertaken by or on behalf of external students. However, in
particular case it was held that, as the universities advised that such copying
was undertaken in reliance of the fair
dealing provisions (s. 40(1A) and (3)),
it was therefore not a factor for the Tribunal to consider and any dispute would
to be resolved by the Court.
In Copyright Agency Limited v University of Adelaide & Ors
[1999] ACopyT 1
(1999) 42 IPR 529
at 540, Burchett P considered whether academic salaries may
include a component for the writing of academic articles and the provision
assistance and support to academics to undertake such writing and thus whether
the level of equitable remuneration should
be discounted accordingly. However,
in this instance, Burchett P expressed concerns as to this argument, noting that
works copied from journals were
written by academics employed by universities and, even if they
were so employed, it is not clear if such writing was undertaken
during official
work hours (at 541). Furthermore, Burchett P was not convinced that in all cases
the contribution of the institution
could be considered 'unremunerated' as the
publication of academic articles and writing often promoted the university's
and general goal of facilitating teaching and research.
E.P. Skone James, J.F. Mummery, J.E. Rayner James and K.M.
Garnett, 1991, Copinger and Skone James on Copyright, London, Sweet
Maxwell, p. 502.
(1989) 25 IPR 597.
Ibid. at 605.
(1998) 43 IPR 67.
Ibid. at 73.
FACTS submission, para. 6.2.
[1999] ACompT 3
(1999) 45 IPR 53
[1999] ACompT 3
(1999) 45 IPR 53.
Ibid. at 112.
Ibid. at 113.
Screenrights submission, para. 4.7.
AVCC submission (No. 2), p. 2.
[1999] ACopyT 1
(1999) 42 IPR 529.
Ibid. at 533­534.
Ibid. at 533.
unreported FCA 1818.
The Federal Court decision arose from a matter in relation to
the determination of equitable remuneration under a sampling notice
in Copyright
Agency Limited v University of Adelaide & Ors
[1999] ACopyT 1
(1999) 42 IPR 529.
issue before the Federal Court related specifically to a sampling system under
s. 135ZW, the universities submitted
that 'the sampling system is not intended
to be qualitatively different from the record-keeping system' (at para. 44).
Accordingly,
the Federal Court was required to consider whether the Tribunal was
empowered to determine different
rates for different types of copying in relation to records
notices under s. 135ZV in order to determine if it was also empowered
determine different rates for different classes of works under s. 135ZW.
unreported FCA 1818 at para. 50.
Ibid., para. 51.
Part 2 Simplification Report, pp. 122­125.
Part 2 Simplification Report, para. 7.97.
ACC submission (No. 2), p. 7
Part 2 Simplification Report, para. 7.92.
CASL submission, p. 2.
APRA, CAL and the ACC all supported the idea of
non-contentious directions hearings being conducted by the Secretary of the
Committee Appointed by the Attorney-General of the
Commonwealth to Consider What Alterations are Desirable to the Copyright Law
the Commonwealth, 1959, Canberra, p. 67.
MCEETYA submission, para. 3.1.
AVCC submission, para. 5; MCEETYA submission, para. 3.4; LCA
submission; ASTRA submission; ALCC submission, para. 10.
In consultations with the Committee, Sheppard J, a former
President of the Copyright Tribunal, indicated that, given the nature
decisions made by the Tribunal, there was much to be said for the Tribunal being
constituted by three members.
See AVCC submission, para. 5.
FARB submission.
CAL submission (No. 2), para. 16.1.
In their report An Implementation Evaluation of Differential
Case Management: A Report on the DCM Program in the Common Law Division
Supreme Court of New South Wales, Civil Justice Research Centre, September 1995,
pp. 1­2, Mauriglio and Baker refer
to calls for judicial involvement in case
management as early as 1941.
Australian Law Reform Commission, Review of the
Federal Civil Justice System, Discussion Paper 62, para. 9.14, p. 242.
See Supreme Court of New South Wales, Practice Notes 68 and
See, for example, the recommendations of Lord Woolf in Access
to Justice: Final Report to the Lord Chancellor on the Civil Justice
England and Wales, HMSO, London, 1996, which included:
1. There should be a fundamental transfer in the responsibility for
management of civil litigation from litigants and their legal
advisers to
courts; and
2. The management should be provided by a three-tier system: an increased
small claims jurisdiction, a new fast track for cases
in the lower end of the
scale, and a new multi-track for remaining cases.
See Re Queensland Independent Wholesalers Ltd
(1995) ATPR
See O. 10, r. 1
Federal Court Rules
Australian Law Reform Commission, 1999, Managing Justice: A
Review of the Federal Civil Justice System, Report 89. See, for example,
recommendations 64 and 65 of that report which relate to the use of expert
witnesses. See also recommendation 83, which relates
to case management in
migration matters.
Practice Note 14, 12 February 1999.
O. 32, r. 4A
Federal Court Rules
Under that procedure, a Registrar may make an estimate of the
taxable costs. The parties then have 14 days to file a notice of
objection to
the estimate. If they do not object, the estimate is deemed to be the amount for
which a certificate of taxation
may issue. If a party does object or files a
notice requiring a full taxation, s/he bears the costs of the taxation of all
parties from the date of the notice unless s/he achieves a 15 per cent better
result on the taxation than on the estimate of taxed
It should be noted that it is part of the Commonwealth
Government's policy that these tribunals be merged into a single federal
Administrative Review Tribunal.
Administrative Review Council,
Better Decisions: Review of Commonwealth Merit Review Tribunals
, Report No. 39, recommendation 19.
Ibid., p. 50, para. 3.136.
Australian Law Reform Commission, 1999, Managing
Justice: A Review of the Federal Civil Justice System, Report 89, recommendation
94, p. 521.
Federal Court Rules
ALRC, Review of the Federal Civil Justice System, Discussion
Paper, para. 13.18.
O. 10 r. 1(2), O. 32 r. 4A
Federal Court Rules
Federal Court Rules
This is consistent with Proposal 13.1 made by the ALRC that
federal courts and tribunals should routinely encourage communication
relevant experts as a standard procedure and should order or facilitate
conferences and other pre-hearing contact between
such experts wherever
appropriate.
ALRC, Review of the Federal Civil Justice System, Discussion
Paper, para. 13.136.
O. 34, r. 2
Federal Court Rules
Federal Court Rules
, commencement date 3 December 1999.
The Committee notes that the ALRC has recommended that
parties, federal courts and tribunals should consider whether experts agreed
between them should be appointed to deal with a particular issue (Proposal 13.7)
and the increased use of expert assistants
should be encouraged in particular
categories of case
(Proposal 13.11).
Lockhart J in Memorandum to Registrar of the Federal Court, 21
April 1998, cited in ALRC, Review of the Federal Civil Justice
Discussion Paper, para. 13.169.
Re AGL Cooper Basin Natural Gas Supply Arrangements (1997)
ATPR 41-393.
O. 34A(e)­(i)
Federal Court Rules
ALRC, Review of the Federal Civil Justice System, Discussion
Paper, proposal 13.13.
Screenrights raised concerns in this regard at the September
forum. APRA also opposed the 'hot tub' approach to expert evidence
The Federal Court introduced O. 34A in December 1998 to deal
with the use of expert evidence.
Clause 11 of PPCA's standard licence agreement provides as
'(i) The Performer shall have a right to refer to a Board of Review ("the
Board") any of the terms and conditions embodied in this
Licence. Such right
must be exercised by the Performer giving to PPCA 1 (one) month's notice in
(ii) (a) The Board shall be constituted by three members who
shall be persons appointed by the following persons, associations,
corporations or their equivalents from time to time upon notification in writing
by the Performer of its desire to have
a licence fee reviewed:
(bb) the Australian Institute of Arbitrators;
(cc) the Trade Association most closely associated with the business in which
the Performer operates. The Board of Review shall
be chaired by the
representative appointed by the Australian Institute of Arbitrators.
(b) No legal representatives shall be allowed to appear before the Board.
(c) The hearing by the Board shall take place at such place as the appointee
of the Institute of Arbitrators deems most convenient
to all parties.
(d) The costs of the proceedings before the Board including but not limited
to any professional costs incurred by any Board Member,
stenographer's fees, and
fees for hiring of a hearing room shall be shared equally between the Performer
(e) The Board shall not make any award of costs.
(f) The proceedings before the Board shall be conducted in an informal manner
and without any strict adherence to the rules of
(g) Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Board may make application to
the Copyright Tribunal pursuant to Part VI of the
(h) Nothing contained in this clause shall in any way limit or hinder or
otherwise affect the right of any party to make an application
to the Copyright
Tribunal pursuant to
(i) The Board shall deliver its decision upon any matter referred to within
three (3) months from the final day of submissions
made to it.'
Re Applications by Australasian Performing Right Association
[1999] ACompT 3
(1999) 45 IPR 53.
For further discussion of these issues see NADRAC's Discussion
Paper on Fairness and Justice in ADR, 1998, and its forthcoming
Standards in ADR.
ALRC, Review of Federal Civil Justice System,
Discussion Paper, para. 9.33. In its final report, at paragraph 6.53, the ALRC
noted that most litigation and review matters are resolved without a hearing
through direct negotiations between parties. The
ALRC also noted that
lawyer-brokered negotiations have always played a part in resolving disputes and
lawyers play a key role
in ensuring that clients can make informed decisions
At present the fees for such services are $253 for individuals
and $506 for corporations.
CAL submission (No. 2), para. 18.2.
Part 4 of the Act deals with primary dispute resolution, which
is defined in s. 21 as:
'procedures and services for the resolution of disputes otherwise than by way
of the exercise of the judicial power of the Commonwealth,
and includes:
(a) counselling; and
(b) mediation; and
(c) arbitration; and
(d) neutral evaluation; and
(e) case appraisal; and
(f) conciliation.'
The Committee notes that, although undertaken in a different
context, the Government has recently announced that it will be supporting
establishment of a voluntary code of conduct for the retail grocery industry and
will fund a Retail Grocery Industry Ombudsman,
Press Release, Hon. Peter Reith
MP, 17 December 1999.
APRA/AMCOS submission, para. 14.
AVCC submission, para. 5; ALCA submission, para. 6; Vi$copy
submission, p. 4.
Hansard, House of Representatives, 2 September 1999, p. 9752.
Part 2 Simplification Report, para 10.09
[1999] ACompT 3
(1999) 45 IPR 53.
Ibid. at 112.
Ibid. at 113.
[Return to contents]
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (619 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter