URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ALRCDP/2009/74.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:31:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Review of Secrecy Laws [2009] ALRCDP 74
PDF version
is also available for viewing and download.
ALRC Discussion Paper 74
Review of Secrecy Laws
Terms of Reference
List of Participants
List of Proposals and Questions
1. Introduction to the Inquiry
Scope of the Inquiry
Process of reform
Discussion Paper 74
2. Open Government, Secrecy and Public Interest
Introduction
Why secrecy?
Towards openness
The idea of accountability
Secrecy laws and the Australian
Constitution
The public interest
3. Sharing Commonwealth Information
Introduction
Framework for information sharing
Outcomes of information sharing
4. Freedom of Information, Privacy and Secrecy
Introduction
Freedom of information
5. Overview of Current Secrecy Laws
Introduction
Common law duties
Statutory secrecy provisions
General criminal offences
6. The Need for a General Secrecy Offence
Introduction
Criminal, civil or administrative penalties
The need for a general secrecy offence
7. General Secrecy Offence: Harm to Public Interests
Introduction
Duty not to disclose information
Harm to identified public interests
8. General Secrecy Offence: Elements
Introduction
Whose conduct should be regulated?
Initial and subsequent disclosures
What conduct should be regulated?
What information should be protected?
9. General Secrecy Offence: Exceptions and Penalties
Exceptions and defences
Exceptions and defences for inclusion in the general secrecy offence
Public interest disclosure
Other issues
10. Specific Secrecy Offences: Elements
Introduction
Reasonable likelihood of harm
Whose conduct should be regulated?
What conduct should be regulated?
What information should be protected?
11. Specific Secrecy Offences: Exceptions and Penalties
Introduction
Exceptions and defences
Consistency of penalties
Level of maximum penalty
12. Specific Secrecy Offences: Simplification and Consistency
Introduction
Replication of secrecy offences
Identifying examples of substantial replication
Case study:
Crimes Act 1914
Consistency in secrecy offences
Consolidation of secrecy offences
Implementation
13. Administrative Obligations in the Australian Public Service
Introduction
The Australian Public Service
Framework for secrecy obligations in the APS
Prejudice to the effective working of government
Information communicated in confidence
Exceptions and defences
Processes for dealing with breaches
14. Regulating beyond the
Public Service Act
Introduction
Commonwealth employees outside the APS
Former Commonwealth employees
Persons outside Commonwealth employment
Lawful and reasonable employer directions
15. Fostering Effective Information-Handling Practices
Introduction
An effective information-handling culture
Risk factors for inappropriate information handling
Agency policies and guidelines
Memorandums of understanding
Training and development programs
Oaths, affirmations and acknowledgements of secrecy
Information and communication technology systems
Avenues for employee queries and concerns
Fostering effective information handling at the agency level
Fostering effective information handling in the private sector
Appendix 1. List of Submissions
Appendix 2. List of Agencies, Organisations and Individuals Consulted
Appendix 3. List of Abbreviations
Appendix 4. Table of Secrecy Provisions
Appendix 5. Extracts of Key Secrecy Provisions
This Discussion Paper reflects the law as at 1 June
© Commonwealth of Australia 2009
This work is copyright. For further information about reproducing this
document - in whole or in part - please refer to the ALRC’s
ISBN 978-0-9804153-6-0
Commission Reference: DP 74
The Australian Law Reform Commission was established on 1 January 1975 by the
Law Reform Commission Act 1973
(Cth) and reconstituted by the
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
(Cth). The office of the ALRC
is at Level 25, 135 King Street, Sydney, NSW, 2000, Australia.
All ALRC publications can be made available in a range of accessible formats
for people with disabilities. If you require assistance,
please contact the
Telephone: within Australia (02) 8238 6333
International +61 2 8238 6333
TTY: (02) 8238 6379
Facsimile: within Australia (02) 8238 6363
International +61 2 8238 6363
info@alrc.gov.au
ALRC homepage:
www.alrc.gov.au
Making a submission
Any public contribution to an inquiry is called a submission and these are
actively sought by the ALRC from a broad cross-section
of the community, as well
as those with a special interest in the inquiry.
Submissions are usually written, but there is no set format and they need not
be formal documents. Where possible, submissions in
electronic format are
It would be helpful if comments addressed specific questions or numbered
paragraphs in this paper.
Open inquiry policy
In the interests of informed public debate, the ALRC is committed to open
access to information. As submissions provide important
evidence to each
inquiry, it is common for the ALRC to draw upon the contents of submissions and
quote from them or refer to them
in publications. As part of ALRC policy,
non-confidential submissions are made available to any person or organisation
upon request
after completion of an inquiry, and also may be published on the
ALRC website. For the purposes of this policy, an inquiry is considered
been completed when the final report has been tabled in Parliament.
However, the ALRC also accepts submissions made in confidence. Confidential
submissions may include personal experiences where there
is a wish to retain
material). Any request for access to
a confidential submission is determined in
accordance with the federal
Freedom of Information Act 1982
, which has
provisions designed to protect sensitive information given in confidence.
In the absence of a clear indication that a submission is intended to be
confidential, the ALRC will treat the submission as non-confidential.
Submissions should be sent to:
The Executive Director
Australian Law Reform Commission
GPO Box 3708
SYDNEY NSW 2001
secrecy@alrc.gov.au
Submissions may also be made using the
on the ALRC’s homepage:
www.alrc.gov.au
to Us … about Secrecy’
The closing date for submissions in response to DP 74 is 7 August 2009.
Terms of Reference
REVIEW OF SECRECY LAWS
I, ROBERT McCLELLAND, Attorney-General of Australia, having regard to:
the desirability of having comprehensive, consistent and workable
laws and practices in relation to the protection of Commonwealth
information;
the increased need to share such information within and between
governments and with the private sector;
the importance of balancing the need to protect Commonwealth
information and the public interest in an open and accountable system
government; and
previous reports (including previous reports of the Commission) that
have identified the need for reform in this area
REFER to the
Australian Law Reform Commission for inquiry and report, pursuant to
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
, options for
ensuring a consistent approach across government to the protection of
Commonwealth information, balanced against the
need to maintain an open and
accountable government through providing appropriate access to information.
1. In carrying out its review, the Commission will consider:
a. relevant laws and practices relating to the protection of Commonwealth
information, including the scope and appropriateness of
legislative provisions
regarding secrecy and confidentiality;
b. whether there is a need to consolidate and modernise relevant provisions
currently in the
Crimes Act 1914
and other Commonwealth legislation for
inclusion in the
Criminal Code
c. the way in which secrecy laws in the
interact with
other laws and practices, including those relating to secrecy, privacy, freedom
of information, archiving, whistle‑blowing,
and data-matching;
d. whether there should be different considerations for secrecy laws
relating to the protection of national security and other sensitive
Commonwealth
information; and
e. any related matter.
2. In carrying out its review, the Commission is to identify and consult with
key stakeholders, including relevant Commonwealth, State
and Territory agencies
and private sector bodies.
3. The Commission will provide its final report to me by 31 October 2009.
Dated 5 August 2008
Robert McClelland
Attorney-General
List of Participants
Australian Law Reform Commission
Senior Legal Officers
Legal Officers
Research Manager
Project Assistant
Legal Interns
Advisory Committee Members
List of Participants
Australian Law Reform Commission
The Division of the ALRC constituted under the
Australian Law Reform
Commission Act 1996
(Cth) for the purposes of this Inquiry comprises the
Professor David Weisbrot (President)
Professor Les McCrimmon
(Commissioner)
Professor Rosalind Croucher (Commissioner in
Justice Berna Collier (part-time Commissioner)
Justice Susan
Kenny (part-time Commissioner)
Senior Legal Officers
Carolyn Adams
Bruce Alston
Legal Officers
Anna Dziedzic
Lisa Eckstein
Amie Grierson
Research Manager
Jonathan Dobinson
Carolyn Kearney
Project Assistant
Tina O’Brien
Legal Interns
Michael Evry
Stephanie Fusco
Kelvin Liew
Isley Markman
Larisa Michalko
Christina Ray
Michael Wells
Smriti Sriram
Yi-Shun Teoh
Rebecca Zaman
Advisory Committee Members
Ms Lynelle Briggs, Australian Public Service Commissioner
Mr Ian Carnell,
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
Mr Chris Craigie SC,
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
Professor Robin Creyke, College
of Law, Australian National University
Mr Simon Daley, Australian Government
Mr Chris Erskine SC, Blackburn Chambers
Justice Paul Finn,
Federal Court of Australia
Mr Kevin Fitzpatrick, Chief Tax Counsel,
Australian Taxation Office
Mr Stephen Gageler SC, Solicitor-General of
Mr John McGinness, Director, National Judicial College of
Professor John McMillan, Commonwealth Ombudsman
Metcalfe, Secretary, Department of Immigration and Citizenship
Professor Moira Patterson, Law Faculty, Monash University
Mr Peter Timmins,
Timmins Consulting
Ms Annette Willing, Australian Government,
Attorney-General’s Department
List of Proposals and
4. Freedom of Information, Privacy and Secrecy
6. The Need for a General Secrecy Offence
7. General Secrecy Offence: Harm to Public Interests
8. General Secrecy Offence: Elements
9. General Secrecy Offence: Exceptions and Penalties
10. Specific Secrecy Offences: Elements
11. Specific Secrecy Offences: Exceptions and Penalties
12. Specific Secrecy Offences: Simplification and Consistency
13. Administrative Obligations in the Australian Public Service
14. Regulating Beyond the Public Service Act
15. Fostering Effective Information-Handling Practices
List of Proposals and
4. Freedom of Information, Privacy and
Proposal 4–1
Reflecting a commitment to open government and to
ensure that claims for exemption be considered on a case by case basis rather
through the mechanism of a global exemption for secrecy provisions,
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth) should be repealed.
Proposal 4–2
The Office of Parliamentary Counsel should issue a
Drafting Direction that any proposed secrecy provision must indicate expressly
whether it overrides the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Proposal 4–3
Freedom of Information Act
(Cth) is repealed, the
FOI Guidelines—Exemption Sections in
the FOI Act
issued by the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet or
the proposed Information Commissioner Guidelines should be updated
Freedom of Information officers that the existence of a secrecy provision is a
relevant factor to consider when deciding
whether or not to disclose a document.
Proposal 4–4
Freedom of Information Act
(Cth) is retained, the responsible minister (or the proposed Freedom of
Information Commissioner) should ensure that the list of
secrecy provisions in
sch 3 of the Act is regularly reviewed and updated.
Proposal 4–5
Complementing the idea of access that underpins
Archives Act 1983
(Cth) and the
Freedom of Information Act
Archives Act
should be repealed.
Proposal 4–6
Archives Act 1983
(Cth) should be
amended to include a provision modelled on
, to the effect that where a
record enters the open access period, any non-disclosure provision applicable to
the record ceases to
have effect, unless expressly stated in the relevant
legislation.
Proposal 4–7
The Office of Parliamentary Counsel should issue a
Drafting Direction that any proposed non-disclosure provision should indicate
whether it overrides the
Archives Act 1983
(Cth) in the open
access period.
6. The Need for a General Secrecy
Proposal 6–1
Sections 70 and 79(3) of the
(Cth) should be repealed and replaced by a new offence in the
Criminal Code
(Cth), which regulates the disclosure of Commonwealth
information by Commonwealth officers (the ‘general secrecy
7. General Secrecy Offence: Harm to Public
Proposal 7–1
The proposed general secrecy offence should require
that the disclosure of Commonwealth information did, or was reasonably likely
to, or intended to:
(a) harm the national security, defence or international relations of the
Commonwealth;
(b) prejudice the prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution or
punishment of criminal offences, breaches of a law imposing
a penalty or
sanction, the enforcement of laws relating to the confiscation of the proceeds
of crime, or the protection of the public
(c) endanger the life or physical safety of any person;
(d) pose a serious threat to public health or public safety;
(e) have a substantial adverse effect on personal privacy; or
(f) have a substantial adverse effect on a person in respect of his or her
lawful business or professional affairs or on the business,
commercial or
financial affairs of an organisation.
The proposed general secrecy offence should consist of three
tiers, as follows:
First tier:
the unauthorised disclosure caused, or was reasonably
likely to cause, harm to one or more of the specified public interests. Strict
liability attaches to this result.
Second tier:
the Commonwealth officer was reckless as to whether,
or knew or intended that, the disclosure would:
(i) have a substantial adverse effect on personal privacy; or
(ii) have a substantial adverse effect on a person in respect of his or her
lawful business or professional affairs or on the business,
commercial or
financial affairs of an organisation.
Third tier:
the Commonwealth officer was reckless as to whether,
or knew or intended that, the disclosure would:
(i) harm the national security, defence or international relations of the
Commonwealth;
(ii) prejudice the prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution or
punishment of criminal offences, breaches of a law imposing
a penalty or
sanction, the enforcement of laws relating to the confiscation of the proceeds
of crime, or the protection of the public
(iii) endanger the life or physical safety of any person; or
(iv) pose a serious threat to public health or public safety.
Proposal 7–3
The first tier offence should include a defence in
circumstances where the Commonwealth officer can prove that he or she neither
nor could reasonably be expected to have known, that the disclosure of the
information was likely to harm any of the specified public
8. General Secrecy Offence: Elements
Proposal 8–1
The proposed general secrecy offence should
regulate the conduct of those who are, or have been, ‘Commonwealth
defined as follows:
(a) the Governor-General;
(b) ministers and parliamentary secretaries;
(c) Australian Public Service employees, that is, individuals appointed or
engaged under the
Public Service Act 1999
(d) individuals employed by the Commonwealth otherwise than under the
Public Service Act
(e) members of the Australian Defence Force;
(f) members or special members of the Australian Federal Police;
(g) individuals who hold or perform the duties of an office established by or
under a law of the Commonwealth;
(h) officers or employees of Commonwealth authorities;
(i) individuals who exercise powers, or perform functions, conferred on them
by or under a law of the Commonwealth;
(j) individuals and entities who are contracted service providers for a
Commonwealth contract; and
(k) individuals who are officers or employees of a contracted service
provider for a Commonwealth contract and who provide services
for the purposes
(whether direct or indirect) of the Commonwealth contract.
Proposal 8–2
The proposed general secrecy offence should
regulate the conduct of judicial officers exercising the judicial
power of the Commonwealth, or Members of the Australian Parliament
who are not
ministers or parliamentary secretaries.
Proposal 8–3
There should be a new offence in the
(Cth) (the ‘subsequent disclosure offence’) for subsequent
disclosure of Commonwealth information by any person where:
(a) the information has been disclosed by a Commonwealth officer in breach of
the proposed general secrecy offence; and
(b) the person knows, or is reckless as to whether, the information has been
disclosed in breach of the proposed general secrecy offence;
(c) the person knows, intends, or is reckless as to whether, the subsequent
disclosure of the information will harm, or is reasonably
likely to harm, one of
the public interests set out in Proposal 7–1.
Proposal 8–4
The proposed subsequent disclosure offence should
include an express exception where the disclosure is of information that is
in the public domain as the result of a lawful disclosure.
Proposal 8–5
The proposed general secrecy offence should
regulate the disclosure of Commonwealth information. The fault element attaching
to disclosure
should be intention.
Proposal 8–6
The proposed general secrecy offence should apply
to any information to which a person has, or had, access by reason of his or her
being, or having been, a Commonwealth officer as defined in
Proposal 8–1.
9. General Secrecy Offence: Exceptions and
Proposal 9–1
The proposed general secrecy offence should
expressly include exceptions applying where the disclosure is:
(a) in the course of a Commonwealth officer’s functions or duties;
(b) authorised by the relevant agency head or minister, and the agency head
or minister certifies that the disclosure is in the public
interest; or
(c) of information that is
already in the public domain as the result of a lawful disclosure.
Proposal 9–2
The proposed general secrecy offence should include
a note cross-referencing to the immunity provided by proposed Commonwealth
interest disclosure legislation.
Proposal 9–3
The general secrecy offence should have three tiers
and three penalty levels:
(a) Where strict liability attaches to the requirement to prove harm, the
penalty should be a maximum of two years imprisonment, or
a pecuniary penalty
not exceeding 120 penalty units, or both.
(b) Where a Commonwealth officer knows, is reckless as to whether, or intends
the disclosure of Commonwealth information to:
(i) have a substantial adverse effect on personal privacy; or
(ii) have a substantial adverse effect on a person in respect of his or her
lawful business or professional affairs or on the business,
commercial or
financial affairs of an organisation,
the penalty should be a maximum of five years imprisonment, or a pecuniary
penalty not exceeding 300 penalty units, or both.
(c) Where a Commonwealth officer knows, is reckless as to whether, or intends
the disclosure of Commonwealth information to:
(i) harm the national security, defence or international relations of the
Commonwealth;
(ii) prejudice the prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution or
punishment of criminal offences, breaches of a law imposing
a penalty or
sanction, the enforcement of laws relating to the confiscation of the proceeds
of crime, or the protection of the public
(iii) endanger the life or physical safety of any person; or
(iv) pose a serious threat to public health or public safety
the penalty should be a maximum of seven years imprisonment, or a pecuniary
penalty not exceeding 420 penalty units, or both.
Proposal 9–4
Where a person knows that, or was reckless as to
whether, Commonwealth information has been disclosed in breach of the general
offence, and then discloses that information knowing, or reckless as to
whether, or intending that the subsequent disclosure of Commonwealth
information
(a) have a substantial adverse effect on personal privacy; or
(b) have a substantial adverse effect on a person in respect of his or her
lawful business or professional affairs or on the business,
commercial or
financial affairs of an organisation,
the penalty should be a maximum of five years imprisonment, or a pecuniary
penalty not exceeding 300 penalty units, or both.
Proposal 9–5
Where a person knows that, or was reckless as to
whether, Commonwealth information has been disclosed in breach of the general
offence, and then discloses that information knowing, or reckless as to
whether, or intending that the subsequent disclosure of Commonwealth
information
(a) harm the national security, defence or international relations of the
Commonwealth;
(b) prejudice the prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution or
punishment of criminal offences, breaches of a law imposing
a penalty or
sanction, the enforcement of laws relating to the confiscation of the proceeds
of crime, or the protection of the public
(c) endanger the life or physical safety of any person; or
(d) pose a serious threat to public health or public safety,
the penalty should be a maximum of seven years imprisonment, or a pecuniary
penalty not exceeding 420 penalty units, or both.
Proposal 9–6
The proposed general secrecy offence, and the
subsequent disclosure offence, should provide that, where a court is satisfied
a person has disclosed, or is about to disclose, information in
contravention of the provisions, the court may grant an injunction
to restrain
such disclosure.
10. Specific Secrecy Offences: Elements
Proposal 10–1
Specific secrecy offences should generally
incorporate a requirement that, for an offence to be committed, there must be a
likelihood that the disclosure of information will cause harm to some
specified public interest, except where there are clear countervailing
Question 10–1
In what circumstances is it inappropriate for a
secrecy offence to require that a disclosure be reasonably likely to cause
example, in relation to the disclosure of national security
classified information or information concerning the defence or international
relations of the Commonwealth?
Proposal 10–2
(a) Where specific secrecy offences incorporate a
reasonable likelihood of harm requirement, recklessness should generally be the
fault element for offences punishable by imprisonment for more than a maximum of
(b) For other offences, strict liability should apply in relation to the
likelihood of harm.
Proposal 10–3
Specific secrecy offences that are stated to apply
to ‘any person’ should be reviewed to establish whether the offences
should apply only to ‘Commonwealth officers’ and to subsequent
disclosure, as defined in the general secrecy offence
and the subsequent
disclosure offence (Proposals 8–1, 8–3).
Proposal 10–4
Specific secrecy offences that apply to
Commonwealth officers should be reviewed to establish whether the offences
should be stated
to apply also to former Commonwealth officers.
Proposal 10–5
Specific secrecy offences should generally not
extend to conduct other than the disclosure of information, such as making a
receiving or possessing protected information.
Proposal 10–6
Specific secrecy offences should generally require
intention as the fault element for the disclosure of information.
Proposal 10–7
Specific secrecy offences that provide that strict
liability applies to one or all physical elements should be reviewed to
whether the application of strict liability remains justified.
Proposal 10–8
Specific secrecy offences that apply to
Commonwealth officers should generally apply to all information to which a
Commonwealth officer
has, or had, access by reason of being a Commonwealth
11. Specific Secrecy Offences: Exceptions and
Proposal 11–1
Specific secrecy offences that include defences
should be reviewed to assess whether these defences are appropriate, in view of
general principles of criminal responsibility set out in ch 2 of the
Criminal Code
. Where such a defence is found to be appropriate,
consideration should be given to recasting the provision as an exception, rather
than as a defence.
Proposal 11–2
Specific secrecy offences that include extensive
codification of permissible disclosure should be reviewed to establish whether
exceptions are necessary in view of the desirability of simplifying
secrecy offences.
Proposal 11–3
Specific secrecy offences that apply to
Commonwealth officers should generally be accompanied by a note
cross-referencing to the immunity
provided by proposed Commonwealth public
interest disclosure legislation.
Proposal 11–4
In order to ensure consistency, secrecy offence
provisions should not specify:
(a) fines for individuals and corporations different from those that would
apply if the formulas set out in the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) were adopted;
(b) penalties different from those that would apply if the alternate
penalties for proceeding summarily on an indictable offence set
were adopted; or
(c) a penalty punishable on summary conviction when, under the
, an offence carrying that maximum penalty would otherwise be tried
before a jury on indictment.
Proposal 11–5
The penalties for specific secrecy offences should
be reviewed for consistency with the general secrecy offence and the subsequent
disclosure offence (Proposals 9–3 to 9–5), and in accordance
with Proposals 11–7 to 11–11.
Proposal 11–6
The maximum penalties for the initial and
subsequent unauthorised handling of Commonwealth information under specific
secrecy offences
should generally be the same, subject to relevant differences
in relation to fault elements or the reasonable likelihood of harm.
Proposal 11–7
Guidance on benchmark penalties for specific
secrecy offences, consistent with Proposals 11–8 to 11–11, should be
incorporated
into the Attorney‑General’s Department’s
to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement
Proposal 11–8
Subject to Proposals 11–9 and
11–10, specific secrecy offences should generally provide for a maximum
penalty of two years
imprisonment, or a pecuniary penalty not exceeding 120
penalty units, or both.
Proposal 11–9
Specific secrecy offences should generally provide
that, where a person knows, is reckless as to whether, or intends the disclosure
of Commonwealth information to:
(a) have a substantial adverse effect on personal privacy; or
(b) have a substantial adverse effect on a person in respect of his or her
lawful business or professional affairs or on the business,
commercial or
financial affairs of an organisation,
the penalty should be a maximum of five years imprisonment, or a pecuniary
penalty not exceeding 300 penalty units, or both.
Proposal 11–10
Specific secrecy offences should generally
provide that, where a person knows, is reckless as to whether, or intends the
of Commonwealth information to:
(a) harm the national security, defence or international relations of the
Commonwealth;
(b) prejudice the prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution or
punishment of criminal offences, breaches of a law imposing
a penalty or
sanction, the enforcement of laws relating to the confiscation of the proceeds
of crime, or the protection of the public
(c) endanger the life or physical safety of any person; or
(d) pose a serious threat to public health or public safety
the penalty should be a maximum of seven years imprisonment, or a pecuniary
penalty not exceeding 420 penalty units, or both.
Proposal 11–11
Specific secrecy offences that provide for
maximum penalties of imprisonment for less than six months, or by pecuniary
penalties only,
should be reviewed and considered for repeal.
12. Specific Secrecy Offences: Simplification
and Consistency
Proposal 12–1
Commonwealth secrecy offences should generally
(a) repealed where the scope of the offences substantially replicates the
proposed general secrecy offence; and
(b) retained where the offences differ in significant and necessary ways from
the proposed general secrecy offence.
Proposal 12–2
Section 79 of the
Crimes Act 1914
should be repealed and a new provision inserted in the
Criminal Code
(Cth) making it an offence for a person, without lawful authority and
intending to prejudice the Commonwealth’s security or
defence, to:
(a) disclose or obtain information concerning the Commonwealth’s
security or defence; or
(b) fail to comply with a direction given by a lawful authority with respect
to the use of information concerning the Commonwealth’s
security or
The offence should be punishable by a maximum penalty of ten years
imprisonment and a fine of 600 penalty units.
Proposal 12–3
The Australian Government should review
Commonwealth secrecy offences that are retained with a view to consolidation,
where possible,
(a) a single provision or part where multiple secrecy provisions exist in
the same Act;
(b) one Act where multiple secrecy provisions exist in more than one Act for
which the same Australian Government agency is, or agencies
responsible.
Proposal 12–4
The Australian Government should review
Commonwealth secrecy offences that are retained for consistency with the
proposed general
secrecy offence, in accordance with Proposals 10–1 to
10–8, 11–1 to 11–11, 12–1 and 12–3.
Proposal 12–5
The Attorney-General’s Department should
incorporate guidance in the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Civil
Penalties and Enforcement Powers
dealing with:
(a) the circumstances in which the enactment of a specific secrecy offence
may be justified;
(b) the drafting of secrecy provisions so that specific secrecy provisions
are consistent with, and do not replicate the scope of,
the general secrecy
This guidance should incorporate the drafting advice contained in Proposals
10–1 to 10–8, 11–1 to 11–11, 12–1
13. Administrative Obligations in the Australian
Public Service
Regulation 2.1
Public Service Regulations 1999
(Cth) should be amended to apply
to information:
(a) to which an Australian Public Service employee has access by reason of
his or her employment; and
(b) where the disclosure is reasonably likely to prejudice the effective
working of government.
Proposal 13–2
Regulation 2.1
Public Service
Regulations 1999
(Cth) should specify that, in determining whether a
disclosure of information is reasonably likely to prejudice the effective
of government, the disciplinary authority should have regard to factors
(a) the nature of the information disclosed, including the likelihood that it
would be subject to release under the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth) or through some other means; and
(b) the circumstances in which the disclosure is made, including whether the
Australian Public Service employee took reasonable steps
to comply with the
agency’s information-handling policy or any lawful and reasonable
direction concerning the disclosure of
information.
Proposal 13–3
The express prohibition
on the disclosure of
information communicated in confidence set out in reg 2.1(4) of the
Public Service Regulations 1999
(Cth) should be removed.
Proposal 13–4
Regulation 2.1
Public Service
Regulations 1999
(Cth) should include a note cross-referencing to the
immunity provided by proposed Commonwealth public interest disclosure
legislation.
Proposal 13–5
The information-handling policies developed by
Australian Government agencies in accordance with Proposal 15–1
should clearly
set out the disciplinary penalties that could result from breach
of secrecy obligations, including the factors that will be considered
determining any such penalty.
Proposal 13–6
Public Service Act 1999
(Cth) should
provide that evidence of information given or documents produced by an
Australian Public Service employee for the purpose
of administrative
disciplinary proceedings with respect to secrecy obligations is not admissible
in criminal proceedings against
the employee for the same, or substantially the
same, conduct.
14. Regulating Beyond the
Service Act
Australian Government agencies that employ persons other than
Public Service Act 1999
(Cth)—including agencies
prescribed under the
Financial Management and Accountability Act 1997
(Cth) and bodies subject to the
Commonwealth Authorities and Companies
(Cth)—should:
(a) include in the agency’s terms and conditions of employment the
requirements set out in reg 2.1 of the
Public Service Regulations
(Cth), to the extent that these requirements are consistent with the
agency’s functions and structure; and
(b) adopt the safeguards set out in the
Public Service Act
dealing with suspected breaches of reg 2.1, to the extent that these
safeguards are consistent with the agency’s functions
and structure.
Australian Government agencies should remind employees, on
termination, of their continuing liability under the general secrecy offence
any relevant specific secrecy offence, and of their obligations under the
equitable duty of confidence.
Proposal 14–3
An Australian Government agency that enters into a
contract for services involving access to Commonwealth information should
in the contract a confidentiality clause that:
(a) clearly sets out the categories of information that are confidential
Commonwealth information;
(b) requires persons (other than Commonwealth employees) who have access to
confidential Commonwealth information by reason of the
contract to agree to
comply with the contractual confidentiality requirements; and
(c) permits the disclosure of confidential Commonwealth information where the
disclosure amounts to a public interest disclosure under
proposed Commonwealth
public interest disclosure legislation.
Proposal 14–4
The Australian Government should include in the
terms and conditions of appointment for members of boards and committees:
(a) secrecy requirements equivalent to those imposed on Commonwealth
employees in a related employment context, to the extent that
these requirements
are consistent with the board’s or committee’s function and
structure; and
(b) the right to terminate the appointment of a member in the event of a
breach of the secrecy obligation.
Question 14–1
Are there any situations in which neither
administrative penalties nor contractual remedies apply to an unauthorised
disclosure of
Commonwealth information? If so, are civil penalties a suitable
way to address these gaps in application or are there other, better
dealing with these situations?
Proposal 14–5
Australian Government agencies should review
administrative secrecy requirements that differ from the revised reg 2.1 of
Public Service Regulations 1999
(Cth), including ‘lawful and
reasonable directions’ issued to employees to ensure that these are
consistent with the
implied constitutional freedom of political
communication.
15. Fostering Effective Information-Handling
Australian Government agencies should develop and implement
policies clarifying the application of relevant secrecy laws to their
information holdings. These policies should include:
(a) the types of information that an employee can lawfully disclose in the
performance of his or her duties;
(b) the types of information for which an employee must obtain authority for
disclosure, including the potential for unauthorised
disclosure to result in
disciplinary action;
(c) the circumstances in which the unauthorised handling of information could
lead to criminal proceedings; and
(d) avenues for an employee to raise queries or concerns, including the
process by which he or she can make a public interest disclosure.
Proposal 15–2
Australian Government agencies should make their
information-handling policies publicly available, save in certain exceptional
where this would be unreasonable or impractical.
Proposal 15–3
Government agencies that
regularly share information with other agencies or bodies should enter into
memorandums of understanding
setting out the terms and conditions for the
exchange of information.
Proposal 15–4
Australian Government agencies should develop and
administer training and development programs for their employees, on induction
at regular intervals thereafter, about the information-handling obligations
relevant to their position, including
the circumstances in which it is
appropriate to share information and the avenues for making public interest
disclosures.
Proposal 15–5
Any Australian Government agency that administers
oaths, affirmations or declarations of secrecy should ensure that these properly
reflect what is required under relevant Commonwealth secrecy laws.
Proposal 15–6
Australian Government agencies should put in place
and maintain information and communication technology systems to facilitate the
secure and convenient handling of Commonwealth information, including access
controls and audit mechanisms.
Proposal 15–7
Private sector organisations that
perform services for or on behalf of the Australian
Government under contract should take steps to ensure that all employees who
Commonwealth information are aware of their obligations of secrecy,
including the circumstances in which criminal, civil or administrative
could result.
1. Introduction to the
Recommendations for a review
A plethora of provisions
Scope of the Inquiry
Terms of Reference
Definitions
Mapping secrecy laws
Matters outside this Inquiry
Process of reform
Timeframe for the Inquiry
Advisory Committee
Issues Paper 34
Inquiry Snapshot
Community consultation
Written submissions
Discussion Paper 74
Chapter structure
1. Introduction to the
1.1 On 5 August 2008, the Attorney-General of Australia, the Hon Robert
McClelland MP, asked the Australian Law Reform Commission
(ALRC) to conduct an
Inquiry into options for ensuring a consistent approach across government to the
protection of Commonwealth
information, balanced against the need to maintain an
open and accountable government through providing appropriate access to
information.
The Terms of Reference, which are set out at the front of this
Discussion Paper, are headed ‘Review of Secrecy Laws’.
1.2 ‘Secrecy laws’ are collectively those provisions that protect
Commonwealth information by imposing obligations on
those who handle it. The
most general of such provisions is s 70 of the
Crimes Act 1914
(1) A person who, being a Commonwealth officer, publishes or communicates,
except to some person to whom he or she is authorized
to publish or communicate
it, any fact or document which comes to his or her knowledge, or into his or her
possession, by virtue
of being a Commonwealth officer, and which it is his or
her duty not to disclose, shall be guilty of an offence.
(2) A person who, having been a Commonwealth officer, publishes or communicates,
without lawful authority or excuse (proof whereof
shall lie upon him or her),
any fact or document which came to his or her knowledge, or into his or her
possession, by virtue of
having been a Commonwealth officer, and which, at the
time when he or she ceased to be a Commonwealth officer, it was his or her
not to disclose, shall be guilty of an offence.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 2 years.
1.3 Section 70 has been described as ‘a pretty wide
provision’.
It is also not
alone in imposing obligations on Commonwealth officers with respect to the
handling of information. In the course
of the Inquiry to date the ALRC has
identified 507 provisions that can be described as secrecy provisions, 358 of
which create secrecy
Recommendations for a
1.4 In its report supporting the introduction of the
Information Act 1982
(Cth) (FOI Act), the Senate Standing Committee on Legal
and Constitutional Affairs urged the Australian Government to reconsider
, as it was ‘implausible to enact a presumption of openness while
leaving untouched provisions like
that provide the legal foundation
for the system of discretionary secrecy that presently
The Committee also
noted that many secrecy provisions conflicted diametrically with the philosophy
espoused in the Freedom of Information
1.5 Commonwealth secrecy laws have been considered in a number of other
reviews and inquiries, either directly or indirectly. In 1983,
the Human Rights
Commission reviewed the
and found that s 70 could operate in a
manner inconsistent with art 19 of the
International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights
(freedom of expression). The Commission recommended that s
70 be amended to limit its operation to the kinds of information in respect
which restrictions may be imposed under art 19.3—these being for the
protection of national security or public order, or
of public health or
1.6 In 1991, a committee chaired by Sir Harry Gibbs undertook a review of
Commonwealth criminal law (Gibbs
Committee),
including secrecy
provisions that imposed criminal sanctions. The Committee concluded that:
It is undesirable that the sanctions and machinery of the criminal law should be
applied in relation to the unauthorised disclosure
of all forms of official
information and this should be avoided if
1.7 The Gibbs Committee recommended that s 70 of the
well as s 79—which deals with the unauthorised communication of
official secrets—should be repealed, and that
the application of criminal sanctions under the general criminal law of the
Commonwealth to disclosure of official information should
be limited to certain
categories of information and that these should be no more widely stated than is
strictly required for the
effective functioning of
Government.
1.8 The Gibbs Committee went on to consider what categories of information
should be protected by criminal sanctions. These included
information relating
to intelligence and security services, defence or foreign relations, and
information obtained in confidence
from other governments or international
organisations.
1.9 In 1994, the Senate Select Committee on Public Interest Whistleblowing
recommended that the existing provisions of the
be amended to
allow the disclosure of information in the public interest to be a defence
against prosecution.
1.10 In 1995, the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs again considered the operation of
ss 70 and 79 and noted
the longstanding calls for
The Committee identified
a number of problems with the sections. These included the lack of precision in
the drafting—particularly
since the duty not to disclose referred to in s
70 is not located in the
application of the sections to officers not employed under the
Public Service
Committee also noted the lack of consistency in drafting and penalties across
the secrecy provisions in other Commonwealth
The Committee
recommended that the existing secrecy provisions should be rationalised and
consolidated into a general offence within
1.11 Protection for whistleblowers again became the focus of attention in the
release in February 2009 of the report of the House
of Representatives Standing
Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs (House of Representatives Standing
Committee),
Whistleblower Protection: A Comprehensive Scheme for the
Commonwealth Public Sector
, which recommended that a Public Interest
Disclosure Bill be introduced to Parliament as a matter of
As explained by the
Chair of the Committee, Mark Dreyfus QC MP, the recommendations in the
reflect what the Committee considers to be primary legislative priorities. They
promote integrity in public administration and support
open and accountable
government. They are informed by the view that legislation should be based on
clear commonsense principles to
provide reasonable certainty to any person
reading it. Yet legislation alone is not sufficient. A shift in culture needs to
place to foster a more open public sector that is receptive to those who
question the way things are
1.12 The principal focus of the recommendations of the House of
Representatives Standing Committee is to protect a broad range of
employees in
the public sector, as well as contractors and consultants, who make public
interest disclosures and may be subject to
secrecy provisions. The Committee
recommended that whistleblower protection provide immunity from criminal
liability (including under
1.13 The ALRC itself has had occasion to comment on secrecy laws in three
prior reviews. First, in 1995, the ALRC and the Administrative
Review Council
recommended that a thorough review of all Commonwealth legislative provisions
prohibiting disclosure of government-held
information by public servants be
conducted to ensure that such provisions did not prevent the disclosure of
information that was
not exempt under the FOI
1.14 Secondly, in 2004, in
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified
and Security Sensitive Information
(ALRC 98), the ALRC recommended that:
The Australian Government should review all legislative and regulatory
provisions giving rise to a duty not to disclose official
information—including in particular
regulation 2.1
Service Regulations
to ensure the duty of secrecy is imposed only in
relation to information that genuinely requires protection and where
unauthorised
disclosure is likely to harm the public
1.15 Thirdly, in 2008, in
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and
(ALRC 108), the ALRC recommended that:
The Australian Government should undertake a review of secrecy provisions in
federal legislation. This review should consider, among
other matters, how each
of these provisions interacts with the
1.16 All the recommendations for a review of secrecy laws were prompted in
large measure by the great number and diverse range of
secrecy provisions.
A plethora of
1.17 In the Terms of Reference the Attorney-General listed, as the first
matter to which he had regard,
the desirability of having comprehensive, consistent and workable laws and
practices in relation to the protection of Commonwealth
information.
1.18 As noted above, the ALRC has identified 507 secrecy provisions. They
have been introduced at different times, in different language
and often with
widely ranging penalties. John McGinness has noted that:
With the expansion of the Commonwealth’s role after the mid-1940s in areas
such as taxation, health, education, welfare, scientific
research, industry
assistance and regulation, secrecy provisions increased in number as a
reflection of the increase in personal
and commercially sensitive information
collected by the government.
1.19 The lack of consistency among the many provisions was remarked upon in
1991 by Professor Paul Finn:
When one amalgamates the plethora of statutory provisions, regulations, codes,
administrative instructions and common law rules one
is left in almost every
Australian jurisdiction with an ill-fitting, sometimes unintelligible mosaic of
prescriptions and proscriptions.
For the individual official the consequence of
this can be conflicting, sometimes quite unacceptable, legal demands: the
can be criminalised, the important left in a state of lamentable
uncertainty.
1.20 There are several intertwined issues in Finn’s observations that
provide a relevant backdrop to this Inquiry and the desire
comprehensive, consistent and workable laws. First, a basic practical matter was
to identify the ‘plethora’
of provisions—without that work
‘it’s a wilderness’, it was remarked in an early
consultation.
The map that has
been produced by the ALRC—described below—provides a thorough
picture of all relevant provisions and
a basis for comparison and analysis
throughout the Inquiry.
1.21 Secondly, a key challenge is to identify the core principles or values
underpinning the ‘mosaic of prescriptions and proscriptions’
and to distinguish these
from the values in play in relation to other Commonwealth provisions concerning
information.
1.22 Information handling, management and protection in the Commonwealth
context can be expressed as a spectrum, or continuum. At
government’ end of the spectrum, we find information that should be
disclosed as a matter of course. It is
now common practice for most Commonwealth
departments and agencies to maintain websites that provide an enormous amount of
information.
This is both desirable, in the interests of promoting open and
accountable government in a democratic society, as well as practical
efficient—the more information that is readily available to the public in
this way, the fewer requests, questions and FOI
applications there are
departmental officers to have to handle. Then there is the information that is
available through the mechanism
of a request under the FOI Act. This also
includes information that is not normally available to the public—for
example, where
it is covered by an exception to FOI disclosure rules, but
nevertheless may be disclosed in the exercise of discretion by a departmental
head or other senior officer. Moving towards the ‘protected
information’ end, one finds information that is shared through
agreement, protocols or legislative arrangements amongst government agencies and
with private sector partners, but is otherwise
protected through confidentiality
and secrecy provisions. Finally, there is the information that is strictly
secret and closely protected—most
obviously, information relating to
national security or ongoing law enforcement operations, but also many other
categories of information
that are exempt from FOI legislation. Even at this end
of the spectrum, however, there may be circumstances in which information
is otherwise secret can be revealed through prescribed ‘public interest
disclosure’ (or ‘whistleblower’)
mechanisms.
1.23 Thirdly, the consequences of the provisions for the individual officer
need to be examined closely so that the penalty regime
is an appropriate fit for
that which is restricted or proscribed; and the individual is not left in a
state of ‘lamentable
uncertainty’
with respect
to their conduct in relation to Commonwealth information. Aspects of this
problem were identified in ALRC 98 where it
was also recommended that, in
conducting the review of secrecy provisions, a clear distinction should be drawn
between conduct that
gives rise to administrative sanctions and conduct that
gives rise to criminal sanctions.
of the Inquiry
of Reference
1.24 The Terms of Reference are reproduced at the beginning of this
Discussion Paper. The ALRC is directed to focus on options for
consistent approach across government to the protection of Commonwealth
information as well as providing appropriate access
to information in the
interests of maintaining an open and accountable government.
1.25 During the course of the Inquiry the ALRC is directed to consider:
a. relevant laws and practices relating to the protection of Commonwealth
information, including the scope and appropriateness of
legislative provisions
regarding secrecy and confidentiality;
b. whether there is a need to consolidate and modernise relevant provisions
currently in the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) and other Commonwealth legislation
for inclusion in the
Criminal Code
c. the way in which secrecy laws in the
interact with other
laws and practices, including those relating to secrecy, privacy, freedom of
information, archiving, whistle-blowing,
and data-matching;
d. whether there should be different considerations for secrecy laws relating to
the protection of national security and other sensitive
Commonwealth
information; and
e. any related matter.
Definitions
1.26 This Inquiry concerns ‘secrecy laws’ in relation to
‘Commonwealth information’, often in the hands of
a Commonwealth
officer. Each expression requires some definition.
Secrecy laws
1.27 A key preliminary step in this Inquiry is to identify what provisions
are included in the concept of secrecy provisions, as there
is no established
definition of the term ‘secrecy law’ or ‘secrecy
provision’.
1.28 Commonwealth secrecy provisions and the information they protect are
varied. There are offences of general application, like
s 70 of the
, that prohibit disclosure of
information a government officer
has obtained in their official capacity that he or she has a duty not to
disclose. Other provisions
are quite specific, and prohibit the disclosure of
identified classified, sensitive or personal information.
1.29 In reviewing the range of provisions that should be considered in this
Inquiry, the ALRC has identified, for example, provisions
that deal with
communicating or disclosing information; provisions about receiving information
that is secret; and those concerning
misuse of information. Issues of secrecy
are also aspects of the management of information in an administrative sense, as
being the subject of specific prescription in legislation.
1.30 For the purposes of this Inquiry, the ALRC has adopted a broad approach
to the characterisation of secrecy provisions and defined
a secrecy provision as
a provision in an Act or subordinate legislation that imposes secrecy or
confidentiality obligations.
1.31 Secrecy provisions are not limited to restricting disclosure of
information. They may cover a chain of conduct that leads to
disclosure—such as soliciting, obtaining, copying, using, retaining,
divulging, and communicating information. They
also may include provisions
dealing with receipt of disclosed information. All the provisions identified,
however, are focused on
protecting the confidentiality of the information.
1.32 There are related provisions that sit outside this definition, as their
principal focus is not the protection of information
through obligations of
confidentiality or secrecy. These have not been included in the concept of
‘secrecy law’ for the
purpose of this Inquiry. Examples include
provisions that:
prohibit the misuse of information for personal gain—as the
principal concern of such provisions is fraud, not protection of
confidentiality of the
information;
concern the storage, modifying or destroying of information;
permit the disclosure of, for example, personal information in
certain circumstances—as the core aim concerns privacy of personal
information.
1.33 Aspects of practice and procedure regarding the
protection of information and management of information handling are also
and are considered separately in Chapter 15.
Commonwealth
information
1.34 ‘Commonwealth information’ (which may also be called
‘government information’) is information developed,
received or
collected by or on behalf of the Commonwealth government. It includes
information the Commonwealth receives from individuals
(such as personal
information provided to an agency like Centrelink), information developed
in-house (for example, intelligence reports)
and information generated by
foreign governments that is shared with the Commonwealth government.
1.35 Commonwealth information may be classified into a number of categories
based upon their ‘sensitivity’. The
Australian Government
Protective Security Manual
binds all Commonwealth
agencies to a series of procedures designed to protect Commonwealth information,
including classified information
and other sensitive information. The PSM also
refers to ‘official information’, which includes any information
or collected by, or on behalf of, the government, through its agencies
and contractors.
1.36 Once information is classified, it is marked accordingly and given
various forms of protection—including restricting access
to people with a
security clearance at the appropriate level; physical protection, such as
storage in approved containers of sufficient
strength or meeting other security
standards; and restrictions on how it may be transferred from one person to
another. Chapter 15
discusses in detail the PSM and other manuals, policies and
guidelines relating to information handling to which Commonwealth officers
other persons made privy to Commonwealth information) are subject. The
protection of classified and security sensitive information
was also considered
in ALRC 98.
1.37 Outside the
classification process, documents prepared for use by the Commonwealth Cabinet
to formulate policy and make decisions
are given special protection on the basis
that unauthorised disclosure would damage the fullness and frankness of
discussions in
the Cabinet Room and would thereby inhibit the process of good
government. These documents are marked Cabinet-in-Confidence regardless
other security considerations. The Cabinet Handbook stipulates that
Cabinet-in-Confidence documents require a level of protection
equivalent to that given to documents classified as ‘Protected’
under the guidelines set out in the
1.38 However, the fact that information is neither classified nor a Cabinet
document does not mean that it is freely available. Other
legislation or the
common law duty of confidence may also protect Commonwealth information in
certain circumstances; and although
the FOI Act gives the public rights of
access to government-held or government-controlled information, this is subject
to a number
of exceptions and
exemptions.
Commonwealth officer
1.39 Individuals who may be subject to secrecy obligations in relation to
Commonwealth information are sometimes referred to as Commonwealth
officers and
sometimes as public service employees or similar terms.
includes a general prohibition against the
unauthorised disclosure of official information by current and former
Commonwealth officers.
‘Commonwealth officers’ are defined as including those appointed or
engaged under the
Public Service Act 1999
(Cth), those holding office
under, or employed by, the Commonwealth, and those who perform services by or on
behalf of the Commonwealth.
Public Service Act
refers to Australian Public Service (APS)
employees, and includes those employed in Australian Government departments and
agencies. ‘Commonwealth officer’, defined in the
includes, but is wider than, ‘APS employees’. These
definitions are discussed in more detail in Chapter 8.
1.42 For the purposes of this Inquiry, the
wider expression is used unless the context requires a narrower term.
Whistleblower
1.43 The term ‘whistleblower’ is of relatively recent origin. The
Macquarie Dictionary suggests that the term emerged
in the United States in the
second half of the 1960s from the phrase ‘blow the whistle on’. It
is now commonly used even
in official contexts, as, for example, the House of
Representatives Standing Committee’s report, referred to
and in s 16 of the
Public Service Act
1.44 In this Inquiry, the term ‘whistleblower’ is used to refer
to someone who makes a public interest disclosure, for
example, alleging that
the conduct of a Commonwealth officer or agency is corrupt or involves
maladministration. This topic is discussed
in greater detail in Chapter 9.
Mapping secrecy
1.45 As part of the background research work for this Inquiry, the ALRC
undertook a ‘mapping exercise’ to identify and
analyse secrecy
provisions. As noted above, for the purposes of this Inquiry, the ALRC has
defined secrecy provisions broadly as
any provision in primary or subordinate
legislation that imposes secrecy or confidentiality obligations.
1.46 The 507 secrecy
provisions identified by the ALRC are scattered throughout 175 pieces of primary
and subordinate legislation.
These provisions are listed in a table in
Appendix 4. Approximately 70% of the statutory secrecy provisions
identified expressly
impose criminal penalties for breach of secrecy or
confidentiality obligations. These provisions are listed in the first section
the table in Appendix 4. The remaining provisions set out a duty of secrecy or
confidentiality or establish rules for the handling
of protected information and
may provide for civil or administrative penalties for breach of such duties.
These provisions are listed
in the second section of the table in Appendix 4.
While such provisions do not in themselves create an offence, s 70 of the
may operate to attach criminal sanctions to the breach by a
Commonwealth officer of these provisions.
1.47 The table does not include provisions that
merely clarify or inform the operation of a secrecy provision, such as exception
that set out the circumstances in which the handling of Commonwealth
information will not breach a secrecy provision.
1.48 The ALRC has used this map of secrecy laws as a basis for comparing and
analysing the scope of current secrecy laws and to inform
the development of
proposed reforms. Figures drawn from the data are expressed throughout this
Discussion Paper in approximate percentage
values, usually rounded to the
nearest 5%. Percentage values will differ according to whether the assessment
includes all secrecy
provisions or only offence provisions.
Matters outside this
1.49 In reviewing Commonwealth secrecy provisions, the Terms of Reference ask
the ALRC to consider ‘relevant laws and practices
relating to the
protection of Commonwealth information’. The idea of protecting
Commonwealth information can be conceived broadly.
It can encompass issues as
varied as how files and documents are physically protected; whether the
classification processes are appropriate
and effective; or the extent to which
the production of Commonwealth information can be compelled from Commonwealth
officers in the
course of investigations or in legal proceedings. It could also
encompass other rules of evidence under which certain information
adduced in courts or tribunals.
1.50 The ALRC’s approach in this Inquiry is informed by the emphasis in
the Terms of Reference on the increased need to share
information ‘within
and between governments and with the private sector’—namely, the
business of government, rather
than the business of courts and tribunals.
In addition, the ALRC has addressed the use of government information in courts
and tribunals
to some extent in a prior report.
1.51 In ALRC 98, the ALRC considered the protection of classified and
security sensitive information in the context of court and tribunal
proceedings.
recommended the introduction of a new National Security Information Procedures
Act, which would apply to all Australian
courts and tribunals. Many of these
recommendations were implemented by the enactment of the
National Security
Information (Criminal and Civil Proceedings) Act
1.52 In this Inquiry the ALRC considers both the scope and appropriateness of
current secrecy provisions and how they affect the ability
of information to
flow between agencies, governments, and with the private and community sectors,
to complement prior
recommendations.
1.53 The focus of the Inquiry is therefore on provisions concerning the
secrecy and confidentiality obligations of individual Commonwealth
officers (or
other people nominated in legislation) and the information they acquire by
virtue of their position. Review of the government’s
larger security and
information management systems is outside the scope of this Inquiry.
Process of reform
for the Inquiry
1.54 The timeframe for the Inquiry is set by the Terms of Reference and the
necessity to embark upon a thorough and staged process
of consultation.
1.55 The ALRC’s standard practice is to produce an Issues Paper and a
Discussion Paper, prior to producing the final Report.
Both the Issues Paper and
the Discussion Paper may be obtained free of charge in hard copy or on CD from
the ALRC or may be downloaded
free of charge from the ALRC’s website
www.alrc.gov.au
1.56 The Report, containing the final recommendations, is due to be presented
to the Attorney-General by 31 October 2009 for tabling
in the Australian
Parliament, at which point the Report becomes a public
1.57 ALRC Reports are not self-executing documents. The ALRC is an advisory
body and provides recommendations about the best way to
proceed, but
implementation is always a matter for Government and
1.58 A key aspect of ALRC procedures is to establish an expert Advisory
Committee or ‘reference group’ to assist with
the development of its
In this Inquiry, the
Advisory Committee includes judges, heads and senior officers of Australian
Government agencies, academics,
senior lawyers, and an FOI consultant.
1.59 The Advisory Committee has particular value in helping the ALRC to
identify the key issues and determine priorities, providing
quality assurance in
the research, writing and consultation processes. The Advisory Committee will
also assist with the development
of proposals and recommendations for reform as
the Inquiry progresses. Ultimate responsibility for the Report and
recommendations,
however, remains with the Commissioners of the ALRC.
1.60 The Advisory Committee met for the first time on 30 October 2008, to
consider the questions to be included in the Issues Paper.
It met for the second
time on 19 March 2009, to consider the proposals contained in this Discussion
Paper. A third (and final) meeting
will be held before the completion of the
final Report, to consider the draft recommendations for reform.
Issues Paper 34
Review of Secrecy Laws
ALRC Issues Paper 34 (IP 34) was
released electronically on 9 December 2008 and on 17 December 2008 in hard copy
format, in order
to commence the community consultation process on an informed
1.62 Divided into seven chapters, IP 34 was intended to identify the
main issues relevant to the Inquiry, provide background information,
encourage informed community participation by stimulating full and open
discussion of the issues arising from the Terms of Reference.
1.63 IP 34 set out 65 questions that the ALRC identified as arising out of
the Terms of Reference and which required comment before
the ALRC could
formulate the proposals for reform contained in this Discussion Paper.
1.64 To date, the ALRC has received 45 written submissions. Lists of the
submissions are set out in Appendix 1. Two submissions were
made as confidential
submissions and one contained a confidential appendix.
1.65 Submissions were received, for example, from: government law enforcement
and investigative bodies—including the Australian
Federal Police, the
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions and the Australian Intelligence
Community; government agencies—such
as the Department of Human Services,
the Australian Taxation Office and the Treasury; tribunals and oversight
bodies—including
the Commonwealth Ombudsman and the Social Security
Appeals Tribunal; lawyers—both through the representative group, the Law
Council of Australia, and by individuals; media groups—such as
Australia’s Right to Know coalition and the Australian
Press Council;
lobby groups—such as Fairness in Child Support and Whistleblowers
Australia; and individuals.
1.66 With the release of this Discussion Paper, the ALRC once again invites
individuals and organisations to make submissions to the
Inquiry prior to the
release of the final Report.
1.67 To facilitate communication about the nature and focus of this Inquiry
the ALRC released an overview document,
Review of Secrecy Laws—Inquiry
, in February 2009. It
is written in plain language and
provides a ready access to information about the Inquiry and is available online
as a virtual document.
Like other ALRC publications, it can be downloaded free
from the ALRC website: <
www.alrc.gov.au
consultation
1.68 The Terms of Reference indicate that the ALRC ‘is to identify and
consult with key stakeholders, including relevant Commonwealth,
Territory agencies and private sector bodies’.
1.69 One of the most important features of ALRC inquiries is the commitment
to widespread community
consultation.
The nature and
extent of this engagement is normally determined by the subject matter of the
reference—particularly whether
the topic is regarded as a technical one,
of interest largely to specialists in the field, or is a matter of interest and
to the broader community. Some ALRC inquiries—such as those
relating to children and the law, Aboriginal customary law, multiculturalism
the law, the protection of human genetic information, and privacy—have
involved a significant level of interest and involvement
from the general public
and the media. Others, like the inquiry into client legal privilege and federal
investigations, were of particular
interest to legal practitioners and
Commonwealth agencies.
1.70 The ALRC is based in Sydney but, in recognition of the national
character of the body, consultations are conducted around Australia
Inquiry. Any individual or organisation with an interest in meeting with the
Inquiry in relation to the matters raised
in this Discussion Paper is encouraged
to contact the ALRC.
1.71 To date, consultations have been held with a number of government
agencies, Commonwealth public servants, academics, judges and
members of the
legal profession. A full list of consultations is set out in Appendix 2.
1.72 Under the provisions of the
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
(Cth), the ALRC ‘may inform itself in any way it thinks fit’ for
the purposes of reviewing or considering anything that
is the subject of an
In this regard the ALRC
is utilising two additional strategies for consultation in this Inquiry—an
online forum and a national
phone-in. A phone-in was undertaken during the
ideas and concerns that complemented the other forms of consultation
through submissions and face-to-face
1.73 The phone-in for this Inquiry was conducted on 11 and 12 February 2009.
The ALRC received thirty-four calls over the two-day
period. The concerns
expressed included matters such as: inappropriate revelations of personal
information or perceived breaches
of privacy; difficulties of gaining access to
personal information for the purpose, for example, of family reunion; problems
security classifications—overclassification—and obtaining
security clearances; cultures of secrecy in agencies and a
desire to keep
problems ‘in house’; problems of obtaining information under the FOI
Act; the need for whistleblower protection;
difficulties in the sharing of
information amongst agencies; and the draconian nature of s 70 of the
1.74 To facilitate public communication in relation to the Inquiry, the ALRC
also initiated a ‘Talking Secrecy’ online
forum, again following
upon the success of the ‘Talking Privacy’ website established in
connection with the Privacy
The ‘Talking
Secrecy’ online forum takes this a step further as an interactive site, or
‘blog’. The object
of such websites is to create a ‘talking
space’ in relation to each ALRC inquiry, to provide information about the
in an accessible manner.
1.75 After moderation, the ALRC posted 12 contributions to the online forum.
Comments included matters about agency culture; the security
classification
system under the PSM; the application of tax secrecy provisions to information
proposals; the need for, and
problems in devising, effective information and risk management systems; and who
should be subject to
secrecy obligations.
1.76 The questions on the ‘Talking Secrecy’ online forum will be
changed to reflect the proposals in this Discussion Paper
and to seek further
comment in addition to the process for making written submissions.
Written submissions
1.77 With the release of this Discussion Paper, the ALRC invites individuals
and organisations to make submissions in response to
the specific proposals, or
to any of the background material and analysis provided, to help advance the
reform process in this Inquiry.
1.78 There is no specified format for submissions and they may be marked
confidential if preferred. The ALRC will gratefully accept
anything from
handwritten notes to detailed commentary and scholarly analyses on Commonwealth
secrecy laws. Although not essential,
the ALRC prefers electronic communications
and submission may be made simply by contributing comments online at the
website—even simple dot-points are welcome.
1.79 The ALRC appreciates that the tight deadline for making
submissions—both in response to the Issues Paper and this Discussion
Paper—places considerable pressure upon those who wish to participate in
the Inquiry. The ALRC acknowledges the considerable
amount of work undertaken by
those who have contributed to the consultative processes to date. Given the
deadline for delivering
the final Report to the Attorney-General, and the need
to consider fully the submissions received in response to this Discussion
all submissions must be submitted on time—by Friday 7 August
1.80 It is the invaluable work of participants that enriches the whole
consultative process of ALRC inquiries. The quality of the
outcomes is assisted
greatly by the understanding of contributors in needing to meet the deadline
imposed by the reporting process
itself. This Inquiry is no exception.
Discussion Paper
1.81 This Discussion Paper contains a more detailed treatment of the issues
raised in the Issues Paper and indicates the Inquiry’s
current thinking in
the form of specific reform proposals.
1.82 The focus of the proposals is to provide a principled basis for a
revised general secrecy offence, complemented by criteria for
review of specific
secrecy provisions and revised administrative procedures and penalty structures
aimed at fostering effective information
handling in the public sector.
1.83 However, the proposals contained in this Discussion Paper do not
represent the final recommendations of the Inquiry. The ALRC
is seeking further
submissions and is undertaking a further round of national consultations and it
is not uncommon for there to be
some significant changes of approach between a
Discussion Paper and Final Report. If there are passages in this paper that
to imply that definitive conclusions have already been drawn about the
final recommendations, this is unintended and not meant to
inhibit full and open
discussion of policy choices before the Inquiry’s program of research and
consultation is completed.
1.84 In recent times, the ALRC’s approach to law reform has involved a
mix of strategies including: legislation and subordinate
regulations, official
standards and codes of practice, industry and professional guidelines, education
and training programs, and
so on. Proposals—and, later,
recommendations—may be directed to the Attorney-General, to whom the
Report is presented,
and also to other government and non-government agencies,
associations and institutions for action or consideration.
1.85 Finally, it should be noted that in the past the ALRC often drafted
legislation as the focus of its law reform effort. The ALRC’s
practice has
since changed, and it does not produce draft legislation unless specifically
asked to do so in the Terms of Reference
for a particular inquiry. This is
partly because drafting is a specialised function better left to the
parliamentary experts, and
partly because the ALRC’s time and resources
are better directed towards determining the policy that will shape any resulting
legislation. The ALRC has not been asked to produce draft legislation in this
Inquiry, but its final recommendations will specify
the nature of any desired
legislative change.
1.86 This Discussion Paper is divided into 15 chapters. Proposals for reform
are not spread evenly throughout. Some chapters provide
mainly contextual or
background material, which does not lend itself to specific reform proposals,
particularly in the earlier part
of the Discussion Paper. Other chapters are
more focused on technical aspects of the law and practice—it is in these
that the reform proposals are mainly found.
1.87 The chapters fall into four broad areas:
concepts and comparisons;
a general criminal secrecy offence;
specific secrecy offences; and
administrative duties, practices and
procedures.
Concepts and
comparisons
1.88 The first five chapters provide the conceptual framework of secrecy
laws, including comparisons with other major Commonwealth
legislation and an
overview of the confidentiality and secrecy obligations under common law and
legislation.
1.89 Chapter 2 provides a consideration of the broad conceptual framework for
the Inquiry and the interaction and tension between
ideas of secrecy and
accountability of government. It also includes a consideration of the concept of
‘public interest’
in both its general and specific senses, and
contrasts approaches to the protection of Commonwealth information, on the one
focusing on categories of information, on the other, on the harm caused by
disclosure.
1.90 Chapter 3 focuses on information sharing by the Australian Government
for the purpose of satisfying governmental policies and
programs. This will
usually involve the sharing of information between Australian Government
agencies, but it may also include the
sharing of information with state and
territory agencies or the private sector. The chapter summarises the various
ways in which
information is shared, including, for example, through data
matching and memorandums of understanding operating within a broad commitment
a ‘whole of government’ response to policy making.
1.91 Chapter 4 considers the relationship between Commonwealth secrecy laws
and other Commonwealth laws dealing with the handling
of information—in
particular, the FOI Act, the
Archives Act 1983
(Cth) and the
(Cth). It also refers to proposed amendments in each area.
1.92 Chapter 5 provides a broad overview of obligations of secrecy both under
the common law and secrecy provisions in Commonwealth
legislation. The chapter
reviews the number and location of secrecy provisions in Commonwealth
legislation today, outlines the different
provisions are designed to protect and provides an analysis of the elements of
secrecy and confidentiality
provisions. In particular, this chapter examines
questions such as whose activity is regulated by Commonwealth secrecy
provisions,
and what kind of activity is regulated.
A new general offence
1.93 Chapter 6 examines the role of administrative, civil and criminal
penalty provisions in regulating the disclosure of Commonwealth
information, as
well as the need for a general secrecy offence. The Chapter proposes that
ss 70 and 79(3) of the
should be repealed and
replaced by a new general secrecy offence in the
Criminal Code
the prosecution should be required to prove that a particular disclosure caused
harm, was reasonably likely to cause harm,
or was intended to cause harm to
specified public interests, such as the security or defence of the
Commonwealth.
1.94 The following three chapters focus on different aspects of the proposed
general secrecy offence. Chapter 7 considers the kinds
of public interest that
should be protected by a general secrecy offence. Chapter 8 considers some of
the essential elements of the
proposed new offence—including whose
conduct, and what kind of conduct, should be regulated. Chapter 9 considers what
and defences should be available under the proposed general secrecy
offence, and what penalties should apply for breach.
Specific secrecy offences
1.95 Chapters 10, 11 and 12 review specific secrecy offences—that is,
secrecy offences other than ss 70 and 79(3) of the
have general application to Commonwealth officers and information—in the
light of the proposed general secrecy offence
and the policy basis for that
offence. The aim of this process is to develop proposals to promote consistency
in, and simplification
of, Commonwealth secrecy offences.
1.96 Chapter 10 discusses how specific secrecy offences should be framed in
order to be more consistent with the general secrecy offence,
and with each
other, and highlights aspects of the general secrecy offence that might usefully
be more broadly adopted. The key elements
of the offences considered in this
chapter are: requirements for a reasonable likelihood of harm; the relevant
conduct; fault elements;
the parties to offences; and the nature of the
information protected. Chapter 11 repeats this approach with respect to
and defences, and penalties.
1.97 Chapter 12 examines the criteria involved in assessing whether
there is substantial replication and identifies examples of offences
subject to more detailed review, might be repealed on this basis. The chapter
also discusses general concerns about lack of
consistency in the drafting of
specific secrecy offences and ways to address this problem, including through
the consolidation of
existing secrecy offences. The chapter also suggests a
process for implementing reform and develops proposals to ensure that this
process is informed by the ALRC’s conclusions, primarily through the
development of detailed drafting directions and other
guidance against which
existing and proposed new secrecy offence provisions can be evaluated.
Administrative duties, practices and
1.98 The final three chapters focus on the administrative secrecy framework
in the Australian Government.
1.99 Chapter 13 considers the administrative secrecy obligations of persons
engaged as Australian Public Service (APS) employees under
Public Service
(Cth), and makes a number of proposals for clarifying and
consolidating these obligations. Procedural safeguards for the investigation
enforcement of administrative secrecy obligations are also discussed.
1.100 Chapter 14 proposes models for harmonising the administrative
secrecy regimes that apply to Commonwealth employees other than
employees—such as members of the Australian Defence Force, members of the
Australian Federal Police and employees of public
authorities—with the
Public Service Act
framework. The chapter also considers mechanisms for
regulating persons that are not in an ongoing employment relationship with the
Australian Government, such as private sector contractors and former
Commonwealth employees.
1.101 Chapter 15 discusses the extent to which the above strategies
contribute to the compliance of Commonwealth officers with secrecy
other information-handling obligations, and makes suggestions for possible
improvements. The chapter goes on to consider
information handling at the level
of Australian Government agencies, in particular, the role of independent
oversight bodies in fostering
an effective information-handling culture at the
agency level. Finally, the chapter considers information handling in the private
In order to ensure
consideration for use in the final Report, submissions addressing the proposals
in this Discussion Paper must reach
the ALRC by
Friday, 7 August 2009
Details about how to make a submission are set out at the front of this
publication.
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 21 October 1914, 269 (P
Parliament of
Australia—Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs,
Freedom of Information: Report by the Senate Standing Committee on
Constitutional and Legal Affairs on the Freedom of Information
Bill 1978, and
Aspects of the Archives Bill 1978
Human Rights Commission,
Crimes Act 1914
and Other Crimes Legislation of the Commonwealth
H Gibbs, R Watson and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Final Report
Parliament—Senate Select Committee on Public Interest Whistleblowing,
In the Public Interest
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
In Confidence: A Report of the Inquiry into the
Protection of Confidential Personal and Commercial Information Held by the
Commonwealth
Australian Parliament—House
of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Whistleblower Protection: A Comprehensive Scheme for the Commonwealth Public
(2009), Rec 1.
Australian Law Reform Commission
and Administrative Review Council,
Open Government: A Review of the Federal
Freedom of Information Act
, ALRC 77 (1995), Rec
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security Sensitive
Information
, ALRC 98 (2004), Rec
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
ALRC 108 (2008), Rec 15–2.
Terms of Reference are set out at the front of this Discussion
J McGinness, ‘Secrecy
Provisions in Commonwealth Legislation’
[1990] FedLawRw 3
Federal Law Review
Information
, Integrity in Government Project: Interim Report 1 (1991),
New South Wales Bar Association,
Consultation
, Sydney, 8 October
Appendix 4 lists all criminal
and non-criminal provisions identified by the ALRC to
Information
, Integrity in Government Project: Interim Report 1 (1991),
This was a matter that was
referred to in the review of Commonwealth criminal provisions in 1991:
H Gibbs, R Watson and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Final
, ‘The Disclosure of Official
Information’, after a consideration of existing Australian law regarding
disclosure of official
information, comparative law and options for reform, a
chapter was included concerning ‘Misuse of Official Information for
Private Gain’: ch 33. The Committee considered that such a matter could be
included, if at all, under other provisions of the
proposed new offence. It was, therefore, peripheral to what were considered
secrecy provisions in the report.
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Government Protective Security Manual (PSM) [Summary]
http://www.ag.gov.au
at 15 October
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Australian Government Protective
Security Manual (PSM)
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security
Sensitive Information
, ALRC 98 (2004). See also Ch
Australian Government Department of
the Prime Minister and Cabinet,
Cabinet Handbook
(5th ed, 2004),
Crimes Act 1914
Australian Parliament—House
of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Whistleblower Protection: A Comprehensive Scheme for the Commonwealth Public
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security
Sensitive Information
Ibid; Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
, ALRC 102 (2005),
The Attorney-General must
table the Report within 15 sitting days of receiving it:
Australian Law
Reform Commission Act 1996
However, the ALRC has a strong
record of having its advice followed. About 58% of the ALRC’s previous
reports have been fully
or substantially implemented, about 29% of reports have
been partially implemented, 8% of reports are under consideration and 5%
had no implementation to date: Australian Law Reform Commission,
Report 2007–08
, ALRC 109 (2008),
A list of Advisory Committee
members can be found in the List of Participants at the front of this Discussion
B Opeskin, ‘Measuring
Success’ in B Opeskin and D Weisbrot (eds),
The Promise of Law
(2005) 202.
Law Reform Commission Act 1996
The ‘National Privacy
Phone-in’ is described in Australian Law Reform Commission,
Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
, ALRC 108 (2008),
[1.89]–[1.91].
[1.92]–[1.93].
2. Open Government, Secrecy and
Public Interest
Introduction
Why secrecy?
Towards openness
The idea of accountability
Scrutiny of government actions
Balancing secrecy laws with accountability
Submissions
ALRC’s views
Secrecy laws and the Australian
Constitution
The implied freedom of political communication
Separation of powers
The public interest
A wide concept
A unifying thread
Contrasting approaches
ALRC’s views
2. Open Government, Secrecy and
Public Interest
Introduction
2.1 In reviewing Commonwealth secrecy laws in this Inquiry, the Australian
Law Reform Commission (ALRC) has been asked to have regard
to the importance of
balancing, on the one hand, the need to protect Commonwealth information and, on
the other, the public interest
in an open and accountable system of government.
This raises the issue of when the balance of ‘public interests’
Commonwealth information to be protected rather than being freely
available on the premise of open and accountable government.
2.2 Both values—secrecy and openness—reflect certain historical
understandings of the relationship between a government,
its citizens, its
officials and information. One fundamental component in that relationship is the
interaction between secrecy laws
Constitution
including the implied freedom of political communication and the separation
2.3 However, at the heart of the challenge of balancing secrecy with openness
lies the question of ‘why secrecy?’ at all,
as well as what is the
meaning, or meanings, of ‘public interest’. In setting the scene for
a consideration of the proper
role and function of secrecy provisions in
Commonwealth laws today, this chapter will explore some of the key ideas in the
Why secrecy?
2.4 For most of Australia’s history, ‘official secrecy has been
the legislatively enforced
The first secrecy
provision was introduced in the colony of Victoria in
and it ‘set the pattern
for the various public services of
Australia’.
It provided that:
no information out of the strict course of official duty shall be given directly
or indirectly, by any officer without the express
direction or permission of the
responsible Minister.
2.5 The idea that secrecy of official information was necessary is based on
the ‘Westminster system’ of government, inherited
from the United
An essentially closed
system, it is based upon ministerial responsibility, in which secrecy in
relation to the mechanisms of advising
ministers—such as Cabinet
deliberations and documents—is critical. It is also complemented by the
view of the public
servant as neutral and anonymous and precluded from public
comment on government actions or
As explained by the
Independent Review Panel examining the Queensland
Freedom of Information Act
, chaired by David Solomon (Solomon Committee):
Secrecy had been an essential ingredient of the system—secrecy to protect
the deliberations of the cabinet, secrecy to protect
the advice proffered by
public servants to their ministers, secrecy to hide what happened within the
public service. The democratic
element that allowed this closed system to
function was provided by the concept of ministerial
responsibility—ministers were
responsible, collectively and individually,
directly to parliament and indirectly to the electorate, for what the government
and for what their departments
2.6 The idea that government information is a special commodity is a much
older one, however. As Professor Enid Campbell has explained,
the notion that
the activities of government should be secret goes back to a period where
monarchs were motivated by a desire to
protect themselves against their rivals
and official information was considered the property of the Crown, to be
disclosed or withheld
2.7 In contrast, in the United States (US), government information is
relatively more accessible.
Sweden a great deal of personal information about individuals is made available
online by government
different from the position in the UK, US and Australia which have legislative
regimes that, to varying degrees, restrict
disclosure of information about
individuals.
2.8 In Australia, the perceived need to protect official information is
reflected in the first Commonwealth secrecy provisions, passed
initial session of the Australian Parliament in 1901 and aimed at protecting
national security information.
But as the reach of government expanded, so too did secrecy provisions. As John
McGinness notes,
with the expansion of the Commonwealth’s role after the mid-1940s in areas
such as taxation, health, education, welfare, scientific
research, industry
assistance and regulation, secrecy provisions increased in number as a
reflection of the increase in personal
and commercially sensitive information
collected by the government.
2.9 Periods of international conflict have precipitated an awareness of the
need for, and experience of, secrecy provisions. For example,
World War II and
the Cold War ‘provided a setting where secrecy was linked to military
Moreover, many
senior ministers in the 1950s and 1960s had served in World War II, and had been
‘imbued with the military’s
respect for
amendments were made to s 70 of the
Crimes Act 1914
inspired in part by
the anti-communist climate of the Cold
which had the effect of
strengthening the provision by extending the reach of the section to former
Commonwealth officers. However,
as Greg Terrill notes, s 70 was ‘just one
of many secrecy provisions inserted or strengthened in legislation after the
2.10 The 1960s saw a change in approach to official secrecy with the
development of a new philosophical and practical approach to
government known as
‘open government’.
As Terrill notes:
The logic was simple. As government became more a part of their lives, so people
outside government needed or wished to know more
affect decisions.
2.11 Freedom of informationFOIlaws were the response.
Following the introduction of such legislation in the US, a
number of speeches,
papers and editorials in the late 1960s and early 1970s raised the profile of
the concept of FOI in Australia
and propelled the inclusion of legislation on
the parliamentary agenda.
2.12 In 1970, the then Leader of the Opposition, the Hon Gough Whitlam MP,
stated that ‘it is clear that after 20 years in government
secrecy has become commonplace in governmental decision
Introduction of
FOI legislation became an issue prior to the 1972 federal
at which time the
Australian Labor Party claimed that the government’s monopoly of knowledge
had ‘led to bad decisions
government’.
2.13 During the early 1970s, a number of government committees were set up
federally and in some of the Australian states to examine
the review of
administrative decisions in light of the growing impetus towards
openness—particularly influenced by developments
in this regard in the US
and in contrast to the adherence to a more closed system of government in the
UK. The introduction of FOI
legislation remained a key political issue during
2.14 The legislative reforms that eventually followed became known as the
‘new administrative law’, the purpose of which
was to facilitate
effective public administration while at the same time safeguarding the civic
rights of the individual
2.15 The initial package of legislation included the
Ombudsman Act
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act
(Cth) and the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act
(Cth). These Acts established mechanisms for enhancing the accountability of
government departments and public servants and ‘together
framework for control of government
In addition, the
Administrative Review Council was set up as part of an integrated system of
administrative review, with ongoing
responsibility for promoting, educating and
advising on administrative law principles, and balancing the provision of
justice for
the individual citizen against the interests of the Government in
implementing the programs and policies for which it was
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth) (FOI Act) was passed in
1982, embracing in a formal way the concept of open government. The FOI Act was
followed by the
Archives Act 1983
(Cth), which established a regime for
the storage of, and public access to, government records. The enactment of the
FOI Act was considered
a ‘major step in establishing open
government’ and a significant step towards overturning ‘a deeply
tradition of government
2.17 The move away from a closed to a more open system is also evident in the
UK—the home of the Westminster system—in
its introduction of the
Freedom of Information Act 2000
, which came into force only in January
2005. To assist in preparation for the operation of the Act and to facilitate
its implementation
once in effect, the Office of Information Commissioner was
established. The Office has a dual purpose—‘to promote access
official information and protect personal
information’.
2.18 At the same time as access to government information was being opened
up, however, the increase in the size and roles of government,
combined with
technological advances that enhanced the ability of government to deal with
large amounts of information, led to concerns
of personal information in the hands of public servants. The
(Cth) was the result, concerning the retention and management of personal
information and reflecting a philosophy of protection and
individual control of
such information.
2.19 Both the FOI Act and the
contain provisions in
relation to personal records and
information.
The precise
interaction of FOI, privacy and secrecy regimes is quite complex and is
considered in Chapter 4. The pivotal question
is how far the idea of
accountability should go? FOI exemptions, secrecy provisions and
information-handling practices are just some
of the matters that are affected by
the response to this question. As a preliminary consideration for the following
chapters, the
idea of accountability and the place for secrecy provisions in
that context will be considered.
The idea of
accountability
2.20 Access to, and openness of, government information is based on the idea
of accountability—that a representative democratic
government is open to
account for its actions, policies and administrative decisions, a key part of
which is public access to the
information on which action and policies are
As Rocque Reynolds has
Governments have access to, and control of, vast amounts of information which
may be personal, commercial, sensitive, confidential
or politically and socially
significant. How governments collect, store, use and disclose this information;
whether the public has
access to such information; and when governments are
required to generate or provide information to the public, tells us a lot about
the relationship between the state and its
2.21 That ‘the public’ now includes an increasing group of
‘Net Geners’—the 12- to 30-year old cohort
Generation’—adds a further imperative of openness:
To win the trust of Net Geners, governments have to be transparent … At a
minimum, policy makers should publicize their overall
goals and objectives and,
for specific issues and decisions, the documents they relied on, the names of
the participants in the decision-making
process, and their underlying rationales
and criteria, and they should provide reasons why alternative policy options
have not been
2.22 In response to the Issues Paper,
Review of Secrecy
(IP 34), Bill
Calcutt drew attention to the ‘fundamental challenge in a liberal
democracy’ of finding the balance between
the rights of individuals and
the powers of the state:
Accountability is a vital safeguard against the abuse of power by the state.
Accountability ensures justification for the exercise
of authority is
scrutinized and responsibility attributed. Accountability is central to learning
from experience.
2.23 Echoing such sentiments, Whistleblowers Australia expressed the view
information in the possession of the public sector should be available for
public consumption as a matter of course. This view is
soundly based. In our
system of representative government it is essential that the functions and
activities of the public sector
are as transparent as possible. It is a right of
Australian citizens to be informed as they wish about matters of public
administration.
Scrutiny of
government actions
2.24 In the 1992 report of the Royal Commission into the commercial
activities of the Western Australian government, a principal recommendation
which was the introduction of FOI legislation in that state, it was commented
that: ‘[i]n a democratic society, effective
accountability to the public
is the indispensable check to be imposed on those entrusted with public
The purpose of [accountability] measures is to hold governments, public
officials and agencies to account for the manner of their
stewardship.
Government is constitutionally obliged to act in the public interest. To the
extent that it is given power to do so,
it must be allowed to do so. Such is its
trust. Accountability provides the test and measure of its
trusteeship.
2.25 A principal plank of accountability relies upon access to information to
provide public scrutiny of government actions—‘because
right to know
Openness in government is the indispensable prerequisite to accountability to
the public. It is a democratic imperative. The right
to vote is without
substance unless it is based on adequate information. If government is to be
truly government for the people,
if the public is to be able to participate in
government and to experience its benefits, the public must be properly informed
government and its
2.26 The ‘right to know’ is the focus of the FOI Act, reflected
in its long title: ‘An Act to give to members of
the public rights of
access to official documents of the Government of the Commonwealth and of its
agencies’. It is also expressly
stated in s 3(1) that the object of
the Act is ‘to extend as far as possible the right of the Australian
community to access
to information in the possession of the Government of the
Commonwealth’, which is further emphasised in s 3(2):
It is the intention of the Parliament that the provisions of this Act shall be
interpreted so as to further the object set out in
subsection (1) and that any
discretions conferred by this Act shall be exercised as far as possible so as to
facilitate and promote,
promptly and at the lowest reasonable cost, the
disclosure of information.
2.27 The importance of accountability based on access to information was
recently reiterated by Senator the Hon John Faulkner, Cabinet
Secretary and
Special Minister of State, in announcing an Exposure Draft of the
Information Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(FOI Exposure Draft Bill):
The slow growth of the idea that government accountability extends beyond
answering to electors on polling day has gradually changed
the way Australian
governments treat government information. With that has come a recognition that
the best safeguard against ill-informed
public judgement is not concealment but
information. As Abraham Lincoln said: ‘Let the people know the facts, and
the country
will be safe.’
There is a growing acceptance that the right of the people to know whether a
government’s deeds match its words, to know what
information the
government holds about them, and to know the information that underlies debate
and informs decision-making is fundamental
2.28 In the Companion Guide to the FOI Exposure Draft Bill, Senator Faulkner
emphasised the importance, in this context, of the ‘right
Both in practice, and as a symbol, ‘freedom of information’
represents the pinnacle of citizens’ right to know:
a legal requirement to
give the Australian community access to information held by the Australian
Government.
2.29 It is also proposed that the objects clause of the FOI Act be revised in
line with this emphasis:
(1) The objects of this Act are to give the Australian community access to
information held by the Government of the Commonwealth,
(a) requiring agencies to publish the information; and
(b) providing for a right of access to documents.
(2) The Parliament intends, by these objects, to promote Australia’s
representative democracy by contributing towards the following:
(a) increasing public participation in Government processes, with a view to
promoting better-informed decision-making;
(b) increasing scrutiny, discussion, comment and review of the
Government’s activities.
(3) The Parliament also intends, by these objects, to increase recognition that
information held by the Government is to be managed
for public purposes, and is
a national resource.
(4) The Parliament also intends that functions and powers given by this Act are
to be performed and exercised, as far as possible,
to facilitate and promote
public access to information, promptly and at the lowest reasonable
2.30 Complementing the commitment towards revising the FOI Act is the work of
the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal
and Constitutional
Affairs (House of Representatives Standing Committee), which released its
Whistleblower Protection: A Comprehensive Scheme for the Commonwealth
Public Sector
, in February 2009 (the
Whistleblower Protection
In recommending
protection to a broad range of employees in the public sector as well as
contractors and consultants, who may be
subject to secrecy provisions, the House
of Representatives Standing Committee effectively provides a ‘right to
where the matter is regarded as a disclosure in the public
interest—in the circumstances and in the manner proposed.
2.31 The challenge, then, is to identify the proper place, if any, for
secrecy provisions in the context of a system of open and accountable
government.
Balancing secrecy
laws with accountability
2.32 The idea of secrecy conflicts conceptually with the ideas of openness
and accountability. From the very outset of the FOI era
in Australia, the
challenge of finding the proper role of secrecy provisions was acknowledged.
When commenting on the Freedom of
Information Bill 1978 (Cth), the Senate
Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs noted that the philosophy
government appears to conflict diametrically with that underlying
secrecy provisions.
2.33 The Senate Standing Committee also criticised what it then described as
‘a fashionable contemporary drafting practice’:
to insert in every new statute a standard provision making it an offence for an
official governed by the statute to disclose without
authorisation any
information of which he has gained knowledge
officially.
2.34 The routine inclusion of secrecy offences in Commonwealth statutes may
open up an avenue for criticism, such as that reflected
in the submission
received from Whistleblowers Australia in response to IP 34:
Secrecy and confidentiality are important tools for the protection of the public
interest. But secrecy and confidentiality are also
convenient tools used for the
manipulation of information to benefit particular
2.35 Such a sentiment was echoed by a caller in the ALRC’s secrecy
phone-in, who remarked that, while there is a genuine need
to protect government
issues, the use of secrecy provisions was ‘the second last refuge of the
scoundrel’ and that a
change in culture, accompanied by appropriate
education, were critical.
2.36 In a conference speech on 24 March 2009, at which he announced the
release of the FOI Exposure Draft
Senator Faulkner stated
that committing to greater openness of government through an amended FOI
has not lifted from Australian governments their responsibilities to safeguard
confidentiality, privacy and security. But it has
required them to evaluate and
define responsibilities in the democratic arena. ...
No government broadcasts the activities of its intelligence services, the
contents of sensitive diplomatic negotiations, or the precise
location of
troops, for example. And no government should. But
democracy, drawing
as it does so strongly on the heritage of Westminster, has inherited a
historical tendency to weight the protective
features of confidentiality more
heavily than the positive aspects of disclosure.
And ... this has been an underlying tension in the development of Freedom of
Information laws in Australia.
2.37 Where FOI provisions are directed towards making government information
accessible, through obligations of publication and also
through applications,
secrecy provisions impose obligations of confidentiality on designated people,
such as Commonwealth officers.
However the conflict between open
government—as a philosophy of government—and secrecy as an
obligation of working practice
for individual public servants may generate
uncertainties, as reflected in the following comment:
the individual official—and particularly the public servant—is often
enough caught between the present commitment both
of modern legislation and of
the common law to open government and the enduring demands of illiberal official
secrecy regimes.
2.38 In view of such conflict, it is fair to ask: do we need secrecy
provisions at all? The sufficiency of common law rules to answer
the need for
protection of information is considered in Chapter 5. The relevance of secrecy
laws in the context of modern accountability
commitments expressed, for example,
in FOI laws is considered here.
Submissions
2.39 In IP 34, the ALRC asked whether secrecy laws were still relevant and
necessary in the light of FOI laws and other modern moves
towards greater
openness and accountability on the one hand, and the current international
security environment on the
2.40 A number of stakeholders strongly supported the principle of access to
government documents. For example, the Law Council of
Australia commented
the principle of open and accountable government, which underpins the FOI Act,
is concerned with ensuring Governments, Ministers
and other public officials
behave appropriately and in accordance with public expectations. This includes
allowing the public to
scrutinise whether a public or elected official has
misused power, misrepresented the truth, maintained false records, made a
on improper grounds, etc. Further, it allows the public to investigate
the basis upon which certain decisions have been made and
provides an avenue to
access information held by government instrumentalities which will better inform
debates about matters of public
2.41 To similar effect, the Media, Entertainment & Arts Alliance, an
active partner in the ‘Australia’s Right to Know’
coalition, argued that:
democracy requires accountability and that accountability is best ensured
through open government. In its policy document released
prior to the 2007
Federal Election, the ALP identified a ‘culture of concealment’
which had grown up within the government
and public service and promised to
‘drive a cultural shift across the bureaucracy to promote a pro-disclosure
The Alliance supports this objective which we believe to be
greatly in the public interest. ...
In one of his first pronouncements on being elected President of the United
States of America, Barack Obama called for the development,
by executive
departments and agencies, of an Open Government Directive, to promote
transparent, collaborative and participatory government
administration. At the heart of that commitment is the presumption in favour of
disclosure, recognising that ‘in
the face of doubt, openness
prevails’. The Alliance believes that the Australian public deserve no
less a commitment from our
own elected
2.42 However, stakeholders also recognised the need to protect government
information in some circumstances. Bill Calcutt acknowledged
times—‘in exceptional circumstances’—‘the
community may choose to temporarily compromise individual
rights and empower the
state to act preemptively’, but stressed the importance of ‘the
community’ in being able
to subject state actions to scrutiny in the
interests of accountability.
2.43 The differences in views centred upon those circumstances that justified
protection, and the extent of it—in particular
the role and nature of
secrecy obligations on Commonwealth officers and others. The ARTK coalition
argued that access to and sharing
of government information is ‘an
essential right’ of every Australian and ‘fundamental to openness,
transparency
and accountability in government’. It was strongly opposed to
secrecy provisions as ‘an anathema to that right’,
except where
‘public interest’ required them:
Any approach to the question of secrecy should be that public access should only
be excluded if it is in the public interest. More
narrow and restrictive
political or bureaucratic considerations that persist in much of the current
legislation should not be relevant
considerations.
The law in its current form is far too focussed on the rights of government and
the bureaucracy and places too little emphasis on
the fundamental proposition
that access to information should be
2.44 While the Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department
(AGD) acknowledged that ‘[o]penness and accountability
are very important
principles in a modern democracy’, it also emphasised that secrecy
provisions ‘have a place in modern
government because there is still a
public interest in certain information being protected from general
disclosure’.
2.45 That ‘public interests’ are protected by secrecy provisions
was also highlighted by the Australian Securities and
Investments Commission
ASIC receives, collects and develops information of a varied nature in the
course of performing its functions and exercising its
powers. A high proportion
of that information is received and developed in confidence and could, if
disclosed without authorisation,
have a material prejudicial effect on both
public and private interests. Public interests that may be affected include, at
level, the effective functioning of the Australian economy. At a
narrower level they include the effective functioning of ASIC. For
certain disclosures may prejudice the conduct of investigations by ASIC. Other
disclosures could inhibit the frankness of
communications with government on
issues of policy development and law reform that are required to address gaps in
regulation. They
could also prejudice the receipt of information from foreign
regulators.
The disclosure of information could also have a materially adverse effect on a
wide variety of private rights and
2.46 ASIC emphasised that, because of the sensitivity of the information that
it receives, persons may be ‘less forthcoming’
in providing the
information if it were not protected from
disclosure.
While general law
obligations were useful, they were not ‘without uncertainty’.
ASIC believes that, given the significance and materiality of the issue of
disclosure, there should be certainty in relation to the
confidentiality obligations that apply to Commonwealth bodies and the persons
who perform services for them. That certainty
would best be achieved by the
operation of a statutory duty on Commonwealth officers not to disclose
confidential information.
2.47 A number of agencies highlighted the importance of secrecy provisions
with respect to their particular operations. For example,
the Australian Bureau
of Statistics (ABS) considers that secrecy laws are necessary and appropriate to
maintain the integrity and
quality of the statistics that the ABS produces:
High quality statistical information is fundamental to effective government.
Assuring the secrecy of information provided to the
ABS is essential to
establishing its quality. The secrecy provisions of the
Census and Statistics
enable the ABS to make this
2.48 The argument is made that there is an ‘unwritten compact’
between the ABS and census respondents of guaranteed confidentiality
this is underwritten by explicit secrecy provisions in the governing
legislation. Without this guarantee, the collection
of national statistics by
the ABS would eventually be
compromised.
2.49 Other federal bodies also emphasised the importance of secrecy
provisions in areas that deal with personal information—in
particular, the
Australian Treasury, the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) and the Department of
Education, Employment and Workplace
2.50 The ATO stressed that it was ‘fundamental’ to the
administration of taxation laws ‘that all information concerning
affairs of a particular taxpayer is protected by a tax secrecy
provision’.
expectation of the community in relation to the handling of personal
information, reinforced by an offence provision, was also
emphasised by
there is a level of community expectation that information held by the
Department will be protected from not only the unauthorised
disclosure of that
information but also the inappropriate collection and use of that information.
It is generally recognised that
the harm that can be caused to the interests of
an individual or the Commonwealth from the inappropriate disclosure of
information
held by the Department can be significant. Because of this, there is
a recognised need for there to be consequences flowing from
such inappropriate
action. ... [H]aving a criminal offence provision which attaches to the
unauthorised handling of information has
value in being a useful
2.51 Secrecy provisions in such contexts, moreover, were not seen to be in
conflict with the principle of open and accountable government.
In this regard,
the Treasury submitted that taxation secrecy provisions were ‘not
inconsistent’ with measures ‘designed
to increase the openness and
transparency of government’:
Taxation secrecy provisions are not designed to hide or conceal the
deliberations of government in relation to decisions that can
have a significant
impact on the affairs of individual taxpayers. Instead they give effect to a
legitimate expectation of Australia’s
taxpayers that the often sensitive
information that they are required to provide to satisfy their taxation
obligations will be subject
to an appropriate level of
protection.
2.52 The ATO made a similar distinction between principles of openness of
government and the rationale of taxation secrecy provisions:
Given that taxation secrecy provisions only apply to protect taxpayer
information, the ATO considers that they are entirely consistent
important principles of openness and accountability which are embodied by
freedom of information laws. Freedom of information
mechanisms assist to ensure
government transparency and accountability, however, they are designed to
provide access to information
sensitive taxpayer information concerning individuals, corporations and other
2.53 The Department of Human Services drew attention to the broad role that
secrecy provisions uniquely fulfil:
Secrecy laws ... serve a number of functions not fully realised in reliance on
other laws ... They ensure individuals who handle
sensitive information have a
clear sense of personal responsibility for the protection of that information,
not just Australian Public
Service employees; they support public confidence in
the appropriate management of private information; they provide practical
acknowledgement
that some information in the possession of the government is
more inherently sensitive, and therefore worthy of greater protection,
other information; and they provide a legitimate basis for agencies to refuse to
disclose information in appropriate circumstances,
and to recover sensitive
information inappropriately disclosed. While other legal mechanisms achieve
these outcomes to a greater
or lesser extent, they are generally not as targeted
and direct as secrecy laws can
2.54 Information in the hands of intelligence agencies was also seen to
require specific protection through secrecy provisions. The
Intelligence Community (AIC) submitted that:
Secrecy laws themselves are essential to the effective operation of
Australia’s intelligence agencies; these agencies would
not be able to
operate effectively if secrecy laws were repealed or significantly diminished. A
statutory duty on Commonwealth officers
not to disclose information is
fundamental to the operation of AIC
2.55 The Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre (AUSTRAC)
expressed similar concerns and reiterated the necessity and
relevance of secrecy
provisions to prevent the unnecessary disclosure of information that
• may not be in the public interest or which might be harmful to
individuals or
• relates to persons that are the subject of reports to the AUSTRAC CEO
under the [
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
(Cth)] and the [
Financial Transactions Reports Act 1988
who are reporting entities or dealers under those
2.56 AUSTRAC’s particular areas of concern were national security, law
enforcement operations, revenue and/or international
relations, where disclosure
of AUTRAC information may affect the:
• ability of Australian Government and State or Territory Government
agencies to identify, investigate, apprehend or prosecute
• safety and anonymity of persons in witness protection, and
under-cover operatives;
• safety of employees of reporting entities who provide reports to
AUSTRAC, especially in relation to the provision of suspicious
matter reports
and/or suspect transaction reports;
• integrity of the financial system, including institutional
reputation;
• competitive neutrality of reporting entities and cash dealers if
commercially sensitive information relating to those entities
disclosed; and
• international relations with overseas [Financial Intelligence Units
(FIUs)] and foreign governments if information obtained
in confidence from these
FIUs were to be disclosed.
2.57 Some stakeholders cited other reasons for needing secrecy provisions,
such as the ability to ensure that commercially sensitive
information is
protected. For example, the Department of Climate Change submitted that:
In particular circumstances, it is both necessary and desirable to impose a
statutory obligation on Commonwealth officers not to
disclose information. In
the case of the [
National Greenhouse and Energy Reporting Act 2007
Act], this is necessary to ensure that commercially sensitive information
reported under the Act by corporations is protected,
and to ensure confidence in
the integrity of the reporting
2.58 The ALRC’s view is that there is a case for secrecy provisions,
provided that they are clear, consistent and fair, and
directed at protecting
important public interests. In Chapter 5, the ALRC considers the
interrelationship of secrecy provisions and
the common law and concludes that
there is still a justified place for secrecy provisions in Commonwealth law.
2.59 The problems identified throughout this Inquiry to date have been in
relation to the range of secrecy provisions and the lack
of clarity for an
individual who is subject to them. The proposals articulated in this Discussion
Paper are aimed at providing a
redrafted general secrecy offence complemented by
a balanced framework for an assessment of current provisions as well as a
administrative provision.
Secrecy laws and the
Australian Constitution
2.60 In unravelling conflicts between ideas of accountability and ideas of
secrecy, a key goal—as suggested in
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of
Classified and Security Sensitive Information
(ALRC 98)—is to ensure
that secrecy provisions are drafted and interpreted consistently with the
Constitution
in particular the implied constitutional guarantee of freedom of political
communication and principles relating to the separation
Constitution
establishes a federal system of
government in which powers are distributed between the Commonwealth and the six
states. The
Constitution
contains a list of subjects about which the Australian
Parliament may make laws. To be valid, secrecy provisions must be able to
withstand scrutiny under the
Constitution
against the
identified heads of power.
2.62 A number of provisions in the
Constitution
could be relied upon to
provide the constitutional basis for laws dealing with the confidentiality or
secrecy of official government
information.
, for example, makes
clear that the Australian Parliament has exclusive power to make laws on matters
relating to Australian Government
public service
departments.
2.63 The Australian Parliament also has power to make laws that are
incidental to the execution of other powers conferred on
Thus, while the Parliament
has express power to make laws concerning, for example, the federal public
service, taxation,
it may also make laws
that are incidental to these matters. Laws dealing with the confidentiality or
secrecy of tax, defence, census
or other official information might be construed
either as laws relating to the public service, tax, defence or the census, or as
incidental to these matters.
2.64 There are, however, a number of constitutional requirements that may
limit the power of the Australian Parliament to legislate
in this area,
including the implied constitutional guarantee of freedom of communication about
government and political matters.
Principles relating to the separation of the
powers and functions of the three branches of government—the legislature,
and judiciary—also affect the application of secrecy provisions
to the parliament and judiciary. In particular, the doctrines
of parliamentary
privilege and the separation of judicial power affect the manner in which
Commonwealth secrecy laws are drafted
and interpreted.
The implied freedom
of political communication
2.65 The High Court jurisprudence in what have been called the ‘free
speech cases’,
is relevant
to an assessment of the validity of secrecy laws. A leading case in the field is
the 1997 decision in
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
in which the Rt
Hon David Lange, the then Prime Minister of New Zealand, sued the Australian
Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) for defamation
on the basis of statements made in
the television programme, ‘Four Corners’, broadcast throughout
Australia. Lange alleged
that the programme conveyed imputations that he was
guilty of abuse of public office and was unfit to hold such office. The ABC
that the matter complained of was, among other things, published pursuant
to a freedom guaranteed by the
Constitution
material in the course of discussion of government and political matters.
2.66 In accepting the argument of the ABC, the High Court affirmed its
earlier decisions
that there is
an implied freedom in the
Constitution
to publish material
discussing government and political matters, and that the common law of
defamation ‘must conform to the
requirements of the
Constitution
stated, however, that laws could be passed to limit that freedom ‘to
satisfy some other legitimate
but two questions
must be answered for their validity:
First, does the law effectively burden freedom of communication about government
or political matters either in its terms, operation
or effect? Second, if the
law effectively burdens that freedom, is the law reasonably appropriate and
adapted to serve a legitimate
end the fulfilment of which is compatible with the
maintenance of the constitutionally prescribed system of representative and
responsible
government ... If the first question is answered ‘yes’
and the second is answered ‘no’ the law is
2.67 How do secrecy provisions fare in this context? The question arose for
consideration in 2003 in
Bennett v President, Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission
Bennett, a public servant employed in the Australian Customs Service, argued
that his implied freedom of political communication
was invalidly constrained by
former reg 7(13) of the
Public Service Regulations 1999
repealed), which stated that:
An APS employee must not, except in the course of his or her duties as an APS
employee or with the Agency Head’s express authority,
give or disclose,
directly or indirectly, any information about public business or anything of
which the employee has official
2.68 Bennett advocated the establishment of a Single Border Protection Agency
and made media comment about the same, which led the
Chief Executive Officer of
Customs to issue a formal direction to him not to comment to the media
‘about public business or
anything of which you have official
knowledge’, and to advise that formal action for a breach of the
Australian Public Service
Code of Conduct could result if he did not
Bennett considered that
his statements were made in his capacity as the President of the Customs
Officers Association and argued
that he was being threatened unlawfully because
of his union activities. An interview with Bennett on radio about proposed cuts
Customs waterfront officers led to action under reg 7(13) and a penalty of
salary reduction being imposed.
2.69 After his challenge in the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
(HREOC) was unsuccessful,
Bennett sought a review under the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review)
(Cth) and directly challenged the constitutional validity of the
regulation itself. The matter came before Finn J of the Federal Court
2.70 First, Finn J gave a detailed historical analysis of the ‘family
of provisions’ represented by reg 7(13), remarking
that two features of
the regulation were ‘immediately arresting’:
The first, reflecting the provenance of the provision, is the archaic character
of its terminology. The second is the amplitude of
the information coverage it
seeks to secure. The only limitations on the information that is caught by the
regulation are that the
information be ‘about public business’ or
that it be ‘anything of which the employee has official
knowledge’.
2.71 Secondly, Finn J assessed the regulation against the two-pronged test
established in
set out above. He held that the first limb
of this test was satisfied, in that the regulation controlled the disclosure by
servants of information about the ‘public business’ of the
Australian Government. In relation to the second limb, Finn
J identified a
range of public interests or ‘legitimate ends’ that would be
compatible with maintaining the Australian
system of representative and
responsible government. These legitimate ends included national security,
cabinet confidentiality and
the maintenance of an impartial and effective public
service. They may also include the ‘efficient operation of
Government’—a
formulation put forward by the Commonwealth in the
case—or the ‘effective working of Government’—a
formulation
put forward in the review of Commonwealth criminal law by the
committee chaired by Sir Harry Gibbs (the Gibbs Committee) in
2.72 Finn J commented on the ‘apparently draconian
character’ of reg 7(13) and the possibility that the provision had
potential to produce unreasonable
The particular
regulation, was not, therefore, reasonably and appropriately adapted to the
legitimate ends identified, being intended
to be a ‘catch-all’
the only limitations on the information that is caught by the regulation are
that information be ‘about public business’
or that it be
‘anything of which the employee has official knowledge’. The former
of these limitations would seem to
encompass all and any aspect of the
structure, conduct and operations of public administration … The reference
to ‘official
knowledge’ in the alternative limitation refers to the
capacity in which information is derived. If it is derived by a person
her official capacity it is caught by the regulation … Neither of the two
limitations is, as such, concerned with
whether the information in question was
or was not otherwise publicly available, or with whether it ought to be or could
so. Nor are they concerned with whether in a given instance any public
interest consideration could reasonably justify a prohibition
disclosure.
2.73 Finn J found, accordingly, that reg 7(13) was inconsistent with the
implied freedom of political communication in the
Constitution
as explained in
and declared it to be invalid. He stated that:
Official secrecy has a necessary and proper province in our system of
government. A surfeit of secrecy does not. It is unnecessary
to enlarge upon why
I consider the regulation to be an inefficient provision other than to comment
that its ambit is such that even
the most scrupulous public servant would find
it imposes ‘an almost impossible demand’ in domestic, social and
work related
The dimensions of the control it imposes impedes quite unreasonably the possible
flow of information to the community—information
which, without possibly
prejudicing the interests of the Commonwealth, could only serve to enlarge the
public’s knowledge and
understanding of the operation, practices and
policies of executive
government.
2.74 Finn J noted that the state might legitimately seek to regulate or
prohibit the disclosure of some official information for reasons
interest relating to the nature of the information, the circumstances of its
generation or acquisition, or the timing or
possible consequences of its
disclosure. He quoted, as an example, a provision of the UK Civil Service
Management Code, which provided
that civil servants must not, without authority,
disclose official information that has been communicated in confidence within
Government or received in confidence from others; or seek to frustrate or
influence the policies, decisions or actions of ministers
and others by
unauthorised, improper or premature disclosures of official
information.
2.75 Finn J distinguished regulating the disclosure of particular information
for legitimate reasons from a ‘catch-all’
approach, such as that in
reg 7(13) that did not differentiate between types of information or the
consequences of disclosure.
2.76 Even before
had been decided, the challenge posed by
secrecy laws in the context of the implied freedom had been clearly identified.
Richard Jolly,
for example, argued that because secrecy laws specifically target
the communication of information about government, such laws may
particularly close scrutiny in order to be consistent with the implied freedom
of political communication.
noting the High Court jurisprudence on this issue, Jolly emphasised the
statement by Mason CJ in
Australian Capital Television v
Commonwealth
that, in relation to the communication of information or ideas
relevant to public affairs,
only a compelling justification will warrant the imposition of a burden on free
communication by way of restriction and the restriction
must be no more than is
reasonably necessary to achieve the protection of the competing public interest
that is invoked to justify
the burden on
communication.
2.77 The importance of ensuring that secrecy provisions are not cast too
widely is recognised in the Australian Government’s
Legislation
requires that:
The Attorney-General’s Department must be consulted at an early stage on
the scope of any new secrecy provisions and on changes
to existing secrecy
provisions. Secrecy provisions in legislation are to be no broader than is
required for the purposes for which
they are enacted, particularly bearing in
mind the policy underlying the
Freedom of Information Act
2.78 It is also not surprising that a secrecy provision can attract scrutiny
against the backdrop of free speech when such a provision
is mooted in
Parliament. As noted by the then Attorney-General, the Hon Daryl Williams AM QC
MP, in introducing the Criminal Code
Amendment (Espionage and Related Offences)
There has been considerable media attention focused on the perceived impact that
the official secrets provisions … were alleged
to have on freedom of
speech and on the reporting of government
activities.
2.79 Following the decision in
reg 7(13) of the
Public Service Regulations
was repealed and replaced by
which expressly
included the formula of ‘effective working of government’. Would
this be enough, however, to survive
scrutiny in the context of the implied
freedom? The validity of the new regulation was challenged in the ACT Supreme
Court case of
2.80 This case concerned the breach of reg 2.1 by Ms Tjanara Goreng
Goreng Goreng had
disclosed certain information by email to her daughter—a draft of talking
points for discussion between Australia
and other countries; and to a member of
the administration of an Aboriginal community, Mutijulu, where the government
was funding
a number of initiatives designed to improve the conditions of the
Indigenous community—concerning allegations against a key
2.81 Relying heavily upon the decision of Finn J in
Goreng sought a stay of the criminal proceedings on the grounds that
reg 2.1 was invalid for infringing her implied freedom
of political
communication
Her counsel argued that the starting point—as
reflected in FOI legislation—was now that government information should
available unless a specific prohibition could be
identified.
2.82 Refshauge J, of the ACT Supreme Court, did not accept the
While that general approach is undoubted, it does not seem to me to assist in
the particular issue I have to determine. If one accepts,
as I do, and it seem
to me, with respect, that Finn J did in
Bennett’s Case,
government as an employer has a legitimate interest in preventing disclosures
that would or might interfere with their effective
operations, the question is
not that one starts with a preference for disclosure, but rather how does one
determine the limits.
2.83 Moreover, the revised regulation was not, in Refshauge J’s view, a
‘catch-all’ provision like its predecessor,
which had been struck
down by Finn J, but rather a more focused and targeted provision that sought to
protect a legitimate government
interest—although he noted that ‘the
effective working of government’ did give rise to some indeterminacy
the exercise of
2.84 The operation of reg 2.1 is a key issue in this Inquiry, to ensure, as
recommended in ALRC 98,
that the duty of secrecy is imposed only in relation to information that
genuinely requires protection and where unauthorised disclosure
is likely to
harm the public interest.
2.85 The regulation is considered, and proposals for its further revision
suggested, in Chapter 13.
Submissions
2.86 In IP 34, the ALRC asked two questions relevant to the implied freedom
of political communication: first, whether reg 2.1 of
Public Service
Regulations 1999
(Cth) provided an appropriate model for protecting
Commonwealth information; and, secondly, whether there were other secrecy
that may be inconsistent with the implied
Submissions in
relation to the first question and proposals for a revised regulation are
considered in Chapter 13.
2.87 In relation to the second question, the Public Interest Advocacy Centre
(PIAC) and the AIC drew attention to
Intelligence
Services Act 2001
(Cth)—enacted after the High Court decisions in
Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
but before the
decision in
. PIAC expressed the view that:
these secrecy provisions bind staff, contractors and others who interact with
defence and security agencies not to communicate information
prepared by or on
behalf of the agencies with which they are involved, connected with or relating
to the performance of agency functions.
They do not require disclosure to cause,
or be likely or intended to cause, any harm to the public interest, and they
impose a penalty
of imprisonment for up to two years.
So far as they do not turn on the likely effect of disclosure, do not require
proof of any intention to harm security or defence
interests, and do not allow
for any exception in the case of information tending to show that the agency in
question has exceeded
its lawful authority, PIAC believes that [these sections]
are in need of amendment or repeal, and that any sanction they impose should
limited to civil as opposed to criminal
2.88 In contrast, the AIC submitted that:
No concerns about the validity of the provisions were raised in Parliament when
the respective bills were passed and to date, the
constitutional validity of
these sections has not been raised or
challenged.
2.89 The Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) expressed the view
that the secrecy provision in s 56 of the
Australian Prudential Regulation
Authority Act
(Cth) (APRA Act) is not inconsistent with the
implied constitutional guarantee of political
communication.
ALRC’s views
2.90 The concern expressed by PIAC about the absence of a harm element in the
provisions identified is one that can be applied to
most of the 358 secrecy
offences identified in the mapping exercise undertaken in this Inquiry,
described in Chapter 1. The main
plank of the proposals in this Discussion
Paper, discussed in Chapter 6, is a new general secrecy offence, in which harm
to essential
public interests is a principal feature. Chapter 13 also proposes a
reworking of reg 2.1 to link more clearly the administrative
secrecy obligations
of APS employees to identified public interests. However there are areas that
may require a different approach
and particular secrecy offences. This is
discussed in Chapters 10–12.
2.91 The structure of the
Constitution
reflects the
principles of the separation of powers, meaning that the three functions of
government—the power to make laws,
administer laws and decide
disputes—are each conferred on three different bodies established by the
Constitution
—the Parliament, executive and judicature. Secrecy laws
primarily regulate the executive, that is, people and organisations
implement and administer the laws made by the Parliament. The extent to which
secrecy laws can affect the activities of the
Parliament and the judiciary has
not been finally determined. This section briefly discusses some limitations on
the application
of secrecy laws to the Parliament and judiciary.
Secrecy laws and the separation of judicial
2.92 The strict separation of judicial power is a fundamental principle of
Constitution
General secrecy provisions should not,
therefore, interfere with, or limit, the exercise of federal judicial power by a
federal court.
2.93 While the issue has not been conclusively determined, in the case of
Grollo v Palmer
High Court considered whether a judge could authorise a telecommunications
interception warrant, a task that required strict
secrecy. The question in the
case was whether investing persons who are judges of the Federal Court with the
non-judicial power of
authorising the issue of warrants (and therefore in a
personal, not a judicial, capacity) was incompatible with the exercise of the
judicial functions of a federal court.
2.94 A question was raised before the Court whether a judge, acting in a
personal capacity in authorising an interception warrant,
would be subject to a
duty not to disclose information gained by virtue of that position. While the
majority decision of the High
Court did not consider the issue, Gummow J was of
the view that secrecy provisions in ss 70 and 79 of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) could not affect the exercise of federal judicial functions by a
whether the source of the duty be in a statute ... or the general law, the ambit
of the duty stops short of impeding discharge of
the higher duty flowing from Ch
Constitution
2.95 What if specific legislative provisions required a court to keep certain
information confidential? In
Gypsy Jokers Motorcycle Club Inc v Commissioner
considered Western Australian legislation that prohibited a court disclosing
information identified by the Police Commissioner
as confidential to any person,
including other parties to the proceeding. Information was confidential if its
disclosure might prejudice
police operations. Then in
K-Generation Pty Ltd v
Liquor Licensing Court
K‑Generation
the High Court considered the validity of South Australian legislation that
required a court, on the application of the Police Commissioner,
to take steps
to maintain the confidentiality of information classified by the
Police Commissioner as criminal intelligence.
2.96 In both cases, the High Court held that the legislation did not
interfere with a court’s integrity, impartiality or independence,
the court retained the power to determine whether information had been correctly
classified as criminal intelligence (in
K-Generation
), or whether the
disclosure of the information might prejudice the operations of the Commissioner
Gypsy Jokers
K-Generation
, French CJ concluded that:
The terms of [the relevant sub-section] do not subject the Licensing Court or
the Supreme Court to the direction of the executive
or an administrative
authority. The subsection does not require them to receive or act upon criminal
intelligence classified as such
by the Commissioner of Police. It does not
deprive the Court of discretion as to how confidentiality is to be maintained.
it mandate a general exclusion in all circumstances of legal
representatives from access to the information. [The provision] does
undermine the institutional integrity of either court. It does not render them
unfit repositories for the exercise of federal
2.97 In this way, specific confidentiality provisions that are directed to
the operations of a court are similar to claims of public
interest immunity and
will not necessarily impair a court’s independence and impartiality.
Secrecy laws and parliamentary
2.98 In response to IP 34, the ALRC received a submission from the Clerk of
the Senate, Mr Harry Evans, drawing the ALRC’s attention
relationship between secrecy provisions and the operation of parliamentary
Evans submitted
From time to time executive government officials suggest that statutory secrecy
provisions prevent them providing information to
either House of the Parliament
or its committees and/or render them liable under such provisions for supplying
relevant information.
2.99 He suggested further that secrecy provisions ‘may also inhibit the
provision of information to the Houses and their committees
by prospective
witnesses without the inhibition becoming
2.100 ‘Parliamentary privilege’ refers to the privileges or
immunities of the Houses of Parliament and the powers of the
Parliament to protect the integrity of their
Section 49 of the
Constitution
gives the Australian Parliament power to declare
the ‘powers, privileges and immunities’ of the Houses of Parliament
provides that, in the absence of any declaration by the Parliament, the
powers, privileges and immunities held by the United Kingdom’s
Commons at the time of the establishment of the Commonwealth shall apply.
2.101 There are two aspects of parliamentary privilege. The first is set out
in art 9 of the
Bill of Rights 1688
(UK) (which is applied in Australia
by virtue of
Constitution
), which states: ‘That the
freedom of speech and debates or proceedings in Parliament ought not to be
impeached or questioned
in any court or place outside Parliament’. Article
9 confers an immunity from civil or criminal action and examination in legal
proceedings on members of the Houses, witnesses and others taking part in
proceedings in parliament. The
Parliamentary Privileges Act 1987
clarifies that giving evidence or submitting a document to a House or committee
are ‘proceedings in parliament’
covered by the immunity. The second
aspect of parliamentary privilege is the parliament’s power to conduct
inquiries, including
the ability to compel witnesses to give evidence or produce
2.102 It is generally accepted that a general secrecy provision will not
prevent the disclosure of information to the Parliament or
a parliamentary
A practical
illustration was recently given in the Explanatory Memorandum released by
Treasury with the Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality
of Taxpayer Information)
Bill, Exposure Draft, in March 2009 (Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill):
While parliamentary privilege is commonly considered to protect disclosures of
information made during parliamentary proceedings,
such privilege also protects
disclosures of information for the purpose of such proceedings. For instance,
under parliamentary privilege
the ATO can currently provide taxpayer information
to ministers for the purpose of briefing the minister to respond to questions
Parliament (in the form of questions on notice and in question time briefs) and
can also provide information to parliamentary
committees when
2.103 The effect of parliamentary privilege in this context, however, is that
where information is provided and presented in Parliament,
while the person
presenting the information may be covered by the immunity that privilege
provides, personal information—and
other information—may effectively
become public. As this may not always be the desired consequence, Parliament may
abrogate parliamentary privilege and prevent the disclosure of
information to the Parliament or its
committees.
2.104 An example of expressly dealing with parliamentary privilege is seen in
the Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill. As noted in the Explanatory
Memorandum:
As the exposure draft seeks to provide for the only circumstances in which
taxpayer information can be disclosed to ministers and
the Parliament, ... the
operation of parliamentary privilege is specifically
2.105 The following illustration is provided:
The Treasurer is asked a question about the tax affairs of a particular taxpayer
and seeks to obtain this information for the purpose
of responding to that
question during the sitting of Parliament. In these circumstances, the ATO
cannot provide any taxpayer information
to the Treasurer for this purpose,
because such disclosures are not permitted by the exposure
2.106 However, where the issue is the power to compel the giving of evidence,
the position is different:
Since the purpose of the [proposed] framework is to specify the circumstances in
which a taxation officer and non-taxation officer
information to a minister or the Parliament and to recognise other powers and
laws that can be used to compel the production
of information, the framework
accordingly does not override Parliament’s power to
production of information.
2.107 There are some secrecy provisions that prevent the Parliament
compelling the production of certain information. For example,
Auditor-General Act 1997
(Cth) provides that the Auditor-General cannot
be required, and is not permitted, to disclose information that he or she is
from including in a public report to a House of Parliament, a member
of a House of the Parliament, or a parliamentary committee.
The Explanatory
Memorandum to the Act makes clear that ‘the effect of [this subclause] is
to act as a declaration for the purposes
Constitution
Section 503A
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) provides a
further example.
Subsections 503A(2)(c)
and (d) prohibit ministers or officers
who have received certain confidential information from a law enforcement or
intelligence
agency from being required to disclose the information to a
parliament or parliamentary committee. Provisions of the
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) and the
Inspector of Transport Security Act 2006
regulate the permissible content of reports to
parliament.
2.109 In its drafting direction dealing with secrecy provisions, the Office
of Parliamentary Counsel (OPC) advises that secrecy provisions
that extend to
information that may be the subject of inquiry by the Parliament or a
parliamentary committee should specify the circumstances
in which that
information may be disclosed. The OPC suggests that this could be done, in
appropriate cases
by including a definition at the end of the secrecy provision to make clear that
‘the performance of duties under the Act’
includes the giving of
evidence to Parliament or to a parliamentary
2.110 In this Inquiry, the ALRC is asked to consider laws and practices
relating to the protection of Commonwealth information, including
consistent and
workable laws in relation to secrecy. The interaction between secrecy provisions
and parliamentary privilege is one
aspect of the workability of secrecy
provisions.
2.111 The ALRC notes that, when drafting secrecy provisions, the Australian
Government should give attention to the interaction between
the provision and
other laws and practices, including parliamentary privilege. Where it is
intended to abrogate parliamentary privilege
so as to prevent the disclosure of
information to the Parliament, this intention should be clearly stated in the
provision and supporting
documents, as for example in the Tax Laws Exposure
Draft Bill.
2.112 The ALRC considers that the current OPC Drafting Direction No 3.5
adequately draws attention to the need to clarify the application
of a secrecy
provision to the disclosure of information to the Parliament or a parliamentary
inquiry. In Chapter 13 the ALRC considers
a range of matters to be included in a
drafting direction concerning secrecy provisions. This direction would be a
suitable place
also to include drafting guidance in relation to parliamentary
The public interest
2.113 The challenge for the ALRC in this Inquiry is to strike the right
balance between the public interest in open and accountable
government and
particular identified public interests—such as privacy, commercial
confidentiality, national security, law enforcement
and investigation. In doing
so, the ARTK coalition urged the ALRC
to return to first principles in its report by recommending a system that is
practical and effective in ensuring information is open
to all Australian
citizens. The enshrining of the right to access and sharing of information has
the additional benefit of raising
awareness and educating the public as to the
operation of its government. There is a good deal of evidence from overseas that
access to information strengthens the democracy, confidence in government
policy formulation and
2.114 Such ‘first principles’ require a focus on the idea of the
public interest, both in the general sense of an overriding
justification for
government action as a balance of openness and the protection of relevant
information—including through secrecy
provisions; and the specific sense
of those matters that are regarded as so essential, or reflective of
‘essential public interests’,
as to require specific protection
through secrecy provisions.
2.115 The emphasis on public interest has recently been brought to the
forefront by Senator Faulkner in announcing the FOI Exposure
Draft Bill, that
‘[q]uestions of openness, and confidentiality, have to be treated as
different aspects of the same over-riding
obligation to act
in the public
2.116 What amounts to public interest has also been the subject of
consideration by the House of Representatives Standing Committee
on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs (House of Representatives Standing Committee), chaired by
Mark Dreyfus QC MP, which recommended
Whistleblower Protection
report that the Australian Government introduce legislation, entitled the
Public Interest Disclosure Bill, to provide whistleblower
protections in the
Australian Government public
2.117 In this Inquiry, the ALRC seeks to articulate how best to identify the
relevant public interests that justify protection through
the mechanism of
secrecy provisions and/or other mechanisms concerning information handling. As
‘public interest’, both
in the general and narrower senses, is a
recurring theme, the following section provides a consideration of how public
interest may
be seen in legislation and different approaches that may be taken
in relation to it.
2.118 Where a specific ‘public interest’ test has arisen for
consideration as a statutory concept in proceedings, a wide
approach has been
taken. For example, in
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
reviewing a decision by the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal, the High Court
held that in construing references to public interest
in a statute the court
should adopt a wide definition and the considerations to be taken into account
were not to be ‘closely
Right to Life Association (NSW) Inc v Secretary, Department of Human
Services and Health
, Lockhart J noted that the ‘public interest is a
concept of wide meaning and not readily delimited by precise
boundaries’.
2.119 As noted in the review of the FOI Act by the ALRC and the
Administrative Review Council (ARC) in 1995,
Open Government: A Review of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
interest is ‘an amorphous concept’, undefined in the FOI Act or any
Saying that
something ‘is in the public interest’ is also a different concept
from something that is ‘of interest
2.120 The width of the idea of public interest was acknowledged in the
Whistleblower Protection
Like the term whistleblower, the term ‘public interest’ can be
defined in a number of ways and in a number of contexts.
Indeed, it may not be
possible to arrive at an all encompassing definition of the public
2.121 Wide concepts, however, are not precise ones and this may provide room
to argue ‘public interest’ from both directions—namely,
information should be withheld, or protected by secrecy, in the public interest;
and that information should be revealed in
While there are
similar areas of public interest concern in the FOI Act and the proposed Public
Interest Disclosure Bill, in the
FOI Act public interest arguments are seen in
support of resisting disclosure, while in the whistleblowing context public
is used in support of revelation of information.
2.122 The ‘public interest’ may be found as a backdrop for, or
specific element in, legislation. For example, in relation
to the FOI Act, it
has been commented that ‘notions of public interest constitute the basic
rationale for the enactment of,
as well as the unifying thread running through
the provisions of, the FOI
2.123 So, for example, it may be said that the FOI Act reflects the broad
public interest in open and accountable government. But
interest’ is also included in a number of ways in several of the exemption
provisions in the Act. It is implicit
that the protection of Commonwealth
information is necessary in certain circumstances, such as national
security—as reiterated
by Senator Faulkner in announcing the FOI Exposure
Draft Bill.
The role of
public interest in the context of the exemption provisions is also brought more
into prominence in the Draft Bill through
a reformulation of the public interest
test. As explained in the
Companion Guide
released with the Exposure
Draft Bill, it is a single test, ‘weighted in favour of disclosure of
documents’, which will
require access to the requested documents
‘unless (in the circumstances) access to the document at that time would,
on balance,
be contrary to the public
also includes factors that must not be taken into account and those which favour
disclosure.
The FOI Act is
considered further in Chapter 4.
2.124 In the context of secrecy provisions, ideas of public interest are
found both implicitly and expressly. The public interest
is an explicit element
of some secrecy provisions—for example, it is only an offence under
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
(Cth) where the unauthorised
disclosure of information is likely to harm ‘the security or defence of
Australia’. In such
examples, while the term ‘public interest’
is not used, the matter protected expressly reflects public interest in a
particular, identified area.
2.125 The public interest may also be raised as a ground for claiming
immunity for the production of documents in court proceedings.
Such a claim to
‘public interest immunity’ may be made both under the common
Evidence Act
2.126 Similar claims to public interest immunity are able to be made before a
parliamentary inquiry, such as a committee, where the
executive government or a
minister can object to disclosure of information on the basis of
‘executive’ or ‘public
interest’ immunity. The grounds
of public interest immunity that may be claimed before a parliamentary inquiry
are those contained
within the FOI
2.127 The proposed Public Interest Disclosure Bill also seeks to include
public interest as a defence to the disclosure of information,
recognising that
‘it is in the public interest that accountability and integrity in public
administration are promoted by identifying
and addressing wrongdoing in the
public sector’.
House of Representatives Standing Committee recommended that the types of
disclosures to be protected in this public interest
include, but not be limited to serious matters related to:
• illegal activity;
• corruption;
• maladministration;
• breach of public trust;
• scientific misconduct;
• wastage of public funds;
• dangers to public health;
• dangers to public safety;
• dangers to the environment;
• official misconduct (including breaches of applicable codes of
conduct); and
• adverse action against a person who makes a public interest
disclosure under the
legislation.
2.128 While stating that ‘new legislation on public interest
disclosures should have a clear and simple purpose so that anyone
who reads the
Act can immediately discern its
the House of
Representatives Standing Committee concluded that:
The term public interest need not be explicitly defined, but rather reflected in
the purpose of the legislation and its provisions
on disclosable conduct. ...
The purpose and key principles of the legislation ... should be included in a
preamble to the Bill.
2.129 Rather than being stated with any precision, public interest
disclosures are left described in somewhat opaque terms as ‘serious
matters’ relating to the non-exclusive list of subjects noted above.
Contrasting
2.130 In reviewing secrecy laws and considering proposals for reform, two
contrasting approaches are, on the one hand, to consider
the category of
information justifying secrecy—or at least secrecy obligations warranting
criminal sanctions; and, on the other,
to consider the public interests that
justify secrecy in particular cases.
2.131 As noted in Chapter 1, the Gibbs Committee recommended that the general
offence provisions in the
should be repealed, and that:
the application of criminal sanctions under the general criminal law of the
Commonwealth to disclosure of official information should
be limited to certain
categories of information and that these should be no more widely stated than is
strictly required for the
effective functioning of
Government.
2.132 The Gibbs Committee went on to consider what categories of information
should be protected by criminal sanctions. These included
information relating
to intelligence and security services; defence; foreign relations; information
obtained in confidence from other
governments or international organisations;
and information the disclosure of which affects law
enforcement.
information related to defence or foreign relations, or was obtained in
confidence from foreign governments and international
organisations, it was
necessary to prove that the disclosure caused damage; but in relation to other
categories, such proof was not
Further, the list
of protected categories of information was not to include certain matters,
unless otherwise covered under the other
(i) information obtained by one or other form of interception of communications
or information as to the processes of interception;
(ii) information supplied in confidence;
(iii) information the disclosure of which could damage Commonwealth/State
(iv) Cabinet documents;
(v) information affecting personal privacy; or
(vi) information causing damage to the
2.133 Alternatively, one can view the identification of particular categories
of information as reflecting an underlying recognition
of particular—or
essential—public interests served by maintaining secrecy provisions in
certain areas. An example of
an attempt at definition is that found in
Surveillance Devices Act 1998
(WA), which defines ‘public
interest’ as including:
the interests of national security, public safety, the economic well-being of
Australia, the protection of public health and morals
and the protection of the
rights and freedoms of citizens.
2.134 In the AGD’s response to the questions in IP 34 about whether
secrecy laws were still relevant and necessary in the light
of freedom of
information laws and other modern moves towards greater openness and
accountability on the one hand, and the current
international security
environment on the other,
considered above, the AGD made additional comments with respect to the approach
to protecting information.
2.135 While endorsing the importance of openness, the AGD submitted that
‘[i]t is necessary for certain information to be protected
by strong laws,
involving criminal penalties, to ensure the public interest is not harmed by its
disclosure’.
then suggested the kinds of information that should be protected as government
information from general disclosure:
• information that could prejudice Australia’s national security,
defence or international relations
• information that could endanger life
• information that could prejudice law enforcement operations and the
effective working of law enforcement agencies
• information provided to the government in confidence by foreign
government agencies
• Cabinet documents, and
• other information that could prejudice the effective working of
Government.
2.136 As evident in the discussion in this chapter, FOI and secrecy are
interrelated facets of the government information prism. The
Solomon Committee
stated that ‘[t]he public interest is the central, unifying feature of
information’.
regard it may be commented that the public interest is also the central,
unifying feature of secrecy laws. As noted above,
Senator Faulkner expressed
this in terms of obligation, that openness and confidentiality should be seen as
‘different aspects
of the same overriding obligation to act
2.137 In its review of the FOI Act in 1995, the ALRC and ARC commented that
‘[t]he availability of government information should
be determined by the
public interest’.
the context of this Inquiry it may similarly be said that the protection of
government information through secrecy laws should
be determined by the public
2.138 Any review of secrecy laws must, therefore, test existing provisions
against a backdrop of public interest. Where particular
provisions do not match,
or cannot be justified in accordance with identifiable public interests, then
they must be judged wanting
and recommendations made for their recasting or
repeal. A particular challenge in this Inquiry is to consider when, and what
of, public interest elements should be expressly included in secrecy
provisions.
2.139 In this Discussion Paper the ALRC proposes a reworking of the
conceptual approach reflected in secrecy provisions through the
public interest
lens of harm, rather than simply by reference to categories of information. As
noted above, the Gibbs Committee recommendations
took this latter approach, with
proof of harm being required in certain cases.
2.140 While it may be argued that starting from a category of information
‘relating to defence’ and requiring the prosecution
damage—as suggested by the Gibbs Committee—is similar to requiring
proof that the disclosure is likely to harm
Australia’s defence, they
reflect a different approach to public interest and, therefore, a different
underlying rationale.
2.141 The areas in which an overriding notion of public interest requires a
protection of information is largely in agreement, both
in the submissions and
in prior reviews, and is consistent, for example, with the approach in the AGD
list which focuses, in the
main, on information, the disclosure of which may
cause harm in particular ways.
2.142 The weakness of a ‘categories of information’ approach,
however, is that it is indiscriminate. While each category
may be seen as
reflecting a sense of public interest—namely, that disclosure of
information of that kind is inherently, or
potentially, harmful—the
emphasis is not on the harm, but on the category. And, in such a case, a desire
for secrecy can drive
the classification of information in particular
ways—a problem identified in the FOI context where an alleged overuse of
class exemption for Cabinet documents, for example, has attracted
2.143 As the nature, place and meaning of public interest has been considered
actively in the context of the FOI Act, an analysis
of the Act and public
interest provides an instructive prelude to a consideration of the role of
public interest, and balancing public
interests, in secrecy laws. The public
interests indentified in the FOI Act are considered as a component of both the
general secrecy
offence in Chapter 6, and the administrative secrecy provision
set out in Chapter 13.
Official Information
Integrity in Government Project: Interim Report 1 (1991),
This provision was found in reg 20
of the 1867 Regulations for Victoria’s
Civil Service Act 1862
Secrecy and
Openness: The Federal Government from Menzies to Whitlam and Beyond
(2000), 34–35.
Parliament of
Australia—Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs,
Freedom of Information: Report by the Senate Standing Committee on
Constitutional and Legal Affairs on the Freedom of Information
Bill 1978, and
Aspects of the Archives Bill 1978
Freedom of Information Review Panel,
The Right to Information: The Report of the FOI Independent Review Panel
(2008), 158.
E Campbell, ‘Public
Access to Government Documents’
Australian Law Journal
In the US, legislation
establishing rights of access to government records in limited circumstances was
enacted in 1946, and legislation
establishing a general right of access was
enacted in 1966:
Administrative Procedure Act of 1946
60 Stat 237 (US)
Freedom of Information Act
80 Stat 383 (US)
Michael, ‘Freedom of Information in the United States of America’ in
N Marsh (ed)
Access to Government-Held Information
The first Swedish Act that
provided for rights of access to government documents was enacted in the
mid-18th century:
Freedom of Press Act
See also G Petren, ‘Access to Government-Held Information in Sweden’
in N Marsh (ed)
Access to Government-Held Information
(1987) 35. The
Personal Data Act
regulates the processing of
data about individuals, but a significant number of Swedish government records
are published online: E
Addley, ‘Sweden Tries to Lose Reputation as
Snoopers’ Paradise’,
Guardian Unlimited Technology
19 June 2007,
<technology.guardian.co.uk>.
Data Protection Act 1998
J McGinness, ‘Secrecy Provisions in Commonwealth Legislation’
[1990] FedLawRw 3
Federal Law Review
, 49. These provisions were ss 9 and 127
Post and Telegraph Act 1901
J McGinness, ‘Secrecy
Provisions in Commonwealth Legislation’
[1990] FedLawRw 3
Federal Law Review
Secrecy and
Openness: The Federal Government from Menzies to Whitlam and Beyond
(2000), 41.
Section 70 of the
(Cth) is a general secrecy provision which is discussed throughout this
Discussion Paper, especially in Ch 6. It is set out in full
in Appendix
Secrecy and Openness:
The Federal Government from Menzies to Whitlam and Beyond
(2000), 45.
Freedom of Information Review Panel,
Enhancing Open and Accountable Government
, Discussion Paper (2008),
Secrecy and
Openness: The Federal Government from Menzies to Whitlam and Beyond
(2000), 43.
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Administrative Review Council,
Open Government: A Review of
the Federal
Freedom of Information Act
, ALRC 77 (1995),
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 20 May 1970, 2428 (G Whitlam—Leader
of the Opposition), cited in G Terrill,
Secrecy and Openness: The Federal
Government from Menzies to Whitlam and Beyond
Australian Law Reform Commission
and Administrative Review Council,
Open Government: A Review of the Federal
Freedom of Information Act
, ALRC 77 (1995), [3.2]; G Terrill,
Secrecy and Openness: The Federal Government from Menzies to Whitlam and
(2000), 15.
It’s Time for Leadership: Policy Speech for the Australian Labor Party
delivered at the Blacktown Civic Centre
http://www.australianpolitics.com/elections/1972
at 23 October 2008.
See, eg, Interdepartmental Committee
on Proposed Freedom of Information Legislation,
Proposed Freedom of
Information Legislation
(1974) Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department; Interdepartmental Committee on Proposed
Freedom of Information
Legislation,
Policy Proposals for Freedom of
Information Legislation: Report of Interdepartmental Committee
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department; Parliament of
Australia—Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional
and Legal Affairs,
Freedom of Information: Report by the Senate Standing Committee on
Constitutional and Legal Affairs on the Freedom of Information
Bill 1978, and
Aspects of the Archives Bill 1978
M Paterson,
Freedom of Information
and Privacy in Australia: Government and Information Access in the Modern
(2005), 3–4.
Australian Law Reform Commission and Administrative Review Council,
Government: A Review of the Federal
Freedom of Information Act
The Administrative Review
Council (ARC) was established under
Administrative Appeals
Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth). For information about the ARC see: Administrative
Review Council,
http://www.ag.gov.au/agd/WWW/arcHome.nsf/Page/Home
at 29 April
M Paterson,
Information and Privacy in Australia: Government and Information Access in the
Modern State
Information
Commissioner’s Office (UK),
http://www.ico.gov.uk/about_us.aspx
at 19 November
In 2000 the
was amended to include the National Privacy Principles for the private
The relationship between the
two Acts was a subject of consideration in the ALRC inquiry on privacy:
Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy
Law and Practice
, ALRC 108 (2008), ch
H Lee, P Hanks and V Morabito,
In the Name of National Security: The Legal Dimensions
R Reynolds, ‘Obtaining
Reasons for Government Decision-Making, FOI and Privacy’ in R Creyke and J
McMillan (eds),
Control of Government Action
L Crovitz, ‘Can We
Trust Anyone Over 30?’
The Wall Street Journal
, 10 November 2008,
http://online.wsj.com
, referring to remarks of Don Tapscott, the
‘best-selling author and researcher’ about the differences for
‘Growing Up Digital’, as the title of his 1997 publication
was called.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34
11 February 2009.
Whistleblowers Australia,
10 March 2009.
the Royal Commission into Commercial Activities of Government and Other
J Faulkner (Cabinet Secretary
and Special Minister of State),
Open and Transparent Government—the Way
http://www.smos.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp_20090324.html
at 24 March 2009.
(Cabinet Secretary and Special Minister of State),
Freedom of Information
(FOI) Reform: Companion Guide
(2009) See also J Faulkner (Cabinet Secretary
and Special Minister of State),
Open and Transparent Government—the Way
(2009) <http://www.smos.gov.au/speeches/2009/
sp_20090324.html> at 24 March 2009.
Freedom of Information Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft,
s 3 ‘Objects—general’. The section is complemented by s 3A
‘Objects—information
and documents otherwise
accessible’.
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
Whistleblower Protection: A Comprehensive Scheme for
the Commonwealth Public Sector
Parliament of
Australia—Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs,
Freedom of Information: Report by the Senate Standing Committee on
Constitutional and Legal Affairs on the Freedom of Information
Bill 1978, and
Aspects of the Archives Bill 1978
Whistleblowers Australia,
10 March 2009.
Secrecy Phone-In
February 2009.
Freedom of Information
Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure
J Faulkner (Cabinet Secretary
and Special Minister of State),
Open and Transparent Government—the Way
http://www.smos.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp_20090324.html
at 24 March 2009.
Information
, Integrity in Government Project: Interim Report 1 (1991),
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008), Question
Law Council of Australia,
27 February 2009.
Entertainment & Arts Alliance,
10 March 2009.
11 February 2009.
Australia’s Right to Know,
6 March 2009. But, as the ARTK coalition also noted, ‘Defining
what is caught within the ambit of the term “government
information”
is a threshold step in ensuring there are appropriate parameters around secrecy
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
24 March 2009.
Department of Education,
Employment and Workplace Relations,
19 February
2009; The Treasury,
19 February 2009;
Australian Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations,
19 February 2009.
19 February 2009.
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
of Human Services,
20 February 2009.
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009.
Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre,
2 March 2009.
Department of Climate Change,
23 February 2009.
Law Reform Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and
Security Sensitive Information
, ALRC 98 (2004),
Rec 5–5(a).
Constitution
s 51(xxxix).
Lange v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
Theophanous v Herald &
Weekly Times Ltd
[1994] HCA 46
(1994) 182 CLR 104
Stephens v West Australian
Newspapers Ltd
[1994] HCA 45
(1994) 182 CLR 211
Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd
v Commonwealth
[1992] HCA 45
(1992) 177 CLR 106
Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Wills
[1992] HCA 46
(1992) 177 CLR 1.
Lange v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR
Theophanous v Herald &
Weekly Times Ltd
[1994] HCA 46
(1994) 182 CLR 104
Stephens v West Australian
Newspapers Ltd
[1994] HCA 45
(1994) 182 CLR 211.
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
Bennett v President,
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
[2003] FCA 1433
(2003) 134 FCR
Public Service Regulations
(Cth) reg 7(13), now repealed and replaced by reg 2.1, considered in
detail in Ch 13.
President, Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
[2003] FCA 1433
(2003) 134 FCR 334
[12]. The APS Code of Conduct is considered in Chapter
The HREOC challenge is detailed in
at [30]–[42].
Bennett v President, Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
[2003] FCA 1433
(2003) 134 FCR 334
R Watson and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Final Report
(1991), [31.3].
Bennett v President,
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
[2003] FCA 1433
(2003) 134 FCR 334
Minister for the Civil
Service (UK),
Civil Service Management Code
<www.civilservice.gov.uk/iam/codes/csmc/index.asp> at 17 September 2008,
R Jolly, ‘The Implied
Freedom of Political Communication and Disclosure of Government
Information’
Federal Law Review
Australian Capital Television
Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
[1992] HCA 45
(1992) 177 CLR 106
, 143. In this case the
High Court considered the constitutional validity of provisions in the
Broadcasting Act 1942
(Cth)—pt IIID— that restricted
broadcasting in relation to Commonwealth parliamentary elections and referenda,
prohibiting political advertising on behalf of the government during
an election period. Broadcasters were also obliged to make available
charge time for election broadcasts to political parties. The High Court held
that pt IIID was wholly invalid on the ground
that it infringed the right to
freedom of communication on matters relevant to political discussion that was
implied in the system
of representative government for which the
Constitution
Department of Prime Minister
and Cabinet,
Legislation Handbook
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 13 March 2002, 1111 (D
Williams—Attorney-General).
Service Amendment Regulations (No 1) 2006
(Cth). The text of reg 2.1 is
set out in Appendix 3.
[2008] ACTSC 74.
breach triggered an action under s 70(1) of the
Crimes Act 1914
R v Goreng Goreng
[2008] ACTSC 74
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security
Sensitive Information
, ALRC 98 (2004),
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Questions 3–8 and 3–9.
Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
[1992] HCA 45
(1992) 177 CLR 106
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR
Public Interest Advocacy
Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009.
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Grollo v Palmer
[1995] HCA 26
(1995) 184 CLR
Gypsy Jokers Motorcycle
Club Inc v Commissioner of Police
(2008) 234 CLR 532.
K-Generation Pty Ltd v Liquor
Licensing Court
[2009] HCA 4
(2009) 252 ALR
Clerk of the
23 January 2009. See H Evans
Odgers’ Australian Senate Practice
(12th ed, 2008),
51–55 for a discussion of the application of secrecy provisions to
parliamentary inquiries.
the Senate,
23 January 2009.
H Evans (ed),
Odgers’ Australian Senate Practice
Explanatory Material, Exposure
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
(Cth), [4.24].
An intention to
abrogate parliamentary privilege requires express statutory words: H Evans (ed),
Odgers’ Australian Senate Practice
(12th ed, 2008), 53; G Griffith,
Parliamentary Privilege: Major Developments and Current Issues
Parliamentary Library Research Service Background Paper No 1/07 (2007),
Explanatory Material,
Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information)
(Cth), [4.25]. The relevant provisions are Explanatory Material,
Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information)
(Cth), cl 355-60.
Explanatory Material, Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of
Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
(Cth), 36–37, Example
Ibid, [4.26]; and see
Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information)
(Cth) cll 350-60(3),
355-195(3).
Auditor-General Bill
Explanatory Memorandum, [71].
Inspector of Transport Security Act 2006
Migration Act 1958
Parliamentary
Drafting Direction No 3.5: Offences, Penalties, Self-Incrimination,
Secrecy Provisions and Enforcement Powers
, Office of Parliamentary Counsel,
13 November 2007, [61].
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
Australia’s Right to
6 March 2009.
(Cabinet Secretary and Special Minister of State),
Open and Transparent
Government—the Way Forward
http://www.smos.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp_20090324.html
at 24 March
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
Whistleblower Protection: A Comprehensive Scheme for
the Commonwealth Public Sector
Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
[1990] HCA 33
(1990) 170 CLR 321
Right to Life
Association (NSW) Inc v Secretary, Department of Human Services and Health
[1995] FCA 1060
(1995) 128 ALR 238
, 245, a case concerning legislation regulating the
administration of clinical trials that made reference to ‘public
considerations to justify a decision to oppose a particular
procedure in the instant case.
Australian Law Reform Commission and Administrative Review Council,
Government: A Review of the Federal
Freedom of Information Act
(1995), [8.13].
Johansen v City
Mutual Life Assurance Society Ltd
[1904] HCA 43
(1905) 2 CLR
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
Whistleblower Protection: A Comprehensive Scheme for
the Commonwealth Public Sector
Ibid [2.34]–[2.44]
provides a discussion of submissions received by the Standing Committee on this
Eccleston and Department
of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs
[1993] QICmr 2
(1993) 1 QAR 60
J Faulkner (Cabinet Secretary
and Special Minister of State),
Open and Transparent Government—the Way
http://www.smos.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp_20090324.html
at 24 March 2009.
(Cabinet Secretary and Special Minister of State),
Freedom of Information
(FOI) Reform: Companion Guide
[1978] HCA 43
(1978) 142 CLR 1
, 38 (Gibbs
Section 130 is replicated in
the other uniform Evidence Acts:
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence Act 2004
Parliament of
Australia—Senate,
Government Guidelines for Official Witnesses before
Parliamentary Committees and Related Matters
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
Whistleblower Protection: A Comprehensive Scheme for
the Commonwealth Public Sector
Ibid, xxi, Rec
H Gibbs, R Watson and A
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Final Report
Ibid, 31.50
(a)–(d). In the case of information relating to the intelligence and
security services disclosed by someone who
was not a member or ex-member of
those services, proof of damage was necessary: 31.50
Ibid, 332, 31.50
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008), Question
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Freedom of Information
Review Panel,
The Right to Information: The Report of the FOI Independent
Review Panel
Faulkner (Cabinet Secretary and Special Minister of State),
Transparent Government—the Way Forward
http://www.smos.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp_20090324.html
at 24 March
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Administrative Review Council,
Open Government: A Review of
the Federal
Freedom of Information Act
, ALRC 77 (1995),
M Paterson,
Information and Privacy in Australia: Government and Information Access in the
Modern State
(2005), [8.58]–[8.61]; Freedom of Information Review
The Right to Information: The Report of the FOI Independent Review
(2008), ch 8, describing the Cabinet exemption in Queensland as
‘a bolt hole’,107. See also Australian Law Reform Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security Sensitive
Information
, ALRC 98 (2004), ch 4.
3. Sharing Commonwealth
Information
Introduction
Framework for information sharing
Security classification system
Memorandums of understanding
Agency information-handling policies
Trusted Information Sharing Network
Conflicting obligations
Outcomes of information sharing
Data matching
Other outcomes of information sharing
Submissions
ALRC’s views
3. Sharing Commonwealth
Information
Introduction
3.1 The Terms of Reference for this Inquiry require the Australian Law Reform
Commission (ALRC) not only to have regard to the importance
of balancing the
need to protect Commonwealth information and the public interest in an open and
accountable system of government,
but also to have regard to the increased need
to share such information within and between governments and with the private
3.2 The previous chapter discussed the concept of ‘open
government’ and the need for the Australian Government to share
information with, or make information available to, the public at large, or
particular members of the public, in order ‘for
the people to know whether
a government’s deeds match its
3.3 This chapter focuses on information sharing for the purpose of satisfying
governmental policies and programs. Normally, this will
involve the
communication of information between Australian Government agencies. However,
given privatisation, public-private partnerships
and concerns about critical
infrastructure, Australian Government agencies increasingly need to share
information outside of government,
with state and territory agencies or the
private sector.
3.4 Information, as Greg Terrill has commented, ‘underpins almost all
of government activity’; it is both an ‘object
right’ and ‘a dimension of all government
Information can be
shared through a range of mechanisms, including, for example, data matching;
legislative codification of permissible
sharing; and memorandums of
understanding (MOUs). Overlying such mechanisms may be seen to be a broad
concept of what is described
as a ‘whole of government’ approach,
which refers to ‘coordinated activities of government that cross
3.5 In its 2004
Connecting Government: Whole of Government Responses to
Australia’s Priority Challenges
, the Australian Government’s
Management Advisory Committee defined ‘whole of government’ in the
Australian Public
Service (APS) as denoting:
public service agencies working across portfolio boundaries to achieve a shared
goal and an integrated government response to particular
issues. Approaches can
be formal and informal. They can focus on policy development, program management
and service delivery.
3.6 In his preface to the report, Dr Peter Shergold described ‘whole of
government’ as
the public administration of the future. It offers links and connections to the
global community of ideas, knowledge and understanding
essential for the APS to
face the governance challenges of the 21st century. It extols
team-based approaches to solving the wicked
problems that are endemic to public
3.7 The idea of a whole of government approach requires that secrecy
provisions be considered within a much wider framework of information
its response to the report of the Independent Review Panel examining the
Freedom of Information Act 1992
the Queensland
Government committed to developing
a whole-of-government information policy framework that will set the long term
goals and strategic direction for government information
policy, while at the
same time mapping the immediate priorities for government in seeking to position
itself as an innovative and
accountable custodian of government
information.
3.8 Such a response conceptualises freedom of information, secrecy provisions
and information management as different facets of a
much larger information
prism in which the government has particular responsibilities as a
‘custodian’ of information
in a context of accountability.
Framework for
information sharing
3.9 Information sharing sits within the overall
framework of information management. Any sharing of Commonwealth information
either be authorised or excepted from the ambit of any applicable secrecy
provisions. This section of the chapter considers aspects
of the framework for
information sharing, including: the system for the classification of documents
on the basis of their security
sensitivity; memorandums of understanding; agency
information-handling policies; and the ‘Trusted Information Sharing
for sharing information with the private sector.
classification system
3.10 The classification of information according to different levels of
security under the
Australian Government
Protective Security Manual
is a key way in which the
flow of information is regulated in the public sector. The PSM sets out
guidelines and minimum standards
in relation to protective security for
Australian Government agencies and officers, and for contractors who perform
services for
or on behalf of the Australian
Government.
It is periodically
revised by the interdepartmental Protective Security Policy Committee.
of the PSM deals with information security. That part
provides agencies with guidance on the development of security policies that
address awareness, responsibility, behaviour and deterrence to ensure official
information is not compromised. The ALRC considered
of the PSM in
detail in its 2004 report,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and
Security Sensitive Information
(ALRC 98). In that report, the ALRC
sets out the following information security
principles:
the availability of information should be limited to those who need
to use or access the information to do their work (the ‘need
know’ principle);
where the compromise of information could cause harm to the nation,
the public interest, the government or other entities or individuals,
must consider giving the information a security classification;
once information has been identified as requiring security
classification, a protective marking must be assigned to the information;
once information has been security classified, agencies must observe
the minimum procedural requirements for its use, storage, transmission
PSM distinguishes between national security information and non-national
security information. ‘National security information’
includes any
official resource that records information about, or is associated with,
Australia’s security, defence, international
relations, or national
interest. National security information may be given one of four security
—if compromise of it could cause ‘limited
damage’ to national security;
Confidential
—if compromise of it could cause
‘damage’ to national security;
—if compromise of it could cause ‘serious
damage’ to national security;
—if compromise of it could cause
‘exceptionally grave damage’ to national
3.13 ‘Non-national security information’
any official resource that threatens the interests of important groups or
individuals other than the nation. Non-national security
information may be
given one of three security markings:
X-in-Confidence
—if compromise of it could cause
‘limited damage’ to the Commonwealth, the Government, commercial
entities or members
of the public;
—if compromise of it could cause
‘damage’ to the Commonwealth, the Government, commercial entities or
the public;
Highly Protected
—if compromise of it could cause
‘serious damage’ to the Commonwealth, the Government, commercial
entities or members
3.14 Security classified information may only be
accessed and handled by persons who have obtained a sufficient security
The clearance process aims to identify whether there is anything in
an individual’s behaviour or history that indicates that
he or she would
be a security risk. Security clearances for non-national security
information—Clearances for a Position of
Trust—are conducted by
individual Australian Government agencies. However, Designated Security
Assessment Positions—which
allow access to national security
information—require an assessment from the Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation
3.15 The Australian Government’s stated policy is to keep security
classified information to the necessary
However, in a 1999
report on the operation of the classification system for protecting sensitive
information, the Australian National
Audit Office noted that all audited
agencies incorrectly classified files, with over-classification being the most
occurrence.
Ongoing problems with the classification system were also raised in a number of
submissions in response to the Issues Paper,
Review of Secrecy Laws
3.16 A post on the ALRC’s online forum,
Talking Secrecy
conducted during the Inquiry, identified difficulties caused by the
‘Restricted’ classification level. It advised that,
because most of
Australia’s allies do not have an equivalent level of protection (moving
straight from ‘Unclassified’
to ‘Confidential’),
information that may be classified as ‘Restricted’ in Australia may
be upgraded to ‘Confidential’
in the United States and then up
to ‘Secret’ on return to Australia. The post also advised of
confusion surrounding the
‘Unclassified’ category. Some people
understand this to mean information that has not yet been assessed for
classification,
whereas the correct meaning is information that has been
assessed as not requiring a security
classification.
3.17 In ALRC 98, the ALRC made a number of recommendations with regard
to the PSM and the classification of Commonwealth information,
the PSM should be amended to provide further and more explicit
guidance on the different classification levels, how to make classification
decisions and when such decisions require review by a more senior
Australian Government agencies should ensure that all staff required
to make classification decisions are well trained in classification
the mandatory minimum standards in the PSM should include express
statements that information should only be classified when there
is a clear and
justifiable need to do so; the decision to classify should be based on the
criteria set out in the PSM; and information
should not be classified for
extraneous reasons, such as to conceal breaches of the law or to prevent
embarrassment to a person,
organisation or
ALRC further recommended that the PSM (with any sensitive protective security
information removed) should be placed in the
—as is the case in
most comparable jurisdictions, such as the United States, Canada and
New Zealand.
submission in response to IP 34, the Australian Press Council also called for
the PSM to be declassified and made publicly
3.19 The PSM has been revised since the publication of ALRC 98.
Unfortunately, however, and without explanation, the document was
subsequently
given a security classification. The security classification scheme in the
revised PSM is broadly consistent with the
regime discussed
3.20 In a submission to this Inquiry, Liberty Victoria proposed a simplified
classification system for documents, with documents marked
‘National Security Information’ (NSI) or ‘non-NSI’.
Liberty Victoria also supported the position
taken in ALRC 98, that the PSM
provide explicit classification guidance and information should only be
classified (at any level) where there is a clear and justifiable
doing so. The later classification of the PSM is an ironic example of over
classification; one which illustrates the absurdity
of creating a system, which
is inaccessible by either its intended or potential
Memorandums of
understanding
3.21 An MOU does not, in itself, provide a legal basis for the handling of
Commonwealth informationits terms must be underpinned
by common law or
statute. The Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department (AGD)
described them as ‘voluntary
arrangements ... premised upon a willingness
to enter into arrangements of mutual benefit and long term
cooperation’.
acknowledging that MOUs generally do not have the force of law, the
Administrative Review Council has advised that they may
regulate the exchange of
information among government agencies by ‘formalis[ing] the terms of a
relationship or framework for
cooperation between the
3.22 In its submission to this Inquiry, the Australian Transaction Reports
and Analysis Centre (AUSTRAC) noted the importance of MOUs,
backed up by secrecy
provisions, in the context of the sharing of information among foreign
intelligence units:
As these MOUs are not enforceable, the secrecy provisions of the [
Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
(AML/CTF Act)] provide
reassurance and certainty to [foreign intelligence units] that information
provided to AUSTRAC will not be
disclosed except in specified circumstances, and
vice versa.
3.23 While the MOU facilitates the sharing of information, it is the
legislative secrecy provisions themselves which are critical:
The secrecy provisions of Division 4 of Part 11 of the AML/CTF Act enable the
[Australian Federal Police], the [Australian Crime
Commission], [the Australian
Security Intelligence Organisation] and [Australian Secret Intelligence Service]
to communicate AUSTRAC
information to a foreign government if satisfied that the
foreign country will protect the confidentiality of the information, control
use and use it only for the purpose that it was
3.24 Several Australian Government agencies have MOUs that are relevant to
information handling. For example, the Australian Securities
and Investments
Commission (ASIC) has entered into an MOU with the Australian Government
Financial Reporting Council, under which
the entities agree (subject to any
restrictions imposed by law) to ‘share information that they believe would
be of assistance
to the other in understanding their respective responsibilities
under the law’.
agency agrees to provide information requested by the other in a timely
They further agree to
use ‘reasonable endeavours’ to notify the other of the existence of
relevant information, notwithstanding
that the information has not been
Commonwealth and
state and territory police also have entered into a detailed MOU for the sharing
of law enforcement
information.
3.25 The AGD remarked that MOUs and similar instruments
may be used to set out a shared understanding and guidelines for the
communication, handling and protection of particular information
by the parties
to the MOU. They can provide a consistent, reliable and easily managed means of
ensuring protection of sensitive Commonwealth
information.
3.26 The place and function of MOUs in facilitating and regulating
information flows between agencies and with the private sector
is considered in
Chapter 15.
information-handling policies
3.27 The policies and practices adopted by agencies also play a critical part
in facilitating information sharing. As noted in Chapter
15, they can play a
positive role in protecting Commonwealth information by clarifying and
standardising information-handling processes.
3.28 As part of the
APS Values and Code of Conduct in Practice
by the Australian Public Service Commission, agencies are advised to establish
‘clear policies and guidelines so that
employees are aware of the
provisions that govern the management of
information’.
provisions are the security classifications of the PSM. Agency
information-handling policies are considered in detail
in Chapter 15.
3.29 In a submission in response to IP 34, the AGD commented that:
Agency policies on information handling may be directed towards several
outcomes, including providing practical guidance on any applicable
secrecy laws
as well as maintaining the integrity of information held by the agency. ...
The Protective Security Manual (PSM) and the Australian Government ICT
Information Security Manual (ISM) are key documents that provide
guidance on the
handling, usage, storage and destruction, of all Commonwealth information. They
provide the guidance and encourage
the application of the policy and procedures
necessary to protect Commonwealth information, material and other assets but do
provide specific penalties themselves. These manuals set out minimum
standards and agencies may implement higher standards if necessary
to meet their
specific needs.
Trusted Information
Sharing Network
3.30 One example of an initiative to provide a means for cooperative sharing
of information is the establishment of the Trusted Information
Sharing Network
(TISN), following a recommendation by the Australian Government’s
Business–Government Task Force on Critical
Infrastructure in March
Since the TISN was launched in 2003, governments around the world have realised
that terrorism is just one threat to critical infrastructure.
The TISN has been
instrumental in promoting the ‘all hazards’ approach to critical
infrastructure protection. This takes
into account all possibilities, natural or
manmade—from fire, criminal activity or cyclone to terrorism, flood or
3.31 The TISN is made up of nine different business sector groups and
the network provides ‘a safe environment where industry
and government can
share vital information on critical infrastructure protection and organisational
resilience’.
Critical Infrastructure Advisory Council
, which oversees the
groups, also reports to the
Attorney-General
, in this way
communicating at a high level with government on, amongst other areas of
significance, Australia’s counter-terrorism
arrangements.
3.32 ‘Critical infrastructure’ refers to:
those physical facilities, supply chains, information technologies and
communication networks which, if destroyed, degraded or rendered
unavailable for
an extended period, would adversely impact on the social or economic well-being
of the nation or affect Australia’s
ability to ensure national
3.33 Critical Infrastructure Protection is ‘not a new
discipline’, but a ‘coordinated blending of existing
specialisations’,
• law enforcement and crime prevention
• counter terrorism
• national security and defence
• emergency management, including the dissemination of information
• business continuity planning
• protective security (physical, personnel and procedural)
• e-Security
• natural disaster planning and preparedness
• risk management
• professional networking
• market regulation, planning and infrastructure
development.
3.34 As a considerable proportion of critical infrastructure is privately
owned—as much as 90% in some parts of Australia—the
approach of the
TISN is to facilitate private industry and government working together to raise
awareness of infrastructure security
risks and to ‘ensure that information
and techniques required to assess and mitigate risks is readily available and
exchanged’.
3.35 Given that the TISN operates on the basis of information sharing, and
that there are legitimate concerns about revealing what
may be confidential
commercial information, the creation and maintenance of a trusting environment
for cooperation is essential.
In this regard, the combination of the TISN Deed
of Confidentiality and guidelines for the handling of potentially commercially
and security-related information operates to ensure that confidential
information is properly managed and reasonably protected from
unauthorised use
or disclosure.
3.36 As the TISN’s ‘Fact Sheet’ about the confidentiality
deed explains,
The definition of confidential information is not to be read as having meaning
under the Commonwealth Protective Security Manual
(PSM). ‘Confidential
Information’ under the PSM refers predominantly to national security
information, rather than the
disclosed in TISN, and is subject to certain security requirements not required
for TISN confidential
information.
3.37 The deed provides assurance amongst private sector participants in the
network. Government representatives are not required to
sign it as they have
existing statutory and other legal obligations for the handling of
information—including secrecy provisions.
However, all government
representatives who participate in the TISN are required to sign a Government
Representative Confidentiality
Acknowledgement, to expressly acknowledge these
obligations.
Conflicting
obligations
3.38 There is often a tension between the ‘need to share’
information and handling information on a ‘need to know’
Sharing information may also conflict with other obligations—such as the
need to protect privacy. This tension was identified
in a report in 1995 by the
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs
on the protection of confidential
personal information:
On the one hand, an unregulated transfer of information has implications both in
terms of privacy and breach of confidence. However,
on the other hand, limits on
the access of Commonwealth agencies to information may impede the agencies,
particularly in relation
to law enforcement and revenue
protection.
3.39 Sharing information may also amount to a contravention of secrecy laws,
which can affect communication at different points in
the information flow. A
secrecy provision may restrict the disclosure or communication of information in
certain circumstances.
restriction can have an immediate or potential impact on information
3.40 The potential danger of improperly managed sharing arrangements was
highlighted in the multi-agency Project Wickenby taskforce
established to target
particular allegations of tax fraud. After questions were raised as to the
processes for managing the sharing
of information between the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO), the Australian Crime Commission (ACC) and the Australian
Federal Police
(AFP), an inquiry was conducted by Dale Boucher, which was
reported to have ‘raised serious concerns about mismanagement and
inappropriate collusion’ between these
Boucher concluded that
although there was not a ‘culture in which tax information may be
inappropriately disclosed to law enforcement
agencies’, ‘there may
be a gap between current policy and practice’. He noted that:
it does highlight serious concerns about staff who have been seconded between
the ATO, [ACC] and AFP, an increasingly common initiative
to share the expertise
and knowledge of the agencies as part of the Project Wickenby
investigations.
3.41 In a submission to this Inquiry, the Commonwealth Ombudsman remarked
that although information obtained for the purposes of an
investigation is
‘protected by secrecy provisions in the
Ombudsman Act
legislation’,
Agencies are sometimes reluctant to allow access to information except in
accordance with their own internal security classification
procedures. The
Ombudsman’s office and agencies have always been able to agree upon a
course of action that resolves this tension,
but it can hamper speedy
investigation. It is an issue that warrants broader
consideration.
3.42 How best to manage the tension between the appropriate protection of
information and information sharing is one of the challenges
in this Inquiry.
Outcomes of
information sharing
3.43 A key reason for, and product of, information sharing is ‘data
matching’, described by the Federal Privacy Commissioner
large scale comparison of records or files … collected or held for
different purposes, with a view to identifying
Agencies and
organisations may wish to conduct data matching for a number of purposes,
including detecting errors and illegal behaviour,
locating individuals,
ascertaining whether a particular individual is eligible to receive a benefit,
and facilitating debt
collection.
3.44 The sharing of information through data matching may need to take
where there is a crisis or national emergency;
to better examine information held by government, by analysing and
integrating information held across a number of different portfolios;
to integrate service delivery, for example, between the ATO and
Centrelink, or between Centrelink and a private employment service
to manage areas of joint activity by encouraging the sharing of
information with the Australian Government, across jurisdictions
and with the
private sector.
3.45 Law enforcement and counter-terrorism are obvious areas where
a sharing of information and data matching may be crucial. The
terrorist attack
on the World Trade Center in New York on 11 September 2001 not only had an
impact on the security environment, it
also heightened the debate about the
‘need to share’ information between agencies. A number of agencies
may have different
pieces of information which, if connected, might assist
counter-terrorism investigations. As the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
commented in
Re Mickelberg and Australian Federal Police
, it is in the
public interest
that law enforcement agencies have speedy, accurate and secure systems of
communication, both within an agency and between agencies
especially where
agencies have different fields of
responsibility.
3.46 In a submission to this Inquiry, the Australian Commission for Law
Enforcement Integrity (ACLEI) said that ‘[a]s in many
other areas of
government, collecting, analysing and sharing information is at the heart of law
enforcement activity’:
In recent decades, digital data storage and retrieval systems have become
powerful intelligence aids in the investigation of serious
crime. Technology and
enhanced cooperation between jurisdictions have enabled unprecedented sharing of
information about individuals,
groups, property and other assets, and
Together, these advances and the legal framework have allowed law enforcement
officers to perform their legitimate work more quickly
and effectively than has
previously been the case.
3.47 However, agencies wishing to undertake data-matching activities may be
prevented from carrying out these activities both through
the application of
from using or disclosing relevant
information.
Further, where
sharing is permitted, it may be accompanied, as ACLEI commented, ‘by
community concerns about the purposes to
which information is put, and the
security of that
information’.
3.48 Under the
(Cth), agencies and organisations are
subject to additional forms of regulation in respect of their data-matching
activities through
Further, agencies
undertaking data-matching programs that include the matching of tax file numbers
are subject to the
Data-matching Program (Assistance and Tax) Act 1990
(Cth) and the
Data-matching Program (Assistance and Tax) Guidelines
issued under that Act.
3.49 The Federal Privacy Commissioner has issued guidelines that address
general data-matching activities of agencies and a number
of agencies have
agreed to comply with them.
guidelines apply to agencies that match data from two or more databases, if at
least two of the databases contain information
individuals. The Federal Privacy Commissioner also undertakes research and
monitors developments in data processing
and computer technology (including data
matching and data linkage) to help minimise any adverse effects of such
developments on privacy.
3.50 In summary, the guidelines require agencies to give public notice of any
proposed data-matching program; prepare and publish
protocol’ outlining the nature and scope of a data-matching program;
provide individuals with an opportunity
to comment on matched information if the
agency proposes to take administrative action on the basis of it; and destroy
personal information
that does not lead to a match. Further, the guidelines
generally prohibit agencies from creating new, separate databases from
information
3.51 There are obvious privacy risks associated with data matching. In the
guidelines, the Federal Privacy Commissioner notes that
data matching may
involve the:
use of personal information for purposes other than for the reasons
it was collected, and these purposes may not be within the reasonable
expectations of the individuals about whom the personal information
examination of personal information about individuals about whom
there are no grounds for suspicion, sometimes without the knowledge
individuals; and
retention of matched information by agencies for potential future
Federal Privacy Commissioner also notes that data-matching is not always
reliable. Matched information may fail to distinguish
between individuals with
similar details; input data may not be accurate; technical errors may occur; and
fields may not be
standardised.
Secrecy provisions
3.53 One significant issue is whether secrecy provisions inappropriately
restrict data matching or other information sharing between
agencies. For
example, federal, state and territory governments are increasingly focusing on
issues related to identity
Data matching may
assist an agency to establish or verify an individual’s identity to
facilitate that individual’s enrolment
in an electronic system. Secrecy
provisions could prevent data matching conducted for the purpose of detecting
errors and identity
fraud in existing systems.
3.54 In the 1995 review conducted by the House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, the Committee
heard that secrecy
provisions frequently impeded the flow of information from one department to
another. In its evidence to the Committee,
the AGD took the view that secrecy
provisions were developed to prevent disclosure of official information to the
public, but were
too inflexible to meet the increasing need to transfer
information within government, for example across the taxation, health and
social security areas.
3.55 More recently, the Treasury reviewed the secrecy provisions in taxation
legislation (the Taxation Secrecy Review) and considered
the need to balance
taxpayer privacy against the need to facilitate government operations through
information sharing. In that review
it was noted that law enforcement agencies
consider that current secrecy and disclosure provisions hinder the investigation
and prosecution
of serious crime, because taxpayer information provided by the
ATO cannot be used as evidence in the prosecution of a non-tax related
3.56 Another issue raised in the Taxation Secrecy Review was whether the
Commissioner of Taxation could obtain access to employee
records of ATO
employees. At present, the Commissioner of Taxation, when acting in his or her
capacity as an agency head, can only
gain access to employee tax information
that has been obtained from a public source. It was suggested that amendments
could be made
to allow the Commissioner, in the capacity as an employer, access
to taxation information about ATO officers or contractors. This
would allow the
Commissioner to be confident that all employees have complied with their tax
obligations and thus ensure community
confidence in the
3.57 Following the Taxation Secrecy Review, the Government released the
Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
Exposure Draft Bill). A key aspect of the Bill is the inclusion of exceptions to
the applicable secrecy provisions to facilitate
information sharing:
Exceptions to the obligation not to disclose taxpayer information are necessary
because information obtained by the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO) needs to be
used by the ATO to fulfil its role and can often be vital to other arms of
government in performing their
functions effectively. ...
Some new disclosures of information will also be introduced in instances where
disclosures.
3.58 The proposed amendments will stipulate exceptions to secrecy provisions.
This approach is also seen, for example, in
Insurance Act 1973
(Cth), which provides that information may only be
disclosed for the purposes of that Act, but the minister responsible for
administering
the Act may authorise disclosure if it is necessary in the public
interest to disclose it, or if the disclosure is in accordance
with a purpose,
person or authority prescribed in regulations.
Other outcomes of
information sharing
3.59 Information sharing goes beyond agencies working across portfolio
boundaries:
A sound whole of government approach requires understanding of how programs and
policies come together to affect particular communities,
social groups, sectors
of the economy and/or regions. ... Most whole of government priorities require
close cooperation with external
groups, such as community organisations,
businesses and other jurisdictions. Moreover, understanding the different
perspectives of
external groups is essential to the government’s desire to
see policies and programs make a constructive contribution ‘on
ground’, as well as in managing the risks associated with new
initiatives.
3.60 With the increasing privatisation of government services, public and
private sector bodies may need to work together on programs
and policies:
Service delivery is often undertaken, consciously or by default, on a
collaborative basis. This is particularly so if it is undertaken
by Centrelink
but also if it is contracted out. A non-government agency would, for instance,
be expected to link all programs it
delivers on behalf of government. One of the
challenges here is that these agencies are often trying to make sense of the
connections
between programs and policy. One of the solutions is to try and form
to unlock the
lessons learnt in service
3.61 One outcome of the collaboration across government and with private
sector bodies is that by maximising the potential of technology,
provision may become ‘seamless’, through ‘common standards and
shared investment in high-priority data
collections and
definitions’.
outcome is a greater sense of public ‘ownership’ of policy:
Involving external players in policy development or the design of services and
programs has many benefits. Policies and services
will more closely meet public
needs if they are developed with the help of people affected by them. Policies
will be better informed
and based on evidence. Involvement is also likely to
improve acceptance of policy measures and satisfaction with
Submissions
3.62 In IP 34, the ALRC asked about any concerns arising from the interaction
between secrecy provisions and data-matching laws and
The ALRC also asked
whether federal secrecy provisions inhibit unduly the sharing of information
within and between law enforcement
agencies, governments and between governments
and the private sector.
3.63 Stakeholders provided a range of views, giving examples of where secrecy
provisions inhibited the sharing of information, and
those where it did not;
suggesting ways that better sharing could be achieved; but also identifying
certain dangers inherent in information
Secrecy provisions inhibiting information
3.64 A problem identified by the AGD was that because many secrecy offences
apply to Commonwealth officers or to officers of the relevant
‘there may be uncertainty as to whether information will remain protected
if shared outside the agency’. The
AGD submitted that:
If secrecy laws were to be drafted in a way that protects information based upon
the nature of the information, and not the fact
that it is held or obtained by a
particular officer or agency, this may assist the sharing of information while
ensuring sensitive
information can continue to be given adequate protection.
In relation to information collected by government agencies for service delivery
and regulatory functions, the capacity for agencies
to exchange information
tends to rely on finding specific exceptions to the various secrecy laws, which
are based on particular programs
or agencies. This approach can result in
‘informational silos’ that may not reflect the actual need to share
information
across agencies with common responsibilities. Few agency operations
are neatly contained within these artificial
boundaries.
3.65 The AGD acknowledged the problems created by secrecy provisions where
they operate as agency-specific provisions. Such provisions
inconsistencies between agencies about how those agencies can share information,
and whether they are able to share information
at all. In its submission, the
ATO gave an example of how taxation secrecy provisions hindered their ability to
share information
effectively:
Taxation secrecy provisions do inhibit the ATO’s ability to share
information with law enforcement agencies, other government
agencies, and the
private sector.
This can create practical problems where the ATO is trying to assist other
agencies with non-tax related investigations, or where
a non-tax remedy may
assist the ATO to deal with a tax mischief.
For example, the Australian Securities and Investment Commission (ASIC) may be
pursuing civil action in relation to a taxpayer under
Corporations Act
. The ATO is not permitted to disclose taxpayer information to ASIC for
the purposes of the civil action, even though the civil action
may actually have
the flow-on effect of protecting taxation
3.66 Some stakeholders, however, emphasised the importance of secrecy
provisions in restricting the sharing of information. The Australian
Statistics (ABS), for example, while identifying the importance of being able to
gain access to certain information from
other agencies, highlighted the
importance of limiting or tightly controlling the access to information held by
Accessing information from other agencies is fundamental to the ABS’s
statistical capability, as it enables the ABS to compile
statistics it may not
be able to produce from conducting surveys alone. For example, the ABS counts
the Australian population each
five years and then updates this count each
quarter using, for example, information on births and deaths from the State
of Births, Deaths and Marriages, and overseas passenger cards from
the Department of Immigration and Citizenship.
In addition, it may be more efficient to use administrative data from another
agency than for the ABS to conduct surveys to collect
similar information. Based
on knowledge developed through the relationship it has with its providers, the
ABS believes most members
of the community would prefer government agencies to
use information they’ve already provided, rather than being asked
by different agencies to provide the same information. ...
In this context, it is important for the ABS to have, for statistical purposes,
access to selected information collected by government
authorities.
Current secrecy provisions in the [
Census and Statistics Act 1905
(CSA)] provide strong restrictions on the ABS sharing identifiable information
it has obtained under the CSA. As discussed,
this position is non-negotiable, as
a guarantee of secrecy to data providers is fundamental to the quality of
national statistics.
Other agencies may also have secrecy provisions in their
governing legislation, and this is an issue the ABS must overcome when it
to use other agencies’ data. In some cases, agencies have amended their
legislation to facilitate this. Regardless of
the arrangements put in place,
once data is received by the ABS, it is subject to ABS secrecy
provisions.
3.67 Liberty Victoria added a warning that data matching, while ‘an
invaluable tool’, is sometimes ‘poorly handled’
and carries
the risk of inadvertent disclosure:
Liberty Victoria believes that data matching should only occur after thorough
risk and cost/benefit analyses have been done. Moreover,
where data from two or
more classes is combined, the highest classification standard should apply. If
implemented correctly, data
matching and secrecy provisions should work together
to ensure only necessary data matching is undertaken with appropriate
safeguards.
3.68 During the secrecy phone-in, the ALRC also received a number of calls on
behalf of charity groups seeking, for example, to assist
people wishing to trace
their family, to become reconciled with family members, or to locate missing
persons. In particular, concern
was expressed about an inability to gain access
to information that would assist them in such
While these are matters
concerning privacy issues, rather than strictly ones concerning secrecy
provisions, the callers said that
the information held by agencies could assist
in achieving the desired outcomes.
Secrecy provisions not inhibiting information
3.69 A number of investigative and law enforcement agencies expressed the
view that their secrecy provisions generally did not unduly
inhibit the sharing
of information with respect to their operations where such sharing was
In this context,
specific provisions and practices were designed to facilitate information
sharing. The Australian Intelligence Community
(AIC), for example, submitted
current laws do not inhibit appropriate information sharing within the AIC and
among AIC and relevant non-AIC agencies. For example,
sections 6(1)(b)
Intelligence Services Act
specifically enable appropriate information sharing for [the
Australian Secret Intelligence Service], [the Defence Signals Directorate]
[the Defence Imagery and Geospatial Organisation]. Within the operation of these
laws, persons with a ‘need to know’
may be appropriately security
cleared to allow their receipt of national security-classified information.
Where necessary, information
can also be sanitised to a lower national security
classification to allow the information to be shared more widely.
subsection 18(2)
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation
creates a limited offence for
unauthorised communication of any information a person has acquired by reason of
being an officer or
contractor of ASIO, the
also identifies the
circumstances in which information may be disseminated to other organisations
and persons (see sections 17(1)(b),
18(3)(a) and (b), and 19(2)). Accordingly,
provided it is done by officers acting within the limits of the authority
conferred upon
them by the Director-General or with the approval of the
Director-General, ASIO will seek to communicate intelligence in support
statutory obligations.
3.70 The AFP also submitted that sharing information other agencies,
including members of the AIC, was facilitated by a variety of
instruments and
The sharing and subsequent use of information is regulated by inter-agency
Memorandums of Understanding (MOU), AFP Guidelines and
legislative provisions
depending on the type, context and classification of the information. The AFP
holds that any reforms to Commonwealth
secrecy provisions should not prevent,
hinder or restrict this current ability to access and/or share
information.
3.71 However, the AFP wanted to ensure that
any reforms maintain or strengthen the strict provisions already in place so as
to support the existing high degree of confidence
our organisation presently
enjoys within Government and the Australian Intelligence
3.72 In its submission, AUSTRAC commented that specific provisions relevant
to its operations enabled information sharing:
Where the sharing of information concerns the primary disclosure between AUSTRAC
and designated agencies, AUSTRAC considers that
the secrecy provisions of the
AML/CTF Act provide an appropriate balance between protecting and sharing
AUSTRAC information. ...
AUSTRAC considers that the AML/CTF Act secrecy
provisions provide considerable flexibility in respect of secondary disclosure
designated agencies.
3.73 In particular, AUSTRAC stated that the secrecy provisions of the AML/CTF
Act facilitate international exchange of information:
The broad principles regarding international exchange of information between
FIUs, including its further disclosure, are set out
in the MOU between the 8
parties. These MOUs reflect the requirements set out in section 132(1) of the
AML/CTF Act for such disclosures
by AUSTRAC. As these MOUs are not enforceable,
the secrecy provisions of the AML/CTF Act provide reassurance and certainty to
intelligence units] that information provided to AUSTRAC will not be
disclosed except in specified circumstances, and vice versa.
The secrecy provisions of Division 4 of Part 11 of the AML/CTF Act enable the
AFP, the ACC, ASIO and ASIS to communicate AUSTRAC
information to a foreign
government if satisfied that the foreign country will protect the
confidentiality of the information, control
its use and use it only for the
purpose that it was provided.
3.74 However, AUSTRAC noted that where agencies are not designated under the
AML/CTF Act, they
must seek legislative amendment to enable any comprehensive sharing of
information, even though their role and function may fall
within activities that
could be otherwise or have previously been considered as relevant to the
overarching objectives of the
3.75 Further, ASIC explained how information sharing is facilitated by
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
(ASIC Act):
The need for ASIC to release confidential information to either domestic law
enforcement agencies or foreign regulators is increasing
significantly.
ASIC releases information to both state and federal agencies and foreign
regulators pursuant to s127 of the ASIC Act.
Section 127 sets out secrecy obligations for ASIC, and the circumstances where
disclosure is authorised. Overlaying this is the common
law obligation to
provide procedural fairness to persons whose interests may be adversely affected
by decisions made under this provision—
Johns v ASC
[1993] HCA 56
(1993) 178 CLR
Since the decision in
, ASIC has taken particular care to
ensure that procedural fairness obligations are complied
3.76 In the experience of the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
(APRA), the secrecy provision that applies to that agency
has not limited its
ability to share information with other agencies or the private sector nor has
it inhibited them from sharing
information about a regulated entity with that
entity. APRA noted that the applicable secrecy provision contains a number of
which allows them to disclose information to a ‘financial
sector supervisory agency’ or a prescribed
3.77 The Department of Human Services (DHS) also remarked that it was able to
match data successfully by entering into MOUs with other
The DHS noted,
however, examples from its portfolio ‘where the restriction on sharing
information could be further considered’:
• while Medicare Australia is able to disclose information to the
police under a public interest certificate, often the police
are unable to then
share that information directly with prosecuting authorities and the courts.
While practical workarounds are sometimes
used (such as Medicare, rather than
the police, making the further disclosures) the policy justification for this
could be questioned;
• [Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service (CRS)] Australia’s
provisions do not deal explicitly with situations where the
disclosure of
information might assist in a criminal investigation, or where disclosure is
necessary to protect against an imminent
threat to a person’s life or
physical safety. Currently, disclosures must be made under a public interest
certificate executed
by a delegate within the Department of Education,
Employment and Workplace Relations. Timeliness is an issue; for example, when a
person departs CRS Australia premises having threatened suicide or imminent
physical harm to another, including employees at a place
they are about to
visit, the current secrecy provision prevents CRS Australia from taking
protective action until a [Department of
Education, Employment and Workplace
Relations] delegate approves the disclosure; and
• Centrelink’s provisions tightly restrict its use of information
within its customer database. For example, using its
customers who might qualify for State Government benefits or non-government
organisation services, and notifying
them of those services, can be a problem as
the secrecy provisions do not include authorisation for consent-based uses. This
the capacity for Centrelink to operate in partnership with such
organisations where doing so would clearly be to the benefit of the
Achieving the right balance
3.78 Maintaining strict secrecy provisions is seen to support information
sharing but at the same time provides protection to information
in appropriate
circumstances. The AGD suggested that:
robust and effective secrecy laws that enable information sharing while also
protecting information from unauthorised disclosure
at any point in the
‘distribution chain’ could enhance information
3.79 The importance of ‘robust controls’ was echoed by AUSTRAC,
who stated that the ability to share information is critical
to its operations
and that current guidelines provided a good framework for meeting privacy
AUSTRAC’s ability to combat money laundering and terrorism financing
depends upon receiving and sharing information with a
wide variety of designated
agencies. Moreover, the ability to cross reference various sets of data supplied
has proved to significantly
enrich the value of AUSTRAC financial intelligence
and its contribution to operational success for AUSTRAC and designated
Bulk data matching can have significant benefits. However, it is crucial that
any data matching exercise that involves AUSTRAC information
be handled securely
with robust controls and procedures in place that require compliance by all
involved. All data matching exercises
are carried out in accordance with the
advisory Guidelines for the Use of Data-Matching in Commonwealth Administration
the Privacy
Commissioner.
3.80 The DHS noted in its submission that while secrecy provisions do inhibit
the sharing of information, they are ‘designed
to do so’. DHS
pointed out that ‘whether the inhibition is inappropriate imports a value
judgment on which the person
concerned, the possessing agency and the requestor
may well have divergent opinions’. Having listed the examples, set out
where information sharing has been unnecessarily inhibited by secrecy
provisions, the Department noted the challenge in ensuring
that a secrecy
provision strikes the appropriate balance:
It is a significant challenge to design a secrecy provision that adequately
protects against unjustifiable dealings with sensitive
information whilst
retaining the capacity for agencies to use and disclose that information in
proper circumstances and for proper
purposes. Part of the challenge is in
determining whose judgment is to be preferred in striking the balance. At
present, secrecy
laws are a mixture of the legislature, the Minister in the
administering agency or a senior officer (by way of public interest certificates
or similar instruments), and the person whose information is concerned (i.e. a
consent based system).
3.81 DHS regarded this as ‘an issue across government’ and
described it as a
‘conundrum’.
3.82 The Department of Climate Change identified drafting as a critical issue
in achieving the right balance between protecting and
sharing information:
There is a potential risk that federal secrecy provisions may inhibit sharing of
information between law enforcement agencies, governments
and between
governments and the private sector. It is important that secrecy provisions be
drafted with sufficient flexibility to
ensure that persons with legitimate uses
for information are able to access it, whilst protecting valuable information
from misuse
and ensuring only persons with a genuine need to know receive such
information.
Agency head authorisation
3.83 In terms of how best to balance the need to share information between
agencies, while also ensuring accountability for the protection
information, the AGD suggested that a general secrecy provision allow the agency
head or a senior officer to authorise disclosure:
Including a provision to enable the agency head or other senior officers to
authorise disclosure may provide greater flexibility
as it may enable disclosure
in new or unforeseen circumstances. It also provides a level of accountability
by requiring a senior
officer to consider whether disclosure would be consistent
with policy considerations in a particular case. Memorandums of understanding
(MOU) or internal guidelines may also be used to set out circumstances when
information can be disclosed from one agency to another.
This may provide a more
flexible approach, as the detail of information sharing arrangements can be left
to documents more easily
3.84 The Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations
discussed the need for information sharing where a whole of government
cross-portfolio response is needed to deliver Government initiatives, but also
expressed reservations about the ‘agency
head’ approach in
[T]here are increasingly a number of Government initiatives which cut across the
portfolio responsibility of a number of Commonwealth
agencies. The ability to
deliver good outcomes for these initiatives is often reliant upon a whole of
government response and thus
necessitates the sharing of information between
relevant Commonwealth agencies and community organisations. However, agency
provisions can often pose a barrier to getting policy measures, aimed
at benefiting the community, up and running. For example, the
confidentiality
provisions in the social security and family assistance law authorise the use
and disclosure of protected information
in a number of prescribed circumstances.
These circumstances however in the main tend to be tied back to purposes which
to or benefit a social security or family assistance outcome.
Accordingly, the Department would be very limited, if not prevented,
and disclosing protected information for the purposes of a policy initiative
which was aimed at assisting vulnerable members
of the community, where that
initiative did not serve a social security or family assistance law purpose or
could be tied back to
a matter of direct relevance to this Department.
While exceptions such as consent or some sort of head to head power which
authorises the head of a Department of State of the Commonwealth
to disclose
protected information to the head of another Commonwealth authority are
available, they are generally not practicable
in the above type of
3.85 The AGD referred to a number of reports that have considered the impact
of secrecy laws on information
and suggested that:
while there are some legislative barriers, a greater barrier to information
sharing has tended to relate to cultures of secrecy within
some of the relevant
agencies. This seems to reflect the tension between the ‘need to
know’ principle and the ‘need
3.86 Whistleblowers Australia and Australia’s Right To Know (ARTK)
coalition also identified a cultural issue, the former commenting
There is a strong cultural issue driving public sector agencies to protect
information for no reason other than they claim it as
their own. No matter how
banal a piece of information or a document may be, agencies tend to guard it as
though it is a redraft of
3.87 The ARTK coalition argued that the solution lay in a fundamental change
in approach to government information:
Such sharing would be facilitated not by developing integration policies for
information but by adopting a fundamentally more open
approach to public
information held in trust by
Government.
3.88 If it is true that most individuals would prefer not to have to be
repeatedly asked for the same information, there is also a
general understanding
that individuals who provide information to government agencies do so for a
specific purpose and are entitled
to a level of protection of that information.
Where information is to be shared, people should know about it.
Australians rightly demand the delivery of government programs and services in a
seamless way. They should also expect that, behind
the scenes, all the resources
of government will be brought to bear in the search for innovative solutions to
the complex challenges
of developing public
3.89 The Privacy Principles provide an appropriate framework for the
management of personal information at an agency level. The PSM
framework for the classification of information broadly for the purposes of
national security.
3.90 The ALRC considers that, as a general principle, information sharing
between government agencies, and government and the private
sector, is best
undertaken at the agency level through individual agency
agreements.
Such agreements,
however, need to sit within the framework of information management, including
any applicable secrecy provisions.
3.91 The new general secrecy offence proposed by the ALRCdiscussed in
Chapters 7, 8 and 9proposes an exception to
the offence where the
disclosure is authorised by the relevant agency head or minister, which would
potentially cover information
disclosed in accordance with information sharing
agreements or agency information-handling
circumstances, however, it may be considered desirable to set out in legislation
the circumstances in which information sharing
is permissible, such as in the
case of intelligence information or in the anti-money laundering context.
Chapter 11 considers this
issue further in the context of the codification
of permissible disclosures in specific secrecy provisions.
See Terms of Reference at the front of
this Discussion Paper.
(Cabinet Secretary and Special Minister of State),
Open and Transparent
Government—the Way Forward
http://www.smos.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp_20090324.html
at 24 March
Secrecy and Openness:
The Federal Government from Menzies to Whitlam and Beyond
Australian Government Management
Advisory Committee,
Connecting Government: Whole of Government Responses to
Australia’s Priority Challenges
(2004), 2. The Management Advisory
Committee is a forum of Secretaries and Agency Heads established under the
Public Service Act 1999
(Cth) to advise the Australian Government on
matters relating to the management of the Australian Public Service (APS): see
http://www.apsc.gov.au/mac/index.html.
Queensland Government,
to Information: A Response to the Review of Queensland’s Freedom of
Information Act
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Australian Government
Protective Security Manual (PSM) [Summary]
http://www.ag.gov.au
at 15 October
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security
Sensitive Information
, ALRC 98 (2004) Ch 4. ‘Minimal procedural
requirements’ include, eg, taking precautions to ensure that only people
a demonstrated need to know and the appropriate security clearance gain
access to security classified information; and providing
a document registration
system to identify all security classified information held by the
Ibid, [2.9].
Ibid, [2.12].
discusses security clearances.
Ibid, [2.10].
Australian National
Audit Office,
Operation of the Classification System for Protecting Sensitive
Information
, Audit Report 7 (1999),
Whistleblowers Australia,
10 March 2009; Liberty Victoria,
18 February 2009; Australian Press
18 February 2009.
‘Talking Secrecy’
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security
Sensitive Information
, ALRC 98 (2004),
Rec 4–1. At the time of ALRC 98, the PSM did not have a security
classification but was not publicly
Ibid, [4.17].
Australian Press
18 February 2009.
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Australian Government
Protective Security Manual (PSM)
Liberty Victoria,
18 February 2009.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Administrative
Review Council,
The Coercive Information-Gathering Powers of Government
, Report No 48 (2008), 65.
Australian Transaction Reports and
Analysis Centre,
2 March 2009.
Australian Government Financial
Reporting Council,
Memorandum of Understanding Between the Australian
Securities and Investments Commission and the Financial Reporting Council
(2004) <www.frc.gov.au/auditor/mou/MOU_ASIC.asp> at 28 May 2009
New South Wales Police
and others,
Memorandum of Understanding between New South Wales Police,
Victoria Police, Queensland Police, Western Australia Police, South Australia
Police, Northern Territory Police, Tasmania Police, ACT Policing, Australian
Federal Police and the CrimTrac
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Public Service Commission,
APS Values and Code of Conduct in Practice
(2005) <www.apsc.gov.au> at 23 September 2008,
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Information Sharing Network,
Trusted Information Sharing Network for Critical
Infrastructure Protection [Home Page]
http://www.tisn.gov.au
April 2009.
Trusted Information Sharing
Critical Infrastructure Protection National Strategy
Trusted Information Sharing
Fact Sheet: TISN Deed of Confidentiality
Australian Parliament—House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Confidence: A Report of the Inquiry into the Protection of Confidential Personal
and Commercial Information Held by the Commonwealth
For example, while not directly
concerning secrecy laws, the sharing of information between agencies in
formulating Australia’s
response to the terrorist attacks in Bali in 2002,
was said to be hampered by the operation of the
key difficulties was that agencies did not have a shared understanding of how
the Act operated, particularly in times of
crises: Australian Government
Management Advisory Committee,
Connecting Government: Whole of Government
Responses to Australia’s Priority Challenges
P Durbin, ‘ATO lashed over
Australian Financial Review
, 23 April 2009,
Ibid, 61. The sharing of
information in a context such as investigations of alleged tax fraud also gives
rise to the issue of procedural
fairness, where the information concerned is
confidential information and the sharing may have an adverse impact on the
Johns v Australian Securities Commission
[1993] HCA 56
The requirement of procedural fairness may, however, be abrogated: eg,
Royal Commissions Act 1902
which was amended by the
Royal Commissions Amendment (Records) Act 2006
(Cth) to enable the
transfer of information obtained by Royal Commissions to investigatory and law
enforcement bodies without the
requirement to provide procedural fairness to
persons who could be adversely
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
19 February 2009.
the Federal Privacy Commissioner,
The Use of Data-Matching in Commonwealth
Administration—Guidelines
Ibid, 2. R Clarke,
‘Computer Matching by Government Agencies: The Failure of Cost/Benefit
Analysis as a Control Mechanism’
Information Infrastructure
Government Management Advisory Committee,
Connecting Government: Whole of
Government Responses to Australia’s Priority Challenges
Re Mickelberg and Australian
Federal Police
(1984) 6 ALN N176.
Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity,
18 February 2009.
The existing confusion about
the extent to which privacy principles prevent the release of information in
appropriate cases is referred
Australian Commission for Law
Enforcement Integrity,
18 February 2009.
, IPP 10 and 11 and
(Cth) Sch 3, NPPs 2 and 10. See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
ALRC 108 (2008), [10.86]–[10.111]; and
on the Privacy
Principles.
Office of the Federal
The Use of Data-Matching in Commonwealth
Administration—Guidelines
(1998). In 2007–2008, the Federal
programs: Office
of the Federal Privacy Commissioner,
The Operation of the
Annual Report: 1 July 2007–30 June 2008
s 27(1)(c).
In addition, the Federal Privacy Commissioner can examine
(with or without a request from a minister) any proposal for data matching
data linkage that may involve an interference with privacy or that may have any
adverse effects on the privacy of individuals.
The Federal Privacy Commissioner
may report to the minister responsible for administering the
proposals for data matching:
ss 27(1)(c)
Office of the Federal Privacy
Commissioner,
The Use of Data-Matching in Commonwealth
Administration—Guidelines
(1998), [33]–[41], [42]–[47],
[63], [69]. In Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information:
Australian Privacy Law and Practice
, ALRC 108 (2008), the ALRC suggested
that the Office of the Privacy Commissioner could exercise its research and
monitoring function
to review the data-matching guidelines. The ALRC also
recommended that the Office of the Privacy Commissioner develop and publish
guidance for organisations that conduct data-matching activities:
Office of the
Federal Privacy Commissioner,
The Use of Data-Matching in Commonwealth
Administration—Guidelines
(1998), 2. See also P Durbin, ‘ATO
lashed over privacy breaches’,
Australian Financial Review
April 2009, 1.
Office of the Federal
The Use of Data-Matching in Commonwealth
Administration—Guidelines
Since April 2005, the AGD has been
developing and implementing a National Identity Security Strategy, which
comprises the national
Document Verification Service and the e-Authentication
framework: Council of Australian Governments (COAG),
Intergovernmental
Agreement to a National Identity Security Strategy
, 13 April 2007;
Australian Government Department of Finance and Deregulation,
Government e-Authentication Framework for Individuals
<http://www.finance.
gov.au/e-government/security-and-authentication/agaf-i.html> at 4 November
Australian Parliament—House
of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Confidence: A Report of the Inquiry into the Protection of Confidential Personal
and Commercial Information Held by the Commonwealth
The Treasury,
Discussion Paper
for the Review of Taxation Secrecy and Disclosure Provisions
(2006), 29.
Explanatory Material, Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of
Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
(Cth), [1.3],
Australian Government
Management Advisory Committee,
Connecting Government: Whole of Government
Responses to Australia’s Priority Challenges
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008), Question
Ibid, Question
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
Bureau of Statistics,
24 March 2009.
18 February 2009.
, 11–12 February
Australian Intelligence
6 March 2009; Australian
Federal Police,
3 March 2009;
Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre,
2 March 2009.
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009.
Federal Police,
3 March 2009.
Australian Transaction Reports
and Analysis Centre,
2 March 2009.
Australian Securities &
Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
of Human Services,
20 February 2009.
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre,
2 March 2009.
Department of
Human Services,
20 February 2009.
Department of Climate Change,
23 February 2009.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Department of
Education, Employment and Workplace Relations,
19 February 2009.
the Review of Information and Intelligence Sharing in the Aviation Sector
(2006); Australian Federal Police National Security Operations Review Committee,
The Street Review: A Review of Interoperability Between the AFP and its
National Security Partners
(2008); R Smith,
Review of Homeland and Border
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Whistleblowers
10 March 2009.
Australia’s Right to Know,
6 March 2009.
Government Management Advisory Committee,
Connecting Government: Whole of
Government Responses to Australia’s Priority Challenges
Preface, Dr Peter Shergold.
information-handling policies and MOUs are discussed in Ch
Proposal 9–1.
4. Freedom of Information, Privacy
and Secrecy
Introduction
Freedom of information
Overview of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Assessing the public interest
The interaction between FOI and secrecy
An appropriate balance between secrecy and open government?
Submissions
ALRC’s views
Overview of the
Archives Act 1983
Secrecy and the
Archives Act
Submissions
ALRC’s views
Overview of the
Submissions
ALRC’s views
4. Freedom of Information, Privacy
and Secrecy
Introduction
4.1 In this chapter, the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) considers
the relationship between Commonwealth secrecy laws and
other Commonwealth laws
dealing with the handling of information. As Associate Professor Moira Paterson
remarked in her treatise
Freedom of Information and Privacy in Australia,
complex tapestry of interconnected and overlapping statutory regimes that govern
access to, and amendment of, government information,
including freedom of
information laws, privacy laws (including information privacy and health records
laws) and public records laws.
4.2 The principal components of the overlapping regimes at the Commonwealth
level are the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth) (FOI Act), the
Archives Act 1983
(Cth) and the
(Cth). Each will
be considered in turn.
information
Overview of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
4.3 The FOI Act
provides a right of access to information held by
government agencies and ministers. Access is provided both through an obligation
to publish certain information
well as a right to apply for the production of
The FOI Act also gives a
person a right to annotate or correct personal records held by government
Hence there are two broad
information.
4.4 However, the principle of open government, which a right of access
enshrines, has to be balanced with the practical need of a
government to be able
to govern and, for that purpose, to be able to keep some documents protected
from disclosure. This is expressed
in the FOI Act by the exemption provisions,
the purpose of which is ‘to balance the objective of providing access to
information against legitimate claims for
protection’.
As stated in the
current objects clause, the exemptions are those
necessary for the protection of essential public interests and the private and
business affairs of persons in respect of whom information
is collected and held
by departments and public
authorities.
4.5 The FOI Act is currently the subject of an Exposure Draft of the
of Information Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(FOI Exposure Draft Bill),
containing a number of key amendments to implement the election policy
commitments of the current Labor
Government in this
4.6 This chapter considers the present workings of the FOI Act, the proposed
amendments in the FOI Exposure Draft Bill, as well as
proposals for the purposes
of this Inquiry arising in response to matters raised in the Issues Paper,
Review of Secrecy Laws
4.7 A document may be exempt from the operation of the FOI Act if an agency
or body is exempt; if the document is an exempt document
under Part IV of the
Act; or it is an official document of a Minister that contains some matter that
does not relate to the affairs
of an agency or of a Department of
4.8 Notwithstanding that a document may fall within an exempt category, there
may nevertheless be a requirement, where practicable,
to provide an applicant
with access to an edited copy from which any exempt matter has been
Moreover, s 14 provides
Nothing in this Act is intended to prevent or discourage Ministers and agencies
from publishing or giving access to documents (including
exempt documents),
otherwise than as required by this Act, where they can properly do so or are
required by law to do so.
4.9 The FOI Exposure Draft Bill will, if implemented, have a significant
impact on the way the exemption provisions are presently
cast. These are
considered below.
Exemptions for
certain agencies and documents
4.10 Section 7 of the FOI Act provides a complete exemption for
documents that have originated with, or been received from, certain
including the Australian Secret Intelligence Service (ASIS), the Australian
Security Intelligence Organisation (ASIO),
the Office of National Assessments
(ONA), the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security (IGIS) and the Defence
Imagery and Geospatial
Organisation (DIGO).
4.11 Other Commonwealth agencies that handle a significant amount of material
relating to national security, such as the Department
of Foreign Affairs and
Trade, the Department of Immigration and Citizenship, and the Australian Federal
Police, are open to FOI applications.
However, s 7(2A) provides an
exemption for all agencies in relation to documents that originate with, or have
been received from,
ASIS, ASIO, ONA, DIGO, the Defence Intelligence
Organisation, the Defence Signals Directorate or the IGIS.
4.12 The proposed amendments to the FOI Act included in the FOI Exposure
Draft Bill leave largely untouched the exempt agency aspects
of the existing
Act, hence, as noted by Cabinet Secretary, Senator the Hon John Faulkner:
That exclusion is maintained, and in some areas clarified, such as to cover
extracts from such documents.
The Defence Department will be excluded for documents in respect of its
collection, reporting and analysis of operational intelligence
and special
access programs under which a foreign government provided restricted access to
technologies.
I make no apology for these exclusions.
There is a strong, in my view undeniable, public interest argument why this
information ought to be protected. National security
is a fundamental
responsibility of Government.
Classified national security information must be protected by the government in
the national interest. This is right, it is vital,
and it is not going to
I just want to make it very clear, so everyone understands, what information the
Government believes we have a responsibility to
of the public
These are clear—and
exceptions to the general
principle of disclosure.
4.13 There are, however, proposals for significant amendment of the
exemptions under pt IV of the existing FOI Act. The present form
of the pt IV
exemptions will be considered first, followed by the amendments proposed by the
FOI Exposure Draft Bill.
Exemptions under Part IV
4.14 Access to documents may be denied on the basis of one of the specific
grounds of exemption under pt IV of the FOI Act. These
exemptions presently
include: documents affecting national security, defence or international
internal working
documents relating to
business affairs;
and documents
affecting the national
4.15 The exemptions in pt IV can be analysed as falling into two broad
categories: class-based exemptions; and exemptions that depend
on demonstrating
the expected harm that would be caused by disclosure.
Class-based exemptions
4.16 In this group of exemptions, documents are exempt by virtue of their
nature, for example, a ‘Cabinet
exemptions in this category are for Executive Council
where secrecy
provisions or legal professional privilege apply, or where disclosure would be
in contempt of Parliament or contempt
for electoral
and under companies and
securities legislation.
4.17 The exemption for Cabinet documents is the clearest expression of the
interaction between open government ideas and the concept
of Westminster
government, in its emphasis on the need for confidentiality of the collective
Cabinet decision-making process. In
this case, it has been said that disclosure
would cause greater harm to the public interest than the withholding of any
It does not matter
that the consequences of disclosure may be infinitesimal; the harm comes from
the inherent shattering of Cabinet
4.18 The operation of class-based exemptions is one of strict principle.
There is no additional assessment of the merits for and against
disclosure, or
harm caused, only that the document satisfies the particular categorisation
within the section. To the extent that
there is a notion of public interest it
may be said to be implicit, namely that there is already a judgment that it
would not be
in the public interest for documents in these categories to be
amenable to access under the FOI Act. The extent to which this continues
appropriate is the subject of the FOI Exposure Draft Bill and surrounding
material—as well as this Inquiry, with respect
to secrecy provisions.
4.19 The FOI Exposure Draft Bill proposes the reduction of the number of
class-based exemptions and a recasting of some others, such
as the Cabinet
exemption. In particular, the latter exemption is reformulated to limit it to
the documents ‘at the core of
the Cabinet process’, as explained in
Freedom of Information (FOI Reform) Companion Guide
), released with the Bill:
The current Cabinet exemption protects submissions that have gone, or are
proposed to go, to the Cabinet, as well as official Cabinet
records and
documents that would disclose any Cabinet deliberation or decision. The proposed
Cabinet exemption is more specific,
and covers:
• Cabinet submissions and proposed submissions that meet the
‘dominant purpose’ test (even if never submitted to
• official records of Cabinet;
• briefing notes created for the dominant purpose of briefing a
Minister on Cabinet submissions or proposed submissions;
• drafts, copies or extracts of such documents; and
• a document, to the extent that it would reveal a Cabinet deliberation
or decision (unless already
published).
4.20 It is also proposed that a number of class-based exemptions be repealed.
As recommended by the ALRC and the Administrative Review
Council (ARC) in 1995,
Open Government: A Review of the Federal
Freedom of Information Act 1982
the FOI Exposure Draft Bill proposes the repeal of the
exemptions for Executive Council documents; documents arising out of companies
and securities legislation; and documents relating to the conduct of an agency
of industrial relations.
4.21 However, there is no proposal in the FOI Exposure Draft Bill with
respect to the secrecy exemption in s 38 of the FOI Act. This
exemption is
considered expressly later in this chapter, after a consideration of the other
broad category of exemptions, namely
those based on anticipated harm.
Anticipated harm based exemptions
4.22 This category of exemptions depends on demonstrating the expected harm
that would be caused by disclosure. For example, documents
national security, defence or international relations’ are exempt under
the present form of s 33(1) if disclosure:
(a) would, or could reasonably be expected to, cause damage to:
(i) the security of the Commonwealth;
(ii) the defence of the Commonwealth; or
(iii) the international relations of the Commonwealth; or
(b) would divulge any information or matter communicated in confidence by or on
behalf of a foreign government, an authority of a
foreign government or an
international organization to the Government of the Commonwealth, to an
authority of the Commonwealth or
to a person receiving the communication on
behalf of the Commonwealth or of an authority of the Commonwealth.
4.23 Other exemptions in this category presently include: Commonwealth-State
law enforcement and
public safety;
the financial or
property interests of the
Commonwealth;
operations of
business and
professional affairs;
the national
and material obtained
in confidence.
The document is
exempt provided that its disclosure would result in harm of the kind identified.
With respect to the personal privacy
exemption, the harm is expressed in terms
of whether disclosure would be ‘unreasonable’ in the
circumstances.
The business
affairs exemption also includes a similar requirement that disclosure
‘would, or could reasonably be expected
to, unreasonably affect’ the
relevant person adversely in the circumstances
4.24 In each case the harm may be seen to reflect an identified, or
public interest,
whether it is the security of the Commonwealth, or security of personal
information.
4.25 In the internal working documents exemption, the harm is expressed more
abstractly, in terms of being contrary to the public
Under s 36 a document
is exempt if its disclosure:
(a) would disclose matter in the nature of, or relating to, opinion, advice or
recommendation obtained, prepared or recorded, or
consultation or deliberation
that has taken place, in the course of, or for the purposes of, the deliberative
processes involved
in the functions of an agency or Minister or of the
Government of the Commonwealth; and
(b) would be contrary to the public interest.
4.26 The FOI Exposure Draft Bill proposes a number of reforms to the
anticipated harm exemptions. These are considered below.
Proposed reforms
4.27 Two main features of the reforms proposed in ALRC 77, in the
Information (Removal of Conclusive Certificates and Other Measures) Bill 2008
and the FOI Exposure Draft Bill, are the abolition of ‘conclusive
certificates’ and the integration of public interest
elements in a variety
Conclusive certificates
4.28 A ‘conclusive certificate’ is one issued by the minister
responsible for an agency and has the effect of making the
document the subject
of the certificate exempt for as long as the certificate remains in force and
operates, as described in ALRC
77, as a ‘ministerial
In the current FOI
Act there are veto provisions of this nature in several
4.29 In 1995, in ALRC 77, the ALRC and ARC recommended the abolition of
conclusive certificates in most cases, retaining them only
in two contexts:
national security and defence; and Cabinet
Amendments to the FOI
Act now under consideration will, if enacted, go further.
4.30 As the first step in implementing its election commitments regarding FOI
the government has
introduced the
Freedom of Information (Removal of Conclusive Certificates and
Other Measures) Bill 2008
. The primary purpose of this Bill is to remove the
power to issue conclusive certificates under both the FOI Act and the
Archives Act
Public interest test
4.31 In ALRC 77, the importance of a public interest requirement in
determining whether material should be exempt from disclosure
reiterated:
Public interest tests allow all considerations relevant to a particular request
to be balanced. They are therefore an important and
necessary feature of the
[FOI Act], even though it can at times be difficult to perform this balancing
4.32 The ALRC also recommended that the proposed Information Commissioner
should issue guidelines on how to apply such a test and
that, for the purpose of
determining whether the release of a document would be contrary to the public
interest, it should be irrelevant
that the disclosure ‘may cause
embarrassment to the
government’.
4.33 At the time, however, the idea of a general exemption—that the
disclosure of the document in question ‘would be contrary
to the public
interest’—was not considered appropriate, on the basis that it would
be ‘uncertain and vulnerable
to idiosyncratic decision
4.34 Since then, however, there has been increasing pressure on such
exemptions in the interests of public accountability of government
making. In consequence, on 24 March 2009, Senator Faulkner announced significant
amendments to the exemption provisions
of the FOI Act. In addition to amending
the Cabinet exemption and repealing particular class-based exemptions, noted
above, many
existing exemptions are to be made subject to a public interest
test, and referred to as ‘conditional exemptions’. As
Faulkner explained:
The draft legislation divides exemptions into those which are subject to a
public interest test (called conditional exemptions) and
those that are not, and
then applies a single simple, strong and clear test to all conditional
exemptions, which requires an agency
to give access to a document unless giving
that access would at the time, ‘on balance, be contrary to the public
4.35 Of the existing anticipated harm exemptions, those concerning personal
the national
will all be brought
under the umbrella of the conditional exemption category, with a common public
interest test.
4.36 This proposal is similar to the approach recommended in Queensland in
June 2008 by the Independent Review Panel examining the
Information Act 1992
(Qld)—chaired by Dr David Solomon (the Solomon
Committee)—that a single public interest test be included in that Act:
Access is to be provided to matter unless its disclosure, on balance, would be
contrary to the public interest.
4.37 The effect of the proposed amendments is not, however, to introduce a
‘single exemption’ in the Commonwealth legislation;
rather, as noted
by Peter Timmins:
Exemptions will now be arranged in two neat boxes—absolute exemptions, and
conditional exempt documents where a public interest
test applies.
Some media reports suggest confusion that the Minister’s statement about a
single public interest test means there will be
one exemption. That’s what
Queensland is proposing. Federally it means only that the current situation of
several different
formulations of a public interest test in the Act will be
replaced by one test—whether disclosure is contrary to the public
interest, relevant only to specified exemptions but not
Assessing the public
4.38 Throughout the FOI Act and discussions of reforming it lie threads of
ideas about public interest. Here, too, the same multiple
uses of the phrase
‘public interest’ referred to in Chapter 2 are evident. There is the
identification in the current
objects clause that the exemptions of the FOI Act
are aimed at protecting ‘essential public
interests’.
There is also
the notion of ‘the public interest’, which is used, for example, in
s 36, where being ‘contrary to
the public interest’ is an element of
the exemption; and in s 40, where the particular exemption does not apply if
‘would, on balance, be in the public interest’. Ideas of
public interest therefore provide a backdrop for, or are integrated
ways into, the legislation and particular aspects of it.
McKinnon v Secretary, Department of
the High Court had
occasion to comment on the public interest element in s 36 of the FOI Act.
Michael McKinnon had applied for access
to government documents concerning,
amongst other things, the first home owners scheme administered by the
Department of Treasury.
The request for access to many of the documents was
rejected on the basis that their release would be contrary to the public
and the Treasurer signed a certificate to that effect. The litigation
tested the ability to review the conclusive certificate. The
Administrative
Appeals Tribunal determined that reasonable grounds existed for the claims and
the High Court agreed, dismissing the
appeal. While the amendments to the FOI
Act under consideration will, if enacted, repeal the power to issue conclusive
certificates
and make exemption decisions subject to full merits
the comments about the
concept of public interest made by the court remain pertinent. For example,
Gleeson CJ and Kirby J commented
that a judgment ‘as to where the public
interest lies’
is not made in a normative vacuum. It is made in the context of, and for the
purposes of, legislation which ... begins from the premise
of a public right of
access to official documents, and which acknowledges a qualification of that
right in the case of
for the protection of
public interests.
4.40 The multi-dimensional, or multi-faceted nature of public interest was
also remarked upon by Hayne J:
It may readily be accepted that most questions about what is in ‘the
public interest’ will require consideration of a
number of competing
arguments about, or features or ‘facets’ of, the public interest. As
was pointed out in
O’Sullivan v Farrer
[1989] HCA 61
168 CLR 210
[T]he expression ‘in the public interest’, when used in a statute,
classically imports a discretionary value judgment
to be made by reference to
undefined factual matters, confined only ‘in so far as the subject matter
and the scope and purpose
of the statutory enactments may enable … given
reasons to be [pronounced] definitely extraneous to any objects the legislature
could have had in view’.
That is why a question about ‘the public interest’ will seldom be
properly seen as having only one
Defining the public interest
4.41 When considering the Bill that led to the FOI Act, the Senate Committee
on Constitutional and Legal Affairs referred to public
interest as a
phrase that does not need to be, indeed could not usefully, be defined ... Yet
it is a useful concept because it provides a balancing
test by which any number
of relevant interests may be weighed one against another ... the relevant public
interest factors may vary
from case to case—or in the oft quoted dictum of
Lord Hailsham of Marylebone ‘the categories of the public interest are
4.42 While not attempting to define public interest, to assist in
interpreting the public interest test proposed in the FOI Exposure
Draft Bill,
two lists of factors to be considered are included: one of factors that point
towards disclosure, the other of those
that are irrelevant.
4.43 The ‘non-exhaustive’ list of factors to be weighed
of disclosure are that disclosure would:
(a) promote the objects of [the] Act ... ;
(b) inform debate on a matter of public importance;
(c) promote effective oversight of public expenditure;
(d) allow a person to access his or her own personal
information.
4.44 In assessing whether access would, on balance, be contrary to the public
interest, the following factors must not be taken into
(a) access to the document could result in embarrassment to the Commonwealth
Government, or cause a loss of confidence in the Commonwealth
Government;
(b) access to the document could result in the applicant misinterpreting or
misunderstanding the document;
(c) the author of the document was (or is) of high seniority in the agency to
which the request for access to the document was made;
(d) access to the document could result in confusion or unnecessary
4.45 Complementing these lists of factors is the proposal that an agency or
minister must have regard to any guidelines issued by
the proposed Information
Commissioner.
4.46 The list of factors favouring disclosure also emphasises the
‘cultural shift’ sought to be produced by the FOI Exposure
Bill, as explained by Senator Faulkner:
These reforms will change the law, but they also demonstrate the
government’s commitment to culture change, a shift from the
secrecy ... to one of openness and
transparency.
Comparative approaches to public
4.47 The United Kingdom (UK) came late to FOI, in the
Information Act 2000
(UK) (UK FOI Act). Similar to the Australian
legislation, it includes two types of exemption—absolute or qualified.
With respect
to the latter, a balancing of public interests is required by
assessing whether the public interest in maintaining the exclusion
outweighs the
public interest in
disclosure.
4.48 In contrast to Australia, there is no absolute exemption for Cabinet
documents—rather, a balancing approach is required.
In assessing whether
Cabinet documents should, or should not, be released in response to an FOI
request, the authority must balance
the exclusion against the public interest in
disclosure, taking into account public interest factors such as the promotion of
accountability. Provided the public interest is best served by
disclosure rather than exclusion, the exemption will not
4.49 In a recent decision involving the disclosure of Cabinet minutes
relating to the Iraq war, the Information Commissioner, the
independent
regulator of the UK FOI Act’s provisions, applied such a test. Considering
the gravity and controversial nature
of the subject matter, the desire for
accountability and transparency in government decision making, and the role of
public participation
in such actions, the Commissioner disclosed the documents
in February 2008, holding that these factors outweighed any possible harm
might emerge from disclosure. Although the Commissioner’s decision was
upheld by the Information
the decision was
subsequently overridden by the Rt Hon Jack Straw, Lord Chancellor and Secretary
of State for Justice,
which attracted considerable
Official Information Act 1982
(NZ) also includes a public
interest element. Section 9 allows information disclosure if the reasons for
withholding it are outweighed
by other considerations which render it desirable
to disclose the information in the public interest. The section then goes on to
describe those reasons, which are similar but not identical to the exemption
provisions set out in the current Australian FOI Act.
The interaction
between FOI and secrecy
4.51 The interaction between the FOI Act and secrecy laws is seen directly in
the exemption of certain agencies from the operation
of the legislation, both in
Australia and comparative jurisdictions, and also where there is an express
secrecy exemption. In the
Australian legislation the secrecy exemption is found
4.52 While the FOI Exposure Draft Bill and Companion Guide consider many of
the exemptions in the existing FOI Act, there is no mention
The secrecy exemption
4.53 The secrecy exemption provides that documents or information contained
in documents that are subject to certain secrecy provisions,
do not need to be
disclosed under the FOI Act. Secrecy provisions in other enactments can
therefore be invoked by a government agency
or minister to refuse access to a
document under the FOI regime.
4.54 The secrecy exemption may apply to documents or information if a secrecy
provision prevents disclosure and is set out in sch
3 of the FOI
or enlivens the secrecy
exemption by expressly applying s 38 of the FOI
4.55 The secrecy exemption applies only to the extent that a secrecy
provision prohibits disclosure to the person making the FOI
In addition, the
secrecy exemption does not apply if the relevant document or information
contains personal information that relates
only to the person making the
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) does not
4.56 Finally, a person cannot be prosecuted under a secrecy provision if that
person discloses a document that is the subject of a
request under the FOI Act
if the person is of ‘the bona fide belief that access was required’
by the Act.
Disclosure in
‘good faith’ in the absence of an FOI request does not, however,
attract this protection under the current
4.57 The secrecy exemption in the FOI Act was intended to preserve the
operation of existing Commonwealth secrecy provisions. In its
report on the
Freedom of Information Bill 1978, the Senate Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs expressed concern,
however, about the wide ambit of the
proposed secrecy exemption, and recommended that it should only apply to
prescribed secrecy
provisions contained in a schedule to the
Secondly, the Committee
was of the view that ‘all criminal provisions prohibiting or restricting
the disclosure of information
that are not prescribed under the Bill should be
4.58 The Committee’s second recommendation was not taken up, and the
first recommendation was not immediately implemented. Instead,
a broadly worded
secrecy exemption was contained in the FOI Act as enacted in
In 1991, however, the FOI
Act was amended to include sch 3, as well as the requirement that secrecy
provisions either be listed in
this schedule, or expressly apply the secrecy
Section 38(1A) also
makes it clear that a document may still be disclosed, notwithstanding the
secrecy exemption, if disclosure in
the circumstances is not prohibited.
4.59 A document is exempt ‘only to the extent that a complying secrecy
provision prohibits its
disclosure’.
example, if disclosure is permitted in the course of a Commonwealth
officer’s duties, this would not be in breach of
the relevant secrecy
provision. As Paterson points out:
Unless the reference to duties etc is constrained or limited in some way, it
will encompass freedom of information disclosure as
well as other routine
disclosures.
4.60 Currently, sch 3 contains over 50 provisions in 28 Acts and one
sub-regulation. This list includes, for example, provisions of
Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Intelligence Services
Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989
Designs Act 2003
4.61 Schedule 3 has been amended several times since its introduction.
The provisions in 11 Acts have been removed entirely from the
provisions in nine new
Acts added to the list,
number of provisions in remaining Acts
In addition, since
1991, a number of provisions in other Acts have expressly applied s 38 of
the FOI Act with respect to certain
information.
Some of these
provisions are also listed in sch
4.62 In its terms, s 38(1)(b)(ii) seems to require that for a secrecy
provision to be relied upon as a basis for exemption, it must
either be listed
expressly in sch 3 or expressly apply s 38 to the document or information for
which exemption is claimed.
if a secrecy provision is not listed in sch 3 and does not expressly apply the
secrecy exemption in s 38?
4.63 This issue arose in the Federal Court decision of
Kwok v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs,
which Tamberlin J considered
Migration Act
restricting the disclosure by Commonwealth officers of information supplied
by law enforcement agencies or intelligence agencies.
Notwithstanding that the
provision failed the criteria in
s 38(1)(b)(ii)
, Tamberlin J considered
that the secrecy exemption applied, because
was ‘cast in
comprehensive language’ sufficient to exclude the operation of the FOI
The width of the language
enlivened the secrecy exemption in the FOI Act, even though that provision was
not listed in sch 3 of the
FOI Act, nor did it expressly apply the secrecy
4.64 The decision in
has not gone uncriticised, and although the
decision was overturned by the Full Federal Court, the secrecy exemption was not
on appeal. In 2003, s 38 of the FOI Act was amended to make
express reference to s 503A, to make clear that a document is exempt
extent that disclosure is prevented by
Migration Act
and the document contains personal information about a person who has
requested access to that
While this amendment
dealt with the immediate problem created by
in the interpretation of
, it leaves a remaining uncertainty as to whether a secrecy provision
may activate the exemption even where the criteria in
Comparative secrecy exemption
4.65 The UK and Canada both include express secrecy exemption provisions in
their FOI legislation. New Zealand, in contrast, does
4.66 Section 44 of the UK FOI Act provides that information is exempt if its
disclosure is ‘prohibited by or under any enactment’.
As explained
by the Information Commissioner’s Office:
Section 44 is an absolute exemption, which means that if information is covered
by any of the subsections in s 44 then it is exempt
from disclosure. There is no
need to consider whether there might be a stronger public interest in disclosing
the information than
in not disclosing it. Absolute exemptions contain an
inbuilt prejudice test. This test means that the harm to the public interest
that would result from the disclosure of information falling within an absolute
exemption has already been
established.
4.67 Pursuant to this exemption, there are ‘still hundreds of statutory
provisions preventing the release of information’,
although under s 75 of
the UK FOI Act they are subject to review by the Lord
Chancellor.
4.68 The Canadian provision is also in absolute terms. Section 24 of the
Access to Information Act 1985
RSC cA-1 (Canada) provides that:
(1) The head of a government institution shall refuse to disclose any record
requested under this Act that contains information the
disclosure of which is
restricted by or pursuant to any provision set out in Schedule II.
4.69 This mirrors the current Australian provision by referring to a list of
provisions set out in a schedule to the Act. There is,
however, an additional
subsection, s 24(2), which provides for a committee to be established to review
every provision in the schedule
and to report ‘on whether and to what
extent the provisions are necessary’. The Annual Reports of the
Information Commissioner
of Canada include a note of whenever sch II is
4.70 In New Zealand, the existence of a secrecy prohibition in another
enactment is not of itself a basis of exemption from an application
Official Information Act 1982
(NZ). Rather, resisting an application for
a document would need to be based on another exception, for example, that the
withholding
of the information is necessary: to ‘protect the privacy of
natural persons, including that of deceased natural
‘prejudice to measures protecting the health or safety of members of the
‘maintain the effective conduct of public affairs’ through the
‘free and frank expression of opinions by
... officers and employees of
any Department or organisation in the course of their
Previous inquiries and the secrecy
4.71 The secrecy exemption in the FOI Act has been considered in a number of
previous inquiries. In ALRC 77, the ALRC and ARC recommended
that the secrecy
exemption should be repealed on the basis that the other FOI exemptions, such as
those dealing with personal information
and national security and defence,
provided sufficient protection of government-held information covered by secrecy
provisions.
The ALRC and ARC
also noted the submission by the Department of Social Security that the 1994
amendments to the
Social Security Act 1991
(Cth), which had removed the
secrecy exemption for FOI applications to the Department, had not adversely
affected the operations of
Department.
4.72 The ALRC and ARC concluded that:
the exemption provisions in the FOI Act represent the full extent of information
that should not be disclosed to members of the public.
Secrecy provisions that
prohibit the disclosure of information that would not fall within the exemption
provisions are too broad.
The Review considers that repealing s 38 will promote
a more pro-disclosure culture in
4.73 The ALRC and ARC also suggested that, if the secrecy exemption were not
repealed, it should be amended so that sch 3 provides
a definitive list of all
secrecy provisions that affect the operation of the FOI
4.74 In 2001, several recommendations made in ALRC 77 were considered by
the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee,
Inquiry into the
Freedom of Information Amendment (Open Government) Bill 2000
(the Senate
Committee Inquiry).
submission to the Senate Committee Inquiry, the Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department (AGD) opposed the
repeal of s 38 of the
In the Department’s view, the exemptions in the FOI Act are, of necessity,
in general terms whereas the secrecy provisions
in other legislation are
tailored to the specific requirements of that legislation and may cover
situations, not covered by the FOI
Act, which nevertheless warrant exemption
from disclosure.
4.75 The Senate Committee Inquiry concluded that the repeal of FOI
exemptions, including the secrecy exemption, would be ‘premature’
and should be considered as part of a ‘longer-term revision of the FOI
4.76 The Solomon Committee gave consideration to the secrecy exemption in the
Queensland FOI Act. Rather than retaining a specific
exemption for
documents subject to a secrecy provision, the Committee recommended that the
existence of a secrecy provision be a
factor in the assessment of disclosure.
This would then be taken into account in the assessment under the proposed
single public
interest test of general
application.
Such an approach
is consistent with the recommendation in
appropriate balance between secrecy and open government?
4.77 One issue in this Inquiry is whether the operation of secrecy provisions
contradicts a fundamental premise of the FOI Act. Paterson
observes that it is
important to scrutinise secrecy provisions ‘to ensure that they do not
unnecessarily restrict
There is an
apparent discrepancy between the objects of the FOI Act—with its
presumption of general access to information—and
the application of
criminal and administrative penalties for informal disclosure in accordance with
the intention of the FOI Act.
A person who follows the spirit of the FOI Act and discloses a document without
having received a formal FOI request may commit a
breach of a secrecy provision
that would not have been breached if the information had been released pursuant
to an FOI application.
This has led Christopher Erskine SC to observe that:
the question is no longer the substance of disclosure, but the process by which
it happens … the issue is who makes the decision
to release [the records],
not whether they are released at
4.78 On 31 December 2007, the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
released an updated version of the
FOI Guidelines—Exemption Sections in
the FOI Act
(the Guidelines)
The Guidelines are described as a
‘reference tool’ and do not replace the operation of exemptions in
the FOI Act.
The Guidelines
note that the secrecy exemption ‘should be used only where truly
necessary’ and that information may be
more appropriately considered under
other exemptions in the FOI Act. The Guidelines also state that the exemption is
not intended
to include information that is ‘identified by reference only
to the manner or capacity in which it is
4.79 The FOI Exposure Draft Bill also includes new protection provisions
against criminal liability where, for example, access to
a document is given in
good faith either in response to a request, or in the belief that access is
Submissions
4.80 In IP 34, the ALRC asked specific questions as to the secrecy exemption,
focusing both on the interrelationship between the FOI
Act and secrecy
provisions generally, as well as the specific operation of the secrecy
The ALRC also
revisited the recommendation made in ALRC 77, that the secrecy exemption in s 38
should be repealed.
4.81 A number of themes were evident in submissions: the role of public
interest in the FOI Act; the tension between FOI and secrecy;
uncertainty and
practical difficulties in the operation of the secrecy exemption; support for
retention of s 38; and support for
repeal of s 38.
Public interest in the FOI Act
4.82 Several stakeholders used the opportunity to remark broadly on the role
of public interest in the FOI Act, for example:
Liberty Victoria understands that the release and retention of government
information represents a balancing of interests, and the
circumstances in which
we, as the public, accede to a shift in that balance in the name of our
interest. As noted on Page 19 of [IP
34], the real public interest lies in an
open and accountable government. It is for this reason that Liberty Victoria
takes the opportunity
to make the important distinction between the
‘public interest’ in information release and a competing
interest’ in its retention. In particular, Liberty
Victoria advocates a narrow definition of national interest which would
the retention of government documents, and a broader definition of public
interest facilitating their release in prescribed
circumstances.
For instance, information withheld in the national interest may be limited to
particular interests such as national security and
cabinet-in-confidence. Other
‘national interests’ such as commercial sensitivity or impartiality
of the public service
will be more circumstantial while others should be
excluded entirely.
4.83 Similarly, Australia’s Right To Know (ARTK) coalition stated that
access to information should be provided ‘as of
right’. The only
exception would be where, on balance, such access ‘is demonstrably
contrary to the protection of essential
public interests’, to be tested
against a single public interest test that states:
Access is to be provided to government information unless its disclosure is
demonstrably contrary to the public
4.84 The result, the ARTK coalition argued, would be that:
Measures such as these will contribute to a socio-political culture which
embraces openness and transparency, holding at its core
the assumption that
government information is ultimately owned by all citizens, held on trust by
their government for their benefit,
and to be made available to further their
rights and purposes and those of the national
Tension between FOI and secrecy
4.85 That there is tension between the regimes was identified by the Public
Interest Advocacy Centre (PIAC):
There is a clear tension when information that would otherwise be subject to
secrecy or non-disclosure provisions also falls within
the access regime
established by the FOI Act, and is otherwise available for release. For example,
the very broad prohibition set
out in section 70 of the
relating to
communication of government information, regardless of its nature or
significance, appears diametrically opposed to the
policy objectives sought to
be achieved by the FOI Act.
4.86 The interconnectedness of secrecy and FOI was also clearly identified in
the submission from the Australian Press Council:
When considering the level of government openness, secrecy laws cannot be
assessed separately to Freedom of Information legislation.
Many of the issues
that arise in relation to secrecy legislation also arise in relation to Freedom
of Information law. It is a curious
paradox that legislation, which was
introduced for the purpose of increasing public access to government
information, is often relied
upon by governments in blocking such access. Reform
of secrecy laws will achieve very little if Freedom of Information is not
at the same time. As with secrecy law reform, Freedom of Information
legislation should be formulated so that open access is the
default, with access
only being denied where disclosure would be likely to cause damage to the public
4.87 The Community and Public Sector Union (CPSU) also expressed concerns
of a commitment to
open government:
The notion of open and transparent government should be the guiding principle in
approaching issues of the ability of the public
to obtain information about
their Government. The CPSU is concerned that any changes to secrecy provisions
to clarify their scope
or application must be tailored to fit with the
principles of open and transparent government and legislation dealing with
of information and privacy. Secrecy provisions and public access to
information should not be viewed as opposed to one another, but
complementary.
4.88 The Department of Human Services (DHS) argued for a closer connection
between the underlying structure of the FOI Act and secrecy
provisions:
From a theoretical standpoint, there would seem to be no justification for the
protection under secrecy laws of information which
would be released under the
FOI Act. The question then becomes whether the basis for exempting information
from disclosure under
the FOI Act (which reflects the Government’s policy
in this regard) should also provide the basis for the scope of protection
afforded by secrecy
provisions.
4.89 It was also submitted by PIAC that:
It could be argued that the relationship between the FOI Act and secrecy
provisions in other Acts would be better balanced were the
existence of a
secrecy provision in another Act sufficient to give rise only to a
claim for FOI exemption, with the claim itself to be tested by
reference to the range of exemptions and machinery provisions which
the FOI Act
itself sets out.
4.90 It also supported the repeal of the current secrecy exemption, which is
considered below.
Uncertainty and practical
difficulties
4.91 Uncertainty in the present working of the secrecy exemption was a
recurring theme. The AGD was concerned as to a lack of clarity
Many secrecy laws provide an exception for disclosure ‘in accordance with
the law’ or ‘as authorised by law’,
which would seem to permit
a document containing that information being disclosed pursuant to the FOI Act
if no exemptions apply.
Secrecy laws listed in schedule 3 of the FOI Act or that
expressly enliven section 38 of that Act provide clear guidance that documents
to which secrecy laws apply are exempt documents under the FOI Act. Uncertainty
may arise if the secrecy law neither enlivens section
38 nor contains an
exception permitting disclosure in accordance with or authorised by law. In
these cases a potential conflict of
laws situation arises, and the interaction
between the secrecy law and the FOI Act may depend on the interpretation of the
provision. ...
It might be helpful to clarify that a disclosure of a document authorised under
the FOI Act does not constitute an offence under
secrecy laws. As discussed
above, this is likely to simply clarify the position, since most secrecy laws
would expressly or impliedly
permit disclosures that are authorised by law.
Where there are strong grounds for a secrecy law to operate to prevent release
documents under the FOI Act, this should be made clear to avoid any
uncertainty. Retaining section 38 of the FOI Act and listing
relevant provisions
in schedule 3 might be one way to ensure the interaction between such secrecy
provisions and the FOI Act are
clear, noting that agencies would need to justify
the inclusion of their secrecy provision in
schedule 3.
4.92 The Australian Taxation Office (ATO) identified ‘practical
difficulties’ in the current operation of the two limbs
if a tax secrecy provision is not listed in Schedule 3 to the FOI Act, or does
not otherwise apply section 38 ... to the relevant
information, the ATO may not
be able to resist the disclosure of information under the FOI Act which would
otherwise constitute a
4.93 To address such problems the ATO suggested that
there may be preferable models of ensuring that the FOI Act does not impede the
confidentiality of taxpayer information. For example,
the FOI Act could exempt
documents (and the information contained therein) from release where a tax
secrecy provision applied to
protect the documents or information. This approach
would be similar to the approach taken in the
Archives Act 1983
Act), which exempts information from being released under that Act where
‘there is in force a law relating to taxation
that applies specifically to
information or matter of that kind and prohibits persons referred to in that law
from disclosing information
or matter of that kind, whether the prohibition is
absolute or is subject to exceptions or qualifications’ (see paragraph
4.94 In its submission, which was in favour of repeal, PIAC also identified
the ‘lack of coherence in the range and seriousness
of matters excluded
from FOI law by the operation of
4.95 The Commonwealth Ombudsman noted the impediment
investigating complaints referred to the Ombudsman:
Another situation where Ombudsman investigations encounter difficulty with
secrecy provisions is where a complaint is received from
a person that their FOI
request was denied because of the operation of a secrecy provision. An
enthusiastic reliance by the agency
on its own secrecy provision can impede
efficient investigation of that complaint by the Ombudsman in a context where
the provision was not
4.96 Other stakeholders remarked on specific aspects or difficulties
experienced with the FOI Act more generally. For example, The
Fairness in Child
Support Group took issue with the wording of Question 7–1 in IP 34 and the
reference to the FOI Act as promoting
open and accountable government. The Group
recommended ‘the removal of exemptions to the FOI Act that apply to the
Child Support
Agency and the Family Court of
Australia’.
Retaining secrecy exemptions
4.97 The Australian Intelligence Community (AIC) argued strongly in favour of
retaining the exempt status of AIC agencies—also
recommended in ALRC
—and that the FOI Act
‘should recognise and not override national security secrecy provisions in
any circumstances’.
4.98 The ATO and the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) also
supported the retention of the secrecy exemption in s
38. The ATO was concerned
that a repeal of the exemption
could potentially result in anomalous levels of protection for taxpayer
information and create uncertainty for both taxpayers and
tax officers who are
responsible for making decisions under the FOI
4.99 The Treasury echoed such concerns:
If section 38 were to be repealed, then in order to give effect to legitimate
expectations of taxpayers to ensure the protection
of their information, such
information would need to come within one of the other exceptions listed in the
FOI Act. While there appears
to be broad consistency in the type of information
that can be disclosed under secrecy and FOI law, the ATO’s submission on
this issue highlights one instance where the FOI exemptions may, but for section
38, be insufficient in resisting the release of
information that is otherwise
protected under taxation secrecy provisions.
When such inconsistencies do arise, the issue then appears to become whether the
secrecy provisions (by virtue of section 38) or
the FOI Act provisions take
precedence. While it is important to ensure that secrecy provisions, such as
those in the taxation law,
are developed in a manner that is consistent with the
objects of the FOI Act and do not seek to undermine the goal of open and
transparent
Government, we consider that the secrecy provisions are best placed
to address the unique characteristics of taxpayer information
and the context in
which they are provided.
4.100 In its submission, APRA also supported the retention of the secrecy
exemption in s 38 of the
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998
APRA is strongly of the view that s 38 should remain in the FOI Act and that s
56 should continue to specify that it attracts the
exemption in s 38. In the
absence of s 38 there would be scope for protected documents to be obtained
under FOI, substantially weakening
the effectiveness of the secrecy provision,
with adverse consequences for APRA’s relationship with regulated entities
and foreign
regulators (and therefore the overall effectiveness of APRA’s
prudential regulation). In particular, APRA does not consider
that s 43 of the
FOI Act (business information) would be a practical alternative in all
circumstances as there could be differences
of opinion as to whether the
conditions in that section are satisfied in relation to individual items of
information. In addition,
if s 38 were repealed, APRA would likely become
subject to a greater number of FOI applications from third parties seeking
information
litigation. This would have the practical effect of forcing APRA to
resources away from its supervisory functions and into the FOI
Repealing the secrecy exemption
4.101 A number of stakeholders supported the repeal of s 38 recommended in
ALRC 77, on the basis that the other exemption categories
were sufficient to
provide protection even where secrecy provisions existed. For example, the ARTK
coalition submitted that:
it is difficult to conceive of circumstances where information protected by
secrecy provisions would not also fall within other exemptions
in the Act, such
as documents containing information the disclosure of which would prejudice
national security, defence or international
relations, or constitute a breach of
Cabinet confidence, and so forth. This approach would then be consistent with
the similar exemption
regime for access to documents under the
Archives Act
4.102 One caller to the secrecy phone-in objected to ‘blanket
exemptions’ in general, because, the caller stated, they
people lazy’.
4.103 Some stakeholders submitted that if a secrecy exemption like
retained, it should be subject to a public interest test. For example, the
Media, Entertainment & Arts Alliance advocated
the preferred approach is that taken by the NSW
Freedom of Information Act 1989
which, rather than applying a blanket exemption to all such documents
irrespective of their content, instead provides an exemption
for documents
dealing with law enforcement, public safety or anti-terrorism measures, except
for documents, or information, which
reveal that the scope of law enforcement
investigation has exceeded the limit imposed by law and whose disclosure would
public interest.
4.104 As PIAC suggested, in some contexts there may be a
prima facie
exemption, but the object of openness should be paramount:
It might be thought, for example, that the fact that a document was prepared by
or received from a security agency could give rise
prima facie
exemption. In PIAC’s view, the exemption itself should be tested having
regard to the content of the document itself, the possible
consequences of
release, and any positive public interest factors in favour of disclosure.
The current review provides a valuable opportunity to consider whether the
introduction of a further layer of procedural safeguards
to the existing
provisions under the FOI Act should lend weight to the policy option set out in
question 7-2 of the Issues Paper.
In PIAC’s view, disclosure in accordance
with the objects of and subject to the exemptions set out in the FOI Act should
secrecy provisions in other
4.105 In a very lengthy and informative submission, Ron Fraser commented that
while simply repealing s 38 might not be as straightforward
as proposed in ALRC
77 with respect to whether the other exemption provisions would provide the full
scope of protection,
... at the very least a very large number of secrecy provisions currently
subject to s 38 do not warrant that protection.
The other exemption provisions of the FOI Act are well designed to protect much
of the information protected by secrecy provisions.
... [And] consideration of
access rights under [other] exemptions, where applicable, is strongly preferable
to absolute protection
of the same information under secrecy provisions
protected by s 38.
4.106 Fraser objected to the width of secrecy provisions such that
‘innocuous information as well as genuinely sensitive information’
may be caught. He suggested—consistent with the submission of the AGD to
the Senate Legal and Constitutional Committee in 2001
when opposing repeal of
—that other
exemptions of the FOI Act ‘should be permitted to do their work’.
Hence, he argued, the only secrecy
provisions that should be included in the
ambit of an exemption provision like s 38, are ‘those that protect
information, access
to which cannot be determined under other FOI
exemptions’, so long as such a provision ‘not be used as an
unwarranted
means to expand widely the categories of information not open to
access under the FOI Act’. A secrecy exemption should, therefore,
confined ‘to its proper role as a complementary provision to the largely
harm-based scheme of the FOI
4.107 Following such an approach, Fraser proposed that the criteria for
retaining any secrecy provisions as exemptions to the FOI
Act should be on the
basis that:
there are no exemptions in the FOI Act which would apply to the information with
which they are concerned, and that disclosure could
be expected to cause
substantial damage to a public
4.108 The inclusion of a public interest test, he argued ‘goes to the
heart of modern access law as against provisions based
on the model of highly
controlled secrecy with discretionary
disclosures’.
kind of public interest that might be included, Fraser submitted that ‘a
standard balancing public interest test
or an override public interest power at
the external review stage’ was the preferable
4.109 A central focus of this Inquiry is to identify the harms caused by
disclosure of Commonwealth information that justify the imposition
of criminal
sanctions or administrative penalties. In later proposals in this Discussion
Paper, the ALRC seeks to strike the appropriate
balance between protecting
essential public interests while ensuring an appropriate level of openness and
transparency in government.
4.110 In ALRC 77, the repeal of s 38 was
recommended.
Although the
ALRC and ARC noted that many agencies were concerned that were s 38 to be
removed, information covered by the secrecy
provisions would not be exempt under
any other provision of the FOI Act, the ALRC and ARC were ‘not
convinced’ by that
Taxpayer information is provided pursuant to statutory obligations, not
voluntarily. In addition, taxpayer information is adequately
protected under the
exemptions for personal and business information. In most, if not all, cases the
FOI exemptions cover government-held
information currently protected by a
secrecy provision. ...
[T]he Review considers that the exemption provisions in the FOI Act represent
the full extent of information that should not be disclosed
to members of the
public. Secrecy provisions that prohibit the disclosure of information that
would not fall within the exemption
provisions are too broad. The Review
considers that repealing s 38 will promote a more pro-disclosure culture in
agencies. ... If
s 38 is not repealed, it should at least be amended so that
Schedule 3 becomes a definitive list of all secrecy provisions to which
Act is subject.
4.111 As the submissions above demonstrate, there is still concern expressed
by some agencies that the removal of s 38 would compromise
the strength of
secrecy provisions, thereby undermining the confidence of those individuals and
businesses or organisations providing
information to agencies. Agencies continue
to express concern that the other exemption provisions in the FOI Act will not
sufficient protection, or may prejudice the future supply of information
to agencies.
4.112 If, by way of example, disclosure of taxation information about an
individual would have a substantial adverse effect on their
willingness to
provide information to the ATO, thereby jeopardising the future supply of such
information, then it would seem such
disclosure would be
‘unreasonable’ under s 41 of the FOI Act. However, as noted in ALRC
77, much taxation information
is provided pursuant to an obligation and not
voluntarily. In the case of a business, if the disclosure of information could
be expected to prejudice the future supply of information to the ATO,
then the information would appear to be exempt under s 43.
Additionally, s 45
would operate to exempt information the disclosure of which would found an
action for breach of confidence. This
should remain so, even where a public
interest test applies to the exemption provisions.
4.113 However, as Paterson has observed, the approach in the current form of
has considerable merit both in terms of simplicity and in ensuring a more
considered approach to the question of which secrecy laws
should take precedence
over the access provisions in the FOI
4.114 Paterson directs attention rather at the ‘chilling effect’
of the large number of secrecy laws:
including the category of general secrecy provisions which prohibit the
disclosure of information acquired by government officers
in the course of their
duties. General secrecy provisions have a very wide operation and effectively
prohibit the revelation, whether
deliberate or accidental, oral or in writing,
of any thing that is secret. Liability does not depend on the nature or
sensitivity
of the information in question and reflects an outdated view that
the general public has no legitimate concern about the processes
government.
4.115 As evident in other chapters in this Discussion Paper, a major concern
expressed in submissions and consultations—and
consonant with the
observations of Paterson—is with respect to the width of current secrecy
provisions and the inconsistent,
and often severe, penalty regimes that
potentially apply. A large number of the ALRC’s proposals are therefore
focused on achieving
a principled basis for secrecy provisions across the
4.116 At the same time, the ALRC has developed a range of proposals in this
Discussion Paper focused upon the whole spectrum of the
handling of Commonwealth
information, from improving the awareness and understanding of secrecy
obligations, to the nature of liability
and penalties that should be imposed in
the event of breach. These, together with a shift towards a pro-disclosure
culture, by improved
and clearer agency practices, are aimed at achieving
consistency, clarity and a better balance of the public interests in play.
4.117 The ALRC is of the view that the proposal made in ALRC 77 is consistent
with this approach. It is also consistent with the pro-disclosure
reflected in the FOI Exposure Draft Bill, notwithstanding the absence of any
mention of s 38.
4.118 As discussed in Chapter 6, the idea of essential public interests as
reflected in the FOI Act forms the backbone of the proposed
new general secrecy
offence. The ALRC takes the view that the exemption provisions—apart from
s 38—do provide sufficient
protection of these essential public interests,
and that consideration of documents on a case-by-case basis is a more effective
for ensuring that only truly sensitive information is placed outside the
reach of the ordinary citizen.
4.119 The FOI Act includes mechanisms for the protection of certain documents
and agencies where such documents and agencies are considered
heightened protection by means of express exempt status. The repeal of s 38
would not affect the ability of the Australian
Parliament to make such
designation in appropriate circumstances, such as national security. In
announcing the release of the FOI
Exposure Draft Bill, Senator Faulkner
reiterated the importance of the current exempt status of national security
agencies and documents,
4.120 If s 38 were repealed, then the existence of a secrecy provision would
form an important factor to be weighed when considering
disclosure under another
exemption provision. In the language of the conditional exemptions in the FOI
Exposure Draft Bill, they
would be subjected to a consideration of whether
disclosure would be ‘contrary to the public interest’, using the
spelled out in the Bill.
4.121 The ALRC proposes that if s 38 is repealed then the FOI Guidelines
should be updated to provide guidance to FOI officers, especially
with reference
to the existence of a secrecy provision being an appropriate consideration when
evaluating whether information should
be disclosed under other exemption
provisions.
4.122 In this context, the ALRC considers that the current FOI Guidelines or
the proposed Information Commissioner Guidelines referred
to in cl 93A of the
FOI Exposure Draft Bill, are an appropriate tool to ensure that officers are
aware of and understand their obligations
in this regard. The Guidelines should
be amended to make particular reference to the existence of a secrecy provision
factor in weighing up whether an exemption should be made from
disclosure in a particular case. This is also consistent with the
recommendations made by the Solomon Committee.
4.123 Alternatively, if s 38 were retained, then clarity in its operation is
essential. In this regard any new secrecy provision should
clearly address the
intersection of the provision with the FOI Act. It should also be included in
sch 3. Further, sch 3 needs to
be reviewed against the pro-disclosure objects of
the FOI Exposure Draft Bill and regularly updated. If the proposed FOI
Commissioner
is introduced, the responsibility for ensuring that sch 3
accurately lists secrecy provisions that trigger the secrecy exemption
rest appropriately with that office.
4.124 To prompt further consideration of the intersection between the FOI Act
and secrecy provisions the ALRC proposes the repeal
Proposal 4–1
Reflecting a commitment to open government and to
ensure that claims for exemption be considered on a case by case basis rather
through the mechanism of a global exemption for secrecy provisions,
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth) should be repealed.
Proposal 4–2
The Office of Parliamentary Counsel should issue a
Drafting Direction that any proposed secrecy provision must indicate expressly
whether it overrides the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Proposal 4–3
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth) is repealed, the
FOI Guidelines—Exemption Sections in the FOI
issued by the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet or the
proposed Information Commissioner Guidelines should be updated to
inform Freedom
of Information officers that the existence of a secrecy provision is a relevant
factor to consider when deciding whether
or not to disclose a document.
Proposal 4–4
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth) is retained, the responsible minister (or the proposed Freedom of
Information Commissioner) should ensure that the list of secrecy
provisions in
sch 3 of the Act is regularly reviewed and updated.
Archives Act 1983
4.125 The FOI Act and the
Archives Act
were both introduced as part of
a package of administrative law reforms in the early 1980s. Both Acts deal with
access to documents
and records, and are interconnected, the
Archives Act
being drafted ‘to dovetail’ with the FOI
Archives Act
established the National Archives of Australia
(NAA) and set out comprehensive arrangements for conserving and preserving the
resources of the
Commonwealth.
As noted in
ALRC 77, the role of the NAA includes:
encouraging and facilitating the use of archives, developing policy and advice
for government agencies on the management, preservation
and disposal of records
and creating and maintaining information systems about the structure of
government and the Commonwealth’s
4.127 The NAA is responsible for providing public access to government
records that are more than 30 years old. Similar to the FOI
Act, however, there
are exemptions to such access. Further, some categories of record may not be
disclosed for periods longer than
30 years. For Cabinet notebooks the period is
currently 50 years; and for census information the period is 99
Under proposed
amendments in the FOI Exposure Draft Bill the open access periods for most
records will be reduced to 20 years and
Cabinet records to 30
Archives Act
does contain some exemptions for access to
records in the open access period, but these exemptions are less restrictive
under the FOI Act because the records sought are older and generally
less sensitive.
Archives Act
provides that a
Commonwealth record is an exempt record if it contains information or matter of
particular kinds, including, for
example, information that:
could reasonably be expected to cause damage to the security,
defence or international relations of the Commonwealth;
is communicated in confidence by or on behalf of a foreign
government;
if disclosed, would, or could reasonably be expected to prejudice
the investigation of a breach of the law, prejudice the fair trial
or endanger
the life or physical safety of any person;
would involve the unreasonable disclosure of information relating to
the personal affairs of any person (including a deceased
4.129 There
is a clear relationship between the exemption provisions in the
Archives Act
and the FOI Act. As noted by Paterson:
[the] exemption provisions, although differently worded, cover similar ground to
a number of the exemption provisions in the Commonwealth
FOI Act and they share
many [of the same] drafting characteristics. They make reference to many similar
concepts such as ‘substantial
adverse effect’ and reasonableness.
Given that the
Archives Act
was specifically drafted to dovetail with the
Commonwealth FOI Act, those expressions arguably convey similar meanings to
those discussed
... in relation to freedom of information
4.130 Information collected for taxation purposes is also singled out as
requiring a particular exemption, in s 33(3):
(3) For the purposes of this Act, a Commonwealth record is an exempt record
(a) it contains information or matter:
(i) that relates to the personal affairs, or the business or professional
affairs, of any person (including a deceased person);
(ii) that relates to the business, commercial or financial affairs of an
organization or undertaking; and
(b) there is in force a law relating to taxation that applies specifically to
information or matter of that kind and prohibits persons
referred to in that law
from disclosing information or matter of that kind, whether the prohibition is
absolute or is subject to
exceptions or qualifications.
4.131 In the 1998 Report,
Australia’s Federal Record: A Review of
Archives Act 1983
(ALRC 85), the ALRC considered the exemptions in the
Archives Act
and recommended that the number of categories for exempt
documents be reduced
In particular, the ALRC recommended that
4.132 The ALRC also recommended that the Act be amended to include an
exemption category relating to information that, under Indigenous
tradition, is
confidential or subject to particular disclosure
restrictions.
4.133 On 1 November 2008, the
Archives Amendment Act 2008
into operation. This Act implements several of the recommendations made in
ALRC 85, but the Act does not remove any exemptions
Archives Act
4.134 Whereas the FOI Act has an express exemption which refers to secrecy
provisions—in s 38—the
Archives Act
does not. It does,
however, give particular attention to census information and refer to taxation
secrecy provisions, as noted above.
4.135 Census information, for example, is given specific protection. The
Archives Act
was amended by the
Census Information Legislation
Amendment Act 2000
(Cth) to provide the 99 year period of protection and
also to subject Archives officers to a particular duty of non-disclosure set
(1) An Archives officer must not, at any time before a record containing Census
information from a Census is in the open access period
for that Census, divulge
or communicate any of that information to another person (except to another
Archives officer for the purposes
of, or in connection with, the performance of
that other officer’s duties under this Act).
4.136 The effect of s 30A is to create a secrecy provision within the
Archives Act
itself, applicable to Archives officers and extending to the
whole period of protection for census records. The duty extends both
non-disclosure to another person and in proceedings before a court or
The duty is
expressed to give rise to criminal liability through the operation of s 70
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth). The interaction between duties such as s
30A and the general secrecy offence is considered in Chapter 6.
4.137 In addition, Archives officers, as persons engaged under the
Service Act 1999
(Cth), are also subject to non-disclosure provisions that
apply to them in that capacity, including under the
Public Service
Regulations 1999
(Cth). Secrecy obligations under the
Public Service
Regulations
are considered in Chapter 13.
4.138 The object of the specific amendments made by the
Census Information
Legislation Amendment Act
to ensure that name-identified 2001 Census information, relating only to those
households which provide explicit consent, will be
stored by the National
Archives of Australia to be preserved for release for future genealogical and
other research after a closed
access period of 99 years. ...
Subsection 30A(1) removes any doubt that Archives officers may not release the
Census information in the closed access period ...
Subsection 30A(2) protects
the 2001 Census information in the custody of Archives from disclosure under
compulsion of a court or
tribunal and prevents information being provided
voluntarily by Archives in evidence before a court or tribunal. Subsection
ensures that this provision prevails over Section 58 which would
otherwise allow Archives to disclose the Census information where
it was proper
to do so or required by law.
4.139 While the
Archives Act
does not contain a specific secrecy
exemption, information or documents that are subject to non-disclosure
provisions may fall within
a number of exemptions set out in the Act. The only
express secrecy exception is in relation to taxation secrecy, as set out
4.140 The ALRC recommendations in ALRC 85 included:
the repeal of s 33(2) which exempts records covered by client
professional privilege;
the repeal of s
the amendment of the
Archives Act
to provide expressly that
non-disclosure provisions in other legislation do not override the public access
provisions of the archives
legislation unless this is expressly provided for in
the legislation
addition to proposed amendments to the FOI Act, the FOI Exposure Draft Bill also
proposes amendments to the
Archives Act
by bringing forward the open
access period for most records, as noted above. As explained in the
The effect of this measure is that Cabinet records (other than Cabinet
notebooks) and other Government records will be disclosed
after 20 years, and
Cabinet notebooks will be disclosed after 30 years. All material disclosed under
Archives Act
will be subject to withholding information which
continues to be sensitive in line with exemptions under that
4.142 The proposed amendments leave untouched the closed period for census
records of 99 years from the date of a census, under s
4.143 In IP 34, the ALRC sought comments on how the relationship between
secrecy provisions and the
Archives Act
is working in practice, and, if
there are any concerns, how these should be addressed.
Submissions
4.144 Only a few stakeholders commented with respect to secrecy provisions
Archives Act
The Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) and the ATO strongly defended the
retention of specific exemptions with respect to their
areas of operation.
4.145 Liberty Victoria supported records becoming available to the public
after the specified period, because ‘[s]uch laws promote
accountable government’ and agreed that that the number of exemption
categories under the
Archives Act
should be reduced, as recommended in
It also argued for a
more open approach to information generally:
Liberty Victoria believes that non‐secret information should be available
to the public on demand at any time. Rather than
exempt secret information from
archives laws, information should be reviewed and reclassified periodically. Top
level information
(i.e. NSI—top secret) may cease to be classified at all
50 years later while low level information (i.e. personal information)
remain classified as such for the lifetime of the person. Where strongly in the
public interest to do so, classified information
may be released.
This approach largely accords with existing exemptions since and provides a more
uniform approach, particularly when transitioning
information from current to
4.146 The ABS strongly emphasised the importance of confidentiality with
respect to the information obtained in censuses, and the
need to back this up
with secrecy provisions. With respect to the
Archives Act
considered that the amendments made in 2000, referred to above, achieved the
protection of census data through the introduction
of the closed period of 99
years. In view of that, ‘[t]he ABS does not believe that the relationship
between the secrecy provisions
Census and Statistics Act 1905
Archives Act 1983
needs to be
clarified’.
4.147 The ATO also stressed the importance of the maintenance of strict
confidentiality in relation to taxation information and argued
for the retention
of the taxation secrecy exemption in
, notwithstanding that ALRC 85 had
recommended its repeal.
Parliament has specifically exempted taxpayer information from being released
Archives Act
after a 30 year period where a tax secrecy
provision applies to protect that information. Tax secrecy provisions continue
to protect the confidentiality of taxpayer information indefinitely,
which the ATO considers is extremely important to maintain the
integrity of the
tax system and taxpayer confidence in
4.148 In contrast, NAA agreed with the recommendation in ALRC 85 that
Archives Act
should be removed and argued that
‘secrecy provisions in other legislation should not specifically extend
protection to open
access period records’:
Exemption categories in the
Archives Act
contain robust protection
against the release of any information that remains sensitive beyond 30 years.
exemption categories allow the National Archives to withhold
information from public release on [specific grounds]. At 30 years,
information
should be assessed against these exemption categories to determine an ongoing
need for protection rather than having
the blanket coverage of secrecy
provisions which may result in information being withheld indefinitely and
permanently from public
The National Archives argues instead that the
Archives Act
should clearly
state that it overrides secrecy provisions for records in the open access period
subject to any exemption covered
, as it does for classified
Section 59.
Whilst the relationship between secrecy provisions and the
Archives Act
generally works well, in part because many of the records covered by such
provisions are lawfully disposed of before they reach 30
years, the lack of any
clear statement in the Act has meant that in infrequent, but significant cases,
it has caused problems.
4.149 The NAA referred to having to seek legal advice on five occasions
between 1985 and 1998 confirming its view ‘that the
Archives Act
has primacy over confidentiality or secrecy provisions in a number of other
circumstances, the NAA considered that clarification of the relationship between
secrecy provisions and the
Archives Act
could be achieved
by insertion of a clause in the latter Act confirming such provisions cease to
apply to records properly made available for public
access (ie records assessed
against the exemption categories set out in Section 33). Such a clause would
resolve current uncertainty,
while at the same time providing necessary ongoing
protection for sensitive information.
4.150 There are two main issues that emerged in submissions: the repeal or
retention of s 33(3) and the introduction of a clarifying
provision in
terms suggested by the NAA. It is clear, however, that any amendment of the FOI
Act needs to take into account the impact
Archives Act
Repeal of s 33(3)?
4.151 In ALRC 85, the competing arguments in relation to
considered and it was concluded that
[the ALRC] maintains the view that the archives legislation provides adequate
protection for such of these records as may survive
to the open period. However,
... it remains a matter for Parliament to determine whether non-disclosure
provisions in other legislation
should apply to open period records. Rather than
including a provision such as
section 33(3)
in the archives legislation, the
Commission considers that any perceived need for added protection of information
provided to the
Australian Taxation Office or the Australian Bureau of
Statistics in confidence should be addressed in a review of the relevant
non-disclosure
provisions in federal legislation, followed, if appropriate, by
amendment of that legislation to clearly indicate that the non-disclosure
provisions apply to records in the open
4.152 Taxation secrecy provisions have been reviewed
and are the subject
of an exposure draft bill—
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer
Information) Bill 2009
(Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill). The object as set out in
the Explanatory Material is ‘to consolidate and standardise’
various secrecy provisions into a new framework, the ‘key principle’
of which is the protection of taxpayer information
and to provide ‘clarity
and certainty’ to taxpayers, the ATO and users of taxpayer
information.
framework gives effect to the primary objective of protecting the
confidentiality of taxpayer information
by placing a general prohibition on the disclosure of taxpayer information.
However, in recognition of the importance that taxpayer
information can play in
facilitating efficient and effective government administration and law
enforcement, disclosure of taxpayer
information [is] permitted in certain
specified circumstances. As a guide for future policy consideration, the
disclosure of taxpayer
information should be permitted only where the public
benefit associated with the disclosure clearly outweighs taxpayer
4.153 There is no proposed provision for any amendment to the
, nor was there discussion of taxpayer information in the open access
4.154 The emphasis in the ALRC’s recommendations in ALRC 85 was to
complement the idea of access that underpins the introduction
of both the
Archives Act
and the FOI Act. The range of exempt records was
recommended to be reduced, and that where exemptions were to be claimed, the
prejudice or adverse effect of release relied upon ‘must be real
and substantial’.
4.155 The comments in the Explanatory Material to the Tax Laws Exposure Draft
Bill reflect a similar approach. Although the emphasis
is on the maintenance of
the confidentiality of the records, disclosure is permitted ‘where the
public benefit associated with
the disclosure clearly outweighs taxpayer
recommendation in
ALRC 85 to focus claims for exemption onto questions of harm.
So, for example, if s 33(3) was repealed, a claim for access to a
information in the open access period would be assessed against
the other exemptions, such as that it would involve ‘the unreasonable
disclosure of information relating to the personal affairs’ of a
4.156 The ALRC is of the view that the recommendation made in ALRC 85 for the
repeal of s 33(3) should be affirmed.
Clarifying provision?
4.157 Secrecy provisions as considered throughout this Discussion Paper occur
in many forms. Many impose direct obligations of non-disclosure—like
one contained in the
Archives Act
with respect to census information.
Others are in the nature of codes, indicating when information may be
4.158 When records are transferred to the custody of the NAA, the Archives
officers have obligations, as Commonwealth officers, in
relation to those
records. But when can the broad obligations of non-disclosure be said to
override an access claim in the open period?
4.159 Given that the NAA has raised this as an important issue requiring
clarification, the ALRC is of the view that such a provision
introduced into the
Archives Act
. There is already a clear analogy
with respect to security classifications. They cease to have effect and
the availability of any record to be released in the open
access period must be
considered against the other exemption provisions. This provides a principled
basis for review of a claim for
access at the relevant time.
4.160 The recommendation in ALRC 85 was to similar effect: for the amendment
Archives Act
to provide expressly that non-disclosure provisions
in other legislation do not override the public access provisions of the
legislation. The recommendation also contained a
rider—‘unless this is expressly provided for in the legislation
concerned’.
allowed for the argument that there may be compelling reasons for the protection
of essential public interests that are not
identified in the exempt records
categories and, in such a case, this should be made clear in the relevant
legislation.
Proposal 4–5
Complementing the idea of access that underpins
Archives Act 1983
Freedom of Information
Archives Act
should be repealed.
Proposal 4–6
Archives Act 1983
(Cth) should be
amended to include a provision modelled on
, to the effect that where a
record enters the open access period, any non-disclosure provision applicable to
the record ceases to
have effect, unless expressly stated in the relevant
legislation.
Proposal 4–7
The Office of Parliamentary Counsel should issue a
Drafting Direction that any proposed non-disclosure provision should indicate
whether it overrides the
Archives Act
(Cth) in the
open access period.
(Cth) aims to protect personal information
collected, stored,
used and disclosed. It also gives individuals rights of
access to, and correction of, their own personal
information.
focuses on the information and its management and does not impose
penalties on Commonwealth officers for mishandling it—such
matters being
the concern of secrecy laws.
contains safeguards set out in a number of
Information Privacy Principles (IPPs) and National Privacy Principles (NPPs),
the force of law.
4.163 The IPPs cover ‘personal information’ which is collected or
in a ‘record’ held by an ‘agency’,
as those terms are
defined in the
. With limited exceptions, these agencies
include only Australian Government and ACT public sector
The NPPs cover
personal information collected or held in a record by certain private sector
organisations.
‘Organisation’ is defined as an individual, a body corporate, a
partnership, any other unincorporated association or
applies to ‘acts and practices’; that is, acts done and practices
engaged in by agencies or organisations.
4.164 ‘Personal information’ is defined as:
information or an opinion (including information or an opinion forming part of a
in a material form or not,
ascertained, from the information
4.165 Personal information includes written or electronic records about
individuals, such as social security records and medical records,
but may also
include photos or videos, where the person can be identified from the context or
in other ways. A person’s name
appearing on a list of clients may also
fall within the definition of personal information because the context provides
information,
possibly sensitive personal information, about the individual.
4.166 ‘Sensitive information’ is a sub-set of personal
information and is given a higher level of protection under the
‘Sensitive information’ is defined as health or genetic information
that individual’s racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, religious
beliefs or affiliations
or sexual preferences or
contains a range of exemptions and exceptions,
which are found throughout the Act, in the definition of some terms, in specific
provisions and in the IPPs and NPPs themselves. The acts and practices
of some Australian Government agencies—including the
intelligence agencies
ASIS, ASIO and ONA—are completely exempt from the
4.168 While information that is subject to secrecy provisions is generally
handled by a government agency and is therefore subject
to the IPPs, some
secrecy provisions regulate organisations that ‘stand in the shoes’
of a Commonwealth officer, or secondary
disclosures to other organisations,
which may then be covered by the NPPs.
4.169 The Federal Privacy Commissioner has a number of statutory functions in
relation to handling complaints, investigating breaches,
and enforcing the
of the Act, the Commissioner has the power
to investigate complaints,
obtain information and
and examine
Commissioner’s determinations may be enforced by proceedings in the
Federal Court of Australia or the Federal Magistrates
4.170 The FOI Act and the
both include provisions
concerning access to personal information. As noted in the
to the FOI Exposure Draft Bill:
The vast majority of FOI requests are submitted by applicants seeking access to
their own information. While the
regulates the collection,
handling, access and disclosure of personal information, access to and
correction of a person’s own
information is enforced through the FOI
4.171 As further noted, in order to provide greater clarity of the operation
of each Act in relation to personal information, ‘[t]he
proposes to amend the
to enact an enforceable right of access to,
and correction of, an individual’s own personal information, rather than
this right through the FOI
Such amendments
will be included in an exposure draft Bill to implement recommendations in the
ALRC’s 2008 Report,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and
(ALRC 108).
This will make the
the key Commonwealth law for the collection,
handling, disclosure and access to personal information. The co-location of
and FOI in a single office, and the future reform to the
is intended to strengthen and elevate the role and importance of privacy
and secrecy
addresses specific secrecy provisions in
This part makes
special provision for the collection, use and disclosure of personal information
in emergencies or disasters.
Section 80P(1)
provides that when an emergency
declaration is in force, an entity may collect, use or disclose personal
information in certain circumstances.
Section 80P(2)
provides that an
entity is not liable to any proceedings for contravening a secrecy provision in
respect of a use or disclosure of
personal information authorised by
, unless the secrecy provision is a ‘designated secrecy
provision’. Designated secrecy provisions include provisions under
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
(Cth) and the
Intelligence Services Act 2001
4.173 In ALRC 108, the ALRC considered whether secrecy provisions in
federal legislation contribute to inconsistency and fragmentation
regulation of personal information. The ALRC also considered whether there is a
need to clarify the relationship between the
legislation containing secrecy provisions. Unfortunately, relatively few
stakeholders made submissions on these
4.174 The ALRC concluded that, for a number of reasons, it is appropriate
that specific laws, rather than the
include secrecy
provisions designed to protect information. First, inserting criminal offences
would be inconsistent with the ‘light
touch’ regulatory regime for privacy. It would not be appropriate for the
regulator, the Federal Privacy Commissioner, to administer and enforce
secrecy provisions.
as discussed in Chapter 2 of ALRC 108:
Secrecy provisions do not relate solely to personal information. They also
protect, for example, commercial, security and operational
information. Secrecy
provisions provide separate and specific standards of protection beyond those
afforded by the privacy principles
… Unlike the privacy principles, the
level of protection afforded by secrecy provisions will often vary with the
sensitivity
of the information
4.175 Given that secrecy provisions may adversely affect the privacy of an
individual, however, the ALRC suggested that a privacy
impact assessment should
be prepared when a secrecy provision is proposed that may have a significant
impact on the handling of personal
information. Further, the ALRC suggested that
where a secrecy provision regulates personal information, that provision should
how the requirements under the provision interact with the privacy
principles in the
Access and correction
4.176 As noted above, the
provides individuals with access
and correction rights for personal information that relates to them, unless
denying access is required
or authorised by or under
If secrecy provisions
should regulate personal information, there may be an issue whether they should
restrict disclosure of that
information to the individual about whom the
information relates.
4.177 Currently, secrecy provisions take various approaches to this issue.
Section 86–2 of the
Aged Care Act 1997
offence for the unauthorised handling of ‘protected information’
acquired by the person in the course of performing
duties or exercising powers
or functions under the Act. However, the section contains an exception for
information disclosed ‘only
to the person to whom it
Australian Trade Commission Act 1985
(Cth) restricts the disclosure of information by a person, to any person, of
‘any information concerning the affairs of another
person acquired by the
first-mentioned person by reason of his or her employment’. While this
provision does not contain an
exception that expressly allows the disclosure of
information to an individual to whom the information relates, it appears from
wording of the provision that such disclosure would be permitted.
4.179 In contrast,
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
(Cth) does not allow the disclosure to an individual of personal information
for the disclosure of
information’.
information is defined to include ‘any information that is likely to
enable the identification of a person, object
or premises specified in a
warrant’. This could include personal information.
out a number of exceptions to these offences—however, there is no
exception that is equivalent to that contained in s
86–2 of the
Aged Care Act
Facilitating disclosure?
and some secrecy provisions place restrictions
around the handling of personal information. However, there may be an issue
secrecy provision facilitates disclosure of personal information by
triggering exceptions in the privacy principles. This could occur
if a secrecy
provision contains an exception to the prohibition on disclosure. Exceptions in
secrecy provisions often mirror the
exceptions set out in the privacy
principles. However, if a secrecy provision contains an exception that is not
contained in the
information that would otherwise be a breach of the privacy principles.
4.181 Such an exception in a secrecy provision would be consistent with the
because it could fall within two types of exceptions in
the privacy principles
First, use and disclosure is permitted under the
Secondly, use and
disclosure is also permitted under the privacy principles if this is
‘reasonably necessary for the enforcement
of the criminal law or of a law
imposing a pecuniary penalty, or for the protection of the public
Submissions
4.182 In IP 34, the ALRC asked a number of questions concerning the
relationship between secrecy provisions and the
4.183 The differences between privacy and secrecy were remarked upon by a
number of commentators.
the AGD’s submission, for example, privacy and secrecy were described as
‘distinct areas of the law’:
disclosure of
sensitive information. Some overlap does exist where secrecy laws deal with
similar types of information to that regulated
particular, secrecy laws may regulate the same information where it is
considered appropriate to impose criminal sanctions for
unauthorised disclosure
of personal information (which may or may not be broader that the information
covered by the
). As the Taxation Secrecy Discussion Paper
noted, criminal sanctions provide an important deterrent and provide a strong
that unauthorised use and disclosure of personal information will not be
tolerated. Remedies available under the
, which include making
a complaint to the Privacy Commissioner and requiring the agency to compensate
any loss, arguably do not have
the same deterrent effect for individual
4.184 The distinct, yet overlapping nature of the two areas was also remarked
upon by the DHS:
and secrecy laws work together in relation to personal
information (information about a living identifiable individual). Generally
personal information falls within the various definitions of protected
information. ...
Where information is regulated by both the
and secrecy laws, then
both sets of provisions must be satisfied. For example, collection and use
within Centrelink must be consistent
both with Information Privacy Principles
(IPPs) 1-3 and 10 in
and any relevant secrecy
provision. In circumstances where use is authorised under a secrecy provision,
it would be expected to satisfy
the current tests of relevance and necessity in
In relation to disclosure, the Department understands that in general terms a
disclosure which is authorised under a secrecy provision
will be authorised by
law, and therefore permitted under IPP 11.1(d) in
However, not all provisions are clear on this point. For example, the
Centrelink provisions contain explicit authorisations for
various dealings (see,
s 202 of the Social Security (Administration) Act) but there is a question
whether very broad provisions permitting
disclosure ‘in the performance of
duties’ are sufficiently precise to enliven IPP 11.1(d). It is important
that agencies
remain able to undertake data matching activities within the
agency and with other agencies, particularly in relation to identifying
circumstances of fraud or over- or under- provision of services and
In relation to access and correction, both the Privacy and FOI Acts allow
individuals an opportunity to access and seek correction
of their personal
information. Human services agencies are amongst the most common recipients of
applications for amendment. No
barriers to these processes arising from the
current secrecy laws were identified in discussions with portfolio
4.185 The ARTK coalition acknowledged that neither secrecy nor privacy were
sufficient of themselves to deal with issues concerning
the protection of
personal information:
Given that there are likely to be many circumstances where official information,
subject to secrecy obligations, will also constitute
personal information for
the purposes of the
(Cth), it does not appear feasible
to seek to regulate personal information either exclusively through secrecy laws
or exclusively
. However, privacy should not be used [as] a
shroud to the provision of information to the public. It is the experience of
the members
of the ARTK that government departments often make such a claim to
avoid disclosure of information that can or should be made
4.186 The latter concern was also evident in the Privacy Inquiry, where it
was described as the ‘BOTPA’ (because of the
Dr Ian Turnbull
suggested that there is a confusion between the concepts, and that:
‘Privacy’ protection should be under the Privacy legislation ...
partly to separate it from ‘secret’ information.
Secrecy provisions should regulate personal information where that information
(primarily identifying information) has become or
been made secret. Examples are
unlisted or secret telephone numbers, or addresses of protected witnesses or
domestic violence victims.
By way of examples, two FOI requests were rejected under the
‘privacy’ exemption of the Victorian legislation. Both demonstrated
a failure to distinguish ‘private’ from ‘secret’. Both
rejections effectively prevented scrutiny of public
4.187 The ATO commented that the
‘would not, of
itself, provide sufficient protection for the confidentiality of taxpayer
information’:
The ATO considers that the
provides an appropriate mechanism for
allowing individuals to access and correct information about themselves, and
that it is unnecessary
for secrecy provisions to duplicate the
this regard. Further, tax secrecy provisions will never apply to restrict a
taxpayer from accessing his or her own tax
information.
4.188 With respect to the question of whether similar terminology should be
used in both areas, the DHS commented that:
[S]ecrecy provisions apply to a wider range of information than the
does. This suggests that adopting
terminology would
not be appropriate (absent an intention to restrict the coverage of secrecy laws
to be coterminous with the
4.189 The Social Security Appeals Tribunal (SSAT) agreed that consistent
terminology would be useful, given that the ‘plethora
of provisions and
definitions give rise to a great deal of confusion and difficulty of
application’:
The SSAT, therefore, welcomes the adoption of consistent terminology throughout
Commonwealth legislation so that information is uniformly
described in line
with, for example, the definition of ‘personal information’ in the
4.190 The AGD suggested, however, that:
It may be helpful if secrecy provisions that regulate personal information as
defined in the
used the same terminology for consistency.
Terms such as ‘affairs of a person’ have the potential to cause
uncertainty
as to their scope, because section 22 of the
Acts Interpretation
provides that, unless the contrary intention appears, the term
person includes bodies corporate and bodies politic. To avoid doubt,
it would be
whether it is intended to only mean a natural
person or whether it has the
broader meaning given by the
Acts Interpretation
4.191 Similarly, the Department of Education, Employment and Workplace
Relations (DEEWR) commented that:
there may be some benefit in consistency of terminology between the
and the secrecy provisions. For example, the distraction between use and
disclosure. However, there would seem to be little value
in a secrecy provision
simply mirroring the
, if it is accepted that legislation
specific secrecy provisions are designed to cater for the particular context and
nature of the
information being
4.192 The submission from DEEWR also emphasised the importance of
‘quality training’ to ensure that staff clearly understood
interaction between secrecy provisions and the
contractors were aware of their privacy
obligations.
4.193 The AGD also submitted that there may be legitimate reasons for
authorising the handling of personal information via secrecy
provisions, such as
‘law enforcement or the detection and prevention of
4.194 It is evident that there is much confusion in the public arena about
what is a privacy matter and what is governed by secrecy
provisions. The
interaction of secrecy provisions and personal information is considered
throughout this Discussion Paper.
M Paterson,
Freedom of Information and
(2005), [1.2].
Freedom of Information
Australian Law Reform Commission and
Administrative Review Council,
Open Government: A Review of the Federal
Freedom of Information Act
, ALRC 77 (1995),
Freedom of Information Act
K Rudd and J
Government Information: Restoring Trust and Integrity—Election
2007 Policy Document
(2007) Australian
Freedom of Information Act
definition of ‘exempt document’. The FOI
Exposure Draft Bill proposes no change to the definition of ‘exempt
Ibid s 22. The FOI
Exposure Draft Bill cl 14 proposes a rewording of this
J Faulkner (Cabinet Secretary
and Special Minister of State),
Open and Transparent Government—the Way
http://www.smos.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp_20090324.html
at 24 March 2009.
Information Act 1982
If it meets the definition
of Cabinet document in
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Whitlam v Australian
Consolidated Press
(1985) 60 ACTR 7
J Faulkner (Cabinet
Secretary and Special Minister of State),
Freedom of Information (FOI)
Reform: Companion Guide
Faulkner (Cabinet Secretary and Special Minister of State),
Transparent Government—the Way Forward
http://www.smos.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp_20090324.html
at 24 March
Freedom of Information Act
(Cth) s 33A.
To use the language of the objects
clause: Ibid
Australian Law Reform Commission and
Administrative Review Council,
Open Government: A Review of the Federal
Freedom of Information Act
, ALRC 77 (1995),
Freedom of Information Act
(documents affecting national security, defence or
international relations); 33A (documents affecting relations with states);
(Cabinet documents); s 35 (Executive Council documents); and s 36 (internal
working documents).
Australian Law
Reform Commission and Administrative Review Council,
Open Government: A
Review of the Federal
Freedom of Information Act
, ALRC 77 (1995),
K Rudd and J Ludwig,
Government Information: Restoring Trust and Integrity—Election 2007
Policy Document
(2007) Australian
See Explanatory Memorandum,
Freedom of Information (Removal of Conclusive Certificates and Other Measures)
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Administrative Review Council,
Open Government: A Review of
the Federal
Freedom of Information Act
, ALRC 77 (1995),
Ibid, [8.6]. The
possibility had been raised in the Issues Paper which preceded the Report, but
was ‘overwhelmingly rejected
in submissions’: fn
J Faulkner (Cabinet Secretary and
Special Minister of State),
Open and Transparent Government—the Way
http://www.smos.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp_20090324.html
at 24 March 2009.
Information Act 1982
(Cth) s 41.
J Faulkner (Cabinet Secretary and
Special Minister of State),
Open and Transparent Government—the Way
http://www.smos.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp_20090324.html
at 24 March 2009.
Information Review Panel,
The Right to Information: The Report of the FOI
Independent Review Panel
(2008), Rec
Some analysis of the
FOI reform package
http://www.foi-privacy.blogspot.com/
March 2009.
Freedom of Information
McKinnon v Secretary, Department of Treasury
[2006] HCA 45
(2006) 228 CLR
Freedom of Information (Removal
of Conclusive Certificates and Other Measures) Bill 2008
Information Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft; and see
Explanatory Memorandum,
Freedom of Information (Removal of Conclusive
Certificates and Other Measures) Bill 2008
(Cth) and J Faulkner (Cabinet
Secretary and Special Minister of State),
Freedom of Information (FOI)
Reform: Companion Guide
McKinnon v Secretary, Department of Treasury
[2006] HCA 45
(2006) 228 CLR 423
Ibid, [55]. Compare, however, the
comments of Callinan and Heydon JJ at
Australian Senate Committee on
Constitutional and Legal Affairs,
Report on Draft Commonwealth Freedom of
Information Bill
(1979), [5.28].
Freedom of Information Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft,
Ibid, cl 11B(4). A similar
approach was recommended in Queensland: Freedom of Information Review Panel,
The Right to Information: The Report of the FOI Independent Review Panel
(2008), 152–154, Rec 42.
Freedom of Information Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft,
cl 11B(5). See also the recommendation in Queensland: Freedom of Information
Review Panel,
The Right to Information: The Report of the FOI Independent
Review Panel
(2008), Rec 43.
Faulkner (Cabinet Secretary and Special Minister of State),
Transparent Government—the Way Forward
http://www.smos.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp_20090324.html
at 24 March
Freedom of Information
(UK) s 2(1)(b).
Information Commissioner’s Office (UK),
Freedom of Information Act
Awareness Guidance No 24: Policy Formulation, Ministerial Communications, Law
Officers’ Advice, and
The Operation of Ministerial Private Office
(Version 2, 2008).
Office v Information Commissioner
(Unreported, Information Tribunal, 27
January 2009).
Ministry of Justice,
Exercise of the Executive Override under Section 53 of the Freedom of
Information Act 2000
http://www.justice.gov.uk/docs/foi-statement-reasons.pdf
at 19 March
Iraq Cabinet
Minutes: ‘Jack Straw Should Not Be His Own Judge’
TIMESONLINE
http://business.timesonline.co.uk/tol/business/law/article5801842.ece
25 February 2009. See also the Information Commissioner’s statement in
response: R Thomas,
Veto of the publication of minutes of key Cabinet
meetings: Statement
Information Commissioner’s Office
J Faulkner (Cabinet
Secretary and Special Minister of State),
Freedom of Information (FOI)
Reform: Companion Guide
Freedom of Information Act 1982
s 38(1)(b)(i).
s 38(1)(b)(ii).
Re Richardson and
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2004] AATA 367
(2004) 81 ALD 486
Petroulias v
Commissioner of Taxation
[2006] AATA 333
Information Act 1982
Migration Act 1958
is discussed below.
Freedom of Information Act 1982
s 92(1)(b).
Actors’ Equity v Australian Broadcasting Tribunal
(1984) 6 ALD 68
Compare cl 92 of
of Information Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft; and see
Australian Law Reform Commission and Administrative Review Council,
Government: A Review of the Federal
Freedom of Information Act
(1995), Rec 11.
Parliament of
Australia—Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs,
Freedom of Information: Report by the Senate Standing Committee on
Constitutional and Legal Affairs on the Freedom of Information
Bill 1978, and
Aspects of the Archives Bill 1978
Rec 21.13(a).
Rec 21.13(c).
The original
s 38 of the FOI Act provided that: A document is an exempt document if
there is in force an enactment applying specifically
to information of a kind
contained in the document and prohibiting persons referred to in the enactment
from disclosing information
of that kind, whether the prohibition is absolute or
is subject to exceptions or
qualifications.
Information Amendment Act 1991
M Paterson,
Freedom of Information
and Privacy in Australia: Government and Information Access in the Modern
(2005), [8.97].
Deletions from the original
sch 3 include:
Wool Tax (Administration) Act 1964
(Cth) s 8(2), (5)
(repealed) and
Social Security Act 1991
(Cth) ss 1312(1), 1336(2).
Provisions in the
Designs Act 1906
(Cth) were replaced by provisions in
Designs Act 2003
Additions of legislative provisions enacted since 1991 include:
(Cth) ss 86-2(1), 86-5 to 86-7; and
Gene Technology
Secrecy provisions added to enactments already listed in sch 3 include:
Telecommunications (Interception) Act 1979
(Cth) s 133 and
Taxation Administration Act 1953
, 3H and sch 1
Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998
(Cth) s 56(11);
Broadcasting Services (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments)
(Cth) s 24;
Reserve Bank Act 1959
See, eg, the notes
contained in
Gene Technology Act 2000
(Cth) s 197 and
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998
M Paterson,
of Information and Privacy in Australia: Government and Information Access in
the Modern State
(2005), [8.99].
Kwok v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2001] FCA 1444
(2001) 112 FCR
Ibid, 99. This is the case
regardless of whether a relevant Act was enacted before or after the
commencement of
Migration Act 1958
(Cth). See also M
Freedom of Information and Privacy in Australia: Government and
Information Access in the Modern State
Migration Legislation
Amendment (Protected Information) Act 2003
Information Commissioner’s
Office (UK),
Freedom of Information Act
Awareness Guidance No 27:
Prohibitions on Disclosure
(December 2004 (updated January 2006)),
Information Commissioner’s
Office (UK),
Freedom of Information Act
Awareness Guidance No 27:
Prohibitions on Disclosure
(December 2004 (updated January 2006)),
Office of the Information
Commissioner (Canada),
Annual Report
(1999–2000),
Statutory prohibitions against disclosure of government
Official Information
(New Zealand) s
9(2)(g)(i).
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Administrative Review Council,
Open Government: A Review of
the Federal
Freedom of Information Act
, ALRC 77 (1995),
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Legislation Committee,
Inquiry into the
Freedom of Information
Amendment (Open Government) Bill 2000
(2001). This Bill was introduced by
Democrats Senator Andrew Murray in 2000, and would have implemented several of
the recommendations
made by the ALRC and the ARC in Australian Law Reform
Commission and Administrative Review Council,
Open Government: A Review of
the Federal
Freedom of Information Act
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Legislation Committee,
Inquiry into the
Freedom of Information
Amendment (Open Government) Bill 2000
[3.34]–[3.36].
Information Review Panel,
The Right to Information: The Report of the FOI
Independent Review Panel
(2008), 156–157, Rec
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Administrative Review Council,
Open Government: A Review of
the Federal
Freedom of Information Act
, ALRC 77 (1995),
M Paterson,
Information and Privacy in Australia: Government and Information Access in the
Modern State
(2005), [8.105].
person who makes an informal disclosure in accordance with the object of the FOI
Act does not receive the same protection as a
person who makes a formal
disclosure under the Act. Paterson has described the ‘chilling
effect’ of secrecy provisions
in this context: Ibid, [8.106]. See also the
discussion of public interest disclosure (or ‘whistleblowing’)
legislation
in Chs 9 and 11.
Erskine, ‘The Bennett Decision Explained: The Sky is not Falling!’
Australian Institute of Administrative Law (AIAL) Forum
Australian Government
FOI Guidelines—Exemption Sections in the FOI Act
<www.dpmc.gov.au> at 14 October 2008. Agency policies for information
handling, which may include FOI matters, are discussed
Ibid, [9.1.4].
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Information Act 1982
—Fundamental Principles and Procedures
http://www.pmc.gov.au/
at 21 November
Freedom of Information
Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft, cl
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008), Questions
7–1 to 7–3.
18 February 2009.
Australia’s Right to Know,
6 March 2009.
Public Interest Advocacy
Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Press Council,
18 February 2009.
Community and Public Sector Union,
2 March 2009.
of Human Services,
20 February 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009. The Australian Securities and Investments Commission
also pointed to the need for clarification within s 38 ‘to
circumstances of its application more clear’, Australian Securities &
Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
The interrelation between secrecy provisions and the
Archives Act
(Cth) is considered
Public Interest Advocacy
Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009. This
submission is also referred to below, in relation to repeal of
Information Act 1982
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
19 February 2009.
Fairness in Child Support,
19 February 2009.
Australian Law Reform Commission and Administrative Review Council,
Government: A Review of the Federal
Freedom of Information Act
(1995), Rec 74.
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009.
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
19 February 2009.
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Australia’s Right to Know,
6 March 2009.
, 11–12 February
Media Entertainment &
Arts Alliance,
10 March 2009. The
particular exemption category behind these comments is sch 1, cl 4 of the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
(NSW), which applies to documents
affecting law enforcement and public
Public Interest Advocacy
Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
23 March 2009.
to in Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
Paper 34 (2008), [7.27].
23 March 2009. So, for example, he
suggested that the exemptions concerning personal information and business
affairs, which already
include a number of safeguards or thresholds before
disclosure, are ‘well-adapted to consideration of the kinds of information
covered by secrecy provisions that apply to “information relating to the
affairs of a person”’.
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Administrative Review Council,
Open Government: A Review of
the Federal
Freedom of Information Act
, ALRC 77 (1995), Rec
Ibid, 146 (notes
M Paterson,
Information and Privacy in Australia: Government and Information Access in the
Modern State
(2005), [8.105].
Ibid, [8.106].
J Faulkner (Cabinet
Secretary and Special Minister of State),
Open and Transparent
Government—the Way Forward
http://www.smos.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp_20090324.html
at 24 March
M Paterson,
Information and Privacy in Australia: Government and Information Access in the
Modern State
(2005), [5.59].
Archives Act 1983
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Administrative Review Council,
Open Government: A Review of
the Federal
Freedom of Information Act
, ALRC 77 (1995),
Archives Act 1983
Information Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft, sch 3
J Faulkner (Cabinet Secretary and Special Minister of State),
Information (FOI) Reform: Companion Guide
Archives Act 1983
, (b), (e)(i), (f)(i) and (iii),
M Paterson,
Information and Privacy in Australia: Government and Information Access in the
Modern State
(2005), [5.59].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Australia’s Federal Record: A Review
Archives Act
, ALRC 85 (1998), Rec
Ibid, Rec 164.
ALRC recommended that the language of this category should be consistent with
that of the exemption proposed in the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Heritage Protection Bill 1998
. The ALRC also recommended that a similar
exemption be included in the FOI Act:
Amendment Act 2008
(Cth) inserts an objects clause into the
Archives Act
and makes changes to ensure that records remain in the
‘care’ of the NAA when in custody of persons other than the
Archives Act 1983
Explanatory Memorandum,
Census Information Legislation Amendment Bill 2000
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Australia’s Federal Record: A Review of the
Archives Act
, ALRC 85 (1998), Rec 166.
Ibid, Rec 167.
Archives Act
(Cth), Rec 108.
J Faulkner (Cabinet Secretary and Special Minister of State),
of Information (FOI) Reform: Companion Guide
Public Interest Advocacy Centre
9 March 2009; National Archives
of Australia,
23 February 2009;
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
24 March 2009; Liberty Victoria,
18 February 2009; Australian Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
Liberty Victoria,
18 February 2009;
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Australia’s Federal Record: A Review
Archives Act
Liberty Victoria,
18 February 2009.
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
24 March 2009.
submission to the ALRC in the
Archives Act
inquiry, the ATO had similarly
pressed the case for retention: Australian Law Reform Commission,
Australia’s Federal Record: A Review of the
Archives Act
85 (1998), [20.76]–[20.79].
Australian Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
National Archives of Australia,
23 February 2009.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Australia’s Federal Record: A Review of the
Archives Act
, ALRC 85 (1998), [20.79]
The Treasury,
Discussion Paper for the Review of Taxation Secrecy and
Disclosure Provisions
Explanatory Material, Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of
Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Australia’s Federal Record: A Review of the
Archives Act
, ALRC 85 (1998), Rec 155.
Archives Act 1983
For example,
Practices Act 1974
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Australia’s Federal Record: A Review
Archives Act
, ALRC 85 (1998), Rec
The ALRC recently conducted a
major inquiry into Australian privacy laws: see Australian Law Reform
Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
ALRC 108 (2008).
(IPPs), sch 3
‘agency’ to include ministers, departments, federal courts and other
bodies established for a public
(Private Sector) Act 2000
came into operation on
21 December 2001 and extended the coverage of the
much of the private sector. The private sector provisions of the
apply to ‘organisations’. An individual who is self-employed
or a sole trader is considered an organisation for the purposes
. Organisations are generally responsible for the actions of
their employees, contractors and subcontractors, all of which are covered
. In Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
(2008), the ALRC recommended that there should be a unified set of privacy
principles that regulates both agencies and
organisations:
In ALRC 108, the ALRC recommended that the
should define ‘personal information’ as ‘information or an
opinion, whether true or not, and whether recorded in
a material form or not,
Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and
, ALRC 108 (2008),
In ALRC 108, the ALRC expressed the view that the current
exemptions that apply to the intelligence and defence intelligence agencies
should remain: Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
[34.94]–[34.109].
(Cabinet Secretary and Special Minister of State),
Freedom of Information
(FOI) Reform: Companion Guide
amended in 2006 to insert this Part:
(Emergencies and Disasters) Act 2006
(Cth). The Part commenced operation on
7 December 2006.
Nearly 600 submissions were received over the course of the ALRC’s
in response to the
Issues Paper: Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Privacy
Paper 31 (2006). No stakeholder addressed the issue in response to Australian
Law Reform Commission,
Review of Australian Privacy Law
, Discussion Paper
72 (2007). Those stakeholders that commented on the earlier stages were:
Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations, Australian Bureau of
Statistics, the Department of Health and Ageing, Office of the Victorian Privacy
Commissioner, Office
of the Privacy Commissioner and the Australian Privacy
Foundation. See Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information:
Australian Privacy Law and Practice
, ALRC 108 (2008),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
ALRC 108 (2008),
[15.117]–[15.118].
[15.122]–[15.124].
, IPP 6; sch 3,
NPP 6.1(h).
Aged Care Act
(Cth) s 86-2(2)(b).
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
also prohibits the
admission of protected information in evidence in any
proceedings.
, IPPs 10.1(c) and 11.1(d); sch 3,
NPP 2.1(g).
IPPs 10.1(d) and 11.1(e); sch 3,
NPP 2.1(h).
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Questions 7–4 to 7–5.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009; Department of Human Services,
20 February 2009; I Turnbull,
17 February 2009.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009. See also Australian Press Council,
18 February 2009.
Department of Human Services,
20 February 2009.
Australia’s Right to Know,
6 March 2009.
Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and
, ALRC 108 (2008), 109.
I Turnbull,
17 February 2009.
Australian Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
Department of Human Services,
20 February 2009.
Security Appeals Tribunal,
17 February 2009.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper
Department of Education,
Employment and Workplace Relations,
19 February
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Overview of Current Secrecy Laws
Introduction
Common law duties
Breach of confidence
Duty of fidelity and loyalty
Sufficiency of the common law
Statutory secrecy provisions
What kind of information is protected?
Whose activity is regulated?
What kind of activity is regulated?
Method of regulation
Exceptions and defences
General criminal offences
—disclosure of information by Commonwealth officers
—disclosure of official secrets
Overview of Current Secrecy Laws
Introduction
5.1 The way that individuals use and disclose
government information is subject to several layers of regulation. Previous
have examined the handling of government information in the context of
other laws, such as freedom of information and privacy laws,
and the broader
principles of open government. This chapter provides a broad overview of the
laws that currently regulate the use
and disclosure of government information by
individual persons and agencies.
5.2 First, the equitable and common law duties of
confidentiality, loyalty and fidelity that apply to some aspects of using and
government information are considered. Secondly, this chapter
examines statutory secrecy provisions currently contained in Commonwealth
legislation. In particular, this chapter sets out the common elements of
statutory secrecy provisions and identifies points of difference
and variation
among them. Finally, overlaying this array of common law and statutory duties
are the general criminal offences in
ss 70 and 79 of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth), which apply criminal sanctions to the breach of secrecy obligations.
of confidence
5.3 The equitable action for breach of confidence
may be used to restrict the disclosure of information in certain circumstances.
In the High Court case of
Commonwealth v
Mason J cited with
approval the following formulation of the law:
The principle is that the court will ‘restrain the publication of
confidential information improperly or surreptitiously obtained
information imparted in confidence which ought not to be
5.4 An action can also be brought against a third
party to whom information has been communicated in breach of a duty of
where that third party was aware, or should reasonably have been
aware, that the information was confidential.
Commonwealth v Fairfax
gave rise to
the question of the applicability of the doctrine of breach of confidence in the
context of disclosure of government
information and the availability of an
injunction in such a case.
The Sydney Morning Herald
newspapers were proposing to publish extracts from an upcoming book,
Documents on Australian Defence and Foreign Policy
parts of classified government documents dealing with the ANZUS Treaty and the
East Timor crisis. Copies of the early editions
of the newspapers had been
distributed before the publishers received notice of the interim injunction
restraining publication. Mason
J concluded that the information had probably
been leaked by a public servant in breach of his or her duty and contrary to the
classifications marked on some of the documents.
5.6 Mason J commented that, although the
equitable action for breach of confidence was developed ‘to protect the
personal, private
and proprietary interests of the citizen, not to protect the
very different interests of the executive
government’,
he accepted that
in some circumstances the principles of breach of confidence could be applied to
protect information in the hands
of government. To do so, however, it must be
not only that the information is confidential in quality and that it was
imparted so as to import an obligation of confidence, but
also that there will
be ‘an unauthorised use of that information to the detriment of the party
communicating it’. The
question then, when the executive government seeks
the protection given by equity, is: What detriment does it need to
5.7 The conclusion drawn in the case was that
disclosure of confidential information would be restrained at the instance of
the government
if it appeared that disclosure would be ‘inimical to the
public interest because national security, relations with foreign
countries or
the ordinary course of business of government will be prejudiced’. Mason J
noted that:
it can scarcely be a relevant detriment to the government that publication of
material concerning its actions will merely expose
it to public discussion and
criticism. It is unacceptable in our democratic society that there should be a
restraint on the publication
of information relating to government when the only
vice of that information is that it enables the public to discuss, review and
criticize government action.
Accordingly, the court will determine the government’s claim to
confidentiality by reference to the public interest. Unless
disclosure is likely
to injure the public interest, it will not be
5.8 The High Court reiterated the importance of
public discussion in
Attorney‑General (UK) v Heinemann Publishers
Australia Pty Ltd (No 2)
, where it referred to the ‘public interest in
freedom of information and
discussion’.
Such an emphasis
is also consistent with the philosophy of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth) considered in Chapter 4.
5.9 The duty of confidentiality may also have
application in circumstances where the government has a contractual relationship
a private provider of a government service (for example, a provider of an
aged care service).
The obligation
of confidence may arise because of the circumstances in which the information is
imparted or because of an express
contractual stipulation. Confidentiality
clauses are now included in many government contracts with service providers as
considered further in Chapter 14.
5.10 Information held by government contractors
that is appropriately categorised as ‘commercial in confidence’,
to a confidentiality clause, or subject to restraint from publication by
the equitable duty of confidence, may therefore be subject
to a particular level
of protection by virtue of obligations of confidence, in addition to whatever
legislative secrecy provisions
may apply in the circumstances.
of fidelity and loyalty
5.11 The common law imposes on any employee the
duty of fidelity and loyalty (or good faith). This duty arises from the contract
employment,
but may also
arise from a fiduciary obligation where the employee is in a special position of
trust and confidence.
of fidelity has largely been imposed in situations involving confidential
information and has been expressed as meaning
that an employee must not use
information obtained in the course of his or her employment to the detriment of
the employer.
5.12 In his report,
Integrity in Government:
Official Information
, Paul Finn noted that the effect of the duty of
fidelity on a public servant is more complicated than in the case of a private
employee, as public servants have a duty to their employer as well as an
overriding duty to the public at large.
For this reason, and as with the law of confidentiality as it applies to
governmental information, the ‘public interest’
and not merely the
‘employer’s’ interests, can affect the incidents of the duty
5.13 Finn noted that the formulation of the duty
is necessarily imprecise. This is because of the variety of considerations that
be brought to bear on the question of the propriety of the use, including:
the nature of the information and whether or not it is publicly available; the
nature of the office held; the possible effects of
allowing its use in the
circumstances of its use; the actual or likely consequences of that use; and the
public interests which might
justify or deny the
5.14 Some years later, in
Bennett v President,
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Finn J made a
number of comments about whether a direction not to disclose information could
be supported by the public servant’s
duty of fidelity and loyalty as an
He noted that the
features of the duty were dependent on the facts in each case, and that public
sector employees may have different
demands placed upon them by virtue of their
The difficulty this creates … is that there is no significant Australian
jurisprudence on how the duty is to be adapted to
accommodate the distinctive
demands of public service employment that result from the ‘special
position’ … public
servants enjoy … This is not the place to
essay the significance that ought to be given to the precepts of loyalty,
and impartiality which are hallmarks of a public service in a system
of responsible government and which have been relied upon in
other jurisdictions
(most notably Canada) in justifying the imposition of restrictions on public
servants in exercising freedom of
expression. ... My only comment would be that
to consider the duty … without regard to such precepts would involve a
from reality.
5.15 Finn J referred to Canadian jurisprudence
and particularly the conclusion of the Supreme Court of Canada in
Public Service Staff Relations Board
’) that, in
relation to comments critical of the government, the Court must balance the
right of an individual, as a member
of the Canadian community, to speak freely
on issues of public importance against the duty of that individual, as a public
to fulfil his or her functions as an employee of the
government.
The Court held that
some comments by public servants were permitted and would be appropriate in
circumstances where:
the government was engaged in illegal
the government’s policies
jeopardised the life, health or safety of persons; or
the comments had no impact on the
ability of the employee to perform his or her
5.16 However, the right to comment was
not unqualified. Dickson CJ stated that:
Public servants have some freedom to criticize the Government. But it is not an
absolute freedom. To take but one example, whereas
it is obvious that it would
not be ‘just cause’ for a provincial government to dismiss a
provincial clerk who stood in
a crowd on a Sunday afternoon to protest
provincial day care policies, it is equally obvious that the same government
just cause to dismiss the Deputy Minister for Social Services who
spoke vigorously against the same policies at the same
5.17 In the later cases of
the Canadian Courts
further considered the ability of public servants to comment on government
matters in the context of the right
of freedom of speech under the
Charter of Rights and Freedoms
. In common with most human rights charters
internationally,
of the Canadian Charter guarantees the rights and freedoms
set out in it, subject to ‘such reasonable limits prescribed by
be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society’.
Osborne v Canada
, the Supreme
Court followed the reasoning in
stating that restrictions
on the rights of public servants to comment on government matters should be
based on the level of seniority
of the employee, including whether he or she
participated in policy development or managerial decisions. This distinction
most public servants to participate freely in public discourse, while
still maintaining the neutrality of the public service
Haydon v Canada
, the Federal Court
held that the common law duty of fidelity and loyalty provided a reasonable
limit on freedom of expression within
the Charter and cited with approval the
three exceptions outlined in
where disclosure or
comment would be allowed. In
Haydon v Canada
, the disclosures related to
drug approval processes for bovine growth hormones. The Court found that the
issue of the safety of growth
hormones was ‘a legitimate public concern
requiring a public debate’ and that ‘the common law duty of loyalty
not impose unquestioning
It was also an
important feature of that case that attempts had been made to resolve the issues
internally before public comments
the Federal Court
acknowledged that while there could be other specific exceptions to the duty in
addition to those enunciated in
, there was no generalised
‘public interest’ exemption. Harrington J rejected the proposition
Haydon v Canada
had created a more general exception, finding that
the public concern in that case was specifically a danger to the health and
of persons and therefore within the exceptions identified in
Sufficiency
of the common law
5.21 Christopher Erskine SC has suggested that
the Canadian cases set out a principled basis upon which a balancing process can
undertaken to determine when the right of a public servant to comment
outweighs their duty to the effective functioning of
government.
He considers that
the common law duty of fidelity ‘has coherent and sensible principles that
neatly cover the difficult questions
raised by public servants disclosing
information’.
5.22 Are these principles applicable in the
Australian context, particularly given the absence of an Australian federal
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
? As Finn J
, there is little law on how the duty of fidelity applies
to public servants in Australia. If the Canadian principles were applied,
is a question whether the duty under reg 2.1 of the
Public Service
Regulations 1999
(Cth) and the consequent general offence under s 70 of the
are necessary. Would the common law principles cover the field
to provide sufficient protection of Commonwealth information?
5.23 Erskine outlines a number of reasons why the
common law framework might be preferable to the duty imposed by the regulation
other statutory provisions, including that:
the duty of fidelity is compatible with
the implied freedom of political expression, as it is based on a
‘reasonableness
the duty is not absolute but is tailored
to what is fair in the circumstances of each case, thereby allowing the
imposition of a
higher duty where, for example, the public servant is a senior
officer or where the information concerns matters of national security;
the duty does not prevent disclosure on
matters of public health and safety or illegality.
5.24 Erskine suggests that, as a
general rule, a public servant should raise concerns internally before making
public comment. This
would provide some protection for
‘whistleblowers’.
Submissions
5.25 In the Issues Paper,
Review of Secrecy
(IP 34), the ALRC asked whether the common law principles are
appropriate and sufficient of themselves to regulate disclosure of
Commonwealth
information by public servants.
5.26 Whistleblowers Australia responded by
expressing the view that:
it is a waste of time addressing problems about secrecy and confidentiality
legislation if it is possible to impose similar restrictions
on disclosures by
or means. The common law facility of employee’s
fidelity and loyalty and the utilisation of Client Legal Privilege are
both of which are able to be used to prevent proper and
appropriate disclosures of information.
The Commission will have failed to meet the terms of reference, if they consider
statute law in respect of secrecy and confidentiality,
while leaving unaddressed
other means by which the public can be denied information to which it is
5.27 Whistleblowers Australia further suggested
that the common law duty of fidelity and loyalty is used as a tool to impose
Regardless of any legislation or statute that provides agencies with the power
to keep matters secret or confidential, the use or
misuse of the common law
power to impose fidelity and loyalty conditions is a significant impediment to
employees to engage in the
rightful and proper disclosure of information in the
public interest.
Through the misuse of fidelity and loyalty provisions, agencies can impose
severe and harsh penalties/damages on an employee for
making adverse comments
It would not be sufficient to legislate to prevent criminal or civil action
being taken against a person who properly and legitimately
discloses particular
information, if the door is left open for an agency to take industrial action
against an employee for breaches
of fidelity and loyalty.
It is essential that any legislation providing for appropriate disclosure of
public interest information is not thwarted or undermined
by the application of
the common law impediments concerning employee fidelity and
5.28 The Australian Intelligence Community (AIC),
however, submitted that general law obligations would be insufficient to protect
Commonwealth information:
Secrecy laws themselves are essential to the effective operation of
Australia’s intelligence agencies; these agencies would
not be able to
operate effectively if secrecy laws were repealed or significantly diminished. A
statutory duty on Commonwealth officers
not to disclose information is
fundamental to the operation of AIC agencies ... General law principles should
not govern secrecy
because that would allow for uncertainty regarding the scope
and application of the law, which could ultimately inhibit national
5.29 The ALRC considers that a key outcome of
this Inquiry should be clear and consistent secrecy provisions and an
integration of
public interest elements on a principled basis through the whole
spectrum of information handling regulation in the Commonwealth
sector. The
inclusion of ‘public interest disclosure’ exceptions is a
significant aspect of this and is considered in
Chapters 9 and 11.
5.30 With respect to the argument by
Whistleblowers Australia that this Inquiry should also consider the role of
client legal privilege
as a tool for suppressing public sector
information,
the ALRC notes the
role that the doctrine may have in limiting the disclosure of information
obtained by way of legal advice or in
relation to legal proceedings but does not
propose in this Inquiry to examine the doctrine as a ‘secrecy
provision’.
In this regard, the ALRC notes its 2007 Report,
in Perspective—Client Legal Privilege in Federal Investigations
107) and its 2005 Report,
Uniform Evidence Law
(ALRC 102) as well as the
Terms of Reference, which focus upon legislative provisions regarding secrecy
and confidentiality.
5.31 The ALRC is of the view that the general law
obligations do not provide sufficient protection in the public sector context,
that it is necessary and desirable to have in place certain statutory
provisions that impose obligations on Commonwealth officers
and others who
handle Commonwealth information.
secrecy provisions
5.32 This section examines the numerous secrecy
provisions contained in Commonwealth legislation.
5.33 As discussed in Chapter 1, the ALRC has conducted a mapping exercise to
identify and analyse provisions in Commonwealth legislation
that impose secrecy
or confidentiality obligations on individuals or bodies in respect of the
handling of Commonwealth information.
The ALRC has identified 507 secrecy
provisions in 175 pieces of primary and subordinate legislation. A table of
secrecy provisions
in Commonwealth legislation is set out in
Appendix 4.
5.34 Approximately 70% of the statutory secrecy
provisions identified create criminal offences. The remaining 30% of provisions
out a duty of confidentiality and establish rules for the handling of
protected information and may specify civil or administrative
penalties for
breach. While the latter provisions are not, in themselves, offences, s 70 of
may attach criminal sanctions to the breach by a
Commonwealth officer of this kind of ‘duty not to disclose’. In this
way, specific secrecy provisionsthat do not themselves create an
offenceinteract with general offences in the
protecting confidential Commonwealth information.
5.35 Statutory secrecy provisions exhibit five
common elements:
protection of particular kinds of
information;
regulation of particular persons;
prohibition of certain kinds of
activities in relation to the information;
methods of regulation, and, if a
criminal offence, the elements of that offence; and
exceptions and defences which set out
the circumstances in which a person does not infringe a secrecy
5.36 It is notable that this list of common elements of
current secrecy provisions does not include an express ‘harm
such as a requirement that a disclosure of information is
reasonably likely to cause harm to a specified public interest, or that
person, in disclosing the information, intended to cause harm. Only a small
number of statutory secrecy offences expressly include
a harm element. These
provisions, and the desirability of including a harm element in secrecy
offences, are discussed further in
Chapter 10.
5.37 This section of the chapter examines each aspect of statutory secrecy
provisions in turn and provides examples of the different
approaches taken
across Commonwealth legislation to the protection of official information. Where
relevant, this section also notes
the percentages of secrecy provisions that
exhibit particular variations within the five elements outlined above. As this
provides an overview of all statutory secrecy provisions, the
approximate values expressed here are different from figures noted
chapters that focus on statutory secrecy offences alone.
kind of information is protected?
5.38 Secrecy provisions in Commonwealth
legislation prohibit the unauthorised handling of a variety of information. This
section examines
such provisions according to the following categories:
any information (or general secrecy
provisions);
information about the affairs of a
taxation information;
census and statistical information;
electoral information;
defence or security information;
law enforcement and intelligence
information;
confidential information;
Indigenous sacred or sensitive
information; and
other types of
information.
information (or general secrecy provisions)
5.39 Approximately 10% of secrecy provisions in
Commonwealth legislation relate to the unauthorised disclosure or use of
information
obtained by a person during the course of his or her
employment.
Generally, these
provisions prohibit the disclosure of any information obtained by a person
carrying out, performing or exercising
any of the person’s duties,
functions or powers under:
the Act in which the provision is
a particular part of the Act in which
the provision is located;
regulations made under the Act in which
the provision is located; or
5.40 Australian Public Service
(APS) employees have a general duty not to disclose official information.
Public Service Act 1999
(Cth) sets out the APS
Code of Conduct which requires an employee to behave honestly and with integrity
in the course of his or her
employment,
and to maintain
appropriate confidentiality about dealings the employee has with any minister or
minister’s member of
Section 13(13)
Public Service Act
provides that an APS employee must also comply with any other conduct
requirement prescribed by the regulations.
Regulation 2.1(3)
Service Regulations
provides that:
an APS employee must not disclose information which the APS employee obtains or
generates in connection with the APS employee’s
employment if it is
reasonably foreseeable that the disclosure could be prejudicial to the effective
working of government, including
the formulation or implementation of policies
or programs.
5.42 Legislation establishing a statutory
authority or independent agency may also include a similar general secrecy
provision to
cover the employees of that authority or
5.43 Section 70 of the
covers a wide range of information
in that it makes it an offence for a Commonwealth officer to disclose ‘any
fact or document’
obtained by virtue of his or her position as a
Commonwealth officer that it is ‘his or her duty not to disclose’.
70 is discussed in more detail below.
Information about
the affairs of a person
5.44 A significant proportion of Commonwealth
secrecy provisions (approximately 30%) aim to prevent the unauthorised use of
information
The majority of these
provisions refer to information about a ‘person’. As such, these
provisions would also capture
the disclosure of information about a body politic
or corporate as well as a natural
However, some
legislation refers to information relating to the affairs of an
individual,
which refers to a
natural person only.
5.45 Some secrecy provisions that protect
information of this type use the term ‘personal
information’.
This is the
term used in the
(Cth) and the
Freedom of Information
which also regulate the disclosure of information about persons
held by Australian Government agencies. Other laws refer to information
‘about a person’,
‘concerning another
while a small
number refer to ‘identifying
information’,
information that would enable people generally to ‘work out the identity
of the individual to whom the information
The majority,
however, refer to information about the ‘affairs’ of another person.
information
5.46 A number of secrecy provisions aim to
prevent the unauthorised disclosure of ‘taxation
information’.
purposes of this discussion, ‘taxation information’ is defined as
information provided by a taxpayer to a person
or an agency pursuant to a
legislative requirement contained in taxation legislation.
5.47 Secrecy provisions have long been used to
protect the unauthorised disclosure of taxation information. The justification
the protection of taxation information is that it encourages voluntary
compliance with taxation
legislation.
It has been noted
that ‘compliance with tax laws could be adversely affected if taxpayers
thought their personal information
could be disclosed
provisions protecting taxation information almost always criminalise the
unauthorised disclosure of the information.
5.48 Some of the secrecy provisions that protect
taxation information specifically refer to the type of information protected.
s 8WB(1)(c)
Taxation Administration Act 1953
(Cth) prohibits the disclosure of a ‘tax file number’. However,
most of the provisions prohibit the disclosure of information
that was disclosed or obtained under a piece of taxation
legislation.
Some provisions
also include the additional requirement that the information was obtained in the
course of official employment.
5.49 Further, a number of secrecy provisions that
protect taxation information deal with the subsequent disclosure of the
information.
For example, s 3EA(2) of the
Taxation Administration Act
makes it an offence for an officer of the Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation (ASIO) to disclose taxation information that
he or she has obtained
from the Commissioner of Taxation pursuant to s 3EA(1) of the Act.
and statistical information
5.50 The Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS)
conducts a census of population and housing every five years in accordance with
Census and Statistics Act 1905
The census is regarded as an important source of
statistical information for use by governments, academics, businesses and
individuals.
Section 19(1)
Census and Statistics Act
it an offence for any past or present officer of the ABS to disclose any
information given under the Act otherwise than in accordance
with a ministerial
determination under
purposes of the Act. Section 19(2) makes it an offence for a person to whom
information has been disclosed pursuant to
a determination under s 13(1) to
fail to comply with an undertaking given in relation to the information. Section
19A of the Act
provides that an officer of the ABS must not be required to
disclose census information to an agency for 99 years following a census,
the disclosure is in accordance with the Act.
5.51 Like taxation information, the justification for the protection of
census information is that without the guarantee of secrecy,
supported by
criminal sanction, people may be reluctant to divulge sensitive personal
information in the census.
5.52 Census information may be transferred to the
National Archives of Australia in certain
circumstances.
As noted in
Chapter 4, the provisions in the
Census and Statistics Act
complemented by
Archives Act 1983
(Cth) which prohibits an
Archives officer from disclosing census information before the information is
available for public access.
5.53 The ABS produces statistics on a wide range
of social and economic matters. Several provisions of the
Statistics Act
deal with the disclosure of information given under the
Section 12 of the Act provides that
the results of any analysis of statistical information shall not be published in
a manner that
is likely to enable the identification of a particular person or
organisation, while s 13(3) provides that information about a person
not be disclosed under s 13(1) in a manner that is likely to enable the
identification of that person.
information
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
requires the Australian Electoral Commission (AEC) to maintain
a roll of people eligible to vote at federal—and, by agreement,
and local government—elections. Electoral rolls are available for public
inspection without fee at offices of the
Only the names and
addresses of enrolled voters are included on the publicly available electoral
5.55 A publicly available electoral roll
facilitates the conduct of free and fair elections by ‘enabling
participants to verify
the openness and accountability of the electoral process
and object to the enrolment of any
In addition, the
Commonwealth Electoral Act
allows for the disclosure of electoral
information to a number of people and bodies, including Members of Parliament,
political parties
and approved medical
researchers.
This information
may only be used for certain
Commonwealth Electoral Act
contains secrecy provisions aimed at protecting the unauthorised disclosure
of electoral information.
Section 90B
prohibits the disclosure of certain
information, such as information about defence and Australian Federal Police
(AFP) personnel,
Section 91B of the Act makes it an offence for a person to disclose information
obtained under s 90B, unless the disclosure ‘would
be a use of the
information for a permitted purpose under s 91A’. Section 189B makes
it an offence to disclose information
obtained from an electronic list of postal
vote applicants provided by the AEC, if the disclosure ‘would not be a use
information for a permitted purpose’. Finally, s 323 makes it
an offence for an officer or scrutineer to disclose any information
with respect
to the vote of an elector that was acquired under the Act or regulations in a
manner that is likely to enable the identification
of the elector.
or security information
5.57 A little over 5% of Commonwealth secrecy
provisions aim to prevent the unauthorised disclosure of defence or security
information.
Historically, the protection of this kind of information is a core
function of secrecy provisions. Most secrecy provisions that protect
security information criminalise the unauthorised disclosure of this
information. Disclosure can also attract criminal
penalties under s 79 of the
(disclosure of official secrets) and s 91.1 of the
(Cth) (espionage).
5.58 Some provisions that protect defence or
security information expressly prohibit the disclosure of certain information.
For example,
Defence Act 1903
(Cth) makes it an offence
for a member of the Australian Defence Force (ADF), or a person engaged or
appointed under the
Public Service Act
, to communicate, otherwise than in
the course of his or her official duty,
any plan, document, or information relating to any fort, battery, field work,
fortification, or defence work, or to any defences
of the Commonwealth, or to
any factory, or air force aerodrome or establishment or any other naval,
military or air force information.
5.59 Other provisions prohibit the disclosure of
any information if the disclosure ‘is likely to’ prejudice the
or defence of
Such provisions are a
rare example of an express requirement that the disclosure be likely to cause
some kind of harm. In some provisions,
a designated person determines the
threshold question of whether information will prejudice the security or defence
of Australia.
For example,
Designs Act 2003
provides that the Registrar of Designs may prohibit or restrict the publication
of information about the subject matter of a
design application if it appears to
be ‘necessary or expedient to do so in the interests of the defence of the
Commonwealth’.
5.60 Criminal offences relating to the disclosure
of official secrets also fall within this category. Section 79 of the
creates a number of offences relating to the use and
disclosure of ‘prescribed information’, which is defined in s 79(1)
and includes three kinds of information:
information made or obtained in
contravention of
(ie, by unlawful sounding) or s
91.1 of the
Criminal Code
(ie, by espionage);
information relating to a prohibited
place or anything in a prohibited place that the person knows, or ought to know
by reason of
the nature of the information or circumstances by which it came
into a person’s possession, should not be
communicated;
information made or obtained by a
Commonwealth officer or a person holding office under the Queen owing to his or
her position, which,
by reason of the nature or circumstances under which the
information was made or obtained, or for any other reason, it is his or
to treat as secret.
5.61 The first two
categories relate to particular kinds of defence and security information.
However, the third category is more
general in application and is discussed
further below in the context of the discussion of general criminal offences.
5.62 The offences created by s 79 of the
extend beyond Commonwealth officers to cover the communication
or receipt of prescribed information by any person. The most serious
created by s 79 is the offence of communicating, retaining or receiving an
official secret with the intention of prejudicing
the security or defence of the
Commonwealth. This provision, and s 91.1 of the
Criminal Code
in the next paragraph, are notable among statutory secrecy provisions for
explicitly referring to an intention to cause
The maximum penalty for
these offences is seven years
imprisonment.
Where there is no
intention to prejudice security or defence, the unauthorised communication or
receipt of such information attracts
a maximum penalty of two years
imprisonment,
while unauthorised
retention is punishable by a maximum penalty of 6 months
imprisonment.
5.63 Section 91.1 of the
Criminal Code
which sets out the offence of espionage, also falls into this category. Section
91.1(1) makes it an offence for a person to communicate
information concerning
the security or defence of the Commonwealth or another country to a foreign
country or organisation with the
intention of prejudicing the security or
defence of the Commonwealth, or of giving an advantage to another
country’s security
or defence. It is also an offence to make, obtain or
copy such information with the intention of delivering it to a foreign country
or organisation in order to prejudice the security or defence of the
Commonwealth
advantage to another country’s security or
All offences in s 91.1
carry a maximum penalty of 25 years imprisonment.
5.64 Espionage offences were previously located
in pt VII of the
. The offence was repealed and re-enacted (in
different terms) in the
Criminal Code
as part of the reforms included in
Criminal Code Amendment (Espionage and Related Matters) Act 2002
5.65 This Act also made amendments to s 79 of the
to replace the phrase ‘intention of prejudicing the
or defence of the Commonwealth’ with the phrase
intention of prejudicing the
or defence of the
Commonwealth’. The Explanatory Memorandum states:
The change to the term ‘security or defence’ in the Bill reflects
the modern intelligence environment. The term ‘security’
is intended
to capture information about the operations, capabilities and technologies,
methods and sources of Australian intelligence
and security agencies. The term
‘safety’ is unlikely to include such
information.
5.66 The term ‘security or defence’
is not defined in the
Criminal Code Amendment Act
also added s 90.1 to the
Criminal Code
to define ‘security
or defence of a country’ for the purposes of
pt 5.2 of the
Criminal Code
as including
‘the operations, capabilities and technologies of, and methods and sources
used by, the country’s intelligence
or security agencies’. The
Explanatory Memorandum envisaged that this definition was to apply to s 79 of
likely that the phrase in s 79 would be interpreted consistently with the
Criminal Code.
enforcement and intelligence information
5.67 About 5% of secrecy provisions aim to
protect information about the operations or investigations of law enforcement
and intelligence
agencies by prohibiting the unauthorised disclosure of a wide
range of law enforcement and intelligence information. Some prohibit
disclosure of information if its disclosure could prejudice the conduct of an
investigation or
Others identify specific types of protected information, such as information
investigation;
the existence or
content of a warrant;
questioning or detention of a person in connection with a
the identity of an
intelligence officer;
identity of a participant in the National Witness Protection
5.68 Further, financial intelligence information
collected under the
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act
(Cth) is protected from unauthorised
disclosure,
as is information
intercepted or accessed under the
Telecommunications (Interception and
Access) Act 1979
obtained under the
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
Some secrecy
provisions also prohibit the unauthorised disclosure of information obtained
when conducting a forensic procedure on
a suspect, offender or
5.69 As noted above in relation to defence and
security information, offences relating to official secrets and espionage may
cover the disclosure of intelligence information.
Confidential
information
5.70 About 10% of secrecy provisions aim to
prevent the unauthorised disclosure of confidential information. Some provisions
the disclosure of ‘confidential’ information, which may or
may not be defined in the Act.
Others prohibit the disclosure of information that was supplied in
confidence,
or information the
disclosure of which would constitute a breach of
confidence.
The most general
provision of this kind is reg 2.1(4) of the
Public Service Regulations
which provides that:
An APS employee must not disclose information which the APS employee obtains or
generates in connection with the APS employee’s
employment if the
information:
(a) was, or is to be, communicated in confidence within the government; or
(b) was received in confidence by the government from a person or persons
outside the government;
whether or not the disclosure would found an action for breach of confidence.
5.71 In addition, approximately 10% of secrecy
provisions protect confidential commercial information. Some of these provisions
the type of confidential commercial information
while others prohibit
the disclosure of information obtained under an Act on the basis that its
disclosure would be detrimental to
the commercial interests of a person or body.
For example,
Wheat Export Marketing Act 2008
prohibits the disclosure of ‘protected confidential information’,
which is defined as information provided under
certain provisions of the Act,
the disclosure of which could cause financial loss or detriment to a person or
benefit a competitor
sacred or sensitive information
5.72 A small number of Commonwealth secrecy
provisions prohibit the disclosure of information that is considered sacred or
significant by Indigenous peoples. For example,
s 193S(3)(b)
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Act 2005
(Cth) prohibits the
disclosure by a designated
of any information that
he or she is aware is considered sacred or significant by a particular group of
Aboriginal persons or Torres
Strait Islanders, where its disclosure would be
inconsistent with the views or sensitivities of the members of the group.
Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Studies Act 1989
(Cth) provides that the Institute must not
disclose information if the disclosure would be inconsistent with the views or
sensitivities
of relevant Aboriginal persons or Torres Strait
information
5.73 The ALRC has also identified secrecy
provisions that aim to protect other types of Commonwealth information,
including information
would disclose the deliberations of the
would disclose the deliberations or
advice of the Executive
would prejudice the international
relations of the
Commonwealth;
would prejudice relations between the
Commonwealth and a state;
could form the basis for a claim by the
Crown in right of the Commonwealth in a judicial proceeding that the information
be disclosed;
is derived from, or related to, a
would endanger the safety of any
relates to an alternative dispute
resolution process;
is derived from inspecting
would reveal that a person was acting in
a certain capacity;
relates to an investigation conducted by
a safety compliance
activity is regulated?
5.74 The ALRC’s mapping exercise shows that
there is considerable variation in the way that the persons regulated by
Commonwealth
secrecy laws are described. Secrecy provisions are stated variously
to apply to:
Commonwealth agencies;
Commonwealth officers and former
organisations or individuals providing
services for or on behalf of the Commonwealth;
other specific categories of
organisation or individual; and/or
Commonwealth
5.75 Some secrecy
provisions apply to agencies or statutory corporations, as distinct from
individuals.
John McGinness noted the growth in statutory authorities with power to
require the production of information and the related
growth in secrecy
provisions applying to those
authorities.
Such provisions
are often expressed to bind the head and staff of an agency or other officers of
the statutory authority.
Bodies corporate, as well as individuals, may be found guilty of a criminal
Commonwealth
5.76 Approximately one third of all Commonwealth
secrecy provisions apply to Commonwealth officers. In some cases, the provisions
regulate specific agency heads or
or all officers of
specific Commonwealth
In other cases the
provisions apply to all Commonwealth
or all employees of
Regulation 2.1
Public Service
Regulations
sets out the general duty of an APS employee not to disclose
official information. An APS employee is defined in
Service Act
to mean a person engaged by an agency head for the purposes of
the agency or as an APS employee by the Public Service Commissioner
specified agency as the result of an administrative rearrangement. An agency is
defined to mean a department, an executive agency
established by the
Governor-General, or a statutory
5.78 Section 70 of the
regulates conduct by ‘Commonwealth officers’. The definition of
the term ‘Commonwealth officer’ in s 70 is
discussed in further
detail below, but includes APS, ADF and AFP
Service providers
to the Commonwealth
5.79 Some secrecy provisions expressly refer to a
wider range of individuals than is encompassed by the definition of Commonwealth
officer, reflecting changes to the structure of government and government
service provision, and the view that information should
be protected at every
point in the ‘distribution chain’, including where that information
is handled outside the public
5.80 Around 10% of current secrecy provisions
expressly regulate
consultants
and others who
provide goods or services for or on behalf of the Australian
Government.
In addition,
service providers are often required by agencies to comply with confidentiality
undertakings as part of service provision
arrangements.
organisations and individuals
5.81 Specific secrecy provisions regulate a wide
range of other organisations and individuals. For example, secrecy provisions
state, territory or local government
organisations and individuals who engage in federally funded or
regulated areas of the private sector—for example, aged care
individuals assisting in government studies or
5.82 A number of secrecy provisions, in
particular those relating to defence and national security, regulate the
activities of
person who comes into possession or control of
documents or information.
Section 79 of the
, for example, prohibits unauthorised
handling or communication of official secrets by any person, which would
include, for example,
members of the media.
5.83 Around 30% of Commonwealth secrecy
provisions are stated to apply to the handling of information by ‘any
However, other language used in these secrecy provisions, and the
practical context in which the provisions operate, mean that the
provisions will
apply mainly to Commonwealth officers or contracted service providers. For
example, the information protected by
the provision may be defined as
information ‘acquired by the person in the course of performing duties or
exercising powers
or functions’ under certain
legislation;
information obtained for the purposes of certain legislation and held in the
records of specific
and former parties
5.84 About 25% of secrecy provisions expressly
regulate the behaviour of persons who have access to Commonwealth information
of their current position, as well as those who have had access in the
past but may no longer have access. For example, s 70 of the
regulates the behaviour of both current and former Commonwealth
5.85 An example of a specific secrecy provision
governing both current and former officers is
and Torres Strait Islander Act 2005
(Cth), which expressly applies to a
(a) who is or has been an Indigenous Business Australia Director or acting
Indigenous Business Australia Director;
(b) who is or has been the Indigenous Business Australia General Manager or an
acting Indigenous Business Australia General Manager;
(c) who is or has been employed or engaged under
section 175
(d) who is performing, or who has performed, duties on behalf of Indigenous
Business Australia pursuant to an arrangement under
section 176; or
(e) whose services are being or have been made available to Indigenous Business
Australia pursuant to an arrangement under
section 177.
5.86 The application
of s 70 of the
may also extend the application of
statutory secrecy offences to former Commonwealth officers. For example, as
noted in Chapter 4
and referred to above,
Archives Act
(Cth) provides that:
An Archives officer must not, at any time before a record containing Census
information from a Census is in the open access period
for that Census, divulge
or communicate any of that information to another person (except to another
Archives officer for the purposes
of, or in connection with, the performance of
that other officer’s duties under this Act).
5.87 Although this section does not expressly refer to both current and
former Archives officers, a note to s 30A(1) draws attention
criminal offence created by s 70 of the
in relation to
the disclosure of information by those who are, or have been, Commonwealth
Section 30A
Archives Act
imposes a duty on current
Archives officers who are engaged under the
Public Service
and therefore fall
within the definition of ‘Commonwealth officer’ in
. The effect of s 70 is to create an offence for both current
and former Archives officers who publish or communicate ‘any fact
document which comes to his or her knowledge, or into his or her possession, by
virtue of being a Commonwealth officer, and which
it is his or her duty not to
disclose’in this case, census information that is not in the open
access periodwithout
lawful authority or excuse.
What kind of
activity is regulated?
5.88 The third aspect of secrecy provisions is
the regulation of particular conduct or activities in relation to the
information.
The vast majority (90%) of secrecy provisions prohibit disclosing,
divulging or communicating Commonwealth information. In addition,
conduct such
as tabling information in Parliament, or serving information on other parties,
can be regarded as regulated forms of
disclosure.
5.89 Secrecy
provisions may also regulate other activities such as making a record
(approximately 30% of secrecy provisions), using
information (approximately 20%)
or soliciting information (less than 5%).
5.90 A small number of provisions focus on
obtaining information. For example, under
Social Security
(Administration) Act 1999
a person commits an offence if he or
she intentionally obtains information without authorisation and knew or ought
reasonably to have
known that the information was protected
information.
5.91 The ALRC’s mapping exercise has
identified very few provisions that regulate the possession or receipt of
information.
One example is s 79(5) of the
If a person receives any sketch, plan, photograph, model, cipher, note,
document, article or information, knowing or having reasonable
believe, at the time when he or she receives it, that it is communicated to him
or her in contravention of section 91.1
Criminal Code
subsection (2) of this section, he or she shall be guilty of an indictable
offence unless he or she proves that the communication
was contrary to his or
her desire.
and subsequent disclosures
5.92 Some secrecy provisions regulate both the
initial and any subsequent unauthorised handling of Commonwealth information.
For example,
Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern
Territory) Act
(4) A person commits an offence if:
(a) information is communicated to the person (the
first person
accordance with [the Act]; and
(b) the information is communicated by a person (the
second person
whom this section applies; and
(c) the second person acquired the information because of his or her
membership of, or employment by, a Land Council or his or
her activities as an
authorised person; and
(d) the information concerns the affairs of a third person; and
(e) the first person, either directly or indirectly, makes a record of, or
divulges or communicates the information to any other
5.93 Some provisions make it an offence for a
recipient of certain information to then use or disclose that information for
purposes. For example, under s 86–3 of the
Aged Care Act 1997
(Cth), the Secretary of the Department of Health and Ageing may disclose
protected information in certain circumstances, including
to other government
departments, such as Centrelink or Medicare, or where there is a risk to health
and safety. Under s 86–5,
it is an offence for a person who receives
information by virtue of s 86–3 to make a record of, disclose or otherwise
information other than for the purpose for which the information was
5.94 However, the vast majority of secrecy
provisions mapped by the ALRC do not contain a prohibition on disclosure by
third party
recipients.
of regulation
5.95 The fourth aspect of secrecy provisions is
the way in which the disclosure of information is regulated. Around 70% of
provisions establish criminal offences and around 75% of these are
indictable offences—that is, offences punishable by imprisonment
period exceeding 12 months.
The remainder are summary offences—that is, offences which are not
punishable by imprisonment, or are punishable by imprisonment
for a period not
exceeding 12 months.
ALRC has identified only three civil penalty
provisions.
5.96 The ALRC’s mapping exercise indicates that the great majority of
Commonwealth secrecy offences do not stipulate fault elements.
circumstances, the
Criminal Code
sets out the fault elements that apply,
for a physical element consisting of
conduct, the fault element is
for a physical element consisting of
circumstance or a result, the fault element is
recklessness.
5.97 By way of example,
Census and Statistics Act 1905
provides that:
A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person is, or has been, the Statistician or an officer; and
(b) the person, either directly or indirectly, divulges or communicates to
another person (other than the person from whom the information
was obtained)
any information given under this Act.
Penalty: 120 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
5.98 Applying the rules set out in the
Criminal Code,
the relevant
physical and fault elements for this offence can be set out as follows:
Physical element
Fault element
Conduct = directly or indirectly divulges or communicates information to
another person
Circumstance = the information was given under the Act
recklessness
5.99 Around 30% of the secrecy provisions identified by the ALRC do not
expressly criminalise the wrongful handling of Commonwealth
information but
rather establish rules for the handling of this information. As noted above,
while such provisions are not, in themselves,
offences, s 70 of the
may operate to attach criminal sanctions to the breach of these rules by
a Commonwealth officer.
and defences
5.100 The final feature of many secrecy
provisions involves exceptions or defences. An ‘exception’ is a
provision that
limits the scope of conduct prohibited by a secrecy law, while a
‘defence’ is a provision that may excuse conduct that
is otherwise
prohibited by a secrecy provision. An exception or defence may provide, for
example, that a Commonwealth officer does
not commit an offence, or has a
defence, where disclosure of information is made in the course of performing
duties under the relevant
legislation. Exceptions are more commonly included in
Commonwealth secrecy laws than defences.
5.101 About 15% of
secrecy provisions do not contain any express exceptions or
However, defences
may nevertheless be available under provisions of the
Criminal Code
common law. In particular, the
Criminal Code
sets out general principles
of criminal responsibility applicable to offences against the laws of the
Commonwealth. The Code provides,
for example, that even if an offence provision
is stated to be an offence of strict liability, the defence of mistake of fact
5.102 Express exceptions or defences are included
in most Commonwealth secrecy provisions. The following discussion summarises
and defences currently contained in secrecy laws within a number of
broad categories.
Performance
of functions and duties
5.103 Approximately 35% of secrecy provisions
allow information handling in the performance of a person’s functions and
as an employee or officer. Taxation secrecy laws, for example, generally
allow information handling in the ‘course of duties
of an officer’.
Secrecy obligations placed on officers by the
Taxation Administration Act
(Cth) do not apply ‘to the extent that the person makes a record
of the information, or divulges or communicates the information
performance of the person’s duties as an
formulations appear in other areas of Commonwealth
legislation.
or authorised by law
5.104 Many secrecy provisions incorporate
exceptions that allow the handling of information as required or authorised by
Secrecy provisions commonly provide that information may be handled ‘for
the purposes of this
It is also common
for secrecy provisions to permit disclosure for the purposes of other
legislation,
or intergovernmental
arrangements.
Authorisation
by specified persons
5.105 About 15% of secrecy provisions permit the
disclosure of information at the discretion of specified office-holders or other
persons. For example, the
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993
(Cth) provides that it is not an offence to disclose information where
disclosure is ‘approved by the Commissioner of Taxation
by instrument in
5.106 Other secrecy provisions permit information
handling to be authorised by specified persons—generally the head of an
or the responsible minister—provided that other criteria are met.
For example:
Customs Administration Act
(Cth) provides an exception to secrecy provisions where the disclosure
of information is authorised by the Chief Executive Officer
of Customs and the
information will be used by another Australian Government agency for the
purposes of that agency’s
Health Insurance Act 1973
(Cth) provides an exception to secrecy provisions where the Minister certifies,
by instrument in writing, that it is necessary in
the public interest that
information be disclosed;
Anti-Money Laundering and
Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
(Cth) provides an exception to secrecy
provisions where access to information is for the purposes of investigating a
breach of a
law of the Commonwealth and is authorised by the Chief Executive
Officer of the Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis
to specified persons or entities
5.107 Approximately 30% of secrecy provisions
provide exceptions where disclosure is made to specified persons or entities
ministers or government (Australian, state or territory) agencies or
officials. For example:
Australian Prudential Regulation
Authority Act 1998
(Cth) provides exceptions to secrecy provisions
where disclosure of information is to the Australian Statistician, the Reserve
of Australia, auditors and
Industry Research and Development
(Cth) provides that secrecy provisions do not apply to the
disclosure of information to the Minister, ministerial staff, the Secretary
the Department or a designated officer of the
Department;
Gene Technology Act 2000
(Cth) provides exceptions to secrecy provisions where disclosure is made in the
course of carrying out duties or functions under
the Act and is to ‘the
Commonwealth or a Commonwealth authority’, a state agency, or the Gene
Technology Technical Advisory
particular focus of such exceptions is to authorise information sharing among
Australian Government agencies. The
Australian Prudential Regulation
Authority Act
Customs Administration Act
Assessment Act 1936
(Cth), for example, each contains provisions authorising
the disclosure of certain information to the
5.109 In some instances, secrecy provisions
permit disclosure in circumstances, or to persons or entities, as prescribed by
regulation.
For example, the
Medical Indemnity Act 2002
(Cth) allows
disclosure of information to a prescribed authority or
Building and
Construction Industry Improvement Act 2005
(Cth) provides an exception where
disclosure is in accordance with
regulations.
proceedings
5.110 About 15% of secrecy provisions provide
exceptions to expressly permit the handling of information for the purposes of
or tribunal
proceedings.
5.111 However, secrecy provisions more often
provide that government office-holders, employees or other persons are not
required to
disclose information in court or tribunal processes, other than for
the purposes of the particular
As noted in
Chapter 1, the extent to which Commonwealth officers can be compelled to
provide information in the course of investigations
or in legal proceedings is
not a focus of this Inquiry.
enforcement purposes
5.112 Approximately 15% of secrecy provisions
provide exceptions to allow the handling of information for various law
enforcement
and investigatory purposes. These provisions often refer to the
investigation of criminal
5.113 Exceptions may extend beyond the
investigation of criminal offences to broader law enforcement and administration
concerns. For example:
allows forensic
DNA information to be disclosed for the purposes of a coronial inquest or
inquiry, or an investigation by the Privacy
Commissioner or
Child Support (Assessment) Act
(Cth) allows the communication of information about missing and
deceased persons where necessary to assist a court, coronial inquiry,
Commission, or department or authority of the Commonwealth, a state or a
Australian Federal Police Act
(Cth) allows the Commissioner to approve the disclosure of information
that relates to the National Witness Protection Program if
he or she is of the
opinion that it is ‘in the interests of the due administration of justice
5.114 About 20% of secrecy provisions provide
exceptions that permit the disclosure of information where the person or entity
the information relates has consented to the
disclosure.
5.115 In some
instances, where legislation provides exceptions permitting the handling of
information, these are subject to further
exceptions in relation to the
disclosure of personal information, as that term is defined in the
For example, under
Customs Administration Act 1985
(Cth) certain authorised disclosures
of personal information may take place only where the person to whom the
information relates
5.116 Some secrecy provisions permit disclosure
of information after notice and an opportunity to object to disclosure has been
to certain persons. For example, the
Food Standards Australia New
Zealand Act 1991
(Cth) provides that confidential commercial information
given by a person may not be disclosed unless the Chief Executive Officer
of Food Standards Australia New Zealand has advised the person of this in
writing and ‘given the person a reasonable opportunity
to communicate the
person's views about the proposed disclosure of that
information’.
De-identified
information
5.117 Less than 5% of secrecy provisions provide
exceptions permitting the disclosure of information if it does not identify the
or entity that is the subject of the
information.
For example:
Australian Prudential Regulation
Authority Act 1998
(Cth) states that it is not an offence if the information
disclosed is ‘in the form of a summary or collection of information
is prepared so that information relating to any particular person cannot be
found out from
Census and Statistics Act
(Cth) provides that certain information shall not be ‘published
or disseminated in a manner that is likely to enable the identification
particular person or
organisation’;
Epidemiological Studies
(Confidentiality) Act 1981
(Cth) provides that the Act does not prohibit the
publication of certain information from prescribed studies ‘but such
conclusions,
statistics or particulars shall not be published in a manner that
enables the identification of an individual
to avert threats to life or health
5.118 Some secrecy provisions contain exceptions
permitting the disclosure of information in order to avert threats to a
life or health. Such exceptions are expressed in different ways,
and may cover threats to a person’s life, health, safety or
welfare. For
Customs Administration Act 1985
(Cth) allows the disclosure of information necessary to ‘avert or
reduce’ a ‘serious and imminent threat to the
health or life of a
Inspector-General of Intelligence
and Security Act 1986
(Cth) allows the disclosure of information
‘necessary for the purpose of preserving the well‑being or safety of
Child Support (Assessment) Act
(Cth) allows the disclosure of information to prevent or lessen a
‘credible threat to the life, health or welfare of a
5.119 A small number of secrecy provisions allow
the disclosure of Commonwealth information when disclosure is in the public or
5.120 For example, the
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand Act 1991
(Cth) allows the disclosure of certain
information if the Minister certifies, by instrument, that it is necessary
‘in the public
provisions are found in other statutes, including the
Medical Indemnity Act
Health Insurance Act 1973
National Health
5.121 In addition, the
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
(Cth) allows the disclosure of
information where the information concerns matters outside Australia and the
Director‑General
‘is satisfied that the national interest requires
the communication’.
Requirement
5.122 Some secrecy laws prohibit the disclosure
of information only where the disclosure is likely to cause harm. For example,
noted above, reg 2.1 of the
Public Service Regulations 1999
provides that an APS employee must not disclose information ‘if it is
reasonably foreseeable that the disclosure could
be prejudicial to the effective
working of government, including the formulation or implementation of policies
or programs’.
5.123 A more specific example is the
Force Discipline Act 1982
(Cth) which provides a defence to the offence of
unauthorised disclosure of information where ‘the person proves that he or
she neither knew, nor could reasonably be expected to have known, that the
disclosure of the information was likely to be prejudicial
to the security or
defence of Australia’.
Further examples of secrecy provisions that contain a requirement of harm are
set out in Chapter 10.
criminal offences
5.124 The preceding section of this chapter has
described key aspects of the numerous statutory secrecy provisions in
Commonwealth
legislation. Chapters 9, 10 and 11 review specific statutory
offences and suggest how such offences could be simplified and framed
consistent manner.
5.125 This section of the chapter examines the two general criminal offences
relating to the unauthorised disclosure of Commonwealth
information. Section 70 covers the disclosure of information by Commonwealth
officers, while s 79 deals with the disclosure of ‘official
secrets’. The following overview analyses these sections
according to
criteria similar to that used to analyse the statutory secrecy provisions
discussed above, that is:
the type of
information protected;
the kinds of activities regulated;
whose activity is regulated; and
exceptions and
70—disclosure of information by Commonwealth officers
5.126 Section 70 of the
only provision remaining in
A version of
s 70 was included in the original
in 1914, and was based
on a provision of the
Criminal Code Act 1899
This original
version of s 70 was repealed and replaced in 1960 to extend the prohibition
on the unauthorised disclosure of information
by Commonwealth officers to
Commonwealth
While minor
amendments have been made to s 70 on three occasions since
the substance of the
provision has not changed since that time.
5.127 Section 70 is set out in Chapter 1 and
in Appendix 5. As it is the pivotal section in this Inquiry, it is instructive
it here in full:
(1) A person who, being a Commonwealth officer, publishes or communicates,
except to some person to whom he or she is authorized
to publish or communicate
it, any fact or document which comes to his or her knowledge, or into his or her
possession, by virtue
of being a Commonwealth officer, and which it is his or
her duty not to disclose, shall be guilty of an offence.
(2) A person who, having been a Commonwealth officer, publishes or communicates,
without lawful authority or excuse (proof whereof
shall lie upon him or her),
any fact or document which came to his or her knowledge, or into his or her
possession, by virtue of
having been a Commonwealth officer, and which, at the
time when he or she ceased to be a Commonwealth officer, it was his or her
not to disclose, shall be guilty of an offence.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 2 years.
5.128 Section 70 does not specify the fault
element for the offence. As noted above, in this situation the
Criminal Code
provides that the fault element for a physical element consisting of conduct
is intention,
while for a
physical element consisting of a circumstance or result, the fault element is
recklessness.
Applying these
rules, the relevant physical and fault elements of the offence in s 70 can be
set out as follows:
Physical element
Fault element
Conduct = publishes or communicates a fact or
Circumstance = the fact or document came into
his or her possession by virtue of being a Commonwealth officer
recklessness
Circumstance = he or she had a duty not to
disclose the fact or document
recklessness
5.129 There have been several successful
prosecutions for breaches of s 70, including of:
a member of the AFP for disclosing
information held in AFP files to a private business
an officer of the ATO for providing
documents containing summaries of taxpayers and tax agents to a private business
an officer of the Australian Customs
Service for providing reports about security at Sydney Kingsford Smith Airport
to journalists;
an officer of the Office of Indigenous
Policy Coordination for disclosing information relating to the then draft
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
to her daughter, and
information relating to Commonwealth Indigenous policy to a member of the
Mutitjulu community in the Northern
an officer of Centrelink for disclosing personal details of
Centrelink customers to a firm which offered to pay for information leading
the whereabouts of various
5.130 The effect of s 70 is to apply
criminal sanctions to the breach of secrecy obligations by public
The following
sections of this chapter examine elements of the provision in more detail.
to disclose’
5.131 Section 70 does not create a duty to keep
information secret or confidential. Rather, the source of such a duty must be
elsewhere. Most commonly, the source of the duty is a specific legislative
provision giving rise to a duty not to disclose official
information. For
example, reg 2.1(3) of the
Public Service
Regulations
provides that APS employees must not disclose information
obtained or generated in connection with their employment if it is reasonably
foreseeable that the disclosure could be prejudicial to the effective working of
government. This provision sets out a ‘duty
not to disclose’ and, as
such, can be used as the basis for a prosecution under s 70 of the
5.132 Other sources of the duty may be those considered earlier in this
chaptersuch as an employee’s common law duty
to serve his or her
employer in good faith and fidelity or an equitable duty to protect his or her
employer’s confidential
information. In addition, the terms and conditions
of an employment contract, or the obligation imposed by
Public Service Act
not to use information for personal benefit, may
establish a ‘duty not to disclose’.
5.133 Leo Tsaknis has argued that in order for
criminal sanctions to attach to the breach of a duty not to disclose, that duty
be a legal duty as opposed to a moral obligation or contractual
arrangement.
However, in
Director of Public Prosecutions v G,
the Full Court of the Federal Court
noted that a contractual obligation may be sufficient to constitute a duty for
the purposes of
the former s 72 of the
which provided for the
offence of falsifying books or records by a Commonwealth officer
‘fraudulently and in breach of his [or
However, the
Court was not required to finally determine this issue.
5.134 Under s 70, criminal sanctions attach
to a breach of a ‘duty not to disclose’. This can be compared with s
(discussed below)
which refers to a
‘duty to treat [information] as secret’. The Western Australian
Court of Criminal Appeal has held that
the phrase ‘duty not to
disclose’ is synonymous with the duty to ‘keep secret’ within
the meaning of s 81
Crimes Act 1913
However, it may be
that, for the purposes of Commonwealth law, the duty not to disclose is wider
than the duty to keep information
secret, in that secrecy presupposes that the
material is not already in the public domain, while a duty not to disclose could
to any information.
What kind of
information is protected?
5.135 Section 70 makes it an offence for a
Commonwealth officer to disclose ‘any fact or document which comes to his
knowledge, or into his or her possession, by virtue of being a
Commonwealth officer’. On its face, s 70 could apply to the
disclosure of
any information regardless of its nature or sensitivity.
Commissioner of Taxation v Swiss
Aluminium Australia Ltd
, Bowen CJ of the Federal Court commented that:
From the policy point of view it may be noted that an enactment such as
s 70 of the
prohibiting the disclosure of information
obtained in the course of the duties of a public servant treats the nature or
kind of information
disclosed as virtually irrelevant. It is the office occupied
by the person and the character in which he obtained the information
imposes the obligation of secrecy upon him in the interests of orderly
administration and discipline of the
5.137 Higgins J of the ACT Supreme Court
expressed a contrasting view, stating that some limitations could be implied
Whether a duty of confidentiality arises so that s 70
punish its breach will depend on the type of information, the circumstances in
which it has been acquired and the interests of
relevant parties in keeping it
confidential. A consideration of the public interest must also be relevant. The
duty to keep information
confidential may attach to information of any kind but
it must be such and acquired in such circumstances that such a duty arises.
does not arise merely because the information is obtained by an officer in the
course of his or her duties.
5.138 The application of s 70 to the disclosure
of information will depend on the nature of the duty not to disclose. For
the equitable duty of confidentiality only arises where the disclosure
would be inimical to the public
Therefore, a
prosecution for an offence under s 70, reliant on a breach of an equitable or
common law duty to protect confidential
information, may require the prosecution
to show that the disclosure was likely to harm the public interest. On the other
the prosecution relied upon a breach of a statutory duty not to
disclose any information obtained in the course of employment, s
potentially apply to the disclosure of information already in the public
5.139 Section 70 expressly applies to the
communication or publication of a ‘fact or document’. Neither
nor ‘document’ is defined. Finn has argued that
the need for disclosure of a ‘fact or document’, rather than
‘information’, opens the application of s 70 to anomalies:
Where a document is not disclosed all that is protected is a ‘fact’;
where a document is disclosed its contents need
not be ones of fact. Unless
‘fact’ is given a meaning which covers disclosure of advice,
opinion, intention etc, the
scope of the offence is manipulated simply by the
particular means (oral or documentary) used in the
disclosure.
5.140 The distinction between the communication
of a fact or a document can be important to the prosecution of an offence. In
R v Kessing
, a former officer of the Australian Customs Service, Allan
Kessing, was convicted of providing reports about airport security arrangements
to two journalists.
appeal, the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal held that the trial judge
had misdirected the jury in saying that it was
sufficient if the prosecution
could establish that Kessing had confirmed the accuracy of material that
journalists had obtained from
another source. Bell JA, with whom Rothman and
Price JJ agreed, stated that:
The offence under s 70 may be committed by publishing or communicating a fact
which came to the knowledge of the accused by virtue
of having been a
Commonwealth officer or by publishing or communicating a document which came
into his or her possession by virtue
of having been a Commonwealth officer or by
both. This was a case in which the offence charged was the communication of the
To confirm the accuracy of a document leaked by another to a
journalist may be to communicate a fact, but in my opinion it is not
communicate the document.
5.141 Further, Tsaknis has pointed out that it is
unclear whether the release of any information would constitute a
or whether the prosecution needs to prove the factual
accuracy of the information in order to satisfy the terms of s 70 of the
What kind of
activity is regulated?
5.142 A person commits an offence under s 70 if
he or she ‘publishes or communicates ... any fact or document’. The
does not provide any guidance as to the meaning of the term
‘publishes or communicates’. In
Kessing v The Queen
with whom Rothman and Price JJ agreed, summarised this requirement as
To ‘communicate’ is to transmit or to impart knowledge or make known
Macquarie Concise Dictionary
, 3rd ed.) One may ‘communicate’
a document by communicating the contents of the document. This is how the Crown
particularised
this case. Generally, to publish connotes to make publicly known,
however, in the law of defamation publication applies to making
complained of known to any person other than the person
5.143 Further, Bell JA confirmed that
communication for the purposes of s 70 can be direct or indirect:
Communication of the contents of a document requires no more than that the
contents be conveyed or transmitted to another. This may
be done directly by
handing the document to another or by reading the document to another. It may be
done indirectly by leaving the
document on a park bench for another to collect
or in any of a variety of ways. The essential feature of communicating a fact or
document for the purposes of s 70 is that the communication is
intentional.
Whose activity is
5.144 Section 70(1) of the
applies to Commonwealth officers, while s 70(2) applies
to former Commonwealth officers. The definition of
Commonwealth officer set out in s 3 of the
appointed or engaged under the
Public Service Act
employed in the public service of a territory, ADF, AFP or public
authority under the Commonwealth;
who performs services for or on behalf of the Commonwealth, a
territory or public authority; and
who performs services, or is an employee of the Australian Postal
Corporation.
5.145 The list of persons
included in this definition is not exhaustive, and some categories could be
broadly interpreted. In particular,
‘a person holding office under, or
employed by, the Commonwealth’ arguably includes a very wide category of
While there has been little judicial consideration of who may be
considered a Commonwealth officer,
and ministerial
staff all potentially fall within the definition. It is important to note that
while a person may be a Commonwealth
officer, it does not necessarily follow
that they have a duty not to disclose information—for example, judges
exercising federal
judicial power may not be bound by such a
5.146 Other legislation may deem certain officers
to be Commonwealth officers. For example, officers or employees of
and staff members of the
Australian Secret Intelligence
are deemed to be
Commonwealth officers for the purposes of the
Crimes Act.
Exception—Authorised
disclosures
5.147 Section 70(1) includes an exception to the
offence where the person discloses the information ‘to some person to whom
he or she is authorised to publish or communicate it’. Section 70(2)
contains a different exception to the offence, in that
the publication or
communication must be ‘without lawful authority or excuse’, proof of
which lies with the defendant.
5.148 The scope of each exception, and the extent
of any difference between them, is unclear. If the duty not to disclose arises
a particular statutory provision, that provision may make clear the
circumstances in which publication or communication of information
authorised. In relation to s 70(1), Tsaknis has suggested that the statute
conferring functions, powers and duties conferred on
a Commonwealth officer by
particular legislation may provide an implied authority to release
information.
Similarly, in
relation to s 70(2), the common law may provide a ‘lawful excuse’,
particularly where the ‘duty not
to disclose’ arises under
contractual, common law or equitable
principles.
5.149 Section 70 does not create an exception or
defence relating to disclosure in the public interest. However, it is possible
this kind of ‘justification’ might be considered in sentencing
in a particular case.
79—disclosure of official secrets
5.150 Section 79 of the
a number of offences relating to the use or disclosure of official secrets.
A version of s 79 formed part of the first
in 1914 and was based on provisions of the
Official Secrets Act
s 79 deals with espionage offences, there is also significant overlap with
the general secrecy offence in s 70. Section 79
is set out in full in
Appendix 5.
5.151 There have been few prosecutions under s
79. One example is the conviction, in 2003, of Simon Lappas of offences under
and s 78 of the
(which was subsequently
repealed and replaced by s 91.1 of the
Criminal Code
). Lappas, an
employee of the Defence Intelligence Organisation, had given several classified
documents to an unauthorised person,
Sherryll Dowling, so she could sell the
documents to a foreign power.
Lappas was found guilty and, on appeal, sentenced to two years’
imprisonment. Dowling pleaded guilty to two charges of receiving
the classified
documents and was placed on a five year good behaviour
5.152 Another example is the conviction in 1977 of a probationary trainee of
ASIO, of offences under s 79(3)
He had communicated official secrets as
part of a ‘personal practical experiment’ to see what kind of
response he would
get to an overture to a foreign agency purporting to offer
intelligence secrets.
What kind of
information is protected?
5.153 Section 79 can be categorised as both a
general and a specific secrecy provision, depending on the kind of information
Section 79(1) defines three categories of information covered by the
5.154 Sections 79(1)(a) and (c) set out two categories dealing with the
disclosure of particular kinds of defence and security
information—information
made or obtained in contravention of pt VIII of
(ie, by unlawful soundings) or s 91.1 of the
(ie, by espionage) and information relating to a prohibited place.
Where s 79 is used in relation to this kind of information, it
categorised as a specific secrecy provision protecting defence or security
information. This aspect is discussed above in
relation to secrecy provisions
that protect defence or security information.
5.155 The third category of information covered by s 79 is more general in
application. Section 79(1)(b) defines protected information
as information which
has been entrusted to the person by a Commonwealth officer or a person holding
office under the Queen or he or she has made or obtained
it owing to his or her
position as a person:
(i) who is or has been a Commonwealth officer;
(ii) who holds or has held office under the Queen;
(iii) who holds or has held a contract made on behalf of the Queen or the
Commonwealth;
(iv) who is or has been employed by or under a person to whom a preceding
subparagraph applies; or
(v) acting with the permission of a Minister;
and, by reason of its nature or the circumstances under which it was entrusted
to him or her or it was made or obtained by him or
her or for any other reason,
it is his or her duty to treat it as
5.156 The category of information protected by s
79(1)(b) is similar to that in s 70, insofar as it does not create a duty to
information confidential, but relies on a ‘duty to treat [the
information] as secret’. As with s 70, this duty could
stem from the
common law, a statutory secrecy provision or the terms of a contract. However, s
79 is not necessarily dependent on
a statutory or legal duty arising from a
person’s position as a Commonwealth officer. Because the offences cover
person’, s 79 contemplates that a duty to keep information
secret could arise from the nature of the informationfor
document that was headed with a security classification—or the
circumstances in which the information was obtained.
5.157 The information covered by s 79 can
take the form of a ‘sketch, plan, photograph, model, cipher, note,
document, or article’.
‘Article’ is defined to include
‘any thing, substance or material’; while information is broadly
to mean ‘information of any kind whatsoever, whether true or false
and whether in a material form or not, and includes (a)
an opinion; and (b) a
report of a conversation’.
5.158 In common with s 70, s 79 applies
to all information, regardless of its nature or the effect of its disclosure. As
the review of Commonwealth criminal law by the committee chaired by Sir
Harry Gibbs in 1991:
No distinction is drawn for the purposes of these provisions between information
the disclosure of which may cause real harm to the
public interest and
information the disclosure of which may cause no harm whatsoever to the public
5.159 Not all material or information that falls
within the existing definition of ‘official secrets’ would harm the
interest if disclosed. Information may have been obtained in
contravention of s 79, for example, but may no longer be sensitive due
the passage of time or prior disclosure in Australia or overseas. Nevertheless,
communicating this information may still constitute
an offence under s 79.
What kind of
activity is regulated?
5.160 Section 79 creates a number of offences
relating to the use and disclosure of ‘prescribed information’ (for
convenience,
here referred to as an ‘official secret’). The offences
can be summarised as follows:
s 79(2): communicating or allowing someone to have access to or
retaining an official secret without authorisation with ‘the
intention of
prejudicing the security or defence of the Commonwealth or a part of the
Queen’s dominions’—maximum
penalty seven years
imprisonment.
s 79(3): communicating or allowing someone to have access to an
official secret without authorisation—maximum penalty two years
imprisonment.
s 79(4): retaining, failing to comply with a direction regarding the
retention or disposal of an official secret, failing to take
reasonable care of
prescribed information or conducting oneself as to endanger its
safety—maximum penalty six months imprisonment.
s 79(5): receiving information knowing
or having reasonable ground to believe, at the time when he or she receives it,
that the information
is communicated to him or her in contravention of
s 91.1 of the
Criminal Code
or s 79(2)—maximum penalty seven
years imprisonment.
s 79(6): receiving information knowing or having reasonable ground
to believe, at the time when he or she receives it, that the information
communicated to him or her in contravention of s 79(3)—maximum penalty two
years imprisonment.
5.161 A notable aspect of s 79 is that the mere
receipt of information can constitute a criminal offence. By way of background,
Criminal Code Amendment (Espionage and
Related Matters) Act 2002
repealed and replaced the espionage offences
originally in pt VII of the
. The Criminal Code Amendment
(Espionage and Related Offences) Bill 2001 (Cth) was initially intended also to
repeal and replace s
with updated
provisions in the
Criminal Code,
although the new provisions did not
exactly replicate s 79
In particular, the new offence of
‘receiving certain information’ did not require the person to know
or have reasonable
grounds to believe that the information was communicated in
contravention of the espionage or secrecy
provisions.
5.162 The new provisions were criticisedparticularly by media
organisationson the basis that the provisions would
interfere with
freedom of speech and prevent public discussion of important issues of public
As a result, the
provisions intended to replace s 79 were removed from the Bill. The then
Attorney-General, the Hon Daryl Williams
AM QC MP, explained this decision as
Recently concerns have been raised about the official
secrets provisions in that bill. ... There has been considerable media attention
focused on the perceived impact that the official secrets provisions in the
earlier bill were alleged to have on the freedom of speech
and on the reporting
of government activities.
The original bill did not alter the substance of the official secrets offences;
it simply modernised the language of the offences
consistent with the
Criminal Code
. The government’s legal advice confirms that there
was in substance no difference between the current provisions of the
and the proposed provisions of the
Criminal Code
. The allegations
ignore the fact that the existing law has not prevented the reporting of such
stories in the past. Despite this,
to avoid delay in the reintroduction of the
important espionage provisions, the government decided to excise the official
provisions from the bill so only those relating to espionage have been
included in the bill introduced
Whose activity is
5.163 Section 79 is not confined to the
actions of Commonwealth officers or former Commonwealth officers. The offences
cover the communication,
receipt or handling of an official secret by any
person. The offence applies regardless of whether the person was aware that he
she had a duty not to disclose
information.
However, the circumstances in which a third party who is not a Commonwealth
officer can be said to have a
to keep information secret are not
Exceptions and
5.164 Sub-sections 79(2) and (3) permit the
disclosure of prescribed information to:
(a) a person to whom he or she is authorized to communicate it; or
(b) a person to whom it is, in the interest of the Commonwealth or a part of the
Queen’s dominions, his or her duty to communicate
5.165 The exemption regarding a duty to communicate information ‘in the
interests of the Commonwealth’ is based on s 2(1)
of the (now repealed)
Official Secrets Act 1911
(UK). The exemption was
considered by a United Kingdom court in the case of
R v Ponting
Mr Ponting was a senior civil servant in the Ministry of Defence. In preparing a
briefing for the Minister, Ponting saw documents
which showed that the
government had provided incorrect information to Parliament about the sinking of
the Argentinian ship
during the Falklands War. When the Minister
did not correct the information, Ponting provided copies of the documents to an
Member of Parliament. He was charged under the
Official Secrets Act 1911
5.166 In his defence, Ponting argued that he had disclosed the documents
‘in the interests of the state’, the equivalent
exception to that
contained in s 79(3)(b) of the
. At trial, the judge
gave a direction to the jury that the reference to this duty was to an official
duty rather than a moral, contractual
or civic duty, and the ‘interests of
the state’ were the interests according to its recognised organs of
government and
the policies as expounded by the particular government of the
5.167 It is not necessarily the case that an Australian court would interpret
s 79(2)(b) and (3)(b) in the same way, particularly
given the High Court’s
decision in
Commonwealth v
which set out
factors relevant to determining the public interest in the confidentiality and
disclosure of certain
information.
5.168 Subsections 79(5) and (6) provide that a person is not guilty of
an offence of receiving prescribed information if he or she
can prove that the
‘communication was contrary to his or her desire’.
5.169 There is some overlap between ss 70 and 79 of the
This may reflect the different sources of each provision—as noted
above, s 70 is based on a provision of the
Criminal Code Act 1899
while s 79 is based on provisions of the (now repealed)
Official Secrets Act
5.170 In particular, there are considerable similarities and points of
overlap between ss 70 and 79(3) of the
Crimes Act.
The offence
under s 79(3), which does not require communication with an intention to
prejudice the security or defence of the Commonwealth,
appears to apply to the
same broad range of information covered by s 70. Both provisions apply
criminal sanctions to the breach of
a ‘duty’ that is found either
outside the criminal provision (ss 70 and 79(3)) or determined by the nature of
the information
or circumstances of the communication (s 79(3)).
5.171 However, s 70 applies only to Commonwealth officers who publish or
communicate information, while s 79(3) applies to ‘any
person’ who
communicates or permits access to protected information. Further, s 79(6)
applies to any person who receives information,
knowing or having reasonable
grounds to believe, that the information was communicated in contravention of s
5.172 A further point of difference between the two provisions is that s
79(3)(b) contains an exception that permits a person to communicate
information
‘in the interests of the Commonwealth’. The meaning and scope of
this exception is unclear. Tsaknis has
suggested that it is possible that a
disclosure may be justified under s 79 in the interests of the Commonwealth and
yet prohibited
under s 70.
5.173 Both ss 70 and 79(3) of the
‘catch-all’ provisions to criminalise the disclosure of a
potentially wide variety of information in breach
of some other duty. Because
the offences are contingent on duties found beyond the terms of those offences,
there is great potential
for uncertainty about the kind of conduct that will
attract criminal sanctions.
5.174 Chapter 6 considers the effectiveness of the general secrecy offences
in ss 70 and 79(3), while Chapters 7, 8 and 9 consider
how the general secrecy
offences currently in the
can be updated and improved.
5.175 The overview in this chapter also reveals a number of key areas for
further examination in relation to specific secrecy provisions,
particularly
where those provisions create offences. Chapters 10, 11 and 12 examine the
appropriate elements of specific secrecy
offences and suggest how such offences
can be simplified and drafted in a consistent manner. In particular, in
reviewing both the
general and specific secrecy offences, the ALRC has been
concerned to test secrecy laws against identifiable public interests with
emphasis on identifying and protecting against the harm that the disclosure of
information may cause.
Commonwealth v Fairfax
[1980] HCA 44
Ibid, 50, citing Swinfen Eady LJ
Lord Ashburton v Pope
(1913) 2 Ch 469
G Munster and J Walsh,
on Australian Defence and Foreign Policy 1968-1975
Commonwealth v Fairfax
[1980] HCA 44
(1980) 147 CLR 39
Ibid, notes
Attorney-General (UK) v Heinemann
Publishing Australia Pty Ltd (No 2)
[1988] HCA 25
(1988) 165 CLR 30
J Macken, P O’Grady, C
Sappideen and G Warburton,
Law of Employment
(4th ed, 2002),
Australian Parliament—House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Confidence: A Report of the Inquiry into the Protection of Confidential Personal
and Commercial Information Held by the Commonwealth
Robb v Green
[1895] 2 QB
J Macken, P O’Grady, C
Sappideen and G Warburton,
Law of Employment
(4th ed, 2002),
Faccenda Chicken Ltd
[1986] 1 All ER 617
Official Information
Integrity in Government Project: Interim Report 1 (1991),
It should be noted that
this issue was remitted back to the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission:
Bennett v President, Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
[2003] FCA 1433
(2003) 134 FCR 334
[128]–[129].
Fraser v Public Service Staff
Relations Board
[1985] 2 SCR 455
Osborne v Canada
Haydon v Canada
Osborne v Canada
Haydon v Canada
[2001] 2 FC 82
[2005] FC 798.
[107]–[108].
‘The Bennett Decision Explained: The Sky is not Falling!’ (2005) 46
Australian Institute of Administrative Law (AIAL) Forum
The implied freedom of political
communication issue is discussed further in Ch
C Erskine, ‘The Bennett
Decision Explained: The Sky is not Falling!’ (2005) 46
Institute of Administrative Law (AIAL) Forum
15, 24–25. Public
interest disclosures, or ‘whistleblowing’, is discussed further in
Chs 9 and 11.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008), Question
Whistleblowers Australia,
10 March 2009.
Australian Intelligence
6 March 2009.
Whistleblowers
10 March 2009.
Australian Crime Commission Act 2002
Auditor-General Act 1997
Australian Hearing
Services Act 1991
Data-matching Program
(Assistance and Tax) Act 1990
Federal Police Act 1979
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Public Service Act 1999
Reg 2.1 of the
Public Service Regulations 1999
(Cth) was amended in 2006, following the
decision in
Bennett v President, Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
[2003] FCA 1433
(2003) 134 FCR 334.
The issues that arose for consideration in
that case are discussed further in Ch 2. The text of reg 2.1 is set
out in Appendix 5.
Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
Human Rights
and Equal Opportunity Commission Act 1986
Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
A New Tax System
(Family Assistance)(Administration) Act 1999
Security (Administration) Act 1999
Acts Interpretation Act
(Cth) s 22.
Building and Construction Industry Improvement Act 2005
Workplace Relations Act 1996
Health Insurance
Regulations 1975
(Cth) reg 23C(2)(a).
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth) s 22.
Education Support Act 2003
(Cth) s 179-10;
Product Grants and
Benefits Administration Act 2000
(Cth) s 47(2);
Aged Care Act
(Cth) s 86-2(1).
Superannuation Contributions Tax (Assessment and Collection) Act 1997
(Cth) s 32(1), (2);
Superannuation Contributions Tax (Members of
Constitutionally Protected Superannuation Funds) Assessment and Collection Act
(Cth) s 28(1), (2);
Termination Payments (Assessment and
Collection) Act 1997
(Cth) s 23(1), (2);
Superannuation Guarantee
(Administration) Act 1992
(Cth) s 45(1),
Australian Institute of Health
and Welfare Act 1987
Citizenship Act 2007
Migration Act 1958
Relations Act 1996
ss 163C(1)(b)
The Commonwealth Treasury
has conducted a review of the various secrecy and disclosure provisions in
Australian taxation laws and,
in March 2009, released an exposure draft bill for
public comment. The exposure draft bill proposes to consolidate the taxation
and disclosure provisions currently found across 18 different statutes.
See further, The Treasury,
Discussion Paper for the Review of Taxation
Secrecy and Disclosure Provisions
(2006); Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment
(Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
The Treasury,
Paper for the Review of Taxation Secrecy and Disclosure Provisions
Ibid. This justification was
considered in the context of the proposed repeal of
Freedom of Information
in Australian Law Reform Commission and Administrative
Review Council,
Open Government: A Review of the Federal
Information Act
, ALRC 77 (1995). See also
Inspector-General of Taxation Act 2003
Tax System (Bonuses for Older Australians) Act 1999
Support (Assessment) Act 1989
A New Tax System
(Australian Business Number) Act 1999
Education Funding Act 1988
Petroleum Resource Rent
Tax Assessment Act 1987
(Cth) s 17(3);
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
(Cth) s 16(2);
Excise Act 1901
(Cth) s 159(2).
Census and Statistics Act 1905
provides that the Minister may, by legislative instrument, make determinations
providing for and in relation to the disclosure of
information (with the
approval in writing of the Australian
Statistician).
Commonwealth Electoral
Australian Electoral Commission,
How to View the Commonwealth Electoral
<http://www.aec.
gov.au/Enrolling_to_vote/About_Electoral_Roll/> at 6 November
Commonwealth Electoral Act
For further discussion of the privacy framework governing the use of
the electoral roll see Australian Law Reform Commission,
Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
, ALRC 108 (2008),
[16.136]–[16.154].
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
Defence Force
Discipline Act 1982
Auditor-General Act 1997
Patents Act 1990
Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission Act 1986
‘Prohibited
place’ is defined in
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) s 80 and includes
defence property and installations.
Chapter 10 includes further discussion on a requirement of harm in secrecy
Crimes Act 1914
ss 79(2), 79(5).
Ibid s 79(3),
Criminal Code
Revised Explanatory
Memorandum, Criminal Code Amendment (Espionage and Related Matters) Bill 2002
Australian Crime
Commission Act 2002
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act 1986
Australian Crime
Commission Act 2002
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Intelligence Services Act
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act
Protection Act 1994
Anti-Money Laundering
and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979
Surveillance Devices Act
Crimes Act 1914
(in which confidential information is not expressly
defined); cf
Offshore Minerals Act 1994
‘confidential information’ is defined in
Corporations
(Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander) Act 2006
(Cth) ss 604-
Equal Opportunity for Women in the Workplace Act 1999
(Cth) s 32;
Therapeutic Goods Act 1989
Industry Research and
Development Act 1986
Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Code Act 1994
Wheat Export Marketing Act
Auditor-General Act 1997
As defined in
s 193S(1) of the Act.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Act 2005
s 193S(3)(d).
Auditor-General
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act 1986
s 24(1)(c).
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
s 24(1)(d).
Auditor-General Act 1997
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
s 24(1)(a).
Auditor-General Act 1997
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
s 24(1)(b).
Auditor-General Act 1997
Superannuation (Resolution
of Complaints) Act 1993
Sex Discrimination Act
Australian Crime Commission Act 2002
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
s 24(1)(h).
Workplace Relations Act 1996
Ibid sch 1, cl 276;
Corporations (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander) Act 2006
s 203E(10).
Workplace Relations Act 1996
Transport Safety
Investigation Act 2003
Space Activities Act
Civil Aviation Act 1988
For example,
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
applies to the Australian Securities and Investments Commission;
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) s 95ZP applies to the Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission.
J McGinness, ‘Secrecy
Provisions in Commonwealth Legislation’
[1990] FedLawRw 3
Federal Law Review
Inspector-General of Taxation Act 2003
Australian Crime
Commission Act 2002
Ombudsman Act 1976
Criminal Code
For example,
Ombudsman Act
applies to the Commonwealth
For example,
Australian Postal Corporation Act 1989
‘employees of Australia Post’ by virtue of
For example,
Assessment Act 1936
Public Service
Regulations 1999
Public Service Act
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
In Confidence: A Report of the Inquiry into the
Protection of Confidential Personal and Commercial Information Held by the
Commonwealth
Opportunity for Women in the Workplace Act 1999
Administration Act 1985
Confidentiality clauses
are included in contracts with service providers as a matter of course:
Australian Parliament—House
of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal
and Constitutional Affairs,
In Confidence: A Report of the Inquiry into the
Protection of Confidential Personal and Commercial Information Held by the
Commonwealth
(1995), 53.
Taxation Administration Act 1953
(Cth) s 62-1.
Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981
Inspector of Transport Security Act 2006
(Special Undertakings) Act 1952
For example,
Care Act 1997
(Cth) s 86-2.
For example,
Student Assistance
(1) definition of ‘protected
information’.
Archives Act
New Tax System (Family Assistance)(Administration) Act 1999
Student Assistance Act 1973
Child Care Act
Defence Act 1903
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) s 79(6) creates a similar offence in relation to material that is in
contravention of s 79(3) of the
Workplace Relations Act
Environment Protection and
Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
Civil penalty
provisions are discussed in Ch 6.
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 70.
Criminal Code
(Cth) ss 6.1,
Taxation Administration Act
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
Aboriginal Land
Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976
Services Act 1986
There is an
extensive discussion of the meaning of the phrase ‘required or authorised
by or under law’ in the context
Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy
Law and Practice
, ALRC 108 (2008), Ch
Building and
Construction Industry Improvement Act 2005
Mining Industry (Long Service Leave) Payroll Levy Collection Act 1992
Taxation Administration Act 1953
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act 1986
Reserve Bank Act 1959
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
Superannuation
Industry (Supervision) Act 1993
252C(5)(b).
Customs Administration Act
Health Insurance Act 1973
Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998
(Cth) s 56(5A), (5B),
Industry Research and
Development Act 1986
Gene Technology
s 187(1)(d).
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998
(Cth) s 56(5A);
Customs Administration Act 1985
s 16(9)(ea)
Assessment Act 1936
(Cth) s 16(4)(ga). See further Ch 3 on sharing
Commonwealth information.
Medical Indemnity Act 2002
Building and
Construction Industry Improvement Act 2005
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
Pooled Development
Funds Act 1992
Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act
(Cth) s 5(5).
Equal Opportunity for Women in the Workplace Act 1999
Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
, relating to the disclosure of forensic DNA
information.
Crimes Act 1914
Support (Assessment) Act 1989
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
Technology Act 2000
s 187(1)(f)
National Health Act 1953
Reserve Bank Act 1959
That is, information ‘about an individual
whose identity is apparent, or can reasonably be ascertained, from the
information
or opinion’.
Customs Administration Act 1985
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand Act 1991
The privacy
implications of the use of de-identified information is discussed in Australian
Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and
, ALRC 108 (2008),
[6.64]–[6.87].
Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998
Statistics Act 1905
Epidemiological Studies
(Confidentiality) Act 1981
Administration Act 1985
Inspector-General
of Intelligence and Security Act 1986
Child Support
(Assessment) Act 1989
s 150(3)(e).
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand Act 1991
Medical Indemnity Act
Health Insurance Act 1973
National Health Act 1953
Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
s 18(3)(b).
Defence Force
Discipline Act 1982
The other offence
provisions in
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) were repealed by the
Criminal Code Amendment (Theft, Fraud, Bribery and Related Offences) Act 2000
(Cth) and replaced by more modern offence provisions in the
Criminal Code
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 21 October 1914, 264 (W
Hughes—Attorney-General), 265, 269; J McGinness, ‘Secrecy Provisions
in Commonwealth Legislation’
[1990] FedLawRw 3
Federal Law Review
Crimes Act 1960
Crimes Amendment Act 1982
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1987
Statute Law Revision Act 2008
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 5.6(1).
Ibid s 5.6(2).
Recklessness is defined in
Criminal Code
The table is based on the
elements of the offence in s 70(2) of the
as summarised by
Kessing v The Queen
[2008] NSWCCA 310
Johnston v Director of
Public Prosecutions (Cth)
(1989) 90 ACTR
R v Petroulias (No 36)
[2008] NSWSC 626.
[2007] NSWDC 138
Kessing v The Queen
[2008] NSWCCA
R v Goreng Goreng
[2008] ACTSC 74.
Transcript of
Proceedings,
R v Sweeney
, (District Court Queensland, Shanahan J, 28
March 2001).
Information
, Integrity in Government Project: Interim Report 1 (1991),
[2008] ACTSC 74
Johnston v Director of Public Prosecutions
(1989) 90 ACTR 7
L Tsaknis, ‘Commonwealth
Secrecy Provisions: Time for Reform?’
Criminal Law Journal
Director of Public
Prosecutions v G
[1999] FCA 108
(1999) 85 FCR 566
, [78] referring to
Austin v Parsons
(1986) 40 SASR 534
R v Cushion
(1997) 141 FLR
30, 32. See also J McGinness, ‘Secrecy Provisions in Commonwealth
Legislation’
[1990] FedLawRw 3
Federal Law Review
‘Commonwealth Secrecy Provisions: Time for Reform?’
Criminal Law Journal
Commissioner of Taxation v
Swiss Aluminium Australia Ltd
(1986) 10 FCR 321
Deacon v Australian Capital
[2001] ACTSC 8
Commonwealth v
[1980] HCA 44
(1980) 147 CLR 39.
Official Information
, Integrity in Government Project: Interim
Report 1 (1991), 216.
R v Kessing
[2007] NSWDC 138.
Kessing v The
[2008] NSWCCA 310
L Tsaknis, ‘Commonwealth Secrecy Provisions: Time for Reform?’
Criminal Law Journal
Kessing v The Queen
[2008] NSWCCA 310
See comments by Gummow J in
Grollo v Palmer
[1995] HCA 26
(1995) 184 CLR 348
There is some uncertainty
Migration Act 1958
‘Commonwealth officer’ as having the same meaning as in s 70 of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth), but includes a note that ‘a Minister is not
a Commonwealth officer’.
Issues relating to the application of secrecy provisions to judicial officers
are discussed in Chs 2 and 8.
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Intelligence Services
Tsaknis, ‘Commonwealth Secrecy Provisions: Time for Reform?’
Criminal Law Journal
Information
, Integrity in Government Project: Interim Report 1 (1991),
See, eg, comments of Bennett
R v Kessing
[2007] NSWDC 138
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 21 October 1914, 264 (W
Hughes—Attorney-General), 265.
[2003] ACTCA 21
(2003) 152 ACTR 7.
Transcript of Proceedings,
, (Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory, Gray J,
9 May 2003). The factual background to the Lappas and Dowling cases,
outline of the court proceedings, are set out in Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security
Sensitive Information
, ALRC 98 (2004), Appendix
Grant v Headland
17 ACTR 29.
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) s 79(1)(b).
Watson and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Final Report
(1991), 242.
Criminal Code
Amendment (Espionage and Related Offences) Bill 2001 (Cth) cl 82.4.
R Sharman, ‘Espionage and
Related Offences Bill’
(2002) 21(1)
Communications Law Bulletin
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 13 March 2002, 1111 (A-G The Hon Daryl
Williams AM QC MP); Parliament of Australia—Senate Legal
Constitutional Legislation Committee,
Provisions of the Criminal Code
Amendment (Espionage and Related Offences) Bill 2002
Grant v Headland
R v Ponting
[1985] Crim LR 318.
Ibid. The jury
nevertheless found Ponting not
Commonwealth v
[1980] HCA 44
(1980) 147 CLR 39.
Tsaknis, ‘Commonwealth Secrecy Provisions: Time for Reform?’
Criminal Law Journal
6. The Need for a General Secrecy
Introduction
Criminal, civil or administrative penalties
Administrative penalties
Civil penalties
Criminal penalties
The need for a general secrecy offence
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
6. The Need for a General Secrecy
Introduction
6.1 In Chapter 5, the ALRC considers general law obligations—such
as an employee’s duty of loyalty and fidelity and the
equitable duty of
confidence—and the extent to which they protect Commonwealth information
in the hands of Commonwealth officers
and others from unauthorised disclosure.
The ALRC has concluded that these general law obligations do not provide
sufficient protection
in the public sector context, and that it is necessary and
desirable to have in place certain statutory provisions that impose obligations
on Commonwealth officers and others who handle Commonwealth information. This
chapter examines the potential role of administrative,
civil and criminal
statutory provisions in regulating the disclosure of Commonwealth
information.
6.2 In addition, in the Issues Paper,
Review of Secrecy Laws
the ALRC sought
stakeholder views on whether the unauthorised handling of Commonwealth
information should remain subject to a general
criminal offence—such as
the existing ss 70 and 79(3) of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth)—updated and moved to the
Criminal Code
and, if so, how such an
offence should be framed.
is of the view that there is a role for both administrative and criminal
penalties in this area and proposes that ss 70
and 79(3) of the
should be repealed and replaced by a new general secrecy offence in the
Criminal Code
6.3 Chapters 7 to 9 go on to consider some of the essential elements of
the proposed new offence. The key element in the ALRC’s
proposed general
secrecy offence is that the prosecution should be required to prove that a
particular disclosure caused harm, was
reasonably likely to cause harm, or was
intended to cause harm to specified public interests, such as the security or
the Commonwealth. In the absence of any likely, intended or actual
harm to those public interests, the ALRC has formed the preliminary
the unauthorised disclosure of Commonwealth information is more appropriately
dealt with by the imposition of administrative
penalties or the pursuit of
contractual remedies.
Criminal, civil or
administrative penalties
6.4 As discussed in Chapter 5, there are many existing statutory
provisions that impose secrecy obligations and carry a range of administrative,
civil or criminal penalties. However, of the 507 secrecy provisions identified
by the ALRC,
criminal penalties. The majority of the remaining provisions do not expressly
contain criminal penalties, but by
establishing a duty not to disclose
Commonwealth information, they have the potential to attract the penalties
imposed by s 70 of
6.5 A number of secrecy provisions allow the imposition of administrative
sanctions—such as termination of employment, a reduction
in salary or a
reprimand—on public sector employees. For example,
Public Service Act 1999
(Cth) allows an Australian Government agency head
to impose a range of administrative sanctions on Australian Public Service (APS)
employees for breach of the APS Code of Conduct. As discussed in detail in
Chapter 13, the Code of Conduct includes a secrecy provision
that prohibits
the disclosure of information obtained or generated in connection with an APS
employee’s employment ‘if
it is reasonably foreseeable that the
disclosure could be prejudicial to the effective working of
government’.
6.6 Finally, the ALRC has identified three secrecy provisions that impose
civil penalties. Two of these provisions are found in the
Workplace Relations
and one in the
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1998
6.7 In weighing up what penalties might be appropriate, regulatory theory
cautions against the over-use of criminal penalties. Criminal
penalties sit at
the top of the ‘enforcement pyramid’ developed by Ayers and
Braithwaite to describe a model regulatory
‘enforcement pyramid’ model, breaches of increasing seriousness are
dealt with by penalties of increasing severity,
with the ultimate
penalties—such as imprisonment—held in reserve. Braithwaite has
described the operation of the pyramid
in the regulatory environment as
My contention is that compliance is most likely when the regulatory agency
displays an explicit enforcement pyramid … Most
regulatory action occurs
at the base of the pyramid where initially attempts are made to coax compliance
by persuasion. The next
phase of enforcement escalation is a warning letter; if
this fails to secure compliance, civil monetary penalties are imposed; if
fails, criminal prosecution ensues; if this fails, the plant is shut down or a
licence to operate is suspended; if this fails,
the licence to do business is
revoked … The form of the enforcement pyramid is the subject of the
theory, not the content of
the particular
6.8 Although this model was developed in the corporate regulatory
environment, the principles of the enforcement pyramid model are
still broadly
applicable to the issues under consideration in this Inquiry. At the bottom of
the enforcement pyramid lie the techniques
described in Chapter 15, which
are designed to foster a culture in which Commonwealth information is handled
effectively—such
as agency policies and guidelines, staff training and
development, and secrecy oaths and affirmations. Where these techniques fail
prevent unauthorised disclosure, administrative penalties, or general law or
contractual remedies may be available. Where the
disclosure is more
serious—for example, where the disclosure has the potential to cause
serious harm or is intended to cause
harm—criminal penalties may be
6.9 In IP 34, the ALRC asked for stakeholder views on when it is
appropriate to impose administrative penalties for the unauthorised
handling of
Commonwealth information,
when it is appropriate to impose criminal
The ALRC also asked
whether civil penalties should have a greater role to play in protecting
Commonwealth information.
following section, the ALRC considers the role of administrative, civil and
criminal penalty provisions in protecting Commonwealth
information.
Administrative
6.10 Broadly speaking, administrative penalties arise automatically by
operation of legislation, or can be imposed directly by an
regulator—for example, parking fines. This distinguishes them from
criminal and civil penalties, which may only be
In the public sector
context, Commonwealth employees will often be subject to secrecy obligations,
breach of which may result in
the imposition of administrative penalties by an
agency head.
6.11 For example, as considered in detail in Chapter 13, where an APS
employee breaches the Code of Conduct in the
Public Service Act
agency head may impose one of the following penalties: termination of
employment; reduction in classification; re-assignment
of duties; reduction in
salary; deductions from salary (which are not to exceed 2% of the APS
employee’s annual salary);
or a reprimand.
While some of
these penalties, such as termination of employment, are quite severe, they are
considered disciplinary rather than
criminal in nature.
6.12 Further, an APS employee who commits a secrecy offence will also
automatically be in breach of the APS Code of Conduct, which
requires APS
employees to comply with all applicable Australian laws. In these circumstances,
APS employees will be liable to both
criminal and administrative penalties for
the same conduct.
6.13 Administrative penalties
Public Service Act
, and other similar
legislation,
apply to current
Commonwealth employees. They do not apply to former employees or persons in the
private sector who may have access
to Commonwealth information. For example, a
person who retires from the APS, or resigns when an investigation into a
suspected breach
of the Code of Conduct commences, is no longer subject to
administrative penalties under the
Public Service Act
. Former employees,
however, remain liable to criminal penalties under the
potentially, a range of other provisions.
6.14 In Chapters 13 and 14, the ALRC
considers in detail the role of secrecy provisions that impose administrative
penalties on public
sector employees. The secrecy requirements set out in the
APS Code of Conduct, and in other similar instruments, are a ‘public
statement of the standards of behaviour expected of those who work in public
employment’.
6.15 In the ALRC’s view such provisions have an important role to play,
particularly where a disclosure is inadvertent, there
is no intention to cause
harm, or where any potential harm caused by the disclosure is likely to be
minor. Administrative penalties
provide a range of responses to different levels
of misconduct. They allow misconduct of a lower order to be addressed in the
context, without imposing the very serious consequences of a criminal
charge and conviction, consistent with the enforcement pyramid
6.16 In Chapters 13 to 15, the ALRC considers how administrative secrecy
provisions, and the methods for enforcing those provisions,
could be improved.
The ALRC’s view is, however, that such provisions are, and should remain,
an important and effective element
in the protection of Commonwealth
information. In Chapter 14, the ALRC makes a number of proposals to ensure that
individuals who
fall outside the various administrative regimes but have, or
have had, access to Commonwealth information are constrained by contractual
obligations, or are made aware of their obligations of confidentiality under the
general law.
6.17 As noted above, the ALRC has identified three secrecy provisions that
impose civil penalties:
s 276 of sch 1 of the
Workplace Relations Act
provides that a member of a registered organisation of employers or employees,
who has obtained an order from the Australian Industrial
Relations Commission
(AIRC) to allow the member to inspect the financial records of the organisation,
must not disclose information
acquired from that inspection except to certain
specified persons;
Workplace Relations Act
provides that a
person who conducts a dispute resolution process under the Act—where the
process is not conducted by the AIRC—must
not disclose information
obtained in the course of the process except in specified
circumstances;
s 170B of the
Environment Protection and Biodiversity
Conservation Act
the Minister to issue a direction to any person prohibiting the disclosure of
‘specified information’ in documents
or materials required or
permitted to be published as part of an environmental impact assessment process.
Specified information is
that which the Minister considers to be critical to the
protection of a matter of national environmental
significance.
6.18 Traditionally,
the civil law has been used as a vehicle for private redress, allowing persons
to seek compensation in private
actions for harm done to them. Modern regulatory
law, however, has created many civil penalty provisions. Contraventions of these
provisions are pursued by the state, but are not criminal offences and do not
attract criminal processes or
6.19 Most civil penalties are monetary. The maximum financial penalty under a
civil penalty provision can be higher than the maximum
fine for a parallel
criminal offence. This is justified on the basis that the adverse effects of a
criminal conviction should be
taken into account when considering the relative
severity of criminal and civil financial
Civil penalty
provisions may also provide for the imposition of compensation
or community service
They may also allow the
court to issue an injunction, which is not in itself a penalty, but may act to
prevent or limit any potential
harm caused by the contravention.
6.20 The procedures and rules of evidence in civil cases apply to the
enforcement of civil penalty provisions. In criminal proceedings
the prosecution
must prove its case beyond reasonable
The standard of proof in
civil proceedings is on the balance of
probabilities.
6.21 The Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department (AGD)
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement
states that:
It is particularly important that civil penalties be used in appropriate and
justifiable contexts. They are otherwise open to criticism
for being too soft
(in not carrying a criminal penalty) or for being too harsh (in not carrying the
safeguards of criminal procedure
such as a requirement for proof beyond
reasonable doubt).
6.22 Taking into account recommendations made by the ALRC in its report on
civil and administrative
Framing Commonwealth Offences
nominates the following criteria as relevant
to whether a civil penalty provision is likely to be appropriate and
where criminal punishment is not warranted—contraventions of
the law involving serious moral culpability should only be pursued
by criminal
prosecution;
where the maximum civil penalty is sufficient to justify the expense
and time of court proceedings—the maximum penalty should
be at least
$5,000 and typically more; and
where the conduct involves corporate wrongdoing—given that
imprisonment is not available as a penalty, the financial disincentives
civil penalties offer may be
penalties are used extensively, for example, in relation to contraventions of pt
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth), dealing with restrictive trade
practices; and in relation to contraventions of a significant number of
provisions in the
Corporations Act 2001
Another example, of
more direct relevance to this Inquiry, is
Commonwealth
Authorities and Companies Act 1997
—which imposes civil penalties on
officers and employees of Commonwealth authorities for improperly using
information: to gain
an advantage for themselves or another person; or to cause
detriment to a Commonwealth authority or to another person.
6.24 Professor Arie Freiberg suggests that civil penalty provisions may be
effective where there is an ongoing regulatory relationship:
The greater flexibility and range of civil sanctions makes them the preferred
mode of social control where persuasion, negotiation
and voluntary compliance
are viewed as the techniques most likely to achieve the desired results. Whilst
the criminal sanction is
said to be suitable for the control of isolated or
instantaneous conduct, the civil sanction is said to be better in cases where
continuous surveillance is
Submissions and consultations
6.25 Although the response in submissions to the use of civil penalty
provisions was mixed, the weight of opinion was in favour of
criminal, rather
than civil, penalties. In its submission, the AGD noted that civil penalties may
be used when criminal punishment
is not merited, but expressed the view that,
given the nature of the information protected by secrecy provisions, criminal
would generally be
appropriate.
The Australian
Taxation Office (ATO) also expressed the view that, in the taxation arena, the
unauthorised handling of taxpayer information
should be subject to criminal
Nevertheless, the ATO recognises that there may be varying degrees of
culpability associated with the unauthorised handling of tax
information, that
criminal prosecution is a very serious consequence, and that the criminal
standard of proof can be onerous to satisfy.
In addition to criminal sanctions,
there may be some merit in having civil options available for breach of a tax
secrecy provision,
as well as Code of Conduct action under the
Public Service
6.26 The Public Interest Advocacy Centre (PIAC) submitted that disclosures
that do not involve intent to damage a significant public
interest—such as
defence or national security—and that do not involve an element of fraud,
dishonesty, or personal gain
should be dealt with under civil penalty
provisions.
6.27 On the other hand, the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA)
expressed the view that when there is already a criminal
regime in place, civil
penalties add little—and that the deterrence value of criminal penalties
was important.
Liberty Victoria
agreed, stating that:
A civil penalty for the deliberate mishandling of non [National Security
Information] for significant gain may be an insufficient
deterrent. This is
particularly so where the maximum civil penalty is outweighed by a substantial
commercial benefit.
6.28 James Renwick drew attention to the utility of civil remedies in dealing
with disclosure of Commonwealth information, and suggested
that such matters
would be more effectively dealt with in civil, rather than criminal, courts:
Although criminal prosecution must remain an option to deter theft or leaking of
that information, it is often a blunt instrument,
which takes too much time. In
contrast the civil litigation system properly used permits the swift
quarantining of information and
delivery up of any stolen material. A criminal
law sanction will not normally be interpreted as permitting a court exercising
essential that there be an effective statutory regime for
protecting stolen or
leaked information in the civil courts. The Federal Court of Australia would be
the appropriate forum for such
litigation.
6.29 The AGD expressed
support for including a power to issue injunctions in secrecy provisions but
noted that an injunction would
be of limited assistance in relation to the
disclosure of Commonwealth information because it is rare to have forewarning of
an unauthorised
disclosure. In addition, the AGD stated that compensation orders
may be problematic because such orders usually require the quantification
loss or damage caused. This is often difficult in relation to the unauthorised
disclosure of Commonwealth information, ‘for
example, it would be
difficult to assess and quantify the damage to the integrity of the Cabinet
process caused by disclosure of
6.30 Although civil penalty provisions exist among the hundreds of secrecy
provisions identified by the
such provisions are quite
uncommon and, therefore, appear somewhat anomalous.
6.31 The conduct of public sector employees who handle Commonwealth
information is largely regulated by administrative secrecy provisions,
conjunction with the criminal law. Administrative penalties are available
because of the employment relationship between Australian
Government agencies
and their employees. This relationship does not exist between regulatory
authorities and regulated entities in
the private sector, which is the area in
which civil penalties have come to play an important role.
6.32 The ALRC has considered the existing civil penalty provisions and
whether an alternative approach might have been adopted. There
is an argument,
for example, that where a person discloses information that is critical to the
protection of a matter of national
environmental significance—contrary to
an express direction of the Minister under s 170B of the
Environment
Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act
—that criminal penalties
should apply. The intentional disclosure of information that has been expressly
identified as potentially
damaging to an important public interest, may well
justify criminal penalties.
6.33 The civil penalty provisions in the
Workplace Relations Act
discussed above, are directed at members of employer and employee
associations,
and persons
providing dispute resolution services as an alternative to the services provided
by the AIRC,
respectively.
6.34 In relation to persons providing alternative dispute resolution
services, it may have been possible to impose contractual secrecy
obligations,
or criminal penalties. Where the AIRC conducts the dispute resolution itself,
s 712 of the Act creates a duty not to
disclose information given to the
AIRC in the course of the dispute resolution process. This duty would attract
the criminal penalties
imposed by s 70 of the
sense there is a lack of consistency between the penalties imposed on the AIRC
and its staff and the penalties imposed on
external providers of dispute
resolution services.
6.35 In relation to members of employer and employee organisations, there is
no possibility of contractual secrecy obligations. It
would have been possible
to impose criminal sanctions for unauthorised disclosure, but a choice was made
to create a civil penalty
provision, perhaps because of the regulatory nature of
the relationship between the AIRC and the relevant organisations. In granting
order to allow a member to inspect the financial records of their organisation,
the AIRC may make ancillary orders, including
an order limiting the use that the
person may make of information obtained during the inspection. Breach of such an
order also attracts
civil penalties.
6.36 In this Discussion Paper, the ALRC is not making any proposals that
would give civil penalties a greater role in relation to
the protection of
Commonwealth information. However, in Chapter 14, the ALRC asks whether
there is a gap that needs to be addressed
in terms of protecting Commonwealth
information where that information is in the hands of persons who are not public
sector employees
or Commonwealth contractors. It is possible that civil
penalties would have a role in this context.
6.37 In addition, in Chapter 9, the ALRC proposes that the courts be
given an express power to issue injunctions to restrain a breach
of the proposed
general secrecy offence or the on-disclosure of information in breach of the
proposed subsequent disclosure offence.
This proposal recognises that preventing
the disclosure of sensitive Commonwealth information is preferable to imposing
once disclosure has occurred.
6.38 In the report,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal
, the ALRC identified the purposes for imposing criminal penalties
as being to:
ensure that the
offender is justly punished for the misconduct;
deter the offender and others from committing the same or similar
misconduct;
promote the rehabilitation of the offender;
protect the community by limiting the capacity of the offender to
denounce the conduct of the offender; and
promote the restoration of relations between the community, the
offender and the
role of the deterrent effect of criminal penalties has been discussed in a
number of other reviews of secrecy laws including,
for example, the Treasury
Discussion Paper for the Review of Taxation Secrecy and Disclosure
In 1995, the
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs
stated that:
If a penalty is adequate, then it may act as a deterrent to the commission of a
crime. Indeed it has been suggested that the worth
of the secrecy provisions in
is measured by governments not in the number of
prosecutions, which are few, but in their deterrence value. However, while
prosecutions
are few, this may not indicate the
adequacy of the penalty in deterring potential offenders, but rather may be
illustrative of the
small number of people actually apprehended for those
particular offences.
6.40 A number of submissions to this Inquiry also emphasised the importance
of the deterrent value of criminal
In considering
whether a criminal penalty is appropriate in relation to particular conduct,
regard must be had to a number of factors,
including: the effect of a criminal
conviction; the need for clarity and certainty in describing conduct to which
criminal penalties
apply; and the public interest in limiting the application of
the criminal law to conduct that is deserving of such treatment. Each
will be considered in turn.
Effect of conviction
6.41 The AGD
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
states that
‘perhaps the most important factor to be considered in determining whether
a provision should be criminal or civil
is the effect of a criminal
conviction’.
6.42 A conviction is a judicial act that alters an offender’s legal
A criminal conviction
carries a social stigma. This can result in an offender being discriminated
against on the basis of his or
her criminal record, long after a sentence has
been completed.
A conviction has
many consequences beyond the immediate penalty imposed. A person who is
convicted of certain offences may be:
ineligible to hold public
ineligible to manage a
corporation,
or be a director or
principal executive officer of a
required to disclose the fact of his or her criminal conviction in a
number of circumstances, for example, in obtaining a driver’s
in seeking employment in certain
deported, if he or she is a
non-citizen.
convicted offender may lose or be unable to continue in, or obtain, suitable
employment—for example, he or she may face
deregistration from a
professional body. For a public sector officer or employee, a conviction for an
offence involving the unauthorised
disclosure of Commonwealth information is
likely to result in adverse career prospects or loss of employment, as well as
significant
reputational damage.
6.44 A federal offender may also be subject to orders for the confiscation of
property in relation to the offence. If a person unlawfully
sold Commonwealth
information, for example, the proceeds of that sale would be subject to the
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
(Cth), which establishes a scheme to trace,
restrain and confiscate the proceeds of crime committed against federal law.
Need for clarity and certainty
6.45 Given the serious consequences of a criminal conviction, it is important
that the parameters of conduct that will attract criminal
penalties are certain.
As a general principle, a person should not be subject to criminal penalties
where the scope of the offence
is ambiguous.
6.46 Chapter 5 discusses the parameters of the offence created by
s 70 of the
. Under that provision, a current or former
Commonwealth officer who discloses information acquired by virtue of his or her
as a Commonwealth officer, being information which it is his or her
duty not to disclose, is guilty of an offence punishable by two
imprisonment. The duty not to disclose information is not found in s 70
itself, but may be found most commonly in other specific
legislative provisions
giving rise to a duty not to disclose official information. Other possible
sources of the duty include an
employee’s common law duty to serve his or
her employer with loyalty and fidelity; the equitable duty of confidence of
to protect the confidential information of their employer; and the
terms and conditions of a contract of
employment.
6.47 In his report on
Integrity In Government, Official Information
Paul Finn expressed the view that Commonwealth criminal legislation
simply attaches criminal sanctions to the breach of whatever secrecy obligation
happens to bind a given public official. This, of
itself, gives reason for
pause. But what makes it particularly obnoxious is that … the secrecy
obligations imposed by public
service legislation are so all encompassing and
unreasonable in their information coverage that strict compliance with them is
practically
impossible. In their current form those obligations have no place in
a modern democratic State. There is an urgent need for their
recasting. There is
a like need to reconsider what their appropriate relationship should be to the
criminal law even after that
6.48 John McGinness has noted that many secrecy provisions expose public
sector officers and employees to criminal sanctions for disclosing
information,
no matter how innocuous, or for disclosing information that already may be in
the public domain.
The fact that a prosecution is unlikely to be initiated for disclosure of
non-sensitive information is no answer. A person’s
potential liability to
prosecution should be precisely stated in legislation, not left as a matter of
discretion to prosecuting authorities.
Uncertainty in operation, as the Franks
Committee observed, is one of the major faults of official secrets legislation:
are not sure what it means or how it operates in practice or what
kinds of action involve a real risk of
prosecution’.
Which factors should determine whether
criminal penalties apply?
6.49 A number of commentators and reports have considered the circumstances
in which it is appropriate for criminal penalties to apply
in relation to the
disclosure of Commonwealth information. The views expressed focus on varying
factors, including: the nature of
the information; the intent of the individual
disclosing the information; and the effect on the public interest if the
information
were to be disclosed.
6.50 McGinness has questioned the need for criminal penalties to protect much
of the information currently covered by secrecy provisions.
He has suggested
that a large number of secrecy provisions could be repealed, and reliance placed
on other means of protecting Commonwealth
information
such as … the loyalty of officials, formal and informal sanctions within a
career service and between ministerial colleagues,
formal public service
disciplinary procedures, security checks and training of staff, security
classification and privacy markings
on documents, other physical security
measures, Cabinet procedures, the law on official corruption, common law and
statutory protection
of rights with respect to information (breach of
confidence, contract, defamation, copyright,
Review of the Commonwealth Criminal Law
, chaired by Sir Harry
Gibbs (the Gibbs Committee), recommended in 1991 that the criminal law should
only apply to the unauthorised
disclosure of a discrete number of categories of
information, ‘no more widely stated than is required for the effective
functioning
Government’.
6.52 In 1995, the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs noted that:
It was generally agreed that the unauthorised disclosure and procurement of
confidential third party information is an appropriate
matter for the criminal
law in some circumstances. Criminal sanctions were considered particularly
appropriate where information
is deliberately released for profit, or with
malicious intent, or possibly where the disclosure is made recklessly.
However, the criminal law should not operate more widely than is needed and it
should not be invoked unless there is a specific reason
for giving certain
information special protection. The reason for restricting the application of
the criminal law is that the imposition
of criminal sanctions can have serious
repercussions and may involve deprivation of an individual’s liberty.
Consequently,
penal sanctions should be reserved for serious offences where the
public interest is best served by imposing those sanctions on the
Submissions and consultations
6.53 Most stakeholders noted the important role that criminal penalties play
in protecting Commonwealth information both as a deterrent,
and as an assurance
to the Australian community that information provided to the Australian
Government is adequately protected. The
AGD submitted that, while administrative
penalties may be appropriate in dealing with less serious cases, criminal
penalties are
necessary where a Commonwealth officer is in serious breach of the
public trust and confidence placed in him or her by the community:
A criminal offence is the ultimate sanction for breaching the law. Criminal
offences should be used where the relevant conduct involves
considerable harm to
society, the environment or Australia’s national interests, including
security interests.
6.54 The Australian Intelligence Community noted that, particularly in the
intelligence context, the unauthorised disclosure of Commonwealth
information
can have very serious consequences and should remain subject to criminal
6.55 APRA noted that the deterrent value of criminal penalties is important
where there is much to gain by disclosing commercial
information.
The Australian
Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity also commented on the importance of the
deterrence value of criminal
The Australian
Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) submitted that the critical factor
in determining when criminal penalties
should apply is the intention of the
accused: ‘There is a stronger argument for criminal culpability if the
offender deliberately
discloses information for profit or with malicious
ASIC also noted
Caution should be exercised in attempting to create a strict divide between
conduct that attracts only administrative penalties and
conduct that gives rise
to other penalties. Doing so would render the secrecy provisions inflexible so
that they may not provide
a remedy that is most appropriate for the particular
circumstances of each breach.
6.56 The Department of Human Services (DHS) noted that portfolio agencies
collect and generate a wide range of sensitive information
including: income and employment information (Centrelink); family relationship
and responsibility information (Child
Support Agency); details of healthcare,
medication and hospital treatment received (Medicare Australia); and information
or injuries (CRS Australia, Australian Hearing, Centrelink);
as well as competitive commercial information about businesses (such
viability of a business, client lists and business plans). In such
circumstances, the DHS noted that:
The ability to point to an offence provision protecting that information gives
assurance to customers, as well as enhancing the agencies’
credibility as
to the seriousness with which they protect customer
information.
6.57 The Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations
recognised that significant harm can be caused to individuals
Commonwealth by the unauthorised disclosure of Commonwealth information and
submitted that:
there is a recognised need for there to be consequences flowing from such
inappropriate action. The
by itself, however, only
partly serves as a useful deterrent, given that it regulates the actions of an
agency rather than the offending
individual. In this sense, having a criminal
offence provision which attaches to the unauthorised handling of information has
in being a useful
6.58 Other stakeholders noted that criminal penalties should only be used
when strictly required for the effective functioning of
government.
Liberty Victoria
cautioned that:
care must be taken when framing criminal offences to ensure that the provisions
only penalise intentional (or reckless) behaviour
in specific situations. While
criminal sanctions may be appropriate in punishing misuse of the most secret
information, administrative
penalties should be considered more appropriate in
the handling of less secret information, where there exists no intention or
fault element.
6.59 PIAC expressed the view that, subject to the availability of injunctions
to restrain disclosure, the law of breach of confidence
was sufficient to
protect all but the most sensitive Commonwealth information:
Given the legitimate interest of electors in the activities of government and
its emanations, it is hard to see why disclosure by
a Commonwealth public
servant of Commonwealth information having no inherent quality of confidence
should be a criminal offence.
Unauthorised disclosure of highly confidential non-government information by
private individuals gives rise (absent an element of
personal dishonesty, as in
fraud, insider trading and the like) to civil liability only. Disclosure by a
government employee of innocuous
government information can currently give rise
to criminal liability. PIAC believes that the current review provides a valuable
opportunity
to remedy this
6.60 Ron Fraser submitted that:
I doubt very much whether it is necessary in day-to-day situations for officers
to be subject to criminal penalties in order for
them to perform their duties
with a strong ethic of confidentiality. While some penalties are needed in
addition to systemic reinforcement,
they don’t need to be criminal in
nature except in the most serious
ALRC’s views
6.61 The ALRC agrees that, consistent with the ‘enforcement
pyramid’ model, criminal penalties for disclosure of Commonwealth
information ‘should be reserved for serious offences where the public
interest is best served by imposing those sanctions on
It seems clear,
however, that there is a role for the criminal law in certain circumstances.
Commonwealth information includes a
range of highly sensitive information such
as national security information, information relating to defence, valuable
information and sensitive personal information. Unauthorised
disclosure of this kind of information has the capacity to cause real
important public interests, and to the effective functioning of government.
6.62 The role of the criminal law in publicly punishing, deterring, and
denouncing offending behaviour is appropriate when applied
to behaviour that
harms, is reasonably likely to harm or intended to harm important public
interests. Given the adverse consequences
of a criminal conviction, however, it
is the ALRC’s view that it is inappropriate to apply such penalties to
disclosures that
were not intended and are unlikely to cause such harm.
6.63 As noted by McGinness, above, there is a variety of other mechanisms in
place to protect Commonwealth information, including
administrative sanctions,
contractual obligations and the general law. In these circumstances, the breadth
of some existing provisions,
such as ss 70 and 79(3) of the
, does not appear to be justified. These provisions create criminal
offences for the disclosure of Commonwealth information without
any express or
implied requirement that the disclosure was harmful or was intended to be
harmful in any way. In the ALRC’s
view, this kind of blanket provision
potentially imposes criminal liability in circumstances that do not merit such a
response. This
is inconsistent with the ‘enforcement pyramid’
6.64 The ALRC proposes a new general secrecy offence that is more limited
than the current
provisions and requires that the unauthorised
disclosure involve some harm, a reasonable likelihood of harm, or an intention
specified public
This proposed new
offence, discussed in detail below and in the following chapters, is intended to
ensure that criminal liability
is only imposed where there is a level of
culpability that would justify the imposition of criminal penalties and all the
consequences
that a criminal conviction entails.
6.65 The ALRC is not suggesting, however, that this general secrecy offence
replace all existing secrecy offences. Chapters 10 to
12 consider the
circumstances in which more specific secrecy provisions imposing criminal
sanctions remain justified. In Chapter
10, the ALRC proposes that any
specific secrecy offence should generally require that the unauthorised
disclosure involve a reasonable
likelihood of harm to specified public
The ALRC also
examines the possibility that, in relation to some information—such as
national security classified information—the
way in which specific secrecy
offences are framed, and the context in which they operate, provide a sufficient
likelihood that harm
will be caused by an unauthorised disclosure and that,
therefore, an express requirement of harm is
unnecessary.
The need for a
general secrecy offence
6.66 There are two general criminal offence provisions in the
that deal with the unauthorised disclosure of Commonwealth information.
Section 70 deals with the disclosure of information by Commonwealth
officers in
breach of a duty not to disclose, while s 79 deals with the disclosure of
‘prescribed information’ by any
person with a duty to keep it
6.67 Although s 79 is generally concerned with espionage activity,
s 79(3) is drawn very widely and prohibits the unauthorised communication
of ‘prescribed information’—which is defined, in part, as
information made or obtained by a person owing to his
or her position as a
current or former Commonwealth officer, office holder or government contractor
that, by reason of its nature
or the circumstances under which the information
was made or obtained, or for any other reason, it is his or her duty to treat as
6.68 As noted by the Gibbs Committee, the combined effect of these provisions
is that ‘the unauthorised disclosure of most information
held by the
Commonwealth Government and its agencies is subject to the sanctions of the
criminal law’.
6.69 In relation to general
offences, the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
states that:
Broadly framed provisions of general application were placed in the
to avoid the technical distinctions, loopholes, additional prosecution
difficulty and appearance of incoherence associated with having
slightly different provisions to similar effect across Commonwealth law. There
are also some provisions concerning offences
intended that these will be transferred to the
Criminal Code
Where a relevant
Criminal Code
provision applies,
separate provision should not be made in another
6.70 Chapters 10 to 12 consider the plethora of specific secrecy
offences in Commonwealth legislation and make a number of proposals
intended to
ensure greater coherence and consistency across such provisions, where they are
retained. This is particularly important
because, in some circumstances, the
unauthorised disclosure of Commonwealth information may amount to an offence
under a general
secrecy provision in the
as well as an offence
under a more specific secrecy provision in another piece of Commonwealth
legislation. In these situations, an
alleged offender can be prosecuted under
either law.
6.71 When determining the charges to be laid or proceeded with, the
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecution’s
Prosecution Policy of the
Commonwealth
states that the provisions of a specific Act should be relied
upon rather than the general provisions of the
, unless to do
so ‘would not adequately reflect the nature of the criminal conduct
disclosed by the
The proposals
in Chapter 12 aim to ensure that specific secrecy provisions are only
enacted or retained where the context or circumstances
require that elements of
the offence—for example, the parties covered—are significantly
different from those in the general
6.72 As discussed in Chapter 5, there have been a small number of
prosecutions for breach of ss 70 and 79(3). In 1990, McGinness noted
prosecutions under these provisions have been rare and ‘have not had the
political overtones that prosecutions in other
countries have
He suggested that
because the provisions have not been subject to the same level of controversy as
equivalent provisions in other
countries, this might explain, in part, why the
provisions have not been substantially amended since the 1960s. McGinness
the view that these general secrecy provisions need to be replaced by
specific provisions that ‘introduce certainty and consistency
regulation of unauthorised public
disclosure’.
6.73 The Gibbs Committee recommended that the ‘catch-all’
provisions of ss 70 and 79(3) of the
be repealed and
replaced with provisions that impose criminal sanctions for the disclosure of
certain types of information. As noted
in Chapter 2, the Gibbs Committee
recommended that these types of information include:
information relating to intelligence and security services, defence
and foreign relations;
information obtained in confidence from, or entrusted in confidence
to, other governments or international organisations;
information the disclosure of which would be likely to result in the
commission of an offence; facilitate an escape from legal custody
or the doing
of an act prejudicial to the safekeeping of persons in legal custody; or impede
the prevention or detection of offences
or the apprehension or prosecution of
Gibbs Committee concluded that it was also necessary to prove that the
disclosure caused damage in certain circumstances.
The Gibbs Committee’s
recommendations are discussed further in Chapter 7.
6.75 In IP 34, the ALRC asked whether the handling of Commonwealth
information should remain subject to a general secrecy offence
and, if so,
whether an updated offence should be included in the
The Australian
Government intends the
Criminal Code
to be the principal piece of federal
legislation containing serious criminal offences and that substantive criminal
provisions in
other, older pieces of law, such as the
progressively reviewed, and either ‘modernised’ and
‘migrated’ to the
Criminal Code
, or repealed. Ultimately, the
intention is that the
will deal only with police powers (such
as arrest, detention, and search and seizure) and criminal
Submissions and consultations
6.76 Most submissions expressed support for retaining a general secrecy
offence. The AGD submitted that:
it would seem desirable to retain a general offence of non-disclosure. There is
a strong argument for consideration to be given to
updating the offence
currently in section 70 of the
Crimes Act 1914
, given that it has existed
in its current form since 1960, which pre-dates the introduction of the FOI Act
and other new administrative
law mechanisms. …
Updating the section 70 general offence to clarify and better target its scope
of operation could result in greater reliance on the
general offence, and
consequently, fewer secrecy provisions being inserted in various Commonwealth
Acts. It would be consistent with
current policy to place any general offence in
Criminal Code
rather than in the
6.77 The ATO, the Australian Federal Police and other stakeholders also
expressed support for a general criminal offence in order
to cover information
not covered by specific secrecy
provisions.
APRA noted that it
was important to have both a specific secrecy provision, such as s 56 of
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998
(Cth)—covering information and documents relating to regulated
entities—as well as a general offence, such as s 70 of
, to cover unauthorised disclosure of information that is not protected
, for example, information about confidential new policy
6.78 The DHS suggested that a general secrecy offence would also address
other gaps in the regulatory regime:
Other legislative regimes for dealing with sensitive information contain gaps in
coverage. For example, the
does not cover information about
deceased individuals or about entities which are not individuals (corporations,
states, trusts etc);
Public Service Act
does not regulate former
employees or [contracted service providers] and their staff; the equitable
doctrine on the obligation not
to breach confidence is quite technical and often
difficult to make out; confidentiality deeds usually do not address all aspects
of dealing with protected information such as collection and solicitation or
subsequent dealings where information was obtained through
an unauthorised
disclosure. Coverage of these areas is considered important for the overall
management of sensitive information in
the Commonwealth’s possession, and
secrecy laws play an important
6.79 In addition, ASIC noted that a general criminal offence helps to ensure
‘parity of treatment of those disclosures that
are regarded as properly
attracting criminal
penalties’.
6.80 In contrast, and as noted above, PIAC submitted that s 70 of the
should be repealed and not replaced and greater reliance
placed on the equitable duty of
confidence.
The NSW Young
Lawyers also suggested that repealing s 70 and placing reliance on
portfolio specific legislation was an option that
considered.
ALRC’s views
6.81 The ALRC considers that there is a need for a general secrecy offence,
to be included in the
Criminal Code
, for a number of reasons. A new
general secrecy offence would set a benchmark for the imposition of criminal
penalties for the unauthorised
disclosure of Commonwealth information. Any
specific provision that differed in significant respects from the general
provision—for
example, in the penalty imposed—would require
justification. In addition, a well drafted, clear and principled general secrecy
offence should reduce the need for the existing plethora of specific offences.
This would be consistent with the AGD
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
and with the ALRC’s proposals in Chapters 10 to 12.
6.82 The general offence would cover a number of gaps left by the
administrative secrecy provisions, including former Commonwealth
officers, and
by more specific secrecy provisions that focus, for example, on a particular
function of an agency or on particular
information held by an agency.
6.83 In Chapters 7, 8 and 9, the ALRC considers the elements of the
proposed offence in detail, including whose conduct should be
regulated and the
relevant physical and fault elements to be included. The ALRC concludes that the
proposed general secrecy offence
should regulate disclosure of Commonwealth
information by ‘Commonwealth officers’, defined to include all those
in the executive branch of government, as well as those who provide
services under contract to or on behalf of the Australian Government.
6.84 The most significant change proposed is that under the new offence
provision, the prosecution should be required to prove that
a particular
disclosure caused harm, was reasonably likely to cause harm, or was intended to
cause harm to a specified public interest.
This approach is intended to balance
the need to protect certain Commonwealth information with the public interest in
an open and
accountable system of government. In finding this balance, the ALRC
was drawn to the idea that the general secrecy offence should
complement the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth) (the FOI Act).
6.85 The objects of the FOI Act expressly include extending ‘as far as
possible the right of the Australian community to access
to information in the
possession of the Government of the Commonwealth’. This right is limited
by certain exceptions and exemptions
considered ‘necessary for the
protection of essential public interests and the private and business affairs of
Chapter 7, the ALRC considers each of the FOI exemptions in detail, and
suggests that a subset of the public interests protected
by the FOI exemptions
should form the basis of the general secrecy offence. The ALRC has identified
those public interests—such
as the protection of national security,
defence and international relations; and the enforcement of the criminal
the potential for harm is of such a serious nature as to warrant
the imposition of criminal sanctions.
6.86 As noted above, in proposing a general secrecy offence, the ALRC is not
suggesting that this should be the only criminal offence
provision regulating
the disclosure of Commonwealth information. The general secrecy offence is
intended to serve as an umbrella
offence applying to all current and former
Commonwealth officers. In Chapters 10 to 12, the ALRC considers
the circumstances in which
more specific secrecy offences are still warranted,
for example, where the circumstances dictate the need for a different level of
regulation.
Proposal 6–1
Sections 70 and 79(3) of the
(Cth) should be repealed and replaced by a new offence in the
Criminal Code
(Cth), which regulates the disclosure of Commonwealth
information by Commonwealth officers (the ‘general secrecy
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34
Question 2–1.
Question 2–2.
Administrative
penalties and contractual remedies are considered in detail in Chs 12 and
Appendix 4.
Section 70 of the
and the need to establish an external ‘duty not to
disclose’ are described in Ch 5 and considered further in
Public Service Regulations
(Cth) reg 2.1, read with
Public Service Act 1999
Other provisions imposing administrative sanctions include the
Cadet Force Regulations 1977
(Cth) sch 4 cl 5 read with
ss 16 and 17; and the
Parliamentary Service Act
Workplace Relations Act
Environment Protection and
Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
The model was first put
forward by Braithwaite in J Braithwaite,
To Punish or Persuade: Enforcement
of Coal Mine Safety
(1985). See also I Ayers and J Braithwaite,
Responsive Regulation: Transcending the Deregulation Debate
Quoted in F Haines,
Corporate Regulations: Beyond ‘Punish or Persuade’
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 5–13.
Question 5–1.
Question 5–17.
Constitution
, and the doctrine of the separation of powers,
only judicial officers may exercise the judicial power of the Commonwealth,
the imposition of fines:
R v White; Ex Parte Byrnes
[1963] HCA 58
, 669–670, or other punishment for an offence:
Commissioner of Taxation v Munro
[1926] HCA 58
(1926) 38 CLR 153
Public Service Act 1999
Public Service Regulations 1999
Public Service Act
Parliamentary Service Act
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Federal Police Act 1979
Cadet Force Regulations 1977
P Shergold, ‘A New
Service Act
: The End of the Westminster Tradition?’ (1997) 85
Bulletin of Public Administration
The maximum pecuniary
penalty for breach of this provision is, in the case of a body corporate, 100
penalty units (currently $11,000)
and in any other case, 20 penalty units
(currently $2,200):
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(Cth) sch 1
that the maximum pecuniary penalty for breach of this provision is, in the case
of a body corporate, 300 penalty units (currently
$33,000) and in any other
case, 60 penalty units (currently
The maximum pecuniary penalty
for breach of this provision is 100 penalty units (currently
See Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences,
Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007),
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil & Administrative
Penalties in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002), Rec 26–3; Australian
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007),
Corporations Act 2001
Trade Practices Act 1974
Trade Practices Act
(Cth) s 86C.
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences,
Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007),
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil & Administrative Penalties in
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences,
Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007),
Corporations Act
Freiberg, ‘Civilizing Crime’: Reactions to Illegality in the Modern
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
18 February 2009.
11 December 2008.
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Appendix 4.
Workplace Relations
(Cth) sch 1
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
103 (2006). The ALRC recommended that federal sentencing legislation should
provide that a court can only impose a sentence
on a federal offender for one or
more of the abovementioned purposes:
The Treasury,
Discussion Paper for the Review of Taxation Secrecy and Disclosure
(2006), 15.
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
In Confidence: A Report of the Inquiry into the
Protection of Confidential Personal and Commercial Information Held by the
Commonwealth
Liberty Victoria,
18 February 2009; Australian
Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity,
18 February 2009; Australian Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009; J Renwick,
11 December 2008.
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007),
R Fox and A Freiberg,
‘Sentences Without Conviction: From Status to Contract in
Sentencing’
Criminal Law Journal
For example, Human Rights and
Equal Opportunity Commission,
Discrimination in Employment on the Basis of
Criminal Record—Discussion Paper
For example, a person who has
been convicted for any offence punishable by imprisonment for one year or longer
cannot be chosen,
or sit, as a Senator or a member of the House of the
Representatives:
Constitution
Corporations Act
Life Insurance Act 1995
This is subject to the
spent conviction provisions in
Crimes Act 1914
Migration Act 1958
Section 70 and
the need to establish a ‘duty not to disclose’ is described in more
detail in Ch 5 and considered further
in Ch 7. Section 70 is set
out in full in Appendix 5.
Official Information
, Integrity in Government Project: Interim Report 1
(1991), 43–44.
J McGinness,
‘Secrecy Provisions in Commonwealth Legislation’
[1990] FedLawRw 3
Federal Law Review
73 citing Departmental Committee on Section 2 of the Official Secrets Act 1911,
Report of the Committee
J McGinness, ‘Secrecy
Provisions in Commonwealth Legislation’
[1990] FedLawRw 3
Federal Law Review
H Gibbs, R Watson and A
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Final Report
(1991), 330.
The categories of information the subject of the Gibbs Committee’s
recommendation are discussed
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
In Confidence: A Report of the Inquiry into the
Protection of Confidential Personal and Commercial Information Held by the
Commonwealth
[7.2.7]–[7.2.8].
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009.
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity,
18 February 2009.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
of Human Services,
20 February 2009.
of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations,
19 February 2009.
Law Council
of Australia,
27 February 2009.
18 February 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
23 March 2009.
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
In Confidence: A Report of the Inquiry into the
Protection of Confidential Personal and Commercial Information Held by the
Commonwealth
Consistent with Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security
Sensitive Information
, ALRC 98 (2004),
Proposal 10–1.
Question 10–1.
provisions are described in detail in Ch 5 and set out in full in
Appendix 5.
H Gibbs, R Watson and
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Final Report
(1991), [35.12].
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007),
Crimes Act 1914
Commonwealth Director of
Public Prosecutions,
Prosecution Policy of the Commonwealth
<www.cdpp.gov.au/Publications/ProsecutionPolicy/> at 26 August 2008,
J McGinness, ‘Secrecy
Provisions in Commonwealth Legislation’
[1990] FedLawRw 3
Federal Law Review
H Gibbs, R Watson and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Final Report
(1991), [31.50].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 2–1.
development of the
Criminal Code
was considered in detail in Australian
Law Reform Commission,
Fighting Words: A Review of Sedition Laws in
, ALRC 104 (2006),
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Bureau of Statistics,
24 March 2009;
Australian Federal Police,
3 March 2009; Australian Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
of Human Services,
20 February 2009.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Lawyers Human Rights Committee,
4 March 2009.
Information Act 1982
7. General Secrecy Offence: Harm to
Public Interests
Introduction
Duty not to disclose information
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Harm to identified public interests
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Fault element attaching to harm
7. General Secrecy Offence: Harm to
Public Interests
Introduction
7.1 As discussed in Chapter 6, the ALRC is proposing that ss 70 and
79(3) of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) be repealed and that there should be a
new general secrecy offence created and located in the
Criminal Code
In the Issues Paper,
Review of Secrecy Laws
the ALRC sought
stakeholder views on how such an offence should be
7.2 In this chapter, the ALRC proposes to considerably narrow the scope of
the general secrecy offence in comparison with the existing
provisions. This
approach is intended to reflect the trend towards open government, articulated
clearly in the objects clause proposed
in the Exposure Draft
Information Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(the FOI Exposure Draft Bill). The FOI
Exposure Draft Bill indicates that the objects of the FOI Act should be to
promote Australia’s
representative democracy by increasing public
participation in Government processes; by increasing scrutiny, discussion,
and review of the Government’s activities; and to increase
recognition that information held by the Government is to be managed
purposes, and is a national
7.3 Consistently with this approach to Commonwealth information, the ALRC
proposes that a disclosure should only attract criminal
penalties under the
general secrecy offence where the prosecution can prove that the particular
disclosure caused harm, was reasonably
likely to cause harm, or was intended to
cause harm to specified public interests, such as the security or defence of the
Commonwealth.
This is consistent with the ‘enforcement pyramid’
model discussed in Chapter 6, in that criminal penalties are reserved
the most serious circumstances. In the absence of any likely, intended or actual
harm to those public interests, the ALRC is
of the view that unauthorised
disclosure of Commonwealth information should be dealt with by the imposition of
administrative penalties
or the pursuit of contractual or general law
7.4 Chapter 8 goes on to consider other elements of the offence, including
what and whose conduct should be regulated. Chapter 9 deals
exceptions and defences should be available under the proposed general secrecy
offence, and what penalties should apply
for breach of the offence.
Duty not to disclose
information
7.5 In considering how a new general secrecy offence should be framed, the
ALRC examined a range of existing provisions—in particular
79(3) of the
—including those aspects of existing
provisions that have drawn consistent criticism. One aspect that has attracted
attention is the lack of clarity and certainty around when a ‘duty
not to disclose information’ might arise under s 70.
7.6 Section 70 provides that it is an offence for a Commonwealth officer
to disclose information ‘which it is his or her duty
disclose’. As noted in Chapter 6, this duty is not found in s 70
itself, but must be found elsewhere. Most commonly,
the source of the duty is a
specific legislative provision giving rise to a duty not to disclose official
information.
7.7 For example,
Service Act 1999
(Cth), which sets out the Australian Public Service (APS)
Code of Conduct, provides that an APS employee must comply with any conduct
requirement prescribed by the
regulations.
Regulation 2.1(3)
Public Service Regulations 1999
(Cth) sets out a duty not to disclose
information:
an APS employee must not disclose information which the APS employee obtains or
generates in connection with the APS employee’s
employment if it is
reasonably foreseeable that the disclosure could be prejudicial to the effective
working of government, including
the formulation or implementation of policies
or programs.
7.8 Regulation 2.1 provides an example of a provision that sets out a
duty of non-disclosure and makes express reference to the application
s 70 of the
in an accompanying note:
: Under section 70 of the
Crimes Act 1914
, it is an offence
for an APS employee to publish or communicate any fact or document which comes
to the employee’s knowledge,
or into the employee’s possession, by
virtue of being a Commonwealth officer, and which it is the employee’s
to disclose.
7.9 Other secrecy provisions are not expressly linked to s 70 in this
way. For example,
Food Standards Australia New Zealand
(Cth) states that:
It is the duty of a person who is a member of the Board, a member of the staff
of the Authority, a member of a committee or a person
engaged as a consultant
section 136
not to disclose any confidential commercial information in
respect of food that has been acquired by the person because of being
member or consultant.
7.10 The provision does not specify a penalty for breach and makes no
reference to the
. Presumably, s 70 applies but its
application is not readily
7.11 A duty may also arise from other sources, such as an employee’s
general law duties
or, possibly,
the terms and conditions of an employment contract. As discussed in Chapter 5,
there is some doubt about whether the
‘duty’ in s 70 can arise
from a contractual term, but it seems clear that it must be a legal—as
opposed to a moral—duty.
The lack of clarity as to what duties may give rise to criminal liability under
s 70 led McGinness to observe that:
The obscure nature of the duties was the subject of criticism when the
was first enacted and has been put forward by prosecuting authorities as
one reason for their failure to prosecute possible
7.12 In IP 34, the ALRC asked whether it was appropriate for a general
secrecy offence to rely on a duty arising separately under
the general law or
under other legislative
provisions.
Submissions and
consultations
7.13 The Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department (AGD)
submitted that:
It would seem preferable for a general secrecy offence to set out the
circumstances when a duty of non-disclosure might arise, as
this would provide
greater clarity and certainty to Commonwealth officers and others. It would also
tend to reduce the perceived
need for including specific secrecy laws in other
legislation on the basis that it is not sufficiently clear whether the general
offence would apply, or to create a specific duty for the purpose of the general
offence. However, it is unlikely to be possible
to set out exhaustively all the
circumstances that may give rise to a non-disclosure duty. Therefore, it seems
advisable to retain
a level of flexibility in the general offence to allow for
non-disclosure duties to arise elsewhere, such as in other legislation,
to contractual agreements or at common
7.14 Noting that it would not be appropriate to include an offence in one
piece of legislation and the penalty in another, the AGD
submitted that it may,
however, be appropriate to include a legislative note referring to the existence
of an offence and penalty
in another piece of
legislation.
The Treasury agreed
that provisions containing a duty of non-disclosure, which do not themselves
create an offence, should at least
cross-refer to the section that establishes
the offence and the penalty.
7.15 Other stakeholders expressed a level of concern that the duty not to
disclose should be found separately from the provision imposing
the criminal
The Community and
Public Sector Union (CPSU) expressed particular concern about the relationship
between reg 2.1 of the
Public Service Regulations
and s 70 of
. The CPSU submitted that only disclosure of classified or
secret Commonwealth information should be subject to criminal penalties.
Disclosure of other confidential information should be dealt with on an
administrative level—as a breach of the APS Code of
Conduct in the
Public Service Act
—in the same way as other employment-related
disciplinary matters.
7.16 Ron Fraser agreed, stating that:
So long as s 70 continues to penalise breaches of duty to be found in other
legislation, breaches of Public Service Regulation 2.1
will be subject both
to administrative penalties and to possible prosecution under s 70. It is
preferable for it to be restricted
7.17 The Public Interest Advocacy Centre (PIAC) submitted that:
Any criminal secrecy provision of general application should not be triggered by
breach of an obligation arising under the general
law, but upon breach of a
clearly identified duty of non-disclosure, set out in the relevant statute.
All secrecy provisions should make clear on their face the consequences of
breach. If the consequences of breach are contained in
another piece of
legislation, the secrecy provision should cross-reference it, although this is
not the preferred approach.
7.18 In Chapter 6, the ALRC considers the need for clarity and certainty in
the criminal law. It appears that there are real concerns
in this regard—in particular, about the need to
establish a duty independently of the offence provision—and also about
some of the terminology used in s 79(3). Although it is possible, for
example, to include a cross-reference to s 70 in a provision
giving rise to
a duty of non-disclosure, this is not ideal. The ALRC considers that it is
preferable for the offence provision itself
to set out all the elements of the
offence and the penalty attached to the offence. This is consistent with the AGD
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement
which states that:
It is normally desirable that the content of an offence be stated in the offence
itself, so that the scope and effect of the offence
is clear to the Government,
the Parliament and those subject to the
7.19 In particular, the ALRC is concerned that, where no cross-reference to
s 70 is included in legislation containing a duty of non-disclosure,
unclear whether the Australian Parliament expressly considered the link with
s 70 and the fact that the duty created had the
potential to give rise to
criminal sanctions.
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
also notes that:
A further problem with such provisions is that they are a form of general
offence that applies a single maximum penalty to a wide
range of potential
conduct of unspecified
seriousness.
7.21 This problem clearly arises in relation to s 70. While the offence
and maximum penalty are set out in the
elements—such as the scope of the duty imposed and the type of information
protected—are set out in other Acts
and may vary widely.
7.22 For these reasons, the
ALRC proposes a general secrecy offence which does not rely on a duty arising
under another Act. Instead,
all elements of the offence will be set out in the
offence itself. As discussed in the following chapters, the proposed offence
apply to all current and former Commonwealth officers and to any
information to which the officer has access by reason of being,
or having been,
an officer. However, the provision will be limited by the need to establish that
a particular disclosure caused harm,
was reasonably likely to cause harm, or was
intended to cause harm to specified public interests.
7.23 This approach gives rise to the need to consider those provisions that
currently establish a duty not to disclose Commonwealth
information, but do not
themselves create a criminal
In the ALRC’s
view, these provisions will need to be reviewed to decide whether they are
necessary at all and, if so, whether
they should attract administrative or
criminal penalties. Chapters 10 to 12 consider when specific secrecy
offences should be repealed
because they substantially replicate the proposed
new general secrecy offence. Where a specific offence can be justified, the
provide guidance on how such provisions should be framed in order to be
more consistent with the policy underlying the proposed general
secrecy offence,
and with each other.
7.24 In some cases, it will
be appropriate to impose only administrative sanctions for unauthorised
disclosure of Commonwealth information.
For example, in relation to reg 2.1
Public Service Regulations
, the effect of repealing s 70 will
be that breach of the regulation may attract the administrative penalties set
Public Service Act
, but will no longer attract criminal
penalties under the
. In the ALRC’s view, this is an
acceptable outcome. The ALRC considers that breach of reg 2.1 should be
treated in the same
way as a breach of any other element of the APS Code of
Conduct. Where it is the Australian Parliament’s intention to impose
criminal penalties for disclosure of Commonwealth information, this should be
done expressly in offence provisions so that there
is a clear and certain link
between the conduct being criminalised and the criminal penalty imposed.
7.25 In the following section, and Chapters 8 and 9, the ALRC considers
in detail how the new general secrecy offence should be framed.
Harm to identified
public interests
7.26 In the 2004 report,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and
Security Sensitive Information
, the ALRC recommended that a duty of secrecy
should only be imposed in relation to information that genuinely requires
and where unauthorised disclosure is likely to harm the public
As discussed in
Chapter 5, this is the approach the courts have adopted in considering the
extent to which government information
is protected by the common law duty of
loyalty and fidelity or the equitable duty of confidence.
7.27 While the ALRC is proposing to narrow the scope of the new general
secrecy offence in comparison with the existing provisions,
it is important to
ensure that where information is disclosed that does damage, is reasonably
likely to damage, or is intended to
damage important public interests, there are
appropriate criminal provisions in place. In the ALRC’s view, this will
a better balance between the need to protect Commonwealth information and
the public interest in open and accountable government.
In this section, the
ALRC considers which public interests require the protection of the criminal law
and therefore should be reflected
in the proposed general secrecy offence.
7.28 Most existing secrecy provisions do not expressly indicate the public
interest they are seeking to protect. For example,
Australian Crime Commission Act 2002
(Cth) provides that:
A person to whom this section applies who, either directly or indirectly, except
for the purposes of a relevant Act or otherwise
in connection with the
performance of his or her duties under a relevant Act, and either while he or
she is or after he or she ceases
to be a person to whom this section
(a) makes a record of any information; or
(b) divulges or communicates to any person any information;
being information acquired by him or her by reason of, or in the course of, the
performance of his or her duties under this Act,
is guilty of an offence
punishable on summary conviction by a fine not exceeding 50 penalty units or
imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 1 year, or both.
7.29 This provision binds the Chief Executive Officer, staff and others
associated with the Australian Crime Commission (ACC), and
applies to any
information acquired in the course of their duties under the Act. It is not
necessary to show that the unauthorised
conduct—making a record of,
divulging or communicating information—would cause, was likely to cause or
was intended to
cause any harm to any public interest. While these issues might
be taken into consideration by the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions
(CDPP) in deciding whether to prosecute a person for a breach of the provision,
or by the court in deciding on an appropriate
penalty for breach of the
provision, they do not form an element of the offence itself.
7.30 By way of contrast, a small number of secrecy provisions expressly
require that the unauthorised conduct cause, be likely to
cause, or be intended
to cause, harm to a specific public interest. Some of these provisions are
discussed in Chapter 10. An example
Defence Force
Discipline Act
(Cth). The necessary harm to the public interest
identified in that provision is that the conduct must be ‘likely to be
prejudicial
to the security or defence of Australia’. Strict liability
applies to this element of the offence and so it is not necessary
to establish
that the person was reckless or intended to prejudice the security or defence of
Australia, just that the disclosure
was likely to do so.
7.31 Another example is
Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Act 2005
(Cth), which expressly requires—as an element of a
number of the offences set out in that section—that the conduct would,
would be likely to, harm specific public interests. The provision makes it an
offence for an Indigenous Land Corporation (ILC)
officer to disclose information
‘considered sacred or otherwise significant by a particular group of
Aboriginal persons or
Torres Strait Islanders’, where ‘the
disclosure would be inconsistent with the views or sensitivities of those
persons or Torres Strait Islanders’.
7.32 In its final report,
The Review of the Commonwealth Criminal Law
the Committee chaired by Sir Harry Gibbs (the Gibbs Committee) considered the
need for secrecy offences to include a requirement
to prove that the
unauthorised disclosure caused some harm and, in this regard, drew a distinction
between different categories of
protected information. In relation to
information relating to defence or foreign relations, for example, the Gibbs
Committee stated
Obviously, the description of information as relating to defence or foreign
relations would be so wide that, unless qualified in
some way, they would apply
to information of an innocuous nature. Thus, no submission disputed that these
descriptions needed to
be qualified by a requirement to prove
7.33 The Gibbs Committee recommended that the prosecution should be required
to prove harm in the case of a disclosure of information:
relating to defence or foreign relations; and
obtained in confidence from foreign governments and international
organisations.
Gibbs Committee also recommended that, where proof of harm is required, it
should be a defence for a person charged with
an offence that he or she did not
know, and had no reasonable cause to believe, that the information related to
the matters in question
or that its disclosure would be
However, in some
areas, the Committee considered it was appropriate to impose criminal sanctions
without having to establish any
harm to the public interest—notably in
relation to intelligence and national security
information.
7.35 In contrast, McGinness argued that ‘it is not sufficient to point
to a category of official information that needs protection
from unauthorised
disclosure’, commenting that some additional justification should be
necessary to attract criminal
7.36 In IP 34, the ALRC asked whether all secrecy provisions should
expressly require that the unauthorised conduct cause, be likely
to cause, or
intended to cause harm to a specified public
Submissions and
consultations
7.37 A number of stakeholders expressed concern about the imposition of an
express requirement to prove harm in every case. The Australian
Taxation Office
(ATO) submitted that such a requirement would be inherently uncertain and
difficult to apply. In addition, the ATO
was of the view that taxpayers would be
less likely to provide full and frank information concerning their tax affairs
if they were
concerned that the ATO could not adequately protect the
confidentiality of the
information.
7.38 The Treasury was also concerned that an express harm requirement would
reduce certainty and clarity. In The Treasury’s
view, the relevant public
interests should be taken into consideration in developing legislation
regulating whether or not information
is permitted to be disclosed for a
specified purpose.
7.39 The Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) and the Australian
Bureau of Statistics (ABS) suggested that an express
harm requirement was not
desirable in their own context-specific legislation. In APRA’s view, it is
implicit in s 56 of the
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act
(Cth) that unauthorised disclosure would harm the public
The ABS expressed the
view that the absolute nature of the ABS specific provisions was their strength,
but noted that some contexts
could allow for a public interest element:
The unauthorised disclosure of identifiable information provided for statistical
purposes should be subject to criminal penalties.
Unauthorised disclosure of
other statistical information (eg unauthorised disclosure of aggregated
statistical results prior to their
official release) should be subject to
criminal penalties where such disclosure is detrimental to the public
7.40 The AGD submitted that it should not be necessary to establish proof of
harm in relation to some categories of information, such
as intelligence
information, but that in relation to the general secrecy offence,
it may be appropriate to focus upon disclosure of information that could have
some specified harm. This would prevent secrecy laws
being too broad and taking
a ‘blanket’ approach. The public interests that require protection
may include things such
as the effective working of government, prejudice to
national security or defence, international relations, and the effective working
of law enforcement agencies.
7.41 The AGD noted that this approach had been taken in reg 2.1 of the
Public Service Regulations
, discussed above.
Regulation 2.1
prohibits the disclosure of information ‘if it is reasonably foreseeable
that the disclosure could be prejudicial to the effective
government’. The AGD suggested that ‘reasonably likely to cause
harm’ would be a useful model to adopt
in relation to the general secrecy
offence as it establishes an objective test. The AGD submitted that a
requirement to prove actual
harm may create evidential difficulties,
‘particularly when the harm may not necessarily be obvious or easily
quantifiable
(such as with the disclosure of Cabinet documents)’. The AGD
also noted that evidential difficulties can arise in establishing
that a person
acted with an intention to cause harm:
Requiring proof of such intention in all cases would be too high a threshold and
would be likely to reduce the effectiveness and
potentially the deterrent effect
of secrecy laws. An option that could be considered is having tiered offences,
so a higher penalty
applies where it can be proved that a person acted with
intention to cause harm to the public interest.
7.42 The CDPP was also concerned that a requirement to prove harm to
specified public interests would give rise to evidential
difficulties.
7.43 The Australian Federal Police (AFP) supported the idea of an offence
hierarchy with a basic offence provision of unauthorised
disclosure of
information, with a lower penalty; and a more serious offence provision
requiring the prosecution to prove an intention
to harm the public interest,
with a higher penalty.
7.44 Other stakeholders, however, expressed strong support for expressly
including a requirement of harm to the public interest in
any secrecy provision.
For example, PIAC submitted that the mere fact that information fell into a
particular category—such
as information relating to defence—or was
held by specific agencies—such as those in the Australian Intelligence
(AIC)—was not sufficient to justify the protection of the
criminal law if disclosure would not, and could not reasonably be
expected to,
harm specific public interests:
In PIAC’s view, the principles developed under the equitable duty of
confidence should be regarded as the touchstone for principled
protection of
government information. An approach based on the equitable duty of confidence
requires a focus on the material in question
and the nature of any detriment
caused by its release, and has the decided advantage of leaving open an
exception where disclosure
would expose serious wrongdoing or
7.45 PIAC noted the tension between very broad secrecy provisions—such
as s 70 of the
—and the access regime established by
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth) (the FOI Act), which is limited
only by those exceptions and exemptions necessary for the protection of
essential public interests
and private and business
7.46 The Department of Human Services (DHS) agreed that the question of harm
to the public interest should be considered in light
of the Australian
Government’s approach to freedom of information, but noted that simply
stating ‘harm to the public
interest’ in secrecy provisions would
not provide sufficient clarity and
7.47 The Law Council of Australia also noted the tension between criminal
secrecy provisions and the FOI Act, stating that it is anomalous
that criminal
sanctions may be imposed against a public servant who releases Commonwealth
information, which a member of the public
could successfully request under the
FOI Act. The Law Council expressed support for including a harm requirement in
secrecy provisions
and commented in relation to
It seems reasonably clear that the information contained in the leaked material,
whilst confidential and potentially embarrassing
to the Sydney Airport
Corporation, was not of its nature to be regarded as inherently
‘secret’, and its release did not
cause any obvious harm to the
interests of the Commonwealth or to human health or safety. The public debate
which followed the charge
and conviction of Allan Kessing centred on the public
interest in knowing about the standard of security controls at Sydney
7.48 The Law Council also submitted that:
Whilst it is important that governments are able to maintain secrecy over
information that affects national security or national
interests (which,
properly characterised, tips the balance in favour of collective, rather than
individual, rights), the Law Council
contends that, in many areas of Executive
power, the case for secrecy is far less obvious. Information should only be
characterised
as ‘secret’ if its release could reasonably be
expected to damage the national interest, where that damage is not outweighed
the public interest in release of the information or ensuring individual rights
are not infringed.
7.49 The Law Council expressed the view that disclosure of information that
is merely embarrassing, confidential or sensitive—but
does not affect
national security, defence, foreign relations or human health or
safety—should lead to administrative rather
than criminal
7.50 The Australian Press Council acknowledged that certain information held
by governments needed to be kept confidential, but expressed
the view that
government information should be available to the public, unless it was
foreseeable that disclosure was likely to result
in harm to the public
The Council recognises that it may be impractical to abolish all laws
restricting access to government information. What the Council
thorough overhaul of existing legislation to minimise its potential to restrict
accountability of government action and
to remove, to the greatest extent
possible, the legislation’s vulnerability to be exploited by governments
and officers seeking
to evade public
7.51 Whistleblowers Australia agreed, stating that:
In our system of representative government it is essential that the functions
and activities of the public sector are as transparent
as possible. It is a
right of Australian citizens to be as informed as they wish about matters of
public administration.
7.52 Australia’s Right to Know (ARTK) coalition emphasised the
importance of recognising the value of openness, accountability
ownership of government information, and urged the repeal of s 70 of the
. The ARTK coalition considered that a principal object of
secrecy legislation should be to provide a right of access to information
by government, and that criminal sanctions should only apply to unauthorised
disclosures of information where there is an ‘overwhelming
public interest
in preventing disclosure, and the consequences of disclosure affect national
security or public safety’. The
ARTK coalition stated that:
In terms of developing the scope of such an exemption, ARTK advocates avoiding,
as far as possible, the tendency to rely on the general,
preferring an approach
whereby specific categories of the public interest are identified and set out in
the legislation. Exemptions
that are framed in terms of disclosures causing
prejudice to the ‘effective workings of government’ or ‘the
course of government’ are too broad, too subjective and risk
being construed so widely as to encompass almost any administrative
governmental activity depending on the
circumstances.
7.53 A number of stakeholders indicated the areas and information
‘likely to attract an overwhelming public interest against
general public
disclosure’. For example, the ARTK coalition suggested that it was likely
to include information:
relating to intelligence and security operations, terrorism, defence
and foreign relations;
obtained in confidence from, or entrusted in confidence to, other
governments or international organisations relating to intelligence
and security
operations, terrorism, defence and foreign relations;
relating to operational military matters and national security
prejudicial to law enforcement, the investigation and prevention of
criminal activity or the administration of justice; and
which could cause harm to any person or prejudice public
7.54 The AGD
also identified the types of information that may require protection in the
general secrecy offence, including:
information that could prejudice Australia’s national
security, defence or international relations;
information that could endanger life;
information that could prejudice law enforcement operations and the
effective working of law enforcement agencies;
information provided to the government in confidence by foreign
government agencies;
Cabinet documents; and
other information that could prejudice the effective working of
Government.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) submitted that liability
should be limited to unauthorised disclosures
of information that genuinely
requires protection and that is likely to harm the public interest or a private
If an element of injury to public interest was introduced, ASIC agrees that, in
the interests of clarity and certainty, the secrecy
provisions should be
explicit about the public interests they are intended to protect.
Finally, if injury to public interest is included as an element, that element
should be subject to strict liability. It would be
very difficult to prove that
a person intended or knew that, their disclosure was likely to harm a specified
public interest. The
onus should be on that person to prove that he/she neither
knew, nor could have been reasonably expected to know, the likely effect
disclosure.
7.56 In ASIC’s view, secrecy provisions and FOI legislation should be
complementary. There should be no inherent tension for
Commonwealth officers
subject to both regimes. In ASIC’s experience, it was possible to balance
the need to protect certain
information under the ASIC secrecy provisions with
the need to release information into the public domain under the FOI
7.57 In the ALRC’s view, criminal secrecy provisions should only impose
liability on Commonwealth officers for disclosure of
Commonwealth information
where the disclosure caused harm, was reasonably likely to cause harm, or was
intended to cause harm. This
approach balances the need to protect certain
Commonwealth information with the public interest in an open and accountable
of government.
7.58 The ALRC acknowledges that, in some circumstances, the way in which
specific secrecy offences are framed, and the context in
which they may operate,
provide a sufficient likelihood that harm will be caused by an unauthorised
disclosure and that an express
requirement is unnecessary. This issue is
discussed in relation to specific secrecy offences in Chapter 10.
7.59 The proposed new general secrecy offence should, however, expressly
include a requirement that the disclosure caused harm, was
reasonably likely to
cause harm, or was intended to cause harm. The proposed general offence applies
broadly to all Commonwealth
officers and all Commonwealth information. In these
circumstances, the harm to the public interest is not implicit and must be made
explicit. As discussed in detail in Chapter 13, reg 2.1 of the
Service Regulations
takes this approach, regulating disclosure ‘if it
is reasonably foreseeable that the disclosure could be prejudicial to the
effective working of government’. While this formulation may be
appropriate in relation to imposing administrative penalties
in the employment
context, it is too broad to provide the basis for criminal sanctions.
7.60 In trying to formulate a provision that targets more specific public
interests, the ALRC was drawn to the idea that any general
secrecy provision
should complement the FOI Act. In this regard it is worthwhile noting that the
Australian Public Service Commissioner
indicates in the
APS Values and Code
of Conduct in Practice
that the exemptions in the FOI Act are a useful
starting point in determining which categories of information fall within the
of reg 2.1, in that disclosure has the potential to be prejudicial to the
effective working of government.
As noted in Chapter 4, the objects clause of the FOI Act states that the
Act is intended to extend ‘as far as possible the
right of the Australian
community to access to information in the possession of the Government of the
Commonwealth’:
limited only by exceptions and exemptions necessary for the protection of
essential public interests and the private and business
affairs of persons in
respect of whom information is collected and held by departments and public
authorities.
7.61 The ALRC has adopted the approach that a subset of the public interests
identified in the FOI Act exemptions could inform the
development of the public
interests to be protected by the proposed general secrecy offence. This would
have the additional benefit
that FOI guidelines and jurisprudence in relation to
the meaning and scope of the various FOI exemptions may assist Commonwealth
officers to better understand their obligations under the proposed general
secrecy offence.
7.62 In the following section, the ALRC considers which of the FOI exemptions
should be reflected in the general secrecy offence.
The ALRC notes that, while
the FOI Exposure Draft Bill proposes a number of changes to various exemption
provisions in the FOI Act—for
example, by reformulating the various public
interest tests in the existing provisions to a single test that ‘access to
document at the time would, on balance, be contrary to the public
interest’—it leaves in place the substance of the exemptions
ALRC has identified for inclusion in the general secrecy
National security, defence and international
7.63 Section 33(1)(a) of the FOI Act provides that a document is exempt
if disclosure would, or could reasonably be expected to, cause
damage to: the
security of the Commonwealth; the defence of the Commonwealth; or the
international relations of the
Commonwealth.
There was general
support in submissions, discussed above, for these public interests to be
protected by secrecy offences. The ALRC
proposes, therefore, that it be an
offence under the general secrecy offence to disclose information that causes,
is reasonably likely
to cause, or is intended to cause harm to the national
security, defence or international relations of the Commonwealth.
7.64 The ALRC has some concerns that imposing criminal liability on
Commonwealth officers for disclosing information that harms, is
likely to harm, or intended to harm Australia’s international relations
may be too broad. The ALRC notes that some
such disclosures may cause
embarrassment rather than any significant harm. The FOI Exposure Draft Bill
expressly provides that the
fact that access to a document could result in
embarrassment to the Commonwealth Government, or cause a loss of confidence in
Government, must not be taken into account in deciding whether access to a
document would, on balance, be contrary to the public
It may be that
‘harm to the international relations of the Commonwealth’ requires
further qualification in the context
of the proposed general secrecy offence by
providing, for example, that the disclosure had a substantial adverse effect,
was reasonably
likely to have a substantial adverse effect, or was intended to
have a substantial adverse effect on international relations. The
welcome stakeholder views on this matter.
Information communicated in confidence by a
foreign government
7.65 Section 33(1)(b) of the FOI Act provides that a document is exempt
if disclosure would divulge any information or matter communicated
in confidence
by or on behalf of a foreign government, an authority of a foreign government or
an international organisation, to
the Government of the Commonwealth, to an
authority of the Commonwealth or to a person receiving the communication on
behalf of the
Commonwealth or of an authority of the
Commonwealth.
7.66 In the ALRC’s view, for the purposes of the general secrecy
offence, it is not appropriate to protect categories of information.
As noted by
stakeholders, not every piece of information in any particular category should
attract the protection of the criminal
law. For this reason, the ALRC has not
included this category of information in the proposed general secrecy
7.67 The ALRC recognises, however, that there is an important public interest
in protecting the flow of information, and in particular,
confidential
information, from foreign governments and international organisations. The flow
of information between governments and
international organisations is an
essential element of international relations. In the ALRC’s view, if
Commonwealth information
was disclosed in circumstances that had the potential
to, or did in fact, damage the flow of information from foreign governments
international organisations, it would be possible to argue that the disclosure
caused, or was reasonably likely to cause, harm
to the international relations
of the Commonwealth. In this way, the disclosure would be caught by the proposed
general secrecy offence.
Relations between the Commonwealth and a
state or territory and information communicated in confidence by a state or
7.68 Section 33A of the FOI Act provides that a document is an exempt
document if disclosure:
would, or could reasonably be expected to, cause damage to relations
between the Commonwealth and a state; or
would divulge information or matter communicated in confidence by or
on behalf of the Government of a State or an authority of a
State, to the
Government of the Commonwealth, to an authority of the Commonwealth or to a
person receiving the communication on behalf
of the Commonwealth or of an
authority of the
Commonwealth.
relation to information that would harm relations between the Commonwealth and
the states and territories, the ALRC has formed
the view that this public
interest is not of the same order as national security, defence and
international relations and could be
adequately protected by administrative
provisions, intergovernmental arrangements and the general law.
Section 33A(5) expressly acknowledges
that there will be situations in
which disclosure of information protected by this exemption will be in the
public interest.
7.70 The ALRC has not included ‘harm to relations between the
Commonwealth and the states and territories’ in the proposed
secrecy offence, but would be interested in stakeholder views on the issue. In
addition, and for the reasons discussed above,
the ALRC’s view is that the
proposed general secrecy offence should not include protected categories of
information. Thus,
the offence does not include information communicated in
confidence, as described in the second dot point, above.
Cabinet documents
7.71 Section 34 of the FOI Act provides that a document is an exempt
document if it has been, or will be, submitted to Cabinet for
consideration and
was brought into existence for the purpose of submission to Cabinet. Other
exempt documents in this section include
the official records of Cabinet and
documents that would involve the disclosure of the deliberations or decisions of
Cabinet, other
than documents by which a decision of the Cabinet has been
officially published.
notes the AGD’s submission that specific types of information, by their
very nature, should be protected and that:
the disclosure of Cabinet documents, regardless of the information contained in
them, has the potential to prejudice the effective
working of government by
diminishing the government’s faith that the Cabinet process provides a
forum for free and frank debate
and consideration of
7.72 As noted above, the ALRC’s view is that, in the context of the
general secrecy offence, categories of information, as such,
should not be
protected. In addition, the ALRC’s view is that the internal processes of
government, including the Cabinet process,
are more appropriately protected by
administrative processes—such as classification and information-handling
guidelines—and
the imposition of administrative penalties. The ALRC has
not, therefore, included Cabinet documents or the Cabinet process in the
proposed new general secrecy offence. If disclosure of a Cabinet document
caused, was likely to cause, or was intended to cause harm
to one of the
specified public interests listed in the general offence, however, this conduct
would be caught.
7.73 For the same reasons, the ALRC has not included Executive Council
or internal working
in the proposed
general secrecy offence.
Enforcement of the criminal law
7.74 Section 37(1)(a) of the FOI Act provides that a document is an
exempt document if disclosure would, or could reasonably be expected
prejudice the conduct of an investigation of a breach, or possible breach, of
the law, or a failure, or possible failure, to
comply with a law relating to
taxation, or prejudice the enforcement or proper administration of the law in a
particular instance.
Section 37(1)(b) provides that a document is an exempt
document if disclosure would, or could reasonably be expected to disclose,
enable a person to ascertain, the existence or identity of a confidential source
of information, or the non‑existence of
a confidential source of
information, in relation to the enforcement or administration of the law.
7.75 In its submission to
this Inquiry, the Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity (ACLEI)
emphasised the sensitive nature
of some of the information it receives:
Those who would give information in secret to law enforcement agencies are
commonly concerned for their own safety, particularly
against reprisals from
those whose interests could be adversely affected by the information they
These people seek assurance that their information will not be disclosed,
whether through inadvertence or corruption. While the details
of the measures
law enforcement agencies take to keep information confidential are of little
interest to these people, what matters
is the reputation of an agency for being
able to keep secrets.
7.76 ACLEI noted that it was essential to protect the flow of information to
the agency, ‘whether it comes from other government
agencies, from
business, from informers, from covert surveillance activities, or from ordinary
members of the public’. ACLEI
noted the well-established link between the
unauthorised disclosure of information and police corruption, such as the
of information alerting suspects to police raids; disclosing the
presence or identity of police informers; and disclosing the use
or methods of
surveillance or other techniques used to investigate criminal activity.
Anti-corruption agencies, such as ACLEI, take a central role in
government’s investment in ensuring that particularly sensitive
enforcement information is not compromised by unauthorised disclosure by
individuals as a consequence of their corrupt
7.77 The ALRC’s view is that the disclosure of information that causes,
is likely to cause, or intended to cause harm to ongoing
investigations—including disclosing the identity of confidential sources
of information—should be covered by
the proposed general secrecy offence.
The formulation in s 37 appears, however, to be too wide for this purpose
in that it extends
to ‘the proper administration of the law in a
particular instance’.
7.78 Information Privacy Principle (IPP) 11 in the
(Cth) provides an exemption for disclosures of personal information
that are reasonably necessary for the enforcement of the criminal
law, or of a
law imposing a pecuniary penalty, or for the protection of the public
National Privacy
Principle (NPP) 2 provides an exemption for disclosures that organisations
believe are reasonably necessary for
one or more of the following by or on
behalf of an ‘enforcement
the prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution or punishment
of criminal offences, breaches of a law imposing a penalty or
sanction or
breaches of a prescribed law;
the enforcement of
laws relating to the confiscation of the proceeds of crime;
the protection of the public revenue;
the prevention, detection, investigation or remedying of seriously
improper conduct or prescribed conduct; or
the preparation for, or conduct of, proceedings before any court or
tribunal, or implementation of the orders of a court or
ALRC has adopted the formulation set out in part in NPP 2 to describe the
law enforcement public interest to be protected
by the general secrecy offence.
The proposal below focuses on the first three categories listed in NPP 2:
the enforcement of the
criminal law and laws relating to the confiscation of the
proceeds of crime, and protection of the public revenue. The ALRC would
interested in feedback from stakeholders on this issue.
7.80 The ALRC has not included a public interest based on the exemption set
out in s 37(2)(a) of the FOI Act—that is, where
disclosure would, or
could reasonably be expected to prejudice the fair trial of a person or the
impartial adjudication of a particular
case. This is because the courts have
their own procedures for protecting their processes and may impose their own
penalties for
such conduct.
Endangering the life or physical safety of
7.81 Section 37(1)(c) of the FOI Act provides that a document is an
exempt document if disclosure would, or could reasonably be expected
to endanger
the life or physical safety of any person. The ALRC agrees with stakeholders
that a disclosure of Commonwealth information
that endangered, was reasonably
likely to endanger, or intended to endanger the life or physical safety of any
person should be covered
by the proposed general secrecy offence.
7.82 A somewhat broader approach might be based on the language used in
NPP 2: ‘a serious threat to an individual’s life,
safety’. The ALRC would be interested in stakeholder views on how best to
formulate this harm for the purposes of
the proposed new general secrecy
offence, and whether the offence should cover disclosures that ‘pose a
serious threat to an
individual’s life, health or safety’.
Prejudice the protection of public
7.83 Section 37(2)(c) of the FOI Act provides that a document is an
exempt document if disclosure would, or could reasonably be expected
prejudice the maintenance or enforcement of lawful methods for the protection of
public safety. In the ALRC’s view, while
disclosures that cause, are
reasonably likely to cause, or intended to cause harm to public safety should be
covered by the proposed
general secrecy offence, the formulation in
s 37(2)(c) may be too narrow. Again, a somewhat broader description of the
relevant public
interest can be found in NPP 2 and the ALRC has adopted
this model: ‘a serious threat to public health or public
Documents to which secrecy provisions
7.84 Section 38 of the FOI Act provides that a document is an exempt
document if disclosure of the document, or information contained
document, is prohibited under a provision of an enactment; and the provision is
specified in sch 3 of the FOI Act; or s 38
is expressly applied to the
document, or information, by the provision, or by another provision of that or
any other enactment. The
relationship between s 38 and secrecy provisions
is discussed in detail in Chapter 4.
Documents concerning certain operations of
7.85 Section 40 of the FOI Act provides that a document is exempt if its
disclosure would, or could reasonably be expected to impact
adversely on the
conduct of agency operations. Examples of such adverse impact include:
prejudice to the effectiveness of procedures or methods for the
conduct of tests, examinations or audits by an agency;
a substantial adverse effect on the management or assessment of
personnel by the Commonwealth or by an agency;
a substantial adverse effect on the proper and efficient conduct of
the operations of an agency; or
a substantial adverse effect on the conduct by or on behalf of the
Commonwealth or an agency of industrial
are matters relating to the internal management and operations of agencies, and
should be addressed through administrative
procedures and, where necessary, the
imposition of administrative penalties. This is also the ALRC’s view in
relation to the
exemption set out in s 43A of the FOI Act relating to
research undertaken by officers of
Personal privacy
7.87 Section 41 of the FOI Act provides that a document is exempt if its
disclosure would involve ‘the unreasonable disclosure
of personal
information about any person (including a deceased
It is possible
to argue that harm to personal privacy should not be included in the general
secrecy offence. The
provides individuals with an avenue to
pursue government agencies and others where personal information is disclosed in
the IPPs or NPPs, and administrative, contractual and general law
obligations may also apply. The disclosure of personal information
generally, attract criminal sanctions outside the public sector.
7.88 A number of stakeholders expressed strong views in relation to this
issue. For example, the AGD submitted that:
There is a legitimate expectation that personal information provided by the
public to government agencies will be kept confidential.
While the harm in
disclosing such personal information may be minimal in an individual case, the
negative impact it has on the confidence
of the public to provide this
information is significant. Criminal sanctions provide an important deterrent
and send a strong message
that the unauthorised use or disclosure of personal
information is unacceptable.
7.89 As discussed in Chapter 4, the AGD noted that privacy and secrecy,
while related, are distinct areas of the law. Privacy law
regulates the
behaviour of agencies and organisations, while secrecy laws are intended to
prevent unauthorised disclosure of sensitive,
government-held information, and
are intended to regulate the behaviour of individuals. The AGD noted that some
overlap existed,
but that the processes and remedies available under the
, which are aimed at agencies and organisations, do not have
the same deterrent effect for individual Commonwealth
7.90 A number of agencies that handle large amounts of personal information,
including the DHS and the Department of Education, Employment
and Workplace
Relations (DEEWR), also emphasised the potential damage to individuals and the
Commonwealth where personal information
is disclosed, as well as the value of
the deterrent effect of criminal
7.91 The Treasury expressed the view that:
The taxation law imposes criminal sanctions for the unauthorised disclosure of
taxpayer information. Treasury considers that this
is appropriate given the
purpose that the secrecy provisions have in deterring their breach, as well as
providing taxpayers with
the confidence that their information is subject to a
high level of protection.
7.92 The ARTK coalition stated that:
it does not seem incompatible for civil and administrative remedies to apply
along with concurrent criminal penalties applicable
under separate legislation,
such as the
Crimes Act 1914
, in circumstances where the unauthorised use
or disclosure of personal information may also constitute a serious breach of
laws. This circumstance would be analogous to a person’s
concurrent civil and criminal liability for assault, trespass or damage
7.93 The ALRC’s view is that unauthorised disclosure of personal
information generally should not attract criminal penalties.
There is a range of
other remedies available—including individual complaints to the Privacy
Commissioner under the
and administrative, contractual and
general law remedies—that are a more appropriate response to such
disclosure.
7.94 The ALRC has, however, considered the concern expressed by agencies
personal information
from the Australian community. Agencies have suggested that the potential to
impose criminal penalties for unauthorised
disclosure of personal information
supports community confidence in the ability of the Government to protect the
information. The
ALRC proposes, therefore, to include personal privacy as one of
the public interests to be protected by the general secrecy offence
circumstances. In order to attract criminal penalties, however, the ALRC
proposes that the harm that is caused, reasonably
likely to be caused, or
intended to be caused by a disclosure of information that impacts on personal
high order, that is, the disclosure would have
to have a substantial adverse effect on personal privacy.
secrets and business, commercial
, financial affairs of persons and
organisations
7.95 Section 43 of the FOI Act provides that a document is an exempt
document if its disclosure would disclose a trade secret or any
information having a commercial value that would be, or could reasonably be
expected to be, destroyed or diminished if the
information were disclosed; or
other information concerning a person in respect of his or her business or
professional affairs or
concerning the business, commercial or financial affairs
of an organisation or undertaking, being information the disclosure of
would, or could reasonably be expected to, unreasonably affect that
person adversely in respect of his or her lawful business or
professional
affairs or that organisation or undertaking in respect of its lawful business,
commercial or financial affairs; or
could reasonably be expected to prejudice the future supply of
information to the Commonwealth or an agency for the purpose of the
administration of a law of the Commonwealth or of a Territory or the
administration of matters administered by an
7.96 Generally,
the ALRC’s view is that harm to business, commercial or financial affairs
should not attract criminal penalties
where the disclosure does not involve
There is a range of other
remedies available to address unauthorised disclosure of this kind of
information including administrative,
contractual and general law remedies. The
ALRC agrees with the ARTK coalition that:
Currently a large number of secrecy provisions, if breached, are punishable by
imprisonment, notwithstanding the relative triviality
of the offence and in many
cases they merely seek to protect what can be described as information that is
no more than commercial
in confidence. Criminal sentences are not appropriate in
such circumstances. …
In a commercial context, the disclosure of confidential information does not
attract such a severe regime and the civil remedies
(such as damages or
dismissal) are adequate to deter a breach of the duty of confidence. The same
should apply in the public
7.97 A number of stakeholders expressed the view that damage to these
interests should be covered, however, on the basis that disclosure
information had the potential to prejudice the future supply of information to
the Commonwealth. The Department of Climate
Change, for example, submitted
Commonwealth secrecy provisions should aim to protect information which could
have a negative commercial impact on commercial entities
(such as providing an
unfair advantage to a competitor) or other persons if inappropriately
7.98 APRA noted that information collected from regulated entities is often
‘commercially sensitive’ and, therefore:
from the perspective of a strong and robust prudential supervision regime it is
important that APRA’s extensive information-gathering
powers … be
accompanied by a robust secrecy
7.99 Similarly, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC)
stated that, in contrast to many Commonwealth departments
and agencies, the ACCC
is mainly concerned with ‘commercially sensitive’ information, the
disclosure of which ‘may
have a substantial adverse effect on the
information provider’.
7.100 The ALRC proposes, therefore, to include the protection of business,
commercial or financial affairs of individuals and organisations
as one of the
public interests to be protected by the general secrecy offence, in certain
circumstances. In order to attract criminal
penalties, however, the ALRC
proposes that the harm caused, reasonably likely to be caused, or intended to be
caused should be of
a relatively high order, that is, the disclosure would have
to have a substantial adverse effect on a person in respect of his or
business or professional affairs or on the business, commercial or financial
affairs of an organisation.
Financial or property interests of the
Commonwealth
7.101 Section 39 of the FOI Act provides that a document is exempt if
its disclosure would have a substantial adverse effect on the
financial or
property interests of the Commonwealth or of an
As noted above, the
ALRCs view is that, generally, disclosure of this kind of Commonwealth
information should not attract criminal
sanctions where it would not attract
such sanctions outside the public sector. The ALRC has not included this public
interest in
the general secrecy offence on the basis that, unlike disclosure of
personal and commercial information affecting the interests of
members of the
Australian community, disclosure of such information would not have an adverse
impact on the ability of the Commonwealth
to collect information.
Adverse effect on managing the
7.102 Section 44 of the FOI Act provides that a document is exempt if
its disclosure would, or could reasonably be expected to:
have a substantial adverse effect on the ability of the Government
of the Commonwealth to manage the economy of Australia; or
result in an undue disturbance of the ordinary course of business in
the community, or an undue benefit or detriment to any person
or class of
persons, by reason of giving premature knowledge of or concerning proposed or
possible action or inaction of the Government
or Parliament of the
Commonwealth.
Australian Government Solicitor’s
Freedom of Information Guidelines
note in relation to s 44 that:
It is the consequences of disclosure that are significant when determining
whether a document is exempt under s 44, not the nature
of the document or
the information contained in the document (although they are likely to be
relevant considerations). The expected
effect of disclosure must be on the
government’s ability to manage the economy. These words seem to suggest
that the effect
must be on the process of decision making in relation to the
economy, rather than on the economy
7.104 The ALRC has not included these public interests in the proposed
general secrecy provision on the basis that damage to the decision-making
processes of government should generally be dealt with on an administrative
basis. In addition, the
Criminal Code
already includes criminal offences
for the use of Commonwealth information with the intention of dishonestly
obtaining a benefit
or dishonestly causing a detriment to another
The ALRC would, however,
be interested in stakeholder views in relation to this issue.
Material obtained in confidence
7.105 Section 45 of the FOI Act provides that a document is exempt if
its disclosure would found an action for breach of confidence.
ALRC’s view, disclosure of information that would found such an action
should be dealt with under the general law dealing
with breach of confidence, or
under administrative provisions. This section describes a category of
information, rather than a public
interest, and should not be included in the
general criminal offence.
Sections 42, 46, 47 and 47A
7.106 Sections 42, 46, 47 and 47A of the FOI Act deal with the
disclosure of documents: which would be privileged from production
proceedings on the ground of legal professional privilege; which would amount to
a contempt of court, or would infringe
the privileges of parliament; arising out
of certain elements of the companies and securities
legislation;
and the electoral
roll and related documents, respectively. In the ALRC’s view, these should
not be included in the general
secrecy offence. The courts and the Australian
Parliament have procedures in place to deal with unauthorised disclosure of
including the imposition of penalties.
7.107 In relation to the documents protected by ss 47 and 47A, in the
ALRC’s view, the documents relating to the Ministerial
Council for
Companies and Securities and the National Companies and Securities Commission
should be protected by administrative arrangements
between the Commonwealth and
the states and territories. The electoral roll and related documents are
regulated by specific secrecy
provisions. The circumstances in which specific
secrecy provisions may be justified are discussed in Chapters 10
Proposal 7–1
The proposed general secrecy offence should require
that the disclosure of Commonwealth information did, or was reasonably likely
to, or intended to:
(a) harm the national security, defence or international relations of the
Commonwealth;
(b) prejudice the prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution or
punishment of criminal offences, breaches of a law imposing
a penalty or
sanction, the enforcement of laws relating to the confiscation of the proceeds
of crime, or the protection of the public
(c) endanger the life or physical safety of any person;
(d) pose a serious threat to public health or public safety;
(e) have a substantial adverse effect on personal privacy; or
(f) have a substantial adverse effect on a person in respect of his or her
lawful business or professional affairs or on the business,
commercial or
financial affairs of an organisation.
Fault element
attaching to harm
Criminal Code
provides that fault elements may include
intention, knowledge, recklessness or negligence, but that particular offences
may specify
other fault
As noted in
Chapter 5, under the
, if the legislation creating an offence
does not specify a fault element for a physical element consisting of conduct,
element is intention.
Where an offence provision does not specify a fault element for a physical
element consisting of a circumstance or a result, the
fault element is
recklessness.
7.109 In Chapter 8, the ALRC proposes that the fault element attaching
to the physical element of disclosure of Commonwealth information
intention. It is also necessary to consider what fault element should attach to
the physical element of harm to the specified
public interests in the context of
the general secrecy offence.
7.110 For the purposes of the
Criminal Code,
harm to specified public
interests can be characterised as a ‘result’. Thus, if no fault
element is specified, the
Criminal Code
will impose recklessness as the
fault element.
Physical element
Fault element
Conduct = disclosure of Commonwealth information
Result = the disclosure caused, or was reasonably likely to cause harm to a
specified public interest
Recklessness
7.111 Section 5.4 of the
Criminal Code
provides in part that:
(2) A person is reckless with respect to a result if:
(a) he or she is aware of a substantial risk that the result will occur;
(b) having regard to the circumstances known to him or her, it is unjustifiable
to take the risk.
(3) The question whether taking a risk is unjustifiable is one of fact.
(4) If recklessness is a fault element for a physical element of an offence,
proof of intention, knowledge or recklessness will satisfy
that fault element.
7.112 In these circumstances, the proposed general secrecy offence would
consist of an intentional disclosure of Commonwealth information,
Commonwealth officer who was reckless as to whether or not the identified harms
would result from the disclosure. Under s 5.4(4)
the offence would also
address situations in which the officer knew the harm would result or intended
that the harm would result.
Strict liability and absolute
7.113 Strict liability and absolute liability offences do not require any
fault elements to be proved. The difference between them
is that the defence of
an honest and reasonable mistake of fact is available in relation to strict
liability offences, but not available
in relation to absolute liability
Courts are unlikely to
impose strict or absolute liability unless there is a clear and express
indication in the
legislation.
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
notes that the
default position under the
Criminal Code
reflects the common law premise
it is generally neither fair, nor useful, to subject people to criminal
punishment for unintended actions or unforeseen consequences
unless those
resulted from an unjustifiable risk (ie
recklessness).
goes on to indicate, however, that the application of
strict or absolute liability to a particular physical element may be appropriate
where there is evidence that a requirement of proving fault in relation to that
physical element could undermine the deterrent effect
7.116 The Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills has also noted
that the requirement for a fault element is one of the
most fundamental
protections of the criminal law, and that strict liability offences should only
be introduced after careful consideration
and on a case by case
The Standing Committee
concluded that strict liability may be appropriate where it has proved difficult
to prosecute fault provisions,
particularly those involving intent. The
Committee noted that strict liability had been applied in a range of
circumstances, including
where it is difficult for the prosecution to prove a
fault element because a matter was peculiarly within the knowledge of the
7.117 The Senate Standing Committee also concluded that:
two-tier or parallel offences are acceptable only where the strict liability
limb is subject to a lower penalty than the fault limb,
and to other appropriate
safeguards; in addition, it should be clearly evident that the fault limb alone
would not be sufficient
to effect the purpose of the
7.118 An example of an offence provision that attaches strict liability to
one element of the offence is
Defence Force Discipline
. The provision provides that strict liability applies to the requirement
that the disclosure is likely to be prejudicial to the security
or defence of
Australia. The application of strict liability avoids the evidential
difficulties for the prosecution in proving beyond
reasonable doubt that the
accused was reckless as to whether, or knew, or intended that, the disclosure
was likely to be prejudicial
to the security or defence of Australia. The
provision also provides a defence where the accused can prove that he or she
knew, nor could reasonably be expected to have known, that the
disclosure of the information was likely to be prejudicial to the
security or
defence of Australia.
Submissions and consultations
7.119 In IP 34, the ALRC asked in what circumstances it would be
appropriate to have fault elements other than intent and recklessness
provisions.
The AGD noted that
difficulty in proving an offence usually arises in relation to fault elements
applicable to circumstances or results
and submitted that:
Strict liability may be appropriate where it is necessary to ensure the
integrity of a regulatory regime such as those relating to
public health and
safety, the environment, or financial or corporate regulation. An example of
regulation 132(3)
Civil Aviation Regulations 1988
which prevents unauthorised disclosure of information relating to air traffic
reports received by the Civil Aviation Safety
Authority. Absolute liability
offences are rare and should be limited to jurisdictional or similar elements of
offences that are
not relevant to the person’s culpability.
Application of strict or absolute liability to
a particular
element of an offence has generally only been considered appropriate where
of the following considerations is applicable:
• there is demonstrated evidence that the requirement to prove fault of
that particular element is undermining or will undermine
the deterrent effect of
the offence, and there are legitimate grounds for penalising persons lacking
‘fault’ in respect
of that element, or
• in the case of absolute liability, there should also be legitimate
grounds for penalising a person who made an honest and
reasonable mistake of
fact in respect of that element.
7.120 The AGD suggested that an objective test, such as that used in
reg 2.1 of the
Public Service Regulations
would be the
preferred approach in relation to the requirement to prove
7.121 On the other hand, the Australian Press Council stated that secrecy
offences should never be strict liability or absolute liability
In all instances the minimum requirement for a conviction should be that the
offender knew that the information was confidential,
knew that he or she had a
duty not to disclose the information, a reasonable expectation that the
disclosure would be likely to cause
damage to the public interest and that such
damage would be more than merely trivial or an embarrassment to the government
a public official. Before a criminal conviction should be imposed there
should be a finding, either that there was an intention to
cause harm to a
specified public interest, or recklessness as to the probability of such harm
7.122 Liberty Victoria expressed the view that criminal liability should only
attach to behaviour that is reckless or intentional,
and that in other
circumstances—such as unintentional mishandling of official
information—only administrative penalties
7.123 The Treasury noted that some taxation secrecy offences do contain
strict liability elements. However, in considering the consolidation
secrecy provisions, Treasury did not consider that there was any reason to
depart from the default elements outlined in the
7.124 PIAC suggested that:
a defence should be available where, at the time of the alleged offence, a
person did not know, and would not reasonably have believed,
information, document or article in question contained protected subject matter,
disclosure of which would cause significant
damage or prejudice to the public
7.125 Whistleblowers Australia made a similar point, stating that:
If the disclosure was inadvertent or unintentional and not reckless, then
serious consideration must be given to those facts and
any penalties reduced or
removed accordingly.
However, if a person deliberately discloses information with the foreknowledge
that such a disclosure will cause or will be likely
to cause actual or real harm
to the public interest or a specific public interest, then an appropriate
penalty should be imposed.
ALRC’s views
7.126 In Chapter 8, the ALRC proposes that the conduct covered by the
general secrecy offence should be disclosure of Commonwealth
information, and
that the fault element attaching to that physical element of the offence should
be intention. In this chapter the
ALRC proposes that there be three tiers to the
general secrecy offence as follows:
Physical element
Fault element
Conduct = disclosure of Commonwealth information
Result = the disclosure caused, or was reasonably likely to cause, harm to
one or more of the specified public interests
Strict Liability
Second Tier
Physical element
Fault element
Conduct = disclosure of Commonwealth information
Result = the disclosure did, was reasonably likely to, or intended
• have a substantial adverse effect on personal privacy;
• have a substantial adverse effect on a person in respect of his or
her lawful business or professional affairs or on the business,
commercial or
financial affairs of an organisation.
Recklessness, knowledge, or intention
Physical element
Fault element
Conduct = disclosure of Commonwealth information
Result = the disclosure did, or was reasonably likely to, or intended
• harm the national security, defence or international relations of
the Commonwealth;
• prejudice the prevention, detection, investigation,
prosecution or punishment of criminal offences, breaches of a law imposing
penalty or sanction, the enforcement of laws relating to the confiscation of the
proceeds of crime, or the protection of the public
the life or physical safety of any person; or
• pose a serious threat
to public health or public safety.
Recklessness, knowledge or intention
7.127 The ALRC notes that there will often be evidential
difficulties—in relation to the second and third tier offences set
above—in establishing that a Commonwealth officer was reckless as to
whether—or knew or intended that—the unauthorised
disclosure would
cause harm to one of the specified public interests. For this reason, the ALRC
proposes that there be a first tier
offence that attaches strict liability to
the harm requirement. In this case, the offence will be committed where a
Commonwealth
officer intentionally discloses information, and the disclosure
actually harms, or is reasonably likely to harm, one or more of the
public interests. It will not be necessary to prove any fault in relation to
this result, only that it was reasonably likely
7.128 This is consistent with the ALRC’s previous recommendation in
Keeping Secrets
, that secrecy provisions should apply only to information
that genuinely requires protection and where unauthorised disclosure is
to harm the public interest.
This approach also recognises that Commonwealth officers have access to
Commonwealth information because they hold positions of trust
in the community.
Such positions involve a level of responsibility to take care that information
that harms, or could potentially
harm, the public interest, is not
7.129 Under s 6.1 of the
Criminal Code
, the defence of mistake of
fact will be available in relation to the first tier offence. ‘Mistake of
fact’ means that,
at or before the time of the offence, the person
considered whether or not facts existed, and acted under a mistaken but
belief about those
The ALRC also proposes
that there be a defence to this offence provision, modelled on
Defence Force Discipline Act
, in circumstances where the person can prove
that he or she neither knew, nor could reasonably be expected to have known,
disclosure of the information was likely to harm any of the specified
public interests. The defendant will bear the legal burden
in relation to this
7.130 In addition, the ALRC proposes that there be two upper tiers with
recklessness, knowledge or intention attaching to the harm
element. In relation
to these two tiers, an offence will be committed where a Commonwealth officer
intentionally discloses information,
and is reckless as to whether, or knows or
intends that, the disclosure will result in harm to one or more of the specified
interests. These tiers will attract higher penalties than the first tier
strict liability offence. The third tier offence will attract
higher penalties
than the second tier offence on the basis of the type of public interests
protected by the third tier offence. Essentially,
the third tier offence
involves harm to the Australian community or to an individual’s life or
safety, while the second tier
offence involves harm to individual privacy or
commercial interests. These issues and the proposed penalties for all three
of the offence are discussed in Chapter 9.
Proposal 7–2
The proposed general secrecy offence should consist
of three tiers, as follows:
(a) First tier:
the unauthorised disclosure caused, or was reasonably
likely to cause, harm to one or more of the specified public interests. Strict
liability attaches to this result.
(b) Second tier:
the Commonwealth officer was reckless as to whether,
or knew or intended that, the disclosure would:
(i) have a substantial adverse effect on personal privacy; or
(ii) have a substantial adverse effect on a person in respect of his or her
lawful business or professional affairs or on the business,
commercial or
financial affairs of an organisation.
(c) Third tier:
the Commonwealth officer was reckless as to whether,
or knew or intended that, the disclosure would:
(i) harm the national security, defence or international relations of the
Commonwealth;
(ii) prejudice the prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution or
punishment of criminal offences, breaches of a law imposing
a penalty or
sanction, the enforcement of laws relating to the confiscation of the proceeds
of crime, or the protection of the public
(iii) endanger the life or physical safety of any person; or
(iv) pose a serious threat to public health or public safety.
Proposal 7–3
The first tier offence should include a defence in
circumstances where the Commonwealth officer can prove that he or she neither
nor could reasonably be expected to have known, that the disclosure of the
information was likely to harm any of the specified public
Sections 70
(3) are described
in detail in Chs 5 and 6, and set out in full in
Appendix 5.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34
Question 2–2.
Information Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft,
Administrative penalties and
contractual remedies are considered in Chs 13 and 14. General law remedies
are considered in Ch 5.
v Goreng Goreng
[2008] ACTSC 74
Johnston v Director of Public
Prosecutions (Cth)
(1989) 90 ACTR 7
Public Service Act 1999
The full text of
reg 2.1 of the
Public Service Regulations
is set out in Appendix
The provision does, however, specify a
maximum penalty of two years imprisonment in circumstances where an unauthorised
disclosure occurs:
Food Standards Australia New Zealand Act
A similar approach is taken in
Hearing Services Act 1991
The common law duty of
loyalty and fidelity and the equitable duty of confidence are considered in
‘Commonwealth Secrecy Provisions: Time for Reform?’
Criminal Law Journal
J McGinness,
‘Secrecy Provisions in Commonwealth Legislation’
[1990] FedLawRw 3
Federal Law Review
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 2–2.
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
19 February 2009.
Law Council of Australia,
27 February 2009.
and Public Sector Union,
2 March 2009.
23 March 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007),
provisions are also discussed in
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security
Sensitive Information
, ALRC 98 (2004),
H Gibbs, R Watson
and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Final Report
Ibid, 323. See, further,
Chs 2 and 10.
J McGinness,
‘Secrecy Provisions in Commonwealth Legislation’
[1990] FedLawRw 3
Federal Law Review
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 3–7.
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
19 February 2009.
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Bureau of Statistics,
24 March 2009.
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions,
18 February 2009.
Federal Police,
3 March 2009.
Public Interest
Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
This view was also expressed by Australia’s Right to Know coalition:
Australia’s Right to Know,
6 March 2009. The tension between secrecy and FOI is considered in
Public Interest Advocacy
Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Department of
Human Services,
20 February 2009.
[2007] NSWDC 138
Kessing v The Queen
[2008] NSWCCA 310.
case is discussed in Ch 5.
Council of Australia,
27 February 2009.
Press Council,
18 February 2009.
Whistleblowers
10 March 2009.
Australia’s
Right to Know,
6 March 2009.
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
Public Service Commission,
APS Values and Code of Conduct in Practice
(2005) <www.apsc.gov.au> at 23 September
Freedom of Information Act
The FOI Exposure Draft Bill proposes a revised
objects clause—set out in Ch 2—re-emphasising the importance of
Information Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft, sch 3
cl 12 (proposed
Freedom of Information
(Removal of Conclusive Certificates and Other Measures) Bill 2008
(Cth) sch 1,
cl 5 proposes to repeal the provisions of the FOI Act that permit a minister or
delegate to issue a conclusive certificate
in relation to documents exempt under
s 33(1) of the FOI Act.
Information Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft, sch 3
s 11B(4)(a).
cl 11 proposes to insert a new s 4(10) into the FOI
Act to clarify that information or communication ‘pursuant to any treaty
or formal instrument on the reciprocal protection of classified
information’ is covered by s 33(1)(b) of the FOI
Ibid, sch 3 pt 2 cll 23
and 28 propose to repeal s 33A of the FOI Act and enact a new s 47B which would
cover the same kind of documents
as s 33A(1). However, as
‘conditionally exempt’ documents, under the proposed amendments an
agency or minister must give
a person access to these documents unless it would
be contrary to the public interest.
Freedom of Information (Removal of
Conclusive Certificates and Other Measures) Bill 2008
(Cth) sch 1
cll 6–7 propose to repeal the provisions of the FOI Act that permit a
minister or delegate to issue a conclusive
certificate in relation to documents
exempt under s 33A(1).
of Information Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft,
cl 23 proposes to repeal and replace s 34 of the
FOI Act. The new provision would clarify that the Cabinet exemption is limited
documents prepared for the dominant purpose of submission for the
consideration of Cabinet. The
Freedom of Information (Removal of Conclusive
Certificates and Other Measures) Bill 2008
(Cth) sch 1 cl 8 proposes to
repeal the provisions of the FOI Act that permit the Secretary of the Department
of the Prime Minister
and Cabinet to issue a conclusive certificate in relation
to documents exempt under
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Information Act 1982
(Cth) s 35. The
Freedom of Information Amendment
(Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft, sch 3
cl 23 proposes to
repeal s 35.
Information Act 1982
(Cth) s 36.
Freedom of Information Amendment
(Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft, sch 3
cll 23, 28 propose to
repeal s 36 of the FOI Act and enact a new s 47C in its place.
Proposed s 47C would cover the same kind of
documents as s 36(1).
However, as ‘conditionally exempt’ documents, under the proposed
amendments an agency or minister
must give a person access to these documents
unless it would be contrary to the public interest.
Freedom of Information
(Removal of Conclusive Certificates and Other Measures) Bill 2008
sch 1 cl 10 proposes to repeal the provisions of the FOI Act that
permit a minister or delegate to issue a conclusive certificate
in relation to
documents exempt under
Australian Commission for
Law Enforcement Integrity,
18 February 2009.
Broadly speaking, the IPPs regulate the conduct of
public sector agencies. The NPPs regulate the conduct of private sector
organisations.
definition of ‘enforcement body’, which includes the AFP, the ACC,
APRA, and ASIC.
Freedom of Information
Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft, sch 3
cll 24, 28 propose to repeal s 40 of the FOI Act and enact a new
s 47E in its place. Proposed s 47E would cover the same kind of
documents as s 40 with the exception of documents currently covered by
s 40(e) regarding an adverse effect on the conduct by or on
behalf of the
Commonwealth or an agency of industrial relations. As ‘conditionally
exempt’ documents, under the proposed
amendments an agency or minister
must give a person access to these documents unless it would be contrary to the
public interest.
Ibid, sch 3 pt 2 cll
24, 28 propose to repeal s 43A of the FOI Act and enact a new s 47H in
its place. Proposed s 47H would cover
the same kind of documents as
s 43A. However, as ‘conditionally exempt’ documents, under the
proposed amendments an agency
or minister must give a person access to these
documents unless it would be contrary to the public
Ibid, sch 3 pt 2 cll 24, 28
proposes to repeal s 41 of the FOI Act and enact a new s 47F in its
place. Proposed s 47F would cover
similar kinds of documents as s 41.
However, as ‘conditionally exempt’ documents, under the proposed
amendments an agency
or minister must give a person access to these documents
unless it would be contrary to the public
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
of Human Services,
20 February 2009;
Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations,
19 February 2009.
19 February 2009.
Australia’s
Right to Know,
6 March 2009.
Information Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft, sch 3
cll 24 and 28 propose to repeal s 43 of the FOI Act and enact a new s 47G
in its place. Proposed s 47G would cover similar kinds
of documents as s 43.
However, as ‘conditionally exempt’ documents, under the proposed
amendments an agency or minister
must give a person access to these documents
unless it would be contrary to the public
Section 142.2 of the
Criminal Code
includes an offence for the use of Commonwealth information
with the intention of dishonestly obtaining a benefit or dishonestly
detriment to another
Australia’s Right to
6 March 2009.
Department of
Climate Change,
23 February 2009.
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Competition & Consumer Commission,
12 February 2009.
Information Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft, sch 3
cll 24 and 28 propose to repeal s 39 of the FOI Act and enact a new
s 47D in its place. Proposed s 47D would cover the same kinds
documents as s 39. However, as ‘conditionally exempt’
documents, under the proposed amendments an agency or minister
must give a
person access to these documents unless it would be contrary to the public
Ibid, sch 3 pt 2 cll 24 and
28 propose to repeal s 44 of the FOI Act and enact a new s 47J in its place. The
proposed s 47J differs
from s 44 and would exempt documents that would, or could
reasonably be expected to, have a substantial adverse effect on
Australia’s
economy by influencing a decision or action of a person or
entity, or by giving a business an undue benefit or detriment by providing
premature knowledge of proposed or possible action or inaction by a person or
entity. As ‘conditionally exempt’ documents,
under the proposed
amendments an agency or minister must give a person access to these documents
unless it would be contrary to the
Australian Government
FOI Guidelines—Exemption Sections in the FOI Act
<www.dpmc.gov.au> at 14 October 2008,
Criminal Code
Freedom of Information
Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft, sch 3
proposes to repeal s 47 of the FOI Act relating to the disclosure of information
arising out of certain companies and securities
legislation.
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 5.1.
For example, the
Criminal Code
itself stipulates an additional fault
element of ‘dishonesty’ in relation to offences in Ch 7—
Proper Administration of Government
. Dishonesty is defined as
‘dishonest according to the standards of ordinary people’ and
‘known by the defendant
to be dishonest according to the standards of
ordinary people’:
Ibid ss 6.1, 6.2.
Proudman v Dayman
[1941] HCA 28
(1941) 67 CLR
He Kaw Teh v R
[1985] HCA 43
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences,
Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007),
Senate Standing Committee for the
Scrutiny of Bills,
Application of Absolute and Strict Liability Offences in
Commonwealth Legislation
Australian Parliament—Senate
Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Application of Absolute and
Strict Liability Offences in Commonwealth Legislation
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 3–6.
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Press Council,
18 February 2009.
18 February 2009.
19 February 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Whistleblowers
10 March 2009.
Law Reform Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and
Security Sensitive Information
, ALRC 98 (2004),
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 9.2.
8. General Secrecy Offence:
Introduction
Whose conduct should be regulated?
‘Commonwealth officers’ and others
‘Commonwealth public officials’
Australian Public Service employees and others
Contracted service providers
The Governor-General
Ministers and parliamentary secretaries
Members of the Houses of Parliament
Commonwealth judicial officers
Former Commonwealth officers
ALRC’s views
Initial and subsequent disclosures
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
What conduct should be regulated?
Receiving information
Copying, recording and using information
Disclosing, divulging, communicating
ALRC’s views
Fault element attaching to disclosure
What information should be protected?
ALRC’s views
8. General Secrecy Offence:
Introduction
8.1 As discussed in Chapter 6, the ALRC is proposing that ss 70 and
79(3) of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) be repealed and that a new general
secrecy offence should be enacted in the
Criminal Code
In the Issues Paper,
Review of Secrecy Laws
the ALRC sought
stakeholder views on how such an offence should be
This chapter considers some
of the essential elements of the proposed new offence—including whose
conduct, and what kind of
conduct, should be regulated. Chapter 9 goes on to
consider what exceptions and defences should be available under the proposed
secrecy offence, and what penalties should apply for breach.
Whose conduct should
be regulated?
8.2 Chapter 5 provides an overview of the parties regulated by federal
secrecy provisions. As noted in that chapter, secrecy provisions
Commonwealth officers;
Commonwealth agencies;
organisations or individuals providing services for or on behalf of
the Commonwealth;
other specific categories of
organisations or individuals; or
8.3 Section 70 of the
to ‘Commonwealth officers’, as defined in
of that Act.
Section 79(3) of the
regulates the conduct of ‘any
person’. The
Criminal Code
includes a number of offences concerning
the conduct of Commonwealth public
‘Commonwealth public official’ is defined in the
, and includes elements from all three arms of government—the
legislature, the executive and the judiciary. In this chapter,
considers whether the proposed general secrecy offence, to be included in the
Criminal Code
, should regulate the behaviour of ‘Commonwealth
public officials’ as defined in the
, or a smaller group of
‘Commonwealth officers’ defined separately for the purposes of the
proposed new offence.
8.4 The answer will depend on whether the offence is intended essentially to
regulate the activity of the executive branch of the
Australian Government, or
whether it is intended to operate more broadly. In Chapter 2, the ALRC
considers the structures established
Constitution
the doctrine of the separation of powers. The ALRC’s proposed approach in
relation to the new general secrecy offence is
to focus on disclosure of
Commonwealth information by members of the executive branch of government.
8.5 The following section examines each of the elements in the definitions of
‘Commonwealth officer’ in the
‘Commonwealth public official’ in the
Criminal Code
extent to which these overlap. The ALRC then considers which elements should be
covered by the proposed new general secrecy
‘Commonwealth officers’ and
8.6 The term ‘Commonwealth officer’
is defined in the
a person holding office under, or employed by, the Commonwealth, and
(a) a person appointed or engaged under the
Public Service Act 1999
(aa) a person permanently or temporarily employed in the Public Service of a
Territory or in, or in connection with, the Defence
Force, or in the Service of
a public authority under the Commonwealth;
(b) the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police, a Deputy Commissioner of
the Australian Federal Police, an [Australian Federal
Police] employee or a
special member of the Australian Federal Police (all within the meaning of the
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
(c) for the purposes of
, a person who, although not holding
office under, or employed by, the Commonwealth, a Territory or a public
authority under the Commonwealth,
performs services for or on behalf of the
Commonwealth, a Territory or a public authority under the Commonwealth; and
(d) for the purposes of
section 70:
(i) a person who is an employee of the Australian Postal Corporation;
(ii) a person who performs services for or on behalf of the Australian Postal
Corporation; and
(iii) an employee of a person who performs services for or on behalf of the
Australian Postal Corporation.
8.7 The definition is fairly broad and although there is some uncertainty at
the outer limits, as discussed below, it clearly covers:
Australian Public
Service (APS) employees; others employed by or holding office under the
Commonwealth; those who perform services
for or on behalf of the Commonwealth;
and those employed by ‘public authorities’, defined as ‘any
authority or
body constituted by or under a law of the Commonwealth or of a
Territory’. The definition also specifically covers the Australian
Police (AFP), the Australian Defence Forces (ADF) and the Australian Postal
Corporation.
8.8 In order for s 70 of the
to apply, it is necessary
for a person to fall within the definition of ‘Commonwealth officer’
and, in addition, to be subject to a duty of non-disclosure as
discussed in detail in Chapter 7.
8.9 Section 79(3) of the
applies to any person who
discloses prescribed information where the information has come to them in
certain circumstances. These
circumstances are set out in 79(1), and include
where information:
has been entrusted to the person by a Commonwealth officer or a person holding
office under the Queen or he or she has made or obtained
it owing to his or her
position as a person:
(i) who is or has been a Commonwealth officer;
(ii) who holds or has held office under the Queen;
(iii) who holds or has held a contract made on behalf of the Queen or the
Commonwealth;
(iv) who is or has been employed by or under a person to whom a preceding
subparagraph applies; or
(v) acting with the permission of a Minister;
and, by reason of its nature or the circumstances under which it was entrusted
to him or her or it was made or obtained by him or
her or for any other reason,
it is his or her duty to treat it as secret ...
8.10 This provision extends liability for disclosure of Commonwealth
information beyond Commonwealth officers, office holders and
contractors to
include any person—including, potentially, a journalist—who acquires
such information in circumstances
which give rise to a duty to treat the
information as secret. As discussed in detail, below, the ALRC proposes that, in
some circumstances,
the subsequent disclosure of Commonwealth information by any
person who receives the information knowing, or having reasonable grounds
believe, that the information has been disclosed in breach of the general
secrecy offence should also be an
‘Commonwealth
public officials’
8.11 The term
‘Commonwealth public official’ is defined comprehensively in the
Dictionary to the
Criminal Code
and includes paragraphs (a) to
The Revised Explanatory
Memorandum for the Criminal Code Amendment (Theft, Fraud, Bribery and Related
Offences) Bill 2000 (Cth) states,
in relation to this definition, that:
‘Commonwealth public official’ includes a broad group of people
including Commonwealth employees and officers, Members
of Parliament, judges,
police, contractors, military personnel and those employed by Commonwealth
authorities.
8.12 The definition ‘sets the scope of the protection of the theft,
fraud, bribery and related offences which are to assist
with the proper
administration of
government’.
The definition
includes bodies established ‘by or under a law of the Commonwealth’
created to perform government functions.
These are captured by the term
‘Commonwealth authority’, which is defined separately. The
Explanatory Memorandum notes
that the current definition of ‘public
authority under the Commonwealth’ in
which includes any authority or body constituted by or under a law of the
Commonwealth or of a Territory, ‘lacks sufficient
discrimination’.
8.13 A number of bodies and organisations are expressly excluded because they
are separate from the Commonwealth government. These
include Aboriginal councils
and associations; the ACT, Northern Territory and Norfolk Island Governments;
corporations and bodies
such as registered unions and employer
associations.
Australian Public
Service employees and others
8.14 The following elements are taken from the definition of
‘Commonwealth public official’. They cover APS employees
public sector employees and there is a significant degree of overlap with the
definition of ‘Commonwealth officer’
APS employees;
other individuals employed by the Commonwealth otherwise than under
Public Service Act
members of the ADF;
members or special members of the AFP;
individuals who hold or perform the duties of an office established
by or under a law of the Commonwealth;
officers and employees of Commonwealth authorities, as defined in
Criminal Code
individuals who exercise powers, or perform functions, conferred on
them by or under a law of the Commonwealth.
8.15 These elements
represent the key working units of the executive branch of government that is
responsible for collecting, generating
and controlling the flow of Commonwealth
information. The extent to which these elements cover judicial officers is
discussed further
Submissions and consultations
8.16 In IP 34, the ALRC asked when secrecy provisions should regulate
the behaviour of persons other than Commonwealth
A number of
stakeholders raised the possibility that the proposed general secrecy offence
should regulate the activity of any person
who comes into possession of
Commonwealth information in certain circumstances. The Australian Government
Attorney-General’s
Department (AGD) submitted that:
it may be appropriate for secrecy laws to apply to anyone who comes into
possession of the relevant information where the potential
unauthorised disclosure would be particularly grave. It may be in the public
interest for secrecy provisions to regulate
the behaviour of ‘any
person’ for information that could prejudice national security, defence,
international relations,
or put individuals at risk of
8.17 The Australian Intelligence Community (AIC) was also of this view,
stating that:
The AIC considers there may be merit in extending the offence in section 70 of
to all persons. AIC agencies note that the damage to
national security (whether danger to life and liberty of staff members and
or other critical information disclosure) can be severely affected if
disseminated by the media or in other public
8.18 On the other hand, the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) submitted that
the taxation secrecy provisions should regulate only those
within government
agencies, or those performing services for such an agency, except where
information has been disclosed to, or obtained
by, a person in breach of a
taxation law.
ALRC’s views
8.19 In the ALRC’s view, the primary focus of the proposed general
secrecy offence should be the protection of Commonwealth
information collected
or generated by the executive branch of government. The executive collects and
generates vast amounts of information
from and about individuals and
organisations on both a compulsory and voluntary basis and it is this sector
that is the main focus
of s 70 of the
. The ALRC proposes
that ‘Commonwealth officer’ be defined for the purposes of the new
general secrecy offence, and that
the definition should include APS employees
and other public sector employees by reference to those elements of the
definition of
‘Commonwealth public official’ set out above.
8.20 In addition, however, the ALRC proposes a new offence for subsequent
disclosure of Commonwealth information where a person knows,
or has reasonable
grounds to believe, that the information has been disclosed by a Commonwealth
officer in breach of the general
secrecy offence. The proposed new subsequent
disclosure offence is discussed in detail below, and will include an additional
requirement
that the person knew, was reckless as to whether, or intended, that
the disclosure would harm one of the public interests listed
in the general
secrecy offence.
8.21 It is possible to distinguish between the offences set out in the
Criminal Code
, such as bribery and abuse of public office—that
apply to ‘Commonwealth public officials’—and the proposed
general secrecy offence that is intended to protect information collected and
generated by the executive. The existing
Criminal Code
offences are
directed at corruption in public office, while the proposed general secrecy
offence is directed at protecting information
collected and generated by
government. For this reason, the ALRC is of the view that it is not appropriate
to rely on the definition
of ‘Commonwealth public official’ in the
Criminal Code
to define those who are subject to the proposed general
secrecy offence. Instead, ‘Commonwealth officer’ should be defined
separately for the purposes of the proposed new offence.
Contracted service
8.22 Currently, the definition of ‘Commonwealth officer’ in
includes ‘a person who … performs
services for or on behalf of the Commonwealth, a Territory or a public authority
the Commonwealth’. This paragraph was added to the definition in
1987, in order to reflect the changing and increasingly dispersed
government and government service
It recognises that
Commonwealth information is often handled by those contracted to provide goods
and services to or on behalf of
the Commonwealth.
8.23 The Revised Explanatory Memorandum for the Criminal Code Amendment
(Theft, Fraud, Bribery and Related Offences) Bill notes that
the definition of
‘Commonwealth public official’ in the
Criminal Code
extends to Commonwealth contracted service providers, that is:
those who provide services by contract rather than as an office holder or
employee ... Often these people have responsibilities that
are indistinguishable
from departmental officers. While they are covered by the
Crimes Act 1914
definition of ‘Commonwealth officer’ for some offences
(non-disclosure, theft, falsification or records, corruption, impersonation
obstruction—sections 75 to 76), there is no reason why they should not be
subject to the full range of Chapter 7 offences
(including the fraud related
The definition of ‘contracted service provider’ covers parties to a
contract with a ‘Commonwealth entity’
but also subcontractors. Often
it is the subcontractors who provide the
8.24 The definition of ‘Commonwealth public official’ in the
Criminal Code
Dictionary includes:
individuals who are contracted service providers for a Commonwealth
contract; and
individuals who are officers or employees of a contracted service
provider for a Commonwealth contract and who provide services for
the purposes
(whether direct or indirect) of the Commonwealth contract.
term ‘contracted service provider for a Commonwealth contract’ is
also defined in the
Criminal Code
to mean a person who is a party to the
Commonwealth contract and who is responsible for the provision of services to a
Commonwealth
entity under the Commonwealth contract; or a subcontractor for the
Commonwealth contract.
8.26 These provisions are specifically directed to individuals, rather than
entities. There is an argument, in the context of the
proposed general secrecy
offence, that entities which are contracted service providers should also be
subject to the general criminal
offence. The Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment
(Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
(Cth) (the Tax Laws Exposure
Draft Bill) includes, as part of the proposed definition of a ‘taxation
officer’, ‘an
entity engaged to provide services relating to the ATO
(such as cleaning firms or IT contractors) and any individual employed or
subcontracted by such an
Submissions and consultations
8.27 There was considerable support in submissions for ensuring that the
proposed general secrecy offence continued to cover Commonwealth
service providers.
Department of Human Services (DHS), for example, stated that:
The extent of outsourcing and potential partnerships with non-Commonwealth
entities makes it necessary that secrecy laws bind [contracted
providers] and partners as if they were Commonwealth employees. The Department
notes that, in respect of personal information,
this is consistent with
s 95B and IPP 4 of the
, which require that contracted service
providers are held to the same privacy standards that would have applied if the
function they are performing for or on behalf of an agency had been
performed by the agency itself.
8.28 The Treasury provided the following example:
Treasury considers that it is appropriate that secrecy obligations have a wide
application to reflect the reality that private individuals
and entities are
increasingly being used to assist in the provision of government services. In
the taxation context, a clear example
is the use of debt collection agencies to
assist with the collection of outstanding taxation debt. Although disclosed
a Commonwealth Government agency, the sensitivity of the information
is not diminished, nor is the policy justification for ensuring
a high level of
protection of that information.
ALRC’s views
8.29 The ALRC agrees that Commonwealth contracted service providers should be
covered by the proposed new general secrecy offence.
This reflects the reality
that contracted services providers are increasingly involved in the business of
government, including the
provision of government services. They collect and
generate large amounts of information, which would clearly be Commonwealth
information
if it was collected or generated by an Australian Government agency,
and this information should be protected in the same way by
the criminal law
whether it happens to be held by the public or private sector.
8.30 Consequently, the ALRC proposes that the definition of
‘Commonwealth officer’ for the purposes of the general secrecy
offence should include individuals and entities who are contracted service
providers under a Commonwealth contract. The ALRC is of
the view that contracted
entities should also be subject to the deterrent value of the criminal law. This
will encourage such entities
to ensure that appropriate measures are put in
place to protect Commonwealth information. The general secrecy offence should
to officers and employees of contracted service providers and to
sub-contractors.
Governor-General
8.31 The Revised Explanatory Memorandum for the Criminal Code Amendment
(Theft, Fraud, Bribery and Related Offences) Bill states that:
The definition of
‘Commonwealth officer’ in
subsection 3(1)
Crimes Act 1914
is very unsatisfactory. This is because there have even been doubts
expressed in the past that it covers Ministers and it does not
even cover the
Governor-General. It is critical that all people who perform duties and
functions for the Commonwealth are covered.
This is not only relevant to
corruption offences, but the whole range of Chapter 7
8.32 It appears that the Governor-General does not fall within the definition
of ‘Commonwealth officer’ in the
, and so would not
be liable to prosecution under s 70. The Governor-General would, however,
be liable to prosecution under s 79(3)
appropriate circumstances, as the provision applies to any person. The
Governor-General belongs to the executive branch of government
and has access to
Commonwealth information at the highest level. Although the Governor-General is
not currently subject to s 70 of
, it is arguable that
the activity of the Governor-General should be regulated by the proposed general
secrecy offence.
8.33 The Governor-General’s staff are appointed or employed under the
Governor-General Act 1974
(Cth) and will, therefore, be covered by other
elements of the definition of ‘Commonwealth public official’. The
Governor-General’s
Official Secretary, for example, is ‘an
individual who holds or performs the duties of an office established by or under
law of the Commonwealth’ and other staff will be individuals
‘employed by the Commonwealth otherwise than under the
Public Service
’. As discussed above, it is the ALRC’s view that these
elements should be included in the definition of ‘Commonwealth
officer’ for the purposes of the general secrecy offence.
Ministers and
parliamentary secretaries
8.34 As noted in the Revised Explanatory Memorandum for the Criminal Code
Amendment (Theft, Fraud, Bribery and Related Offences) Bill
there is some doubt
whether the definition of ‘Commonwealth officer’ in the
extends to cover ministers. By way of contrast, however, Lindgren J
Wong v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
reasoned that they should be covered:
The expression ‘Commonwealth officer’ is defined in
Crimes Act 1914
to mean ‘a person holding office under, or employed
by, the Commonwealth’, and to include particular office-holders listed
the definition.
Constitution
empowers the
Governor-General to appoint ‘officers’ to administer departments of
State of the Commonwealth, and provides
that ‘[s]uch officers shall hold
office during the pleasure of the
Governor-General’.
8.35 Ministers and parliamentary secretaries belong to the executive branch
of government and have access to Commonwealth information
at the highest level.
Although there is some uncertainty, ministers may be subject to prosecution
where they are subject to a duty of non-disclosure, as well as
more specific secrecy offence provisions, such as
Support (Assessment) Act 1989
(Cth), which expressly applies to the
Minister. Both ministers and parliamentary secretaries are also potentially
subject to prosecution
under s 79(3) of the
certainly arguable, therefore, that the activity of ministers and parliamentary
secretaries should be regulated by the new general
secrecy offence.
8.36 On the other hand, where ministers are not expressly prohibited from
disclosing information, they may be required to decide whether
Commonwealth information should be disclosed or not. Information may be
disclosed on the basis of a decision by the minister
that disclosure is
generally in the public interest, even though the disclosure may cause harm to a
particular public interest—for
example, Australia’s relationship
with another country. John McGinness noted that:
Sections 70 and 79(3) do not specify who may authorise the disclosure of
information. A committee which reviewed equivalent provisions
in the United
Kingdom suggested that in practice authorisation for this purpose is implied,
flowing from the nature of public servants’
duties. It accepted that
Ministers and ‘senior’ civil servants are
self-authorising.
8.37 The ALRC proposes that, for the purposes of the proposed general secrecy
offence, the definition of ‘Commonwealth officer’
should include
ministers and parliamentary secretaries. In order to address the issue of
disclosures authorised by the minister,
the ALRC proposes in Chapter 9 that
one of the exceptions to the new general secrecy offence should be disclosure
with the approval
of an agency head or the responsible minister, who would have
to certify that disclosure is in the public interest in any particular
8.38 In his submission, James Renwick suggested that:
although public servants are often blamed for the leaking of information, it is
widely suspected that most leaks of information come
from the offices of
ministers, usually from their staff (who, these days, are rarely public
servants). Any criminal or civil law
sanctions imposed to prevent leaking by
public servants ought equally apply to ministerial
8.39 Ministerial staff are generally employed under the
Parliament (Staff) Act 1984
(Cth) and will, therefore, be individuals
‘employed by the Commonwealth otherwise than under the
Public Service
’. The ALRC proposes to include such individuals in the definition
of ‘Commonwealth officer’ for the purposes of
the new general
secrecy offence. Although the proposed exception for approval by the minister
will allow information to be disclosed
by ministerial staff, this will not
protect ministers’ staff from prosecution for unauthorised
‘leaks’ where information
is disclosed that harms, is reasonably
likely to harm, or is intended to harm, the public interests discussed in
Members of the
Houses of Parliament
8.40 Members of the Australian Parliament, both Senators and Members of the
House of Representatives, who are not ministers or parliamentary
secretaries, do
not form part of the executive branch of government, but are part of the
legislative branch. While Members of Parliament
do not fall within the
definition of ‘Commonwealth officer’ in
they are expressly included in the definition of
‘Commonwealth public official’ in the
Criminal Code.
occasion they do have access to Commonwealth information that is not in the
public domain, for example, when they are approached
by whistleblowers or
briefed on government proposals. Members of Parliament would be liable to
prosecution for unauthorised disclosure
of such information under s 79(3)
, in appropriate circumstances.
8.41 The proposed general secrecy offence targets Commonwealth information
held by Commonwealth officers. The ALRC does not propose
to extend the
definition of Commonwealth officer beyond the executive branch to include
Members of Parliament who are not ministers
or parliamentary secretaries,
although the ALRC would be interested in feedback from stakeholders on this
issue. Members of Parliament
may be liable to criminal penalties if in breach of
the ALRC’s proposed subsequent disclosure
8.42 In addition, Members of Parliament are liable to criminal penalties for
breach of existing provisions of the
Criminal Code.
These include
provisions that prohibit a Commonwealth public official from using any
information that he or she has obtained in the
official’s capacity as an
official with the intention of dishonestly obtaining a benefit for himself or
herself or for another
person, or dishonestly causing a detriment to another
Commonwealth
judicial officers
8.43 The Revised Explanatory
Memorandum for the Criminal Code Amendment (Theft, Fraud, Bribery and Related
Offences) Bill states that:
Certain judicial officers are covered by the
Crimes Act 1914
of ‘Commonwealth officer’
(subsection 3(1))
which covers any person
holding office under the Commonwealth. This would include judges of federal
courts but there is less certainty
State and Territory judges and officials performing judicial
8.44 Judicial officers, when acting judicially, do not form part of the
executive branch of government, but comprise the judicial
branch. As discussed
in Chapter 2, the
Constitution
establishes the principle
of the separation of powers, meaning that the three functions of
government—the power to make laws,
administer laws and decide
disputes—are conferred on three different bodies: the legislative,
executive and the judiciary.
The independence of the judicial branch and the
strict separation of judicial power, established under Chapter III of the
Constitution
, is fundamental to Australia’s system of
representative democracy
General secrecy provisions must not, therefore,
interfere with, or limit, the exercise of federal judicial power by a federal
8.45 It is possible to confer executive functions on judicial
officers—acting as designated persons rather than in their judicial
capacity—for example, the power to issue warrants under the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
(Cth). As noted in
Chapter 2, in
Grollo v Palmer
, Gummow J expressly considered this
situation and the fact that judicial officers might be subject to prosecution
for breach of a duty of non-disclosure arising under the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
or, possibly, under
s 79 of the
Although in this case, Gummow J
expressed the view that the ambit of the duty imposed by these provisions
‘stops short of impeding
discharge of the higher duty flowing from
Chapter III of the
Constitution
’, he noted that:
But for this construction which, in my view, should be placed upon the Act and
upon ss 70 and 79 of the
, I would have accepted the
submission by the applicant that the impugned provision of the Act and these
sections of the
, in their operation upon information and
documents acquired by ‘eligible Judges’ pursuant to the Act, did
amount to an
impermissible undermining of the
Boilermakers
8.46 In addition, judicial officers are liable to criminal penalties for
breach of existing provisions of the
Criminal Code
, including
s 142.2 on misuse of official information by Commonwealth public officials,
discussed above.
ALRC’s views
8.47 Although both the legislative and judicial branches collect information
from individuals and organisations on both a voluntary
and compulsory basis, the
context in which this information is collected and used is quite different from
the executive branch. Much
of the information is collected in the context of
public processes, such as court hearings and parliamentary committee inquiries.
These processes raise different issues in relation to disclosure of information,
and have their own rules and procedures for providing
protection for information
in appropriate circumstances. It is also possible to make specific provision in
legislation regarding
disclosure of certain executive branch information to the
judicial and legislative branches of government and this has been done
number of existing secrecy
provisions.
8.48 The proposed general secrecy offence targets Commonwealth information
held by Commonwealth officers in the executive branch of
government. The ALRC is
not proposing that the definition of Commonwealth officer for the purposes of
the proposed offence be extended
beyond the executive branch to include judicial
officers acting in their judicial capacity. However, judicial officers may be
under the proposed general secrecy offence when appointed as designated
persons to perform executive functions under Commonwealth
legislation, the
extent that this was consistent with the exercise of federal judicial power as
discussed above.
8.49 In addition, the ALRC proposes the enactment of an offence relating to
the subsequent disclosure of Commonwealth information
by any person, where the
person knows, or has reasonable cause to believe, that the information has been
disclosed in breach of the
general secrecy
This proposed offence
would apply to any person including, potentially, those working in the judicial
and legislative branches of
government. The offence would, however, be subject
to the operation of the
Constitution
, including the doctrine
of the separation of powers and the requirement not to interfere with the
exercise of judicial power, and
the doctrine of parliamentary
Former Commonwealth
8.50 Chapter 5 considers the extent to which existing secrecy provisions
expressly regulate the behaviour of former Commonwealth officers
and others who
have had access to Commonwealth information in the past, but no longer have
access. For example, s 70 of the
expressly regulates the
behaviour of persons who are Commonwealth
as well as those who
have been Commonwealth
8.51 As noted in Chapter 5, the common law duty of fidelity and loyalty also
provides some protection for information acquired during
the employment
relationship once that relationship ends. Leo Tsaknis noted that the common law
duty allows former employees to use
the knowledge, skills and experience gained
as an employee in order to carry out their profession or trade, while also
confidential information where disclosure would have an adverse
impact on the employer’s
8.52 Tsaknis argued, however, that s 70(2) of the
not draw a distinction between information that is confidential and information
that is not, and expressed the view that this
imposes ‘a form of servitude
that the common law would not
countenance’.
agreed with this view, stating that this provision is ‘objectionably wide
in its scope and mysterious in its possible
applications’.
Finn’s view was that third party and commercial information should be
protected—while it remains confidential and not
in the public
domain—but suggested that, in relation to other government information, it
should only be protected to the extent
that disclosure is likely to injure the
public interest.
Submissions and consultations
8.53 In IP 34, the ALRC sought stakeholder views on the circumstances in
which it is appropriate for secrecy provisions to continue
to regulate the
behaviour of those who have been Commonwealth officers, or who have held other
positions subject to Commonwealth
secrecy provisions, but who are no longer in
those positions.
In response,
the AGD submitted that:
If there are strong reasons for protecting information based upon its nature and
the harm to the public interest if it is disclosed,
it would seem to follow that
secrecy laws should extend, in most cases, to individuals who formerly held
positions where they were
required to keep the relevant information
confidential. To exclude such persons from the ambit of secrecy laws would
frustrate their
purpose, as it would allow a person to avoid any penalty simply
by resigning from the relevant office before making an unauthorised
disclosure.
8.54 Stakeholders
agreed that
it would significantly undermine the utility of the provisions if they did not
extend to former officers.
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA), for example, noted that the
effectiveness of its secrecy provision would be
‘dramatically curtailed if
it did not apply to former
8.55 The Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) noted that,
if a secrecy provision included a ‘harm to the
public interest’
test, this would allow former Commonwealth officers to disclose certain
information, for example, where the
information had become dated and was no
longer relevant to the operations of the
ALRC’s views
8.56 The ALRC’s view is that the proposed general secrecy offence
should apply to both current and former Commonwealth officers.
The ALRC agrees
with stakeholders that it would significantly undermine the utility of the
provision if it did not extend to former
officers. This problem is especially
acute in relation to those who have had access to highly sensitive information
in the Australian
Intelligence Community or the law enforcement context. The
requirement, discussed in Chapter 7, that to attract criminal liability
disclosure must cause harm, be reasonably likely to cause harm, or be intended
to cause harm will limit the liability of former
Commonwealth officers,
consistent with Finn’s analysis, discussed above.
8.57 The ALRC considers that the following ‘Commonwealth
officers’ should be covered by the proposed new general secrecy
Governor-General;
Ministers and parliamentary secretaries;
APS employees—that is, individuals appointed or engaged under
Public Service Act
individuals employed by the Commonwealth otherwise than under the
Public Service Act
members of the ADF;
members or special members of the AFP;
individuals who hold or perform the duties of an office established
by or under a law of the Commonwealth;
officers or employees of Commonwealth authorities;
individuals who exercise powers, or perform functions, conferred on
them by or under a law of the Commonwealth.
individuals and
entities who are contracted service providers for a Commonwealth contract;
individuals who are officers or employees of a contracted service
provider for a Commonwealth contract and who provide services for
the purposes
(whether direct or indirect) of the Commonwealth contract.
ALRC’s view is that the proposed new offence should not apply to judicial
officers acting in their judicial capacity,
or to members of parliament who do
not form part of the executive. It may be necessary to expressly exclude
judicial officers from
the definition of ‘Commonwealth officer’.
8.59 These elements have been adapted from the definition of
‘Commonwealth public official’ in the
Criminal Code
are a number of express exceptions to these elements in the
will also need to be included in the definition of ‘Commonwealth
officer’ for the purposes of the general secrecy
offence, such as
individuals who hold or perform the duties of an office established under, for
example, the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) or the ACT and Northern
Territory self-government
Proposal 8–1
The proposed general secrecy offence should
regulate the conduct of those who are, or have been, ‘Commonwealth
defined as follows:
(a) the Governor-General;
(b) ministers and parliamentary secretaries;
(c) Australian Public Service employees, that is, individuals appointed or
engaged under the
Public Service Act 1999
(d) individuals employed by the Commonwealth otherwise than under the
Public Service Act
(e) members of the Australian Defence Force;
(f) members or special members of the Australian Federal Police;
(g) individuals who hold or perform the duties of an office established by
or under a law of the Commonwealth;
(h) officers or employees of Commonwealth authorities;
(i) individuals who exercise powers, or perform functions, conferred on
them by or under a law of the Commonwealth;
(j) individuals and entities who are contracted service providers for a
Commonwealth contract; and
(k) individuals who are officers or employees of a contracted service
provider for a Commonwealth contract and who provide services
for the purposes
(whether direct or indirect) of the Commonwealth contract.
Proposal 8–2
The proposed general secrecy offence should
regulate the conduct of judicial officers exercising the judicial
power of the Commonwealth, or Members of the Australian Parliament
who are not
ministers or parliamentary secretaries.
Initial and
subsequent disclosures
8.60 As noted in Chapter 5, a number of existing secrecy provisions regulate
both the initial disclosure, whether authorised or unauthorised,
subsequent unauthorised disclosure of Commonwealth information. The majority of
secrecy offences mapped by the ALRC, however,
do not contain a prohibition on
subsequent unauthorised disclosure. McGinness notes that:
Where a secrecy provision permits disclosure to other government agencies then,
in the absence of a specific provision, the persons
receiving the information
are not bound by that statute to maintain its confidentiality … Some
secrecy provisions attempt to
deal with this by imposing a further prohibition
on disclosure by recipients.
8.61 The Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill has addressed this problem by proposing
three separate offences to cover the following possibilities:
the unauthorised
disclosure of taxpayer information by current and former taxation officers;
the unauthorised disclosure of taxpayer information by individuals
who receive the information as a result of a lawful disclosure;
the unauthorised disclosure of taxpayer information by individuals
who receive the information as a result of an unlawful
disclosure.
proposed taxation provision provides that an entity does not commit an offence
if the information was obtained with authority—that
is, under one of the
disclosure exceptions—and the information is on-disclosed for, or in
connection with, the original purpose
disclosure.
However, an offence
is committed where information is on-disclosed and the subsequent disclosure
does not fall within one of the
exceptions to the prohibition on
disclosure.
The following
example is provided in the Explanatory Material:
Paul, an employee of the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority, receives
taxpayer information from the ATO for the purposes
of administering the
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993
(SIS Act). Paul discloses
the information to a journalist and to another Australian Prudential Regulation
Authority employee for a
purpose that is unconnected to the administration of
the SIS Act. In both cases, the disclosure of the information is an
8.63 When Commonwealth information is disclosed without authority, the action
for breach of confidence may provide a remedy. An action
can be brought against
a third party to whom information has been communicated in breach of a duty of
confidence where that third
party was aware, or should reasonably have been
aware, that the information was
confidential.
8.64 In 1995, the House of Representatives Standing Committee report,
Confidence: A Report of the Inquiry into the Protection of Confidential Personal
and Commercial Information Held by the Commonwealth
report), expressed the view that the general offence provisions
should also prohibit unauthorised dealing in confidential third party
information at every point in the ‘distribution chain’, where there
was the requisite mental
8.65 The earlier
Review of the Commonwealth Criminal Law
, developed by
a committee chaired by Sir Harry Gibbs (the Gibbs Committee), recommended that
Australian legislation should follow
the model provided by the
Secrets Act
(UK), and include a provision prohibiting subsequent
unauthorised disclosures. The Gibbs Committee recommended the following form
words for the offence:
[W]here a person knows, or has reasonable grounds to believe, that
information—
(i) had been disclosed (whether to him or another) by a Commonwealth officer or
government contractor without authority or had been
unlawfully obtained from
either such person; or
(ii) had been entrusted to him or her in confidence by such officer or
contractor on terms requiring it to be held in confidence;
(iii) had been disclosed (whether to him or another) without lawful authority by
a person to whom it had been entrusted as in (ii);
it would be an offence for the person to disclose the information without
authority, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
that the disclosure
would be damaging.
Submissions and
consultations
8.66 In IP 34, the ALRC asked whether secrecy provisions should, as a
matter of course, include offences dealing with both the initial
unauthorised
handling of information and any subsequent
disclosures.
significant support in submissions for covering both initial and subsequent
unauthorised disclosures, in particular, where
the person making the subsequent
unauthorised disclosure knew, or was reckless as to whether, the information had
been initially
disclosed without authority.
8.67 The ATO submitted that the taxation secrecy provisions should apply
where information has been disclosed to, or obtained by,
a person in breach of a
taxation law. This is the position under s 8XB of the
Administration Act
In the absence of these types of provisions, the ATO would be concerned that
protected information could be released in breach of
a secrecy provision and
that information could subsequently be used (by the media for example) without
that subsequent use being
subject to any criminal
8.68 The AGD stated that:
Arguably, if information is sensitive and it is in the public interest for it to
be protected from unauthorised disclosure, then
it may be appropriate to
regulate both initial and subsequent unauthorised disclosure. It would be
important to ensure that this
did not cover inadvertent or unintentional
disclosures by the second person. It may be appropriate for any offence of
unauthorised disclosure to include additional elements requiring
proof that the person knew, or was aware of the substantial risk,
information was provided to them in breach of the law and that they had reason
to believe that they should not further disclose
the information. Consideration
might also be given to cases where a person knows, or is aware of the
substantial risk, that disclosure
might cause harm, but has not necessarily
turned his or her mind to whether the initial disclosure was lawful or
8.69 The AFP agreed that secrecy offence provisions should cover subsequent
use of information where the subsequent user knew, or
should have known, that
the information had been disclosed on an unlawful basis or was classified or
protected and should not be
further used or
8.70 The Treasury made clear that it supported regulating both initial and
subsequent disclosure and that the same penalties should
apply to both. The
Treasury stated that ‘maintaining the integrity of the information becomes
no less important notwithstanding
the information may have been on-disclosed a
number of times’.
8.71 A range of other stakeholders agreed that secrecy provisions should
cover subsequent use or
disclosure.
ASIC added, however,
that secrecy provisions should not extend to the unauthorised, but unsolicited,
receipt and possession of Commonwealth
information.
8.72 The Public Interest Advocacy Centre (PIAC) also expressed concern about
imposing criminal liability for receipt of information:
In PIAC’s view, criminal liability should only apply to third parties who
knowingly deal with secret material with the intention
of damaging the defence
or security of Australia. … PIAC believes that the penalties for
subsequent handling should be of a
lower order, except where intent to damage
Australia’s national interest is
8.73 In its submission, the Australian Press Council asserted that in many,
if not most instances ‘when the media publish information
that has been
leaked from government, there is some element of public interest
involved’. In addition, the Press Council noted
that journalists and
editors are not subject to the same legislative and administrative duties as
Commonwealth officers:
A journalist will have a different set of professional obligations and does not
have the same training in information assessment.
This raises difficulties,
which need to be considered when framing secrecy legislation. Because media
professionals are not subject
to the disciplinary processes, which are available
in relation to public servants, a situation may arise where a minor disclosure
that is ostensibly in the public interest is treated as a breach of secrecy
warranting criminal conviction. By contrast, a public
servant making a
disclosure of the same information for the same purpose might instead be
disciplined by way of a range of internal
mechanisms, even though the duty
breached is arguable a higher one than that breached by the
journalist.
8.74 The Press Council suggested that specific provision should be made in
secrecy provisions in relation to unauthorised disclosures
to journalists. The
Council noted that the conduct of media organisations ‘in the course of
journalism’ is exempt from
the National Privacy Principles in the
on condition that the organisation is publically committed to
observe published privacy standards. The Press Council suggested that
exemption could operate in relation to secrecy provisions where media
organisations were committed to a set of standards
dealing with the handling of
confidential government information:
Such standards would specify that journalists must not publish government
information that they know to be confidential unless there
is a sincerely held
belief that publication would be in the public interest. The Press Council would
be willing to cooperate with
government agencies in the drafting of appropriate
8.75 Although most existing secrecy provisions do not seek to address
subsequent unauthorised disclosures, the ALRC can see merit
in the argument that
the general secrecy offence should cover subsequent disclosures in certain
circumstances. The ALRC agrees that,
in the context of the proposed new general
secrecy provision, it would not be appropriate to criminalise the mere receipt
of Commonwealth
information—even where the information has been disclosed
in contravention of the provision—if there is no subsequent
disclosure.
Those who receive such information should have the opportunity to inform the
relevant agency and, possibly—as in
the Centrelink example provided by the
DHS above—to return the information.
8.76 However, where a person receives Commonwealth information knowing, or
reckless as to whether, the information has been disclosed
in breach of the
general secrecy offence and then intentionally on-discloses that information
knowing, intending, or reckless as
to whether, the disclosure would harm, or was
reasonably likely to harm, one of the identified public interests, it appears
to impose criminal sanctions.
8.77 As discussed in Chapter 7, the proposed general secrecy offence is
limited to the disclosure of information that will harm, is
reasonably likely to
harm, or is intended to harm specific and important public interests. In these
circumstances, it is the ALRC’s
view that it would not be appropriate to
provide an exception in the criminal context for subsequent
disclosure—including by
the media. Where a journalist is aware that a
Commonwealth officer has disclosed Commonwealth information in breach of the
offence and the journalist knows, intends, or is reckless as to whether,
subsequent disclosure will harm, or is reasonably likely
to harm, one of the
identified public interests, it seems reasonable to impose sanctions in relation
to further disclosure of the
information.
8.78 As noted above, the Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill addresses three
different situations: the unauthorised disclosure of information
by current and
former taxation officers; the unauthorised disclosure of information by
individuals who receive the information as
a result of an unlawful disclosure;
and the unauthorised disclosure of information by individuals who receive the
information as
a result of a lawful
disclosure.
8.79 In the ALRC’s proposed regime, unauthorised disclosure by current
and former Commonwealth officers will be covered by the
proposed new general
secrecy offence, which is intended to apply to all Commonwealth officers,
including Commonwealth contracted
service providers. Thus, all disclosures
between Commonwealth agencies, and between agencies and their contractors, will
by the new general secrecy offence and will address the problem
identified by John McGinness, above. The proposed subsequent disclosure
will cover unauthorised disclosure by individuals who receive information as the
result of an unlawful disclosure.
8.80 The ALRC is not proposing an offence to cover unauthorised disclosure of
information by individuals who receive the information
as a result of a lawful
disclosure, although the ALRC would be interested in receiving stakeholder views
on this issue. Where a Commonwealth
officer discloses Commonwealth information
with authority to a person or entity that is not a Commonwealth
officer—for example,
a state or territory public service agency or
official, a foreign government or international organisation, or a private
sector organisation
that is not a contracted service provider—the
Commonwealth has the opportunity to ensure that appropriate safeguards are in
place, or are put in place, to protect the information. State and territory
officers are usually subject to state and territory secrecy
provisions,
or specific
Commonwealth secrecy provisions. The Australian Government can put in place
intergovernmental or inter-agency agreements
or contractual arrangements with
state and territory governments and agencies, foreign governments, and private
sector organisations.
The equitable action for breach of confidence may also be
available in some
circumstances.
8.81 The proposed subsequent disclosure offence should be subject to a number
of exceptions and defences. It should be subject to
an exception where
information is legally in the public domain. This exception is discussed in
detail in Chapter 9. Other exceptions
in the general secrecy offence will
also be relevant. For example, where information is disclosed by a Commonwealth
officer in the
course of his or her functions and duties, or with the authority
of an agency head or minister, the information will not have been
disclosed in
breach of the general secrecy offence and any subsequent disclosure should not,
therefore, be an offence under the subsequent
disclosure offence.
8.82 The proposed subsequent disclosure offence will also be subject to the
general defences established by the
Criminal Code,
and discussed in
Chapter 9, such as conduct that is justified or excused by or under
and conduct that is a
reasonable response to an emergency, where a person reasonably believes that
circumstances of sudden or extraordinary
emergency exist; and committing the
offence is the only reasonable way to deal with the
8.83 Chapter 9 also considers the need for comprehensive public interest
disclosure legislation. It will be important to ensure that
under the proposed
regime, where a public interest disclosure is made to a third party in
accordance with public interest disclosure
legislation, the subsequent
disclosure of the information by that third party will not be a criminal
Proposal 8–3
There should be a new offence in the
(Cth) (the ‘subsequent disclosure offence’) for subsequent
disclosure of Commonwealth information by any person where:
(a) the information has been disclosed by a Commonwealth officer in breach
of the proposed general secrecy offence; and
(b) the person knows, or is reckless as to whether, the information has
been disclosed in breach of the proposed general secrecy
offence; and
(c) the person knows, intends, or is reckless as to whether, the subsequent
disclosure of the information will harm, or is reasonably
likely to harm, one of
the public interests set out in Proposal 7–1.
Proposal 8–4
The proposed subsequent disclosure offence should
include an express exception where the disclosure is of information that is
in the public domain as the result of a lawful disclosure.
What conduct should
be regulated?
8.84 The following section of the chapter considers what conduct should be
covered by the proposed general secrecy offence—including
unauthorised
disclosure, use and receipt of information—and what fault element should
attach to that conduct.
8.85 As discussed in Chapter 5, at present, around 60% of Commonwealth
secrecy provisions regulate activities other than (but usually
in addition to)
the disclosure of information—including
soliciting,
possessing,
making a record
information.
Section 70 of the
regulates publishing or communicating
information, and s 79(3) regulates communicating information. The
unauthorised disclosure of
information is also described in legislation as
divulging information.
Criminal Code
contains a number of provisions that extend
criminal responsibility in certain circumstances. These provisions regulate:
which must involve conduct that is more than merely preparatory to the
commission of the offence;
aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring the commission of an offence by
another person;
incitement,
where a person urges the commission of an
and conspiracy, where a
person conspires with another person to commit an offence punishable by
imprisonment for more than 12 months,
or by a fine of 200 penalty units or
8.87 If a new criminal offence for disclosure of Commonwealth information by
Commonwealth officers were included in the
Criminal Code
, as proposed in
this Discussion Paper, then these extensions would automatically apply to the
offence. The extended criminal liability
would catch activity such as soliciting
the unauthorised disclosure of Commonwealth information.
8.88 In IP 34, the ALRC asked whether it is appropriate for secrecy
provisions to regulate conduct other than the disclosure of
information—such
as the unauthorised receipt, copying, recording or use of
information.
The ALRC considers
each of these possibilities in the next part of the chapter, and concludes that
the general secrecy offence should
be limited to the disclosure of Commonwealth
information.
information
8.89 McGinness argues that provisions that criminalise the mere receipt of
information may unduly burden journalists who receive information
they have no
intention of publishing, or Members of Parliament who are briefed by public
servants without authorisation. He notes
that s 5 of the
Secrets Act 1989
(UK) does not contain offences for mere unlawful possession
or receipt of official
information.
mapping exercise has identified 13 existing secrecy provisions that criminalise
the possession or receipt of
information.
8.90 The House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs also cautioned against the creation of offences
prosecuting the mere possession or receipt of confidential information. In the
Committee’s view, criminal liability should
only attach where the person
‘has the requisite mental element and proceeds to use, disclose or make a
record of the confidential
information’.
Submissions and consultations
8.91 A number of stakeholders expressed concern about provisions that
extended to unsolicited possession or receipt of
information.
The Australian
Press Council, for example, submitted that:
The Press Council is of the view that the receipt and holding of information
should only be treated as an offence if the recipient
has an intention to use
the information maliciously, recklessly or with intent to obtain
8.92 PIAC agreed with McGinness
as to the undesirability of criminalising mere receipt of information where the
recipient has no intention of publishing that information.
It is important to
consider the position of journalists charged in these circumstances, who are
faced with the prospect of going
to gaol for an indeterminate period of time,
rather than breaching their ethical obligations by revealing their sources.
real potential for such provisions to be used to target end recipients
of information, in an effort to pressure them into revealing
information that
enables ‘leaks’ to be traced back to their
Copying, recording
and using information
8.93 A number of secrecy provisions regulate conduct potentially leading up
to an unauthorised disclosure of information, such as
copying and recording of
information, as well as unauthorised use of information. The Privacy
Commissioner has drawn a distinction
between the use of information and the
disclosure of information on the basis that, in general terms, a
‘use’ refers
to the handling of information within an organisation;
while a ‘disclosure’ refers to the release of information to those
outside an organisation.
8.94 The Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill covers both recording and disclosure of
taxpayer information.
Explanatory Material accompanying the Draft Bill states that the former conduct
is covered ‘not only to ensure that information
is not disclosed
unlawfully, but that the information is not recorded in another form that can be
readily accessed by
Submissions and consultations
8.95 A number of stakeholders submitted that conduct other than disclosure
should be regulated in some way. The ATO submitted that
the primary mischief
addressed by the operation of tax secrecy provisions is disclosure, but noted
that the unauthorised collection,
use and recording of information could lead to
inadvertent disclosures of information. Tax law also regulates access to
information—for
Taxation Administration
prohibits unauthorised access to information about another
person’s tax affairs. The ATO stated that access to, use, recording
disclosure of information should be addressed, but noted that such provisions
should be separate from secrecy
provisions.
8.96 In its submission, the Department of Education, Employment and Workplace
Relations (DEEWR) noted that the primary reason to have
secrecy provisions was
to prevent the harm that may flow from disclosure:
This reason for protecting information against unauthorised disclosure would
seem to apply equally to ensuring that the collection
and use of the information
was also appropriate. For example, accessing a departmental database would
generally be considered a ‘use’
of the information. If a staff
member was to intentionally access a database to locate a spouse, who purposely
did not want to be
found because of domestic violence issues, then the harm that
could flow from this could be significant. It would seem equally desirable
necessary to regulate this behaviour as it would the inappropriate disclosure of
information.
8.97 The AIC noted that the espionage offences in s 79 of the
—which apply to unauthorised communication of
information—also apply to unauthorised retention or receipt of
information;
failure to comply with a reasonable direction to dispose of
information; and failure to take reasonable care of information.
91.1 of the
Criminal Code
also applies to unauthorised
making, obtaining or copying a record. The AIC considers it essential to
preserve these elements in
the intelligence
Disclosing,
divulging, communicating
8.98 As noted above, most secrecy provisions regulate the disclosure of
information, although this is described in different ways,
including divulging,
communicating and publishing information.
Submissions and consultations
8.99 The ATO and APRA submitted that disclosure should be the primary
mischief addressed by secrecy
provisions.
Ron Fraser expressed
the view that:
Much of the conduct covered by many secrecy provisions, such as receipt,
collection, use or recording or otherwise dealing with information
marginal to the real concerns of disclosure and or
communication.
8.100 The DHS noted that while there are arguments in favour of including
other activity such as unauthorised collection, accessing,
browsing, use or
disclosure,
it can be argued that the prohibition in secrecy provisions should be limited to
use and disclosure, or even disclosure alone. Disclosure
is the dealing most
likely to lead to disadvantage to the person
8.101 The DHS also noted the legal issues that arise as a consequence of the
inconsistent terminology used in legislation:
For example, Medicare Australia officers are variously forbidden from
‘divulging or communicating’ (
National Health Act
Insurance Act
), ‘disclosing or producing’ (
Medical Indemnity
), and ‘disclosing’ only (
Aged Care Act
, Dental Benefits
). There is a difference between ‘divulging or communicating’
(Medicare Australia—
Health Insurance Act
National Health Act
‘disclosing’ (Centrelink and Australian Hearing) as it is possible
to divulge or communicate information which has
already been disclosed and is
publicly known. Meanwhile [Child Support Agency] officers are forbidden from
‘communicating’
only and [Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service]
Australia from ‘divulging’ only. The rationale for these
distinctions
is not clear and does not easily justify the withholding of
information which another agency has already properly disclosed
8.102 The Law Council of Australia expressed some concern over the use of the
word ‘publish’ in s 70 of the
, noting that,
in the absence of a definition, ‘guidance as to the meaning of the term
may need to be taken from case law, including
defamation law, which may not be
appropriate for cases dealing with
8.103 The AGD stated that:
The conduct that should be regulated by secrecy provisions will depend upon the
policy rationale and harm sought to be avoided. If
harm can be caused by
unauthorised handling, access or use of information, then it would seem
appropriate for these actions to also
prohibited.
8.104 The ALRC agrees with the AGD that the focus of the proposed new general
secrecy offence should be the potential harm caused
by the conduct. In this
case, the ALRC’s view is that the relevant harm to the public interests
identified in Chapter 7 would
come from unauthorised disclosure of
Commonwealth information and that this should be the focus of the proposed
general secrecy offence.
The term ‘disclosure’ is preferred because
it is widely used and understood in the privacy context. The provisions of
Criminal Code
dealing with extension of criminal responsibility will
ensure that a range of other activity leading up to an unauthorised disclosure,
such as procuring or conspiring to bring about a disclosure, may also attract
criminal sanctions.
8.105 While the ALRC proposes that the new general secrecy offence be limited
to ‘disclosure’ of Commonwealth information,
in some specific
contexts it will be appropriate to regulate other activity. For example, in
Chapter 10, the ALRC discusses the need
for a wider range of activity to be
regulated in the intelligence context. The ALRC can also see merit in
restricting an officer’s
access to certain information in some contexts;
for example, the prohibition on browsing in the tax context. But these are
context-specific
requirements and would not fit comfortably into a general
provision applying to all Commonwealth officers and all Commonwealth
information.
8.106 The ALRC agrees with the majority of stakeholders that the mere receipt
of information should not be covered in the general
secrecy offence. As
discussed above, however, the ALRC considers that certain subsequent disclosures
of information by a person who
knows, or is reckless as to whether, the
information has been disclosed in breach of the general secrecy offence, should
a criminal offence in some
circumstances.
8.107 How information is ‘used’ within an agency is a different
and wider issue than simply protecting the information
from unauthorised
disclosure. A clear distinction is drawn in the Privacy Commissioner’s
guidelines, discussed above, between
use and disclosure. While it may be
necessary to criminalise inappropriate uses in some circumstances—for
example, where information
is security classified or otherwise
sensitive—this is an issue that requires consideration on an agency by
agency basis and
not one that can be addressed in a general secrecy offence.
8.108 The ALRC’s view is that a great deal of conduct that may precede
an unauthorised disclosure, such as recording or copying
information, could be
dealt with through administrative procedures and penalties. In particular, the
example provided in the Explanatory
Material to the Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill
of an officer copying a person’s tax information into her diary, where the
is discovered before any disclosure has occurred, would appear to be of
this order. Such conduct may attract criminal penalties,
in more serious
circumstances, under the
Criminal Code
provisions extending criminal
responsibility, for example, where copying the information provides evidence of
complicity or conspiracy.
Fault element
attaching to disclosure
Criminal Code
provides that fault elements may include
intention, knowledge, recklessness or negligence, but that particular offences
may specify
other fault
As noted in
Chapter 5, under the
, if the legislation creating an offence
does not specify a fault element for a physical element consisting of conduct,
Where an offence
provision does not specify a fault element for a physical element consisting of
a circumstance or a result, the
fault element is
recklessness.
8.110 The ALRC’s mapping exercise indicates that the majority of
Commonwealth secrecy provisions do not stipulate fault elements.
This is also
true of s 70 of the
. On the basis of the provisions of
Criminal Code
, noted above and discussed further in Chapter 5,
and given the serious nature of the offence, the fault element attaching to the
conduct of publishing or communicating information under s 70 of the
is intention. The ALRC proposes that the fault element
attaching to the conduct of disclosure in the proposed new general secrecy
offence should also be intention.
8.111 There is, however, a question of whether the proposed provision should
include recklessness as a fault element attaching to
disclosure. Section 5.4 of
Criminal Code
provides that:
(1) A person is reckless with respect to a circumstance if:
(a) he or she is aware of a substantial risk that the circumstance exists or
will exist; and
(b) having regard to the circumstances known to him or her, it is unjustifiable
to take the risk.
(2) A person is reckless with respect to a result if:
(a) he or she is aware of a substantial risk that the result will occur;
(b) having regard to the circumstances known to him or her, it is unjustifiable
to take the risk.
(3) The question whether taking a risk is unjustifiable is one of fact.
(4) If recklessness is a fault element for a physical element of an offence,
proof of intention, knowledge or recklessness will satisfy
that fault element.
8.112 The ALRC has identified a number of secrecy provisions in which the
fault element attaching to disclosure is recklessness. For
A person is guilty of an offence if:
(a) the person has access to any information stored on the Commonwealth DNA
DNA Database] or to any
other information revealed by a forensic procedure carried out on a suspect,
offender or volunteer; and
(b) the person’s conduct causes the disclosure of information other than
as provided by this section; and
(c) the person is reckless as to any such
disclosure.
8.113 As the proposed general secrecy offence requires that there be harm to
significant public interests, a reasonable likelihood
of harm, or an intention
to harm those interests, the ALRC would be interested in stakeholder views on
whether it would be appropriate
to include recklessness as to disclosure as part
of the offence. This would mean that where a Commonwealth officer was aware of a
substantial risk that disclosure would occur and, having regard to the
circumstances, it was unjustifiable to take the risk, he or
she took the
Proposal 8–5
The proposed general secrecy offence should
regulate the disclosure of Commonwealth information. The fault element attaching
to disclosure
should be intention.
What information
should be protected?
8.114 In Chapter 5, the ALRC considers the various categories of
information protected by the hundreds of existing secrecy provisions
legislation.
In this section,
the ALRC considers what information should be protected by the proposed new
general secrecy offence.
Australian Government Protective Security Manual
binds all Commonwealth
agencies to a series of procedures designed to protect Commonwealth information,
including classified and
other sensitive information. The PSM refers to
‘official information’, which includes any information received or
by, or on behalf of, the Government, through its agencies and
contractors.
applies to any current and former Commonwealth officer
who publishes or communicates ‘any fact or document which comes to his
her knowledge, or into his or her possession, by virtue of being a Commonwealth
officer’. This would include official information
received or collected by
the Australian Government, as well as information generated within
Government.
Regulation 2.1
Public Service Regulations
applies broadly to ‘information which the APS employee obtains or
generates in connection with the APS employee’s
employment’.
8.117 Other possible models include s 142.2 of the
Criminal Code
which prohibits a ‘Commonwealth public official’ from dishonestly
using information ‘obtained in the official’s
capacity as a
Commonwealth public official’.
Section 18(2)
Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
(Cth) (the ASIO Act) applies to
‘any information or matter that has come to the knowledge or into the
possession of the person
by reason of his or her being, or having been, an
officer or employee of the Organisation’.
8.118 The Explanatory
Material that accompanies the Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill states that:
Protected information includes information in the form of written documents,
conversations, electronic recordings, transcripts or
any other form in which
information can be recorded. It includes information obtained directly from a
taxpayer or information generated
by the ATO (for instance, through the
collating, cross referencing or summarising of related information from a
variety of different
8.119 The ALRC proposes to retain a broad definition of Commonwealth
information in the proposed new general secrecy offence. The
provision is
intended to be an umbrella provision of general application applying to all
Commonwealth officers and to all Commonwealth
information. It is intended to
address gaps left by more specific provisions that are limited in their scope to
particular parties
or particular information. However, the scope of the
provision will be narrowed by the requirement to prove that the disclosure of
the information caused harm, was reasonably likely to cause harm, or was
intended to cause harm, as discussed in Chapter 7.
8.120 For the reasons set out in Chapter 13, the ALRC is of the view
that the language currently used in reg 2.1 of the
Public Service
Regulations
to describe the information covered by the regulation is too
wide. In that chapter, the ALRC proposes that the language in reg 2.1
should be amended to specify ‘information to which an APS employee has
access by reason of his or her being an APS employee’
in order to bring
the regulation more into line with the proposed new general secrecy offence and
also because, in the ALRC’s
view, the phrase ‘in connection
with’ currently used in the regulation is too
8.121 The formulation used in the
Criminal Code
noted above—that
is, information obtained in the official’s capacity as a Commonwealth
public official—appears
to be too narrow for the purposes of the general
secrecy offence. This formulation limits the relevant information to that which
a Commonwealth public official has legitimate access to in his or her formal
capacity. In a provision dealing with unauthorised disclosure,
it is important
to include information that a Commonwealth officer may have access to because of
his or her position, whether or
not that access is legitimate. This would
include, for example, Commonwealth information that the officer accessed in
contravention
of agency guidelines or rules. This information may not have been
available to the particular officer in his or her formal capacity
Commonwealth officer because, for example, he or she may not have had an
adequate security clearance.
8.122 The approach adopted in s 70 of the
s 18(2) of the ASIO Act is not limited in this way. These provisions apply
to any information the officer may access by virtue
of being, or by reason of
being, an officer. This would include information that a person is able to
access because of his or her
position, despite access being in breach of agency
8.123 The ALRC prefers the term ‘information’ to the
formulation of ‘any fact or document’. As indicated in the
Explanatory Material to the Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill,
‘information’ can be given a wide meaning to include information in
oral, written, electronic or any other form. Much
information intended to be
covered by the proposed general offence will not be factual or in documentary
form, although the ALRC
notes that the term ‘document’ is defined
widely in s 25 of the
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth). The ALRC
proposes that the general secrecy offence apply to ‘any information to
which a person has, or had, access by
reason of his or her being, or having
been, a Commonwealth officer’.
Proposal 8–6
The proposed general secrecy offence should apply
to any information to which a person has, or had, access by reason of his or her
being, or having been, a Commonwealth officer as defined in
Proposal 8–1.
Sections 70 and 79(3) are described
in detail in Chs 5 and 6, and set out in full in
Appendix 5.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34
Question 2–2.
These include the
offence of ‘Abuse of Public Office’ that, in part, prohibits public
officials from using any information
that the official has obtained in the
official’s capacity as a public official with the intention of dishonestly
a benefit for himself or herself or for another person; or dishonestly
causing a detriment to another person:
Criminal Code
Crimes Act 1914
Proposal 8–3.
The definition is
set out in full in
Appendix 5.
Revised Explanatory
Memorandum, Criminal Code Amendment (Theft, Fraud, Bribery and Related Offences)
Bill 2000 (Cth), [367].
Criminal Code
(Cth) Dictionary definition of ‘Commonwealth public official’
paras n and r.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 3–1.
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009.
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1987
(Cth) sch 1. This issue is
discussed further in Ch 3.
Explanatory Memorandum, Criminal Code Amendment (Theft, Fraud, Bribery and
Related Offences) Bill 2000 (Cth),
[371]–[372].
Exposure Draft,
Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
. The contractual relationship between the Australian
Government and contracted service provider entities and individuals is discussed
in detail in Ch 14.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009; Public Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009; Australian Federal Police,
3 March 2009; Australian Taxation
16 February 2009; Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
of Human Services,
20 February 2009.
19 February 2009.
Explanatory Memorandum, Criminal Code Amendment (Theft, Fraud, Bribery and
Related Offences) Bill 2000 (Cth),
Wong v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
(2004) 204 ALR 722,
J McGinness, ‘Secrecy
Provisions in Commonwealth Legislation’
[1990] FedLawRw 3
Federal Law Review
Proposal 9–1(b).
11 December 2008.
Proposal 8–3.
(Cth) s 142.2.
Explanatory Memorandum, Criminal Code Amendment (Theft, Fraud, Bribery and
Related Offences) Bill 2000 (Cth),
Grollo v Palmer
[1995] HCA 26
184 CLR 348
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 142.2.
Migration Act 1958
re disclosure to the Australian
Parliament; and
Law Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
re disclosure to the
Proposal 8–3.
Proposal 8–3.
Crimes Act 1914
‘Commonwealth Secrecy Provisions: Time for Reform?’
Criminal Law Journal
Official Information
, Integrity in Government Project: Interim
Report 1 (1991), 259.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 3–3.
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009;
NSW Young Lawyers Human Rights Committee,
4 March 2009; Department of Human Services,
20 February 2009; Department of Education, Employment and
Workplace Relations,
19 February 2009; The
19 February 2009; Australian
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009;
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
(Cth) Dictionary.
J McGinness,
‘Secrecy Provisions in Commonwealth Legislation’
[1990] FedLawRw 3
Federal Law Review
Explanatory Material, Exposure
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
(Cth), [3.9].
Exposure Draft,
Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
(Cth) sch 1
item 1 s 355-175.
item 1 s 355-155.
Explanatory
Material, Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer
Information) Bill 2009
The equitable action for breach
of confidence in relation to Commonwealth information is discussed in
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
In Confidence: A Report of the Inquiry into the
Protection of Confidential Personal and Commercial Information Held by the
Commonwealth
(1995), [7.11.7].
Gibbs, R Watson and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Final
(1991), 333.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 3–5.
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Federal Police,
3 March 2009.
The Treasury,
19 February 2009.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009; Department of Human Services,
20 February 2009; Australian Commission for Law Enforcement
18 February 2009;
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Press Council,
18 February 2009.
Explanatory
Material, Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer
Information) Bill 2009
State and territory secrecy
provisions are discussed in
The equitable action for
breach of confidence is discussed in
Criminal Code
System (Family Assistance)(Administration) Act 1999
(Cth) s 79(6).
A New Tax System (Family Assistance)(Administration) Act 1999
(Special Undertakings) Act 1952
A New Tax System
(Australian Business Number) Act 1999
Aged Care Act
(Cth) s 62-1.
Equal Opportunity for Women in the Workplace Act 1999
Criminal Code
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 3–4.
J McGinness,
‘Secrecy Provisions in Commonwealth Legislation’
[1990] FedLawRw 3
Federal Law Review
, 85. See also Departmental Committee on Section 2
of the Official Secrets Act 1911,
Report of the Committee
, Vol 1 (1972),
[232]–[233].
(Cth) ss 79(4)–(6), 83;
Defence (Special Undertakings) Act
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
In Confidence: A Report of the Inquiry into the
Protection of Confidential Personal and Commercial Information Held by the
Commonwealth
(1995), [7.11.7].
Council of Australia,
27 February 2009; The Treasury,
19 February 2009.
Press Council,
18 February 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Office of the
Federal Privacy Commissioner,
Guidelines to the National Privacy
Exposure Draft,
Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
(Cth) sch 3
Explanatory
Material, Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer
Information) Bill 2009
Australian Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations,
19 February 2009.
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009.
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009;
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
23 March 2009.
Department of
Human Services,
20 February 2009.
Council of Australia,
27 February 2009.
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Proposal 8–3.
(Cth) s 5.1. For example, the
Criminal Code
stipulates an additional fault element of ‘dishonesty’ in relation
to offences in Ch 7—
The Proper Administration of Government
Dishonesty is defined as ‘dishonest according to the standards of ordinary
people’ and ‘known by the defendant
to be dishonest according to the
standards of ordinary people’:
also Ch 10.
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Australian Government
Protective Security Manual (PSM)
Explanatory Material,
Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information)
Proposal 13–1.
9. General Secrecy Offence:
Exceptions and Penalties
Exceptions and defences
Introduction
Exceptions versus defences
Defences available under the Criminal Code
Exceptions and defences for inclusion in the general secrecy offence
In the course of an officer’s functions and duties
Required or authorised by or under law
On the authority of specified persons
To specified persons or entities
For the purposes of law enforcement
For use in legal proceedings
With consent
A serious threat to a person’s life, health or safety
A serious threat to public health or public safety
Information already in the public domain
Public interest disclosure
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Penalties in existing secrecy provisions
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Penalties for subsequent disclosure
Other issues
Consent of the Attorney-General
Infringement notices
Injunctions
9. General Secrecy Offence:
Exceptions and Penalties
Exceptions and
Introduction
9.1 Commonwealth secrecy offences include a range of exceptions and
defences—for example, disclosure in the course of an officer’s
duties, or for the purposes of the relevant Act, or disclosure of information
that is already in the public domain. Protection from
criminal liability under
secrecy offences may also arise as a result of public interest disclosure (or
‘whistleblower’)
legislation. This chapter will consider which
exceptions or defences should be included in the proposed new general secrecy
and the proposal for public interest disclosure legislation discussed
in the recent House of Representatives Standing Committee on
Constitutional Affairs report.
Exceptions versus
9.2 A distinction may be drawn between an ‘exception’, which
limits the scope of conduct prohibited by a secrecy offence,
‘defence’, which may be relied on by a person whose conduct is
prohibited by a secrecy offence.
Australian Trade Commission Act 1985
provides an example of an ‘exception’, stating that ‘a person
to whom this section applies shall not, either
directly or indirectly, except
for the purposes of this Act’ disclose any information concerning the
affairs of another person
acquired by reason of the person’s employment.
Section 191(2A)
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Act
(Cth), on the other hand, provides that ‘it is a defence to a
prosecution’ for disclosing information if the information
relates to a
loan made by Indigenous Business Australia and the information was communicated
to a person authorised in writing, by
the person to whose affairs the document
relates, to receive the information.
9.4 The Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department (AGD)
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
) makes clear the
practical consequences of providing one or the other:
In general, the prosecution should be required to prove all aspects of a
criminal offence beyond reasonable doubt. A matter should
be included in a
defence, thereby placing the onus on the defendant, only where the matter is
peculiarly within the knowledge of
the defendant; and is significantly more
difficult and costly for the prosecution to disprove than for the defendant to
9.5 The Guide goes on to state that the fact that it is difficult for the
prosecution to prove an element of an offence has not traditionally
considered, in itself, a sound justification for taking the significant step of
reversing the onus of proof.
Defences available
Criminal Code
Criminal Code
sets out a range of circumstances
in which a person is not criminally responsible for an offence. For ease of
reference, the ALRC
has referred to these as ‘defences’, although
does not characterise them in this
Even where a secrecy offence
does not contain any express exceptions or defences, these
may nevertheless be available. The
includes the following defences
of general application, that may be relevant in the context of the general
secrecy offence:
mistake or ignorance of fact—which applies where the fault
element is something other than negligence (s 9.1);
mistake of fact—which applies where the offence is one of
strict liability (s 9.2);
duress (s 10.2);
sudden or extraordinary emergency (s 10.3); and
conduct justified or excused by or under a law
9.7 In its submission, the AGD noted that the
provisions were intended to codify the general defences available at
common law.
Guide to Framing
Commonwealth Offences
states that these defences are of general application
to Commonwealth offences, and that defences covering the same matters should
be included in individual
Exceptions and
defences for inclusion in the general secrecy offence
9.8 Chapter 5 identifies a range of exceptions and defences found in
existing secrecy provisions. These include where information
is disclosed:
in the course of a person’s functions and duties as an officer
or an employee;
as required or authorised by or under law;
on the authority of specified persons;
to specified persons or entities;
for the purposes of law enforcement;
for use in legal proceedings;
with the consent of the person or entity
to whom the information relates;
to avert serious threats to a
person’s life or health; and
in the public or national interest.
9.9 In the Issues
Review of Secrecy Laws
(IP 34) the ALRC asked which
exceptions should be included in the general secrecy
In particular, the ALRC
asked whether the first six exceptions listed above should be included, and
whether there were any others
that should be
Submissions and consultations
9.10 The Public Interest Advocacy Centre (PIAC) submitted that the first six
exceptions listed above were likely to be of such frequent
and general
application that they should be included in all secrecy
provisions.
The Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) noted that these elements essentially
reflected the structure of the secrecy
provision in the
Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority Act 1998
APRA’s view was that
these exceptions worked well in the regulatory context where it is essential for
regulators to be able
to exchange information with other regulators, to brief
the executive government, and to use information in legal
proceedings.
9.11 The AGD suggested the following exceptions and defences should be
included in the general secrecy offence: disclosure in the
course of an
individual’s duties; disclosure in accordance with the law; disclosure
where the information has been made lawfully
available to the public; disclosure
authorised by an agency head; and disclosure to prevent a serious and imminent
threat to life
9.12 In this chapter, the ALRC considers the suggested exceptions and
defences and whether each should be included in the proposed
general secrecy
offence. The ALRC proposes that there should be three express exceptions
included in the offence provision, and examines
how the defences in the
Criminal Code
would operate in relation to the offence.
In the course of an
officer’s functions and duties
9.13 Secrecy provisions commonly allow information to be disclosed in the
performance of a person’s functions and duties as
an employee or officer.
For example, the
Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976
(Cth) provides that secrecy provisions do not extend to a person handling
information ‘in the performance of the person’s
functions or
duties’ under the Act.
9.14 A 2006 Treasury review of taxation secrecy and disclosure provisions
(the Taxation Secrecy Review) noted, however, that the meaning
of disclosure in
the ‘course of duties of an officer’ is uncertain and should be
The Explanatory
Material to the Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer
Information) Bill 2009
(Cth) (the Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill) notes that:
Specific disclosures for taxation officers are found across the taxation laws.
These generally provide for disclosures to be made
by the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO) to another Government agency in circumstances in which taxpayer
information will be used
to enable that other agency to fulfil some aspect of
its function more effectively.
9.15 The Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill, like a number of existing secrecy
provisions, attempts to clarify some of the ambiguities by
providing a
non-exhaustive list of disclosures that fall within the ‘performance of
duties’ exception.
these are quite general—for example, ‘for the purpose of
administering a taxation
or ‘for the
purpose of criminal, civil or administrative proceedings (including merits
review or judicial review) that are
related to a taxation
Some are more
specific—for example, ‘for the purpose of determining whether to
make an ex gratia payment; or administering
such a payment; in connection with
administering a taxation
9.16 In IP 34, the ALRC asked in what circumstances Commonwealth secrecy
laws should permit the disclosure of Commonwealth information
in the performance
of a Commonwealth officer’s functions and
Submissions and consultations
9.17 A number of stakeholders, including the Australian Securities and
Investments Commission (ASIC), APRA, the Australian Bureau
of Statistics (ABS)
and the ATO, noted that the secrecy provisions regulating their activity were in
the form of a general prohibition
on disclosure, followed by a list of
situations in which disclosure is
authorised.
9.18 ASIC submitted that the specific circumstances in which disclosures
should be permitted must be determined by reference to the
functions that are
performed and the duties that are exercised by each Commonwealth agency. ASIC
noted that where secrecy provisions
attempt to list authorised
disclosures—as in
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission Act 2001
(Cth) (the ASIC Act)—it is important
to ensure that the list is inclusive, rather than exhaustive and suggested that
of the ASIC Act may be an appropriate
9.19 Section 127 provides a detailed list of situations in which
disclosure is specifically authorised—for example, to the Minister,
APRA or to a Royal Commission; but also includes more open ended
elements—for example, s 127(3) provides that a disclosure
authorised where it is for the purposes of performing functions as a member, a
staff member or an ASIC delegate.
9.20 The ATO also expressed support for the proposition that secrecy
provisions should list those disclosures that are permitted to
specific agencies for specific purposes, as well as a general exception
permitting disclosures in the performance of an
officer’s duties. The ATO
considered this last exception to be fundamental to the proper functioning of
the taxation system:
The performance of duties exception is flexible enough to allow disclosures of
information which may not arise directly under a taxation
law, but which relate
to the ATO’s administration of taxation laws. For example, it allows
disclosures for the purpose of complying
with equitable, common law and
statutory obligations, such as responding to a request for a statement of
reasons under the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
and producing information in response to certain court orders. The ATO considers
that the flexibility of this exception is integral
to allowing the ATO to comply
with these broader legislative, equitable and common law
obligations.
9.21 The Treasury also expressed support for a ‘performance of
duty’ exception, on the basis that there is existing jurisprudence
the scope of the term.
agreeing that there is a considerable body of case law around the term ‘in
the performance of duties’, the Department
of Human Services (DHS) noted
that its meaning remained
9.22 The AGD suggested that, in addition to legislative lists of authorised
disclosures,
Memorandums of understanding (MOU) or internal guidelines may also be used to
set out circumstances when information can be disclosed
from one agency to
another. This may provide a more flexible approach, as the detail of information
sharing arrangements can be left
to documents more easily
9.23 Ron Fraser stated that:
In effect, the exceptions to a number of secrecy provisions (eg in the
National Health Act 1953
Health Insurance Act 1973
operate as guidelines to the agency as to appropriate disclosures of
information: they don’t need to be appended to a criminal
provision. These
rules relating to release, other than under an FOI request, have become an
internalised part of the culture of an
agency and its officers with little or no
reference to the underlying criminal
ALRC’s views
9.24 In the ALRC’s view, it would be important to include an exception
in the general secrecy offence for disclosure in the
course of an
officer’s functions or duties. However, in the proposed new general
secrecy offence it will not be possible to
include a comprehensive list of those
disclosures that fall within this exception, because the provision is intended
to apply across
all agencies and all Commonwealth information. It should be
possible to provide clarity about the scope of the exception in other
9.25 The legislation regulating some specific agencies, such as the ATO and
ASIC, includes a list of authorised disclosures, which
are indicative of what
falls within an officer’s duties or functions in those agencies. Such
disclosures would fall within
the ‘duties and functions’ exception
to the proposed general secrecy
9.26 It also would be possible to indicate those disclosures that fall within
an officer’s functions and duties by issuing agency
guidelines or
inter-agency memorandums of understanding (MOUs). In some cases, and in relation
to some agencies, this will not be
necessary, but where there is doubt about the
scope of an officer’s duties these mechanisms may prove helpful.
9.27 In relation to a number of existing secrecy provisions that set up a
general prohibition on disclosure and then proceed to list
exceptions to the
prohibition, it may be possible to do away with the prohibition—while
leaving the list of authorised disclosures
in place—and rely, instead, on
the proposed general secrecy offence.
Required or
authorised by or under law
9.28 Secrecy provisions commonly provide that information may be disclosed
‘for the purposes of this
It is also common
for secrecy provisions to permit disclosure for the purposes of other
legislation,
or intergovernmental
arrangements.
As discussed
above, many secrecy provisions also include a list of specifically authorised
disclosures.
Criminal Code
includes a defence of ‘lawful
authority’ where ‘the conduct constituting the offence is justified
or excused by
Commonwealth
Criminal Code: Guide for Practitioners
states that this provision:
Provide[s] a general defence which will excuse or justify conduct which is
authorised by law. The law in question must be a law of
the Commonwealth …
The reference to conduct which is justified or excused ‘by or under a
law’ recognises that the
authorisation may be indirect or implied, rather
than explicit.
defence will protect disclosures in a range of
circumstances, including those made in accordance with provisions that:
expressly allow disclosures to particular persons or
agencies—such as s 127 of the ASIC Act discussed above;
allow disclosure ‘for the purposes of the
Act’—such as
Taxation Administration Act 1953
allow disclosure for the purposes of another Act—such as
Reserve Bank Act 1959
(Cth), which permits
disclosure for the purposes of that Act and certain other Acts including
Banking Act 1959
Corporations Act 2001
Payment Systems (Regulation) Act 1998
Payment Systems and
Netting Act 1998
Submissions and
consultations
9.31 The Treasury submission queried whether there was a meaningful
distinction between a ‘performance of duties’ exception
disclosures that are allowed ‘for the purposes of an Act’. A
disclosure for the purposes of the regulating legislation
is likely to fall
within the duties of an
9.32 The Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions (CDPP) noted that
because the defence of lawful authority in s 10.5 of the
is of general application, it is not necessary to duplicate the defence
in other legislation containing secrecy
provisions.
9.33 Liberty Victoria submitted that individuals authorised to disclose
information under the FOI Act should not be penalised for
doing so, and noted
that this was so under the Act, if the information was released in good
ALRC’s views
9.34 The ALRC notes that, given the general application of the defence of
lawful authority under the
Criminal Code
, it is not necessary to
expressly include this defence in the proposed general secrecy offence. In
Chapter 15, the ALRC proposes
that Australian Government agencies should
develop and implement policies clarifying the application of relevant secrecy
their information holdings, including the circumstances in which the
unauthorised handling of information could lead to criminal
proceedings.
It would be helpful
to include a reference in any such policy to the ‘lawful authority’
9.35 In addition, the ALRC proposes that Australian Government agencies
should develop and administer training and development programs
employees, about the information-handling obligations relevant to their
position. Any such training and development should
allude to the obligations
imposed by the proposed general criminal offence and relevant exceptions and
defences, including ‘lawful
authority’.
9.36 Finally, the ALRC proposes that private sector organisations that
perform services for or on behalf of the Australian Government
under contract
should take steps to ensure that all employees who access Commonwealth
information are aware of their obligations
of secrecy, including the
circumstances in which criminal, civil or administrative liability could
This should include reference to the obligations imposed by the proposed general
criminal offence and relevant exceptions and defences,
including ‘lawful
authority’.
On the authority of
specified persons
9.37 Chapter 5 considers
a range of secrecy provisions that allow disclosure of information at the
discretion and with the authority
of specified office-holders, such as the
Commissioner of Taxation,
other persons, including agency
or the responsible
A number of these
provisions require the authorising person to certify that the disclosure is
necessary in the public interest.
9.38 For example, s 86–3 of the
Aged Care Act 1997
provides that the Secretary of the Department of Health and Ageing may disclose
protected information in a range of circumstances
including ‘if the
Secretary certifies, in writing, that it is necessary in the public interest to
do so in a particular case—to
such people and for such purposes as the
Secretary determines’.
Section 130(3)
Health Insurance Act
(Cth) provides that the agency head may disclose information where the
Minister certifies, by instrument in writing, that disclosure
is necessary in
the public interest.
Submissions and consultations
9.39 The ATO submitted that it would not be appropriate for disclosures of
taxpayer information to be made on the authority of specified
persons. In the
ATO’s view, such discretionary authority would provide less certainty for
tax officers and taxpayers.
9.40 The Treasury also expressed the view that:
It is important for the legislature to turn its mind to the particular instances
where it considers a disclosure is warranted. Therefore,
Treasury does not
support broad provisions permitting disclosures when authorised by some
9.41 On the other hand, the AGD stated that, while completely codifying the
circumstances in which disclosure is allowed provides
clarity and certainty for
officers, this approach may prove to be insufficiently flexible:
Including a provision to enable the agency head or other senior officers to
authorise disclosure may provide greater flexibility
as it may enable disclosure
in new or unforeseen circumstances. It also provides a level of accountability
by requiring a senior
officer to consider whether disclosure would be consistent
with policy considerations in a particular
ALRC’s views
9.42 In Chapter 7, the ALRC proposes that the new general secrecy
offence apply to those disclosures of Commonwealth information that
reasonably likely to harm, or are intended to harm specified public interests.
In Chapter 8, the ALRC proposes that the
offence bind agency heads, as well
as ministers. It is possible that, in some circumstances, it will be in the
overall public interest
to disclose information, despite the fact that the
information may harm one of the specified public interests. For example,
the public disclosure of certain information is likely to harm
Australia’s relations with a particular country—that is,
reasonably likely to harm the international relations of the
Commonwealth—the responsible minister may be of the view
that it is in the
overall public interest to disclose the information.
9.43 In addition, it may be necessary for an officer to disclose information
in unforeseen circumstances where the disclosure does
not fall clearly within
the officer’s duties or functions. The ALRC notes the advice of the AGD
that, in such circumstances,
a level of flexibility is necessary. Because the
information protected by the proposed general secrecy offence has the potential
to harm the public interests specified in Chapter 7, the ALRC’s view
is that, where disclosure of the information does not
fall clearly within an
officer’s functions or duties, he or she should be required to seek
authority for the disclosure from
the agency head or the minister. Where harm is
likely to be caused to the specified public interests by the disclosure of
information,
the competing public interests should be considered at a senior
9.44 The ALRC proposes, therefore, that the general secrecy offence include
an exception for disclosure of information, where the
disclosure has been
authorised by the relevant agency head or minister, and the agency head or
minister certifies that the disclosure
is in the public interest.
To specified persons
or entities
9.45 As discussed in Chapter 5, a number of secrecy provisions provide
exceptions to allow disclosures to specified persons or entities,
ministers or government
These provisions are
aimed at facilitating the legitimate sharing of information within
government.
9.46 In other circumstances, provisions provide that information must not be
disclosed to specified persons—for example, the
minister. The Explanatory
Material to the Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill states that information may only be
disclosed to ministers
where this is specifically provided for in the
legislation:
As with the current law, this recognises the importance of a separation between
the Executive and Legislative arms of government
and the administration of the
taxation laws and sensitivities associated with the possible release of taxpayer
information into a
public forum.
9.47 It would not be an offence, however, under the Tax Laws Exposure Draft
Bill for a taxation officer to provide taxpayer information
to a minister for
the purpose of enabling a minister to exercise a power or perform a function
under a taxation law.
Submissions and consultations
9.48 A number of submissions—discussed above in relation to the
exception for disclosure in the course of an officer’s
functions and
duties—expressed support for provisions that include a list of authorised
disclosures to specified persons or
entities. In its submission, the AGD noted
Secrecy provisions that contain specific provisions about disclosure to
Ministers are generally only found in confidentiality provisions
relating to
information collected by government agencies for service delivery purposes. In
these cases, such information may not,
as a general rule, need to be provided to
Ministers unless the Minister has a particular role in the relevant
decision-making process.
ALRC’s views
9.49 The ALRC is not proposing to include exceptions in the general secrecy
offence to allow disclosure to ministers or to other specified
entities. These matters need to be considered at an individual agency level. Any
disclosure to a minister or other specific
person or entity that has been
authorised, for example, in legislation, through agency guidelines, or
inter-agency MOUs will fall
within the exception for disclosures in the course
of an officer’s functions or duties, or with the authority of the agency
9.50 Where it is necessary to restrict disclosure of certain Commonwealth
information to a minister, or other specified persons or
entities, a specific
secrecy provision can be used.
For the purposes of
law enforcement
9.51 As discussed in Chapter 5, a number of secrecy provisions expressly
provide exceptions for the disclosure of information for
various law enforcement
and investigatory purposes. For example, s 86–3 of the
provides that the Secretary may disclose protected information in a
range of circumstances including:
if the Secretary believes, on
reasonable grounds, that disclosure of the information is reasonably necessary
(i) enforcement of the criminal law; or
(ii) enforcement of a law imposing a pecuniary penalty; or
(iii) protection of the public revenue;
to an agency whose functions include that enforcement or protection, for the
purposes of that enforcement or protection;
9.52 The Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill proposes a number of changes to the
provisions in taxation legislation dealing with disclosure
for the purposes of
law enforcement. The Bill expands the range of circumstances in which
disclosures can be made to ASIC in order
for it to fulfil its law enforcement
role. It is proposed that disclosures will be permitted to ASIC for the
enforcement of a law
administered by ASIC which is a criminal law or which
imposes a monetary penalty.
Explanatory Material notes that enforcing a law includes investigating breaches
of that law, prosecuting any offences committed
under that law, and gathering
information to support the investigation and prosecution
9.53 The Bill also proposes to amend the provisions allowing disclosure to
law enforcement agencies for the enforcement of ‘serious
existing provisions, law enforcement agencies that receive taxpayer information
for the purposes of investigating an offence
cannot then use that information
for the prosecution of the offence unless it is a taxation offence:
Taxpayer information has proved to be a valuable source of intelligence
information for the investigation of activities such as money
laundering and
social security fraud. Such information would also be invaluable for and could
form the basis of related prosecutions.
This broadening of the disclosure also
recognises the changing nature of crime and the need for flexible,
whole-of-government responses.
It will also ensure that law enforcement agencies
can rely on the best evidence
prosecution.
9.54 The Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill also proposes to amend the definition
of ‘serious offence’ to mean an offence punishable
by more than
twelve months imprisonment, consistent with the Commonwealth definition of an
indictable offence.
Submissions and consultations
9.55 A number of agencies submitted that it was important to allow the
exchange of information with law enforcement and regulatory
agencies, and to
ensure that secrecy provisions did not interfere with these processes. In its
submission, the CDPP noted that:
The CDPP considers that the interaction between the secrecy provisions in the
legislation of investigation agencies and the criminal
process can be
problematic. In particular, secrecy provisions can create a very narrow basis
for disclosure of information to other
investigation agencies. This, in turn,
impacts on the investigation of serious criminal offences …
The CDPP is aware of matters where investigation agencies have requested
information from the ATO as part of an investigation of
a serious Commonwealth
offence, where the ATO has been unable to provide that information, as
disclosure was prevented by the taxation
provisions.
9.56 The ATO also noted that the existing taxation secrecy provisions
inhibited its ability to share information with law enforcement
9.57 The CDPP went on to note the changing nature of law enforcement and the
fact that serious criminal activity is no longer confined
to one identifiable
By way of example, those involved in trafficking narcotics will also commonly be
involved in money laundering and tax evasion. Similarly,
terrorist activity may
not only involve acts of, or in direct preparation of, terrorism. While direct
Australian experience is limited,
it is generally accepted that terrorist
activity may be accompanied with other forms of illegal activity, such as
offences against
immigration/passport laws, customs offences, money laundering,
fraud, firearm offences, taxation fraud, identity fraud and social
fraud. … Active co-operation between a range of Government agencies is
important to identify, investigate and prosecute
such serious criminal activity.
A possible reform to secrecy provisions to meet these concerns would be
amendment to enable information to be disclosed where the
disclosure was
reasonably necessary for the enforcement of the criminal law or a law imposing a
pecuniary penalty and allowing for
the use of the information as evidence in the
prosecution of offences.
9.58 The Treasury also expressed support for provisions allowing the
disclosure of information to law enforcement agencies. The Treasury
however, that where the purpose of the disclosure is far removed from the
purpose for which the information was collected,
any provision allowing
disclosure should be narrowly
9.59 The Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations noted
if there is a commitment to a whole of government approach to minimising fraud
against the Commonwealth and protecting Australia’s
domestic and
international interests, then there is a need to ensure that secrecy provisions
do not unnecessarily constrain an agency’s
ability to share information
with another agency that has direct responsibility for a particular regulatory
9.60 The DHS noted that:
while Medicare Australia is able to disclose information to the police under a
public interest certificate, often the police are
unable to then share that
information directly with prosecuting authorities and the courts. While
practical workarounds are sometimes
used (such as Medicare, rather than the
police, making the further disclosures) the policy justification for this type
of restriction
questioned.
ALRC’s views
9.61 The ALRC recognises the importance of allowing information to flow to
law enforcement and regulatory agencies in appropriate
circumstances. However,
the ALRC’s preliminary view is that the disclosure of Commonwealth
information for the purposes of
law enforcement is not a matter for individual
Commonwealth officers, but should be regulated at agency level, based on agency
legislation, agency policies and guidelines and inter-agency MOUs. On
this basis, such disclosures would fall within the exception
for disclosure in
the course of an officer’s duties and functions.
9.62 If it is not clear to a particular officer whether information should be
passed onto a law enforcement agency, it would also
be possible, under the
proposed structure of the general secrecy offence exceptions, to seek the agency
head’s permission and
to rely on that exception.
9.63 For the purposes of this Discussion Paper, the ALRC is proceeding on the
basis that the Australian Government will move forward
with its proposed public
interest disclosure legislation, as discussed in the House of Representatives
Standing Committee on Legal
and Constitutional Affairs (the Standing Committee)
report, entitled
Whistleblower Protection: A Comprehensive Scheme for the
Commonwealth Public Sector
Whistleblower Protection
The current proposal
for public interest disclosure legislation, discussed in detail below, would
provide an avenue for Commonwealth
officers to report a range of matters to
appropriate authorities, including serious matters related to illegal
For use in legal
proceedings
9.64 A number of secrecy offences expressly regulate the disclosure of
Commonwealth information to the courts. As discussed in Chapter
disclosure of Commonwealth information for use in legal proceedings is not a
focus of this Inquiry. In relation to the general
secrecy offence, however, such
disclosure could be made in the course of a Commonwealth officer’s
functions or duties; or with
the authority of the agency head or minister.
Consequently, the ALRC does not propose that this be included as an express
in the general secrecy offence.
9.65 As discussed in Chapter 5, some secrecy provisions provide an
exception permitting the disclosure of information with the consent
person to whom, or entity to which, the information
9.66 The Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill does not, however, include consent as a
defence for an otherwise unauthorised
disclosure.
The Explanatory
Material to the Draft Bill states that:
This approach avoids issues of whether the consent is informed and voluntary (as
opposed to, for instance, being a precondition for
a particular good or
service). This also recognises the fact that, if any entity requires the
taxpayer’s information, the taxpayer
is able to obtain that information
and pass it on. Indeed, there is no prohibition on a taxation officer or a
non-taxation officer
in lawful receipt of taxpayer information from disclosing
that information to the taxpayer and there are no limits on what a taxpayer
do with their own information. This will ensure that the taxpayer knows
precisely what information is being
Submissions and consultations
9.67 The ATO suggested that there would be some administrative benefits if a
taxpayer could consent to his or her information being
released to a third
party. For example, the ATO could provide information directly to banks to
confirm taxpayers’ tax
A number of other
agencies also expressed support for allowing disclosure with
APRA noted that
s 56 of the APRA Act allowed the release of personal information with the
consent of the individual to whom the information
9.68 In its submission, the AGD noted that:
It may be appropriate to permit disclosure of personal information with the
consent of the person to whom the information relates.
However, it would be
important that the consent is expressly provided, voluntary and informed. The
Treasury’s Discussion Paper
contains a useful discussion about consent,
noting concerns that taxpayers could be denied a service or good if they did not
to the Tax Office providing their confidential information to the
provider of that good or service. The Paper noted an alternative
approach is to
enable the taxpayer to obtain their confidential information from the Tax Office
and provide the necessary information
to the third
9.69 ASIC expressed the view that a consent exception may be desirable under
the ASIC Act, but noted that the exception would have
to be limited so that it
did not allow the disclosure of information that would harm other public
interests, such as an ongoing investigation
under the ASIC
ALRC’s views
9.70 Disclosure of Commonwealth information with the consent of the person to
whom, or entity to which, the information relates is
not appropriate in all
circumstances. The information may be sensitive for other reasons—for
example, it may be personal information
an ongoing investigation into the criminal activities of another individual. For
this reason,
the ALRC is not proposing to include disclosure with consent as an
exception to the new general secrecy offence.
9.71 Where it is desirable in particular agencies to allow release of
information with consent, this should be made clear in agency-specific
legislation, agency policies and guidelines or inter-agency MOUs. In this way,
disclosure with consent will fall within the exception
provided in the general
secrecy offence for disclosure in the course of a Commonwealth officer’s
functions and duties or disclosure
with the authority of the agency head.
A serious threat to
a person’s life, health or safety
9.72 As discussed in Chapter 5, a number of secrecy provisions include
an exception for disclosure where it is necessary to prevent
or lessen a serious
threat to a person’s life, health or safety. For example,
Customs Administration Act 1985
(Cth) provides that a person may
disclose protected information:
if there are reasonable grounds
for that person to believe that:
(a) a serious and imminent threat to the health or life of a person or persons
exists or might exist; and
(b) it is necessary to carry out that act in order to avert or reduce that
9.73 The Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill proposes an exception for disclosure to
a government agency where the disclosure is necessary
to lessen or prevent a
serious threat to an individual’s life, health or
This exception is based
on one of the exceptions in Information Privacy Principle (IPP) 11 in
(Cth)—which regulates the disclosure of
personal information by Australian Government agencies—for disclosure of
information where the disclosure is necessary to prevent or lessen a
serious and imminent threat to the life or health of any person.
The Tax Laws
Exposure Draft Bill provision does not include a requirement that the threat be
9.74 The Explanatory Material to the Draft Bill states that:
The fact that there is a threat is not enough. The disclosure of the information
must be necessary to prevent or lessen the threat.
A taxation officer must
therefore consider whether the disclosure will have any real impact on the
threat or whether there are any
alternatives, other than the disclosure of
taxpayer information, that could achieve the same result.
A threat to life or health includes threats to safety and would include
bushfires, industrial accidents and direct threats to individuals
Health includes mental as well as physical health, although a threat of stress
or anxiety would generally not be
sufficient.
9.75 Some secrecy provisions allow disclosure in an even wider range of
circumstances. For example,
Child Support (Registration and
Collection) Act 1988
(Cth) allows the disclosure of protected information to
any person, if the information concerns ‘a credible threat to the life,
health or welfare of a person’ and the Registrar, or a person authorised
by the Registrar, believes on reasonable grounds that
the disclosure is
necessary to prevent or lessen the threat.
Criminal Code
includes a defence of ‘sudden or
extraordinary emergency’ where a person reasonably believes that:
(a) circumstances of sudden or
extraordinary emergency exist; and
(b) committing the offence is
the only reasonable way to deal with the emergency; and
(c) the conduct is a reasonable response to the
Commonwealth Criminal Code: Guide for Practitioners
The emergency must be real or reasonably apprehended as real: The defence of
sudden or extraordinary emergency is not available to
a defendant who is
unreasonably mistaken in apprehending a situation of emergency;
The emergency must be unavoidable by lesser means: The defence is barred unless
commission of the offence was the only reasonable
way to deal with the
The defendant’s response to the emergency must be reasonable in the
circumstances: The defence is barred if commission of an
offence was not a
reasonable response to the
defence is a general defence that would be available in
relation to the proposed general secrecy offence and the subsequent disclosure
Submissions and consultations
9.79 As noted above, the AGD suggested that the general secrecy offence
should include an exception for disclosures to prevent serious
and imminent
threats to life or health.
9.80 The DHS noted that:
[Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service] Australia’s provisions do not deal
explicitly with situations where the disclosure of
information might assist in a
criminal investigation, or where disclosure is necessary to protect against an
imminent threat to a
person’s life or physical safety. Currently,
disclosures must be made under a public interest certificate executed by a
within the Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations.
Timeliness is an issue; for example, when a person departs
CRS Australia
premises having threatened suicide or imminent physical harm to another,
including employees at a place they are about
to visit, the current secrecy
provision prevents CRS Australia from taking protective action until a DEEWR
delegate approves the
disclosure.
ALRC’s views
9.81 The ALRC does not
propose that the general secrecy offence include an express exception for
disclosures necessary to lessen or
prevent a serious threat to a person’s
life, health or safety. The ALRC’s preliminary view is that the
Criminal Code
defence of sudden or extraordinary emergency will operate
to protect Commonwealth officers in appropriate circumstances. The defence
apply where a Commonwealth officer has a reasonable belief that a real threat
exists—for example, as in the DHS example
provided above, someone has left
agency premises threatening to kill someone else—the disclosure of
Commonwealth information
is the only reasonable way to deal with the threat; and
the disclosure is a reasonable response to the threat.
A serious threat to
public health or public safety
9.82 The Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill also proposes an exception for
disclosure to a government agency where the disclosure is necessary
to lessen or
prevent a serious threat to public health or public
The Explanatory Material
states that:
Threats to public health or safety are those that have the potential to affect
the public (both in Australia and overseas) more generally
rather than just a
specific individual or group of individuals. A possible outbreak of an
infectious disease is one such example,
and an example of where a threat to the
public health or safety would be
ALRC’s views
9.83 The ALRC does not propose that the general secrecy offence include an
express exception for disclosures necessary to lessen or
prevent a serious
threat to public health or public safety. Where such disclosures do not fall
within an officer’s functions
and duties, it will be open to an officer to
seek agency head or ministerial authorisation for disclosure. The ALRC notes
that certain
such disclosures will fall within the ‘sudden or
extraordinary emergency’
Criminal Code
defence—that is, where
the officer reasonably believed that: there was a sudden or extraordinary public
health or safety emergency;
the disclosure was the only reasonable way to deal
with the emergency; and the disclosure was a reasonable response to the
9.84 In the
Whistleblower Protection
discussed in detail
below, the Standing Committee recommended that public interest disclosure
legislation should protect disclosures
to public health or public safety. This includes disclosures made to the media,
matter threatens immediate serious harm to public health or safety and
has been disclosed to internal and external authorities, but
has not been acted
on in a reasonable time.
person who made such a disclosure under the public interest disclosure
legislation would be protected from criminal liability,
including liability
under the proposed general secrecy offence.
Information already
in the public domain
9.85 In its submission, the AGD suggested that the ALRC consider including an
exception for disclosure where the information has been
made lawfully available
to the public.
Regulation 2.1(5)
Public Service Regulations 1999
provides an exception where information ‘is already in the public
domain as the result of a disclosure of information that is
lawful under these
Regulations or another law’. The Explanatory Memorandum to the legislative
instrument that enacted the current
version of reg 2.1 notes that this
would not apply if at the time of disclosure the information had not yet been
lawfully disclosed, for example the matter was made
public via a budget
‘leak’. Nor would it apply if disclosure would have the effect of
expressly or impliedly disclosing
other information to which subregulations
2.1(3) and 2.1(4) apply. An example would be where a public servant makes a
which, because of their official role, has the effect of confirming a
previous leak of information that had been provided in confidence
government.
9.86 The question of information already in the public domain was considered
Discussion Paper for the Review of Taxation Secrecy and Disclosure
the tax secrecy and disclosure rules protect information obtained by the
Commissioner in order to maintain the public confidence.
However, these rules
need not protect tax information that is already in the public domain. …
While the current formulation
of most secrecy and disclosure provisions allows
such disclosures (according to government legal advice), this has not always
9.87 Under the Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill, it is not an offence to disclose
information that is lawfully available to the public:
A publicly available source would include things such as the electoral roll,
open court records, books, the Internet, newspapers
and other material that is
generally available to the public. The information does not cease to be
‘publicly available’
if a member of the public has to pay a fee to
access that information.
9.88 Section 91.2 of the
Criminal Code
provides a defence in
relation to the espionage offences in s 91.1 where the relevant information
is lawfully available:
(1) It is a defence to a prosecution of an offence against subsection 91.1(1) or
(2) that the information the person communicates
or makes available is
information that has already been communicated or made available to the public
with the authority of the Commonwealth.
(2) It is a defence to a prosecution of an offence against subsection 91.1(3) or
(4) that the record of information the person makes,
obtains or copies is a
record of information that has already been communicated or made available to
the public with the authority
of the Commonwealth.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matters in
subsections (1) and (2). See subsection 13.3(3).
Submissions and consultations
9.89 The ATO considered that once information has entered the public domain,
it loses its inherently confidential nature and should
not be protected,
regardless of its source.
9.90 APRA noted that information that is lawfully in the public domain is
excluded from the definition of ‘protected information’
of the APRA Act.
A number of
other stakeholders expressed support for including an exception along these
Liberty Victoria, for
example, stated that it would be arbitrary to impose criminal liability on those
who disclose information that
is already in the public domain:
For instance, while a journalist may be the subject of penalty for subsequent
handling of secret information, a member of the public
should not be punished
for repeating that information once it has been published or otherwise made
As a result Liberty Victoria strongly supports an exception from penalty for
disclosure of information already in the public
9.91 The DHS cautioned, however, that:
A difficulty in relation to a public information defence/exception centres on
whether it should apply only where the disclosing employee
knows, or believes on
reasonable grounds, that the information is publicly known. What amounts to
‘public knowledge’
of a matter will be an issue for example where
the offending material appears on the customer’s Facebook or MySpace site
not more widely.
ALRC’s views
9.92 As discussed in Chapter 7, the proposed new general secrecy offence
will impose criminal liability only where the information
disclosed harms, is
reasonably likely to harm, or is intended to harm specified public interests.
Public interests such as national
security and international relations can be
harmed by the disclosure of information, even where the information is already
public domain—for example, where information has been
‘leaked’ but there is uncertainty about whether or not the
information is genuine or complete. A Commonwealth officer may harm a relevant
public interest by disclosing the same information,
thereby confirming that the
information is genuinely Commonwealth information. The ALRC proposes, therefore,
that the general secrecy
offence should include an exception for disclosure of
information, but only where the information is
in the public
9.93 The issue of when information is in the public domain has been
extensively considered by the courts in the context of breach
of confidence.
Information is in the public domain when it has received such publicity among
relevant groups in the community as
to effectively destroy the usefulness of its
secrecy to its owner, or to destroy any usefulness in enforcing the original
confidentiality.
9.94 It is unlikely that a charge would be brought against a Commonwealth
officer under the proposed new general secrecy offence for
disclosure of
information that is already
in the public domain. This is
because the offence requires that the disclosure harms, is reasonably likely to
harm, or is intended
to harm one of the specified public interests. While it is
unlikely that such disclosure would harm, or be reasonably likely to harm
the specified public interests, it is possible that a Commonwealth officer might
disclose information intending to cause harm,
unaware that the information is
already in the public domain and so the ALRC has included the exception to
ensure that the matter
is absolutely clear. The exception should also be
included in the proposed subsequent disclosure
so that where a
Commonwealth officer discloses information to a person—for example, a
journalist—in breach of the general
secrecy provision, and the information
is later lawfully put into the public domain, the journalist will not be guilty
of an offence
under the subsequent disclosure provision if he or she then
on-discloses the information.
Proposal 9–1
The proposed general secrecy offence should
expressly include exceptions applying where the disclosure is:
(a) in the course of a Commonwealth officer’s functions or duties;
(b) authorised by the relevant agency head or minister, and the agency head
or minister certifies that the disclosure is in the public
interest; or
(c) of information that is
already in the public domain as the result of a lawful disclosure.
Public interest
9.95 This section of the chapter examines whether the general secrecy offence
should contain an exception for disclosures that are
made in the public
interest. A related issue raised in the course of this Inquiry is the
interaction between secrecy offences and
proposed new Commonwealth public
interest disclosure legislation. This section provides a brief overview of
proposals in relation
to whistleblower protection legislation and examines how
such legislation may interact with the proposed general secrecy offence.
9.96 The relationship between the proposed public interest disclosure
legislation and specific secrecy offences is discussed in Chapter
Public interest exceptions in secrecy
9.97 Section 70 of the
does not create an exception or
defence relating to the disclosure of information ‘in the public
interest’. While s 79
permits a person to
communicate prescribed information to a ‘person to whom it is, in the
interests of the Commonwealth ...
his or her duty to communicate
the meaning and scope
of this exception is
9.98 As noted in Chapter 5, some secrecy provisions in Commonwealth
legislation include more confined exceptions that permit certain
disclosures in
the public interest. However, such disclosures are generally only permitted by
senior officers and for limited purposes.
For example, the
Law Enforcement
Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
(Cth) permits the Integrity Commissioner to
disclose certain information ‘if [he or she] is satisfied that it is in
interest to do
Similarly, the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
(Cth) (the ASIO
Act) allows the disclosure of information where the information concerns matters
outside Australia and the Director-General
of ASIO ‘is satisfied that the
national interest requires the
communication’.
9.99 Occasionally, legislation provides that a minister may determine that a
disclosure is in the public interest. For example, the
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand Act 1991
(Cth) permits the disclosure of certain
information if the responsible minister certifies, by instrument, that it is
necessary ‘in
Public interest disclosure
legislation
9.100 Public interest disclosure, or ‘whistleblowing’, is
‘the disclosure by organisation members (former or current)
of illegal,
immoral or illegitimate practices under the control of their employers to people
or organisations that might be able
Public interest
disclosures by Commonwealth officers may involve the disclosure of information
obtained because of a person’s
position as a Commonwealth officer, and
therefore may attract criminal penalties under various secrecy offences.
9.101 Currently, there is limited protection at the Commonwealth level for
people who make public interest disclosures. As discussed
in Chapter 15,
s 16 of the
Public Service Act 1999
(Cth), entitled
‘Protection for whistleblowers’, provides that a person performing
functions for an Australian Government
agency must not victimise or discriminate
against an Australian Public Service (APS) employee who has reported breaches of
Code of Conduct to the Public Service Commissioner, Merit Protection
Commissioner or the head of an agency. This provision is quite
limited in scope.
Importantly, it does not provide protection against criminal liability under
secrecy laws. Professor AJ Brown has
suggested that, at the Commonwealth level,
there is no protection from
the legal or disciplinary consequences that might attach
to an APS employee who reports a breach of the APS Code of Conduct. At best
s 16 of the [
Public Service Act
] can be taken as relieving a
whistleblower from liability to disciplinary action if the action could be shown
to constitute victimisation
or discrimination for the reporting of a
9.102 Some Commonwealth legislation contains more comprehensive protection
for whistleblowers working in particular areas. For example,
provides immunity from prosecution for a person who makes a disclosure
(in accordance with the reporting framework in the Act) regarding
the assault of
a person in residential care.
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(Cth) and the
Corporations
(Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander) Act 2006
(Cth) provide certain
persons with protection in relation to disclosure of information that reasonably
indicates that there has been
a contravention of the legislation. The protection
provided includes immunity against ‘any civil or criminal liability for
disclosure’.
9.103 All Australian states and territories have enacted legislation to
facilitate the making of public interest disclosures and to
protect people who
This legislation
is intended, among other things, to provide immunity from prosecution for
offences associated with breaches of state
or territory secrecy provisions. For
example, the
Whistleblowers Protection Act 2001
(Vic) provides that a
person who makes a ‘protected disclosure’ does not ‘commit an
offence under … a provision
of any other Act that imposes a duty to
maintain confidentiality with respect to a matter or any other restriction on
the disclosure
information’.
Whistleblower Protection report
9.104 As noted above, the House of Representatives Standing Committee on
Legal and Constitutional Affairs (the Standing Committee)
Whistleblower Protection
report in February
The Standing Committee
recommended that the Australian Government introduce public interest disclosure
legislation to provide whistleblower
protections in the Australian Government
public sector.
The proposed
legislation would establish a system whereby employees in the Commonwealth
public sector can make disclosures about
serious matters within their
organisation, to other public service agencies or, in limited circumstances,
9.105 The Standing Committee recommended that the proposed legislation cover
a broad range of participants in the Australian Government
public sector,
Australian Government and general government sector employees
including APS employees;
contractors and consultants engaged by the public sector and their
Australian and locally engaged staff working overseas;
members of the Australian Defence Force and Australian Federal
Police (AFP);
parliamentary staff;
former employees in any of the above categories; and
anonymous persons likely to be in any of the above
categories.
legislation would include, but not be limited to,
‘serious matters’
related to illegal activity, corruption, maladministration, breach of public
trust, scientific misconduct,
wastage of public funds, dangers to public health
or safety, dangers to the environment, official misconduct (including breaches
of codes of conduct) and adverse action against a person who makes a public
interest disclosure.
making a disclosure must have an honest and reasonable belief, on the basis of
information available to them, that the matter
concerns disclosable conduct
under the legislation.
9.107 The Standing Committee also made recommendations regarding procedures
to facilitate the making of a public interest disclosure,
and proposed that a
person could make a public interest disclosure internally (that is, to the
agency concerned) or externally (to
the Commonwealth Ombudsman, Australian
Public Service Commissioner or other integrity agency) or
9.108 A person who made a disclosure under the framework established by the
proposed legislation would be protected from detrimental
action in the workplace
and receive immunity from criminal liability (including under secrecy offences),
civil liability (including
civil penalties and civil actions) and administrative
9.109 The Standing Committee considered that it was necessary to protect
public interest disclosures to third parties—such as
to the media, a
member of parliament, a trade union or a legal adviser—in certain
circumstances. The Standing Committee stated
experience has shown that internal processes can sometimes fail and people will
seek alternative avenues to make their disclosure.
There are cases with
implications of the utmost seriousness, when disclosure through third parties
has been initially necessary and
consequently beneficial. ... A public interest
disclosure scheme that does not provide a means for such matters to be brought
light will lack
credibility.
9.110 Further, the Standing Committee considered that:
It may be possible that in some cases, for example, where an agency has not
fulfilled its obligations to a whistleblower, the disclosure
framework within
the public sector may not adequately handle an issue and that a subsequent
disclosure to the media could serve the
9.111 However, the Standing Committee’s final recommendation confined
protected public interest disclosures to third parties
to very narrow
circumstances. A disclosure to a third party external to the public service
would only be protected where the matter
already had been disclosed internally
or to an external authority, but had not been acted on in a reasonable
time—having regard
to the nature of the matter—and the matter
threatened immediate serious harm to public health and
9.112 This recommendation with respect to disclosures to third parties has
been criticised as too limited. Brown has commented that,
while it is reasonable
to require people to proceed through internal channels or external integrity
agencies before disclosing a
matter publicly, the requirement that the matter
must ‘threaten immediate serious harm to public health and safety’
too restrictive in that it excludes from protection public interest
disclosures to the media regarding major fraud, corruption and
major abuses of
power. Brown also argues that the recommended provision fails to cover the
situation in which the external agency
does not adequately address a public
interest disclosure, so that ‘even if the Ombudsman had looked at the
problem and failed
to act, or got it wrong, a public servant who justifiably
went public could still be sacked, sued or
prosecuted’.
Submissions and
consultations
9.113 In IP 34, the ALRC asked what relationship should exist between
exceptions and defences provided under Commonwealth secrecy
laws and possible
new Commonwealth public interest disclosure legislation. In particular, the ALRC
sought stakeholders’ views
on whether public interest disclosure should be
incorporated as an exception to secrecy
9.114 Several stakeholders suggested that secrecy offences should provide for
an exception or defence where a disclosure could be
shown to be in the public
For example, the
Australian Press Council expressed the view that:
First, it is essential that any legislative provision establishing an offence
for unauthorised disclosure exempts from its scope
those disclosures made for
public interest reasons. Such reasons should include, but not be restricted to,
the exposing of maladministration.
If public interest disclosures are not exempt
from the scope of the offence, the legislation should include a defence for the
of disclosures which are in the public interest or which are made for
public interest
9.115 The Press Council also submitted that:
With specific regard to public interest disclosures, it is not appropriate to
impose a custodial sentence where the disclosure was
made for the purpose of
exposing maladministration. Nor should a custodial sentence be imposed unless
the offender had a clear intention
of obtaining benefit or had a malicious
intent. The onus for establishing such intent should be on the
prosecution.
9.116 A number of comments about the need to protect
‘whistleblowers’ from prosecution under secrecy laws were made in
the course of the national secrecy
Several submissions
also expressed strong support for the introduction of robust public interest
disclosure legislation, noting that
disclosures made under such a regime should
not attract civil, criminal or administrative
9.117 Brown submitted that the approach to disclosure to third parties
proposed in the
Whistleblower Protection
report was too narrow and
fails to contemplate what would occur in circumstances where an official had
reason to believe not only that their own agency would
not respond appropriately
to the disclosure, but that the ability of the relevant external integrity
agency to respond appropriately
had also been corrupted or
compromised.
9.118 Brown suggested that a better approach would be one that protects
public interest disclosures to persons outside government:
• where the matter has been disclosed internally to the agency concerned
and to an external integrity agency of government,
or to an external integrity
agency alone, and has not been acted on in a reasonable time having regard to
the nature of the matter;
• where a matter is exceptionally serious, and special circumstances exist
such as to make the prior disclosure of the matter,
internally or to an external
integrity agency, either impossible or unreasonable (for example, in some
circumstances involving a
serious and immediate threat to public health or
9.119 In Professor Brown’s view, if this issue is not adequately
addressed in public interest disclosure legislation, it will
be necessary to
include an appropriate exception or defence in relevant secrecy offences. On the
other hand, ASIC highlighted the
need for caution in linking public interest
disclosure legislation with secrecy provisions, noting that a public interest
may have the potential to harm the public interest and that, in the
public interest disclosure context, a decision would have to
be made about the
relative merits of the competing public
the time of writing, the Australian Government had not responded to the
Whistleblower Protection
report. While the Government has indicated that
it intends to develop public interest disclosure legislation in
the ALRC may not have
the opportunity to consider the final form of the legislation before this
Inquiry’s final Report is due.
For the purposes of this Discussion Paper,
the ALRC is proceeding on the basis that any future public interest disclosure
legislation
will largely reflect the recommendations made in the
Whistleblower Protection
report. The ALRC recognises, however, that the
final form of the legislation may differ from those recommendations.
9.121 Because the whistleblower protections recommended by the Standing
Committee include immunity from criminal liability, it may
not be necessary to
include an express exception in the general secrecy offence for disclosures made
in the public interest. A public
interest disclosure exception would provide no
additional protection for a person immune from criminal liability under public
disclosure legislation. For the sake of clarity, it would be useful to
include a legislative note in the general secrecy offence
referring to the fact
that public interest disclosure legislation may provide immunity from criminal
liability for a breach of the
secrecy offence.
9.122 For this interaction to be effective, however, there needs to be
consistency between the proposed general secrecy offence and
the proposed public
interest disclosure legislation. In particular, it is important that the public
interest disclosure legislation
cover at least the same categories of persons
covered by the general secrecy offence. There also needs to be adequate
for individuals who make public interest disclosures to third
parties, such as the media, and those who may be caught by the ALRC’s
subsequent disclosure offence.
Categories of persons covered
9.123 To provide effective protection for whistleblowers, the public interest
disclosure legislation should cover at least the same
range of persons as those
subject to the general secrecy offence. If the legislation fails to cover some
persons subject to the general
secrecy offence, such people who disclose
information in the public interest would not receive immunity from prosecution
for contravention
of the secrecy offence.
9.124 The ALRC proposes that the new general secrecy offence cover a range of
‘Commonwealth
people, it appears that only the Governor-General, ministers and parliamentary
secretaries would not be covered by the proposed
public interest disclosure
legislation. While the
Whistleblower Protection
report did not expressly consider the issue, it may be that people so senior
in the executive branch of government have alternative
avenues to make public
interest disclosures and do not require whistleblower protection—for
example, members of parliament
are protected from criminal and other liability
for disclosures made under the protection of parliamentary
Otherwise, the
categories of people subject to the proposed secrecy offence and those the
Standing Committee proposes be covered
by the public interest disclosure
legislation seem consistent, albeit expressed in different language. The
statutory language used
in the public interest disclosure legislation and the
proposed new general secrecy offence ultimately should be consistent in this
Whistleblower Protection
report recommended that public
interest disclosure legislation provide that a decision-maker within the scheme
be able to deem a person
to be a public official for the purposes of the
legislation, where that person has an ‘insider’s knowledge’ of
matters that might form the basis of a public interest
disclosure.
The Standing
Committee used the example of a former volunteer of a not-for-profit body
contracted to a local government authority
to implement a federally funded
program. The Standing Committee expressed the view that ‘there should be
no automatic protection
afforded to people in such instances but a decision
maker should be able to grant protection in appropriate
circumstances’.
could be that one consideration in making a decision to deem a person to be a
‘public official’ for the purposes of
public interest disclosure
legislation might be whether he or she is subject to a secrecy offence.
Public interest disclosures to third parties
9.126 A person making a disclosure to a third party in the public interest
that relates to a serious matter, but which does not threaten
immediate serious
harm to public health and safety, would not receive immunity from liability
under the public interest disclosure
legislation proposed by the Standing
Committee. Concerns have been expressed that the provision recommended by the
Standing Committee
Arguably, a person
who publicly discloses information relating to a particularly serious matter in
the public interest, where other
avenues of disclosure are exhausted or
unavailable, should not be liable to prosecution for contravention of a secrecy
9.127 It is also important to ensure that a journalist or other person who
further discloses information received by way of a public
interest disclosure
will not commit an offence —for example, under offences which cover the
disclosure of information by ‘any
or under the
proposed subsequent disclosure
While this issue
does not appear to have been directly considered by the Standing Committee, it
seems logical that a third party
who subsequently discloses information received
by way of a protected public interest disclosure would also be immune from civil
or criminal liability.
9.128 The ALRC considers that comprehensive public interest disclosure
legislation is preferable to developing a public interest exception
general secrecy offence. An exception to the secrecy offence would only provide
a person making a public interest disclosure
with protection against criminal
prosecution, whereas a comprehensive public interest disclosure scheme would
also give whistleblowers
immunity from civil and administrative sanctions.
9.129 However, if the public interest disclosure legislation provides
insufficient protection for public interest disclosures to third
parties, or the
proposed legislation is not enacted, it would become necessary to consider an
exception to any new general secrecy
offence and the subsequent disclosure
offence for such public interest disclosures. The exception could encompass a
broader range
of public interest disclosures than recommended in the
Whistleblower Protection
report. For example, an alternative based on
Brown’s approach, discussed above, would be to protect disclosures made
the matter has been disclosed to the proper authorities and has not
been acted on in a reasonable time having regard to the nature
of the matter;
the matter is exceptionally serious, and special circumstances exist
such as to make the prior disclosure of the matter to the proper
authorities
either impossible or unreasonable (for example, a serious and immediate threat
to public health or
ALRC would welcome stakeholders’ views on when, and in what circumstances,
it would be appropriate for a public interest
disclosure made to a third party
to be an exception to the general secrecy offence.
Proposal 9–2
The proposed general secrecy offence should include
a note cross-referencing to the immunity provided by proposed Commonwealth
interest disclosure legislation.
9.131 The Terms of Reference for this Inquiry ask the ALRC to consider
options for ensuring a consistent approach across government
to the protection
of Commonwealth information. The
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
directs those framing offences to ‘ensure [the] penalty fits with
other penalties in Commonwealth
Same Crime,
Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
(ALRC 103), the ALRC
emphasised the importance of imposing consistent sentences on offenders for
similar offences.
only be achieved if the penalties specified for similar offences are also
consistent. In the following section of the chapter,
the ALRC, in keeping with
this approach, proposes a three tier penalty regime for the proposed general
secrecy offence, and considers
what penalty should apply for breach of the
proposed subsequent disclosure offence.
Penalties in
existing secrecy provisions
9.132 Currently, both ss 70 and 79(3) of the
a maximum penalty of imprisonment for two years.
provides a formula for the calculation of a maximum fine where
a provision specifies a maximum term of imprisonment but is silent
maximum fine. Under this provision, where a natural person is convicted of an
offence against ss 70 or 79(3), if the court
thinks it appropriate in all
the circumstances of the case, the court may impose instead of, or in addition
to, a penalty of imprisonment,
a pecuniary penalty not exceeding 120 penalty
Section 4B(3)
provides that where a body corporate is convicted of
an offence, the court may, if the contrary intention does not appear and the
court thinks fit, impose a pecuniary penalty not exceeding an amount equal to
five times the amount of the maximum pecuniary penalty
that could be imposed by
the court on a natural person convicted of the same offence.
9.134 Sections 70 and 79(3) do not require the prosecution to establish
that the unauthorised disclosure caused harm, was reasonably
likely to cause
harm or was intended to cause harm to any specified public interest. Where an
element of this nature is present in
similar existing offences, the maximum
penalties prescribed tend to be higher. For example, s 79(2) sets out an
offence for communicating
certain prescribed information ‘with the
intention of prejudicing the security or defence of the Commonwealth or a part
the Queen’s dominions’. This offence stipulates a maximum penalty
of seven years.
9.135 Section 142.2 of the
Criminal Code
includes an offence for
using official information where a Commonwealth public official intended to
dishonestly obtain a benefit for
himself or herself or for another person; or
dishonestly cause a detriment to another person. This offence stipulates a
maximum penalty
of five years.
Section 22(1)
Witness Protection Act 1994
prohibits the disclosure of information about the identity or location of a
person who is or has been a participant in the
National Witness Protection
Program, where the disclosure compromises the person’s security. This
offence also attracts a maximum
penalty of 10 years imprisonment.
Criminal Code
espionage offences—which include
communicating information concerning the Commonwealth’s security or
defence to another
country intending to prejudice the Commonwealth’s
security or defence—attract a maximum penalty of 25 years.
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
(Cth) provides an example of a
secrecy offence provision with two clear tiers. The first tier does not require
proof of harm, the
second tier does require proof of harm.
Section 45(1)
prohibits the unauthorised use, recording or disclosure of protected information
and prescribes a maximum penalty of two years imprisonment.
Section 45(2)
prohibits the same conduct where it ‘endangers the health or safety of any
person or prejudices the effective conduct of an
investigation into a relevant
offence’. This section provides a maximum penalty of 10 years
imprisonment.
9.139 In sentencing a federal offender,
requires a court to take into account certain factors, including the
‘nature and circumstances of the offence’ and ‘any
loss or damage resulting from the offence’. The ‘nature and
circumstances’ of the offence might include,
for example, the sensitivity
of the information disclosed. The ‘injury, loss or damage resulting from
the offence’ would
include the consequences of disclosure, for example,
whether and to what degree the disclosure harmed national security or posed
risk to an individual’s life or safety.
Submissions and
consultations
9.140 There was some support from stakeholders for a tiered penalty structure
for the proposed new general secrecy offence, with escalating
attaching to increasingly serious behaviour. The AGD noted in its submission
that currently most secrecy offences carry
a maximum penalty of two years but
that, where particularly sensitive or national security information was
involved, this would justify
the imposition of higher maximum penalties:
The underlying principle for the imposition of higher maximum penalties in this
latter category of offences is that there are certain
information, the unauthorised disclosure of which could cause significant harm
to the public interest and as
such require additional protection. By its nature,
the unauthorised disclosure of national security information will carry a higher
likelihood of harm to the public interest. For example, national security
information that has been received from sensitive sources
such as foreign
governments could not only damage international relations with that government
but also jeopardise the security or
9.141 In its submission, ACLEI noted that s 127A of the
Regulation Act 1958
(Vic) includes two tiers. The first tier addresses the
unauthorised disclosure of official information and imposes a maximum penalty
two years imprisonment, or 240 penalty units, or both. The second tier addresses
the unauthorised disclosure of official information
where the officer knows, or
is reckless as to whether, the information may be used to harm specified public
interests including endangering
the life or safety of any person, or impeding or
interfering with the administration of justice. This offence attracts a maximum
penalty of five years imprisonment, or 600 penalty units, or both.
9.142 ACLEI was of the view that, where there is an element of corrupt
intent, secrecy offences ought to carry a penalty of no less
than seven years.
ACLEI also suggested that it might be appropriate to apply strict liability in
relation to certain harmful results—for
example, a disclosure that might
‘seriously prejudice the effectiveness of an authorised law enforcement
operation’—but
that the penalties for such an offence should be
9.143 Liberty Victoria suggested a sliding scale of criminal penalties:
If there was intent to mishandle the information, a criminal penalty should be
applied. Liberty Victoria submits that this should
be on a sliding scale of
punishment applied by the courts based on a number of factors including the
classification of the information,
and whether or not the conduct was intended
to cause harm to the ‘national
9.144 The AFP stated that:
The AFP is supportive of the idea of an offence hierarchy with a basic offence
provision supported by more serious offence provisions
with higher penalties
that could apply in aggravated circumstances. For example, greater penalty
provisions should apply in cases
of a deliberate disclosure to cause damage to
the government/public interest or to obtain a financial
9.145 The Australian Press Council submitted that:
The key point is that the penalty should be appropriate to the offence, taking
into account both the seriousness of the breach, the
purpose for which the
information was disclosed and its consequences. It is not appropriate to impose
a significant penalty where
the information disclosed is merely trivial, where
there has been no significant damage to the public interest (or no risk of such
damage), where the offender has been negligent rather than reckless, or where
there was an absence of
9.146 In Chapter 7, the ALRC proposes a three tier general secrecy
offence as follows:
: a Commonwealth officer discloses Commonwealth
information and the disclosure harms, or is reasonably likely to harm, one of
specified public interests. Strict liability attaches to the physical
element of harm to one of the specified public interests. The
prosecution is not
required to prove a fault element in relation to the harm.
Second tier
: a Commonwealth officer discloses Commonwealth
information and knows, is reckless as to whether, or intends the disclosure
(i) have a substantial adverse effect on personal privacy; or
(ii) have a substantial adverse effect on a person in respect of his or her
lawful business or professional affairs or on the business,
commercial or
financial affairs of an organisation.
: a Commonwealth officer discloses Commonwealth
information and knows, is reckless as to whether, or intends the disclosure
(i) harm the national security, defence or international relations of the
Commonwealth;
(ii) prejudice the prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution or
punishment of criminal offences, breaches of a law imposing
a penalty or
sanction, the enforcement of laws relating to the confiscation of the proceeds
of crime, or the protection of the public
(iii) endanger the life or physical safety of any person; or
(iv) pose a serious threat to public health or public
9.147 In relation to the first tier offence, the ALRC proposes that the
penalty should be a maximum of two years imprisonment, or
a pecuniary penalty
not exceeding 120 penalty units, or both. This is consistent with most existing
secrecy provisions and the fact
that the proposed offence does not involve
reckless or intentional harm to the public interest.
Second tier
9.148 In relation to the second tier offence, the ALRC proposes a maximum
penalty of five years imprisonment, or a pecuniary penalty
not exceeding 300
penalty units, or both. The harms set out in the second tier offence do not
involve risks to individual lives or
community safety, unlike the harms
reflected in the third tier offence. They are essentially harms to private
interests. The mid-range
penalty is intended to reflect the reckless or
intentional nature of the harm caused and the fact that the disclosure must have
substantial adverse effect. This is consistent with the AGD
Framing Commonwealth Offences,
which sets a penalty benchmark of five years
imprisonment or 300 penalty units for offences such as corruption and abuse of
9.149 In relation to the third tier offence, the ALRC proposes a maximum
penalty of seven years imprisonment, or a pecuniary penalty
not exceeding 420
penalty units, or both. This offence involves harm of a high order and may
involve risks to individual lives or
the safety of the Australian community. A
maximum penalty of seven years imprisonment is consistent with the AGD
to Framing Commonwealth Offences
which states that ‘a heavier penalty
will be appropriate where … the consequences of the commission of the
offence are
particularly dangerous or
9.150 This is also consistent with the position the ALRC adopted in
Fighting Words: A Review of Sedition Laws in Australia
(ALRC 104) in
relation to sedition
The sedition
offences in s 80.2 of the
Criminal Code
each carry a maximum penalty
of seven years imprisonment. Although the ALRC recommended that a number of the
offences be repealed,
after consideration the ALRC did not recommend any changes
to the seven year maximum penalties imposed for the remaining offences
the overthrow of the
government,
interference with parliamentary
and urging violence
within the community.
Proposal 9–3
The general secrecy offence should have three tiers
and three penalty levels:
(a) Where strict liability attaches to the requirement to prove harm, the
penalty should be a maximum of two years imprisonment,
or a pecuniary penalty
not exceeding 120 penalty units, or both.
(b) Where a Commonwealth officer knows, is reckless as to whether, or
intends the disclosure of Commonwealth information to:
(i) have a substantial adverse effect on personal privacy; or
(ii) have a substantial adverse effect on a person in respect of his or her
lawful business or professional affairs or on the business,
commercial or
financial affairs of an organisation,
the penalty should be a maximum of five years imprisonment, or a pecuniary
penalty not exceeding 300 penalty units, or both.
(c) Where a Commonwealth officer knows, is reckless as to whether, or
intends the disclosure of Commonwealth information to:
(i) harm the national security, defence or international relations of the
Commonwealth;
(ii) prejudice the prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution or
punishment of criminal offences, breaches of a law imposing
a penalty or
sanction, the enforcement of laws relating to the confiscation of the proceeds
of crime, or the protection of the public
(iii) endanger the life or physical safety of any person; or
(iv) pose a serious threat to public health or public safety
the penalty should be a maximum of seven years imprisonment, or a pecuniary
penalty not exceeding 420 penalty units, or both.
Penalties for
subsequent disclosure
9.151 In Chapter 8, the ALRC proposes the creation of an offence for the
subsequent disclosure of Commonwealth information in certain
circumstances. The
offence would be committed where a person knew, or was reckless as to whether,
information had been disclosed
by a Commonwealth officer in breach of the
general secrecy offence. It would also be necessary to show that the person
knew, or was
reckless as to whether, the subsequent disclosure of the
information would harm, or was reasonably likely to harm, one of the specified
public interests.
9.152 In IP 34, the ALRC asked whether the maximum penalties for initial
and subsequent disclosures should be
consistent.
Examples of
provisions which impose the same penalty for initial and subsequent disclosures
of protected information can be found
Anti-Money Laundering and
Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
sets out penalty
benchmarks for certain classes of
It specifies a
penalty benchmark for breach of a confidentiality requirement as two years
imprisonment or 120 penalty units—citing
as examples provisions which
relate to both initial
unauthorised
handling of Commonwealth information.
Submissions and consultations
9.154 In its submission, the AGD expressed the view that:
If the fault elements and harm caused by the conduct are the same, it would be
reasonable for the penalty to be the same regardless
of whether the offence is
one of first or subsequent unauthorised handling. The penalties that apply to
existing comparable offences
should be considered in setting penalties. For
example if an individual is aware that the disclosure of certain protected
information
will prejudice Australia’s security it would be appropriate to
apply the same penalty regardless of whether it was an initial
or subsequent
unauthorised disclosure.
9.155 A number of other stakeholders agreed that the same penalty should
apply to both initial and subsequent disclosures, with ASIC
noting that the
potential harm arising from both the initial and subsequent disclosures is the
9.156 On the other hand, PIAC’s view was that the penalties for
subsequent disclosure should be lower, ‘except where intent
Australia’s national interest is
9.157 The Australian Press Council noted that journalists and editors are not
subject to the same legislative and administrative duties
as Commonwealth
officers and expressed concern that ‘a minor disclosure that is ostensibly
in the public interest is treated
as a breach of secrecy warranting criminal
conviction’.
ALRC’s views
9.158 The first tier general secrecy offence imposes liability where a
Commonwealth officer discloses information that harms, or is
reasonably likely
to harm, one of the specified public interests. The subsequent disclosure
provision does not include a parallel
strict liability offence. The ALRC does
not consider it appropriate to impose criminal liability on non-Commonwealth
officers for
disclosure of Commonwealth information unless the person is
reckless, knows or intends that the disclosure would cause harm.
9.159 As noted above, the proposed subsequent disclosure offence requires
that the person making the subsequent disclosure:
knew, or was reckless as to whether the information was disclosed in
breach of the general secrecy offence; and
knew, was reckless as to whether, or intended that the disclosure
would harm one of the specified public interests.
9.160 The level of
culpability contained in the proposed subsequent disclosure offence provision is
of a similar order to that reflected
in the second and third tiers of the
general secrecy offence.
9.161 The ALRC proposes, therefore that a two tier penalty regime should
apply to the subsequent disclosure offence. The penalties
imposed should be the
same as the penalties imposed in relation to the second and third tiers of the
general secrecy offence.
Proposal 9–4
Where a person knows that, or was reckless as to
whether, Commonwealth information has been disclosed in breach of the general
offence, and then discloses that information knowing, or reckless as to
whether, or intending that the subsequent disclosure of Commonwealth
information
(a) have a substantial adverse effect on personal privacy; or
(b) have a substantial adverse effect on a person in respect of his or her
lawful business or professional affairs or on the business,
commercial or
financial affairs of an organisation,
the penalty should be a maximum of five years imprisonment, or a pecuniary
penalty not exceeding 300 penalty units, or both.
Proposal 9–5
Where a person knows that, or was reckless as to
whether, Commonwealth information has been disclosed in breach of the general
offence, and then discloses that information knowing, or reckless as to
whether, or intending that the subsequent disclosure of Commonwealth
information
(a) harm the national security, defence or international relations of the
Commonwealth;
(b) prejudice the prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution or
punishment of criminal offences, breaches of a law imposing
a penalty or
sanction, the enforcement of laws relating to the confiscation of the proceeds
of crime, or the protection of the public
(c) endanger the life or physical safety of any person; or
(d) pose a serious threat to public health or public safety,
the penalty should be a maximum of seven years imprisonment, or a pecuniary
penalty not exceeding 420 penalty units, or both.
Consent of the
Attorney-General
9.162 The consent of the Attorney-General must be obtained before a
prosecution can be commenced for breach of certain secrecy provisions.
example, the Attorney-General, or a person acting under his or her direction,
must consent prior to a prosecution under s 79
or s 91.1 of the
Criminal Code
dealing with espionage. The Revised Explanatory Memorandum
for the Criminal Code Amendment (Espionage and Related Matters) Bill 2002
justified the need for such consent on the basis that prosecutions under Part
—which includes s 91.1—are likely to raise issues
regarding matters of national security or sensitive international relations
require government to government
9.163 Other secrecy provisions that require the consent of the
Attorney-General include:
Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation Act
, which govern communication of intelligence by officers of
ASIO, and publication by any person of the identity of an officer of ASIO,
respectively; and
various provisions of the
Intelligence Services Act 2001
(Cth), including the communication of information prepared by or on behalf of
ASIS, the Defence Imagery and Geospatial Organisation
(DIGO) or the Defence
Signals Directorate (DSD) by officers of the respective
and publication by
any person of the identity of the staff of these
9.164 Other
commence prosecutions include:
those involving harming Australians outside of Australian
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and crimes against the
administration of justice in the International Criminal
primary justification for a requirement for the Attorney-General (or another
minister or office holder) to consent to a
prosecution is that it provides an
additional safeguard to ensure that prosecutions are not brought in
inappropriate circumstances.
Prosecution Policy of the Commonwealth
advises that a
consent provision may be included, for example, where ‘it was not possible
to define the offence so precisely
that it covered the mischief aimed at and no
more’ or for offences that ‘involve a use of the criminal law in
or controversial areas, or must take account of important
considerations of public
9.166 In 1996, with respect to the repeal of certain provisions requiring the
Attorney-General’s consent to prosecution, the
then Attorney-General, the
Hon Daryl Williams AM QC MP, observed that consent provisions were originally
enacted for the purpose
of deterring private prosecutions brought in
inappropriate circumstances—particularly for offences relating to national
or international treaty obligations:
However, since establishing the office of the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions the retention of those provisions is difficult
to justify. That is
particularly so now that the Director of Public Prosecutions has the power to
take over and discontinue a private
prosecution brought in relation to a
Commonwealth offence.
9.167 In its Inquiry into federal sedition laws, the ALRC raised concerns
requirements.
Specifically,
the Attorney-General, as a political figure, might be perceived to agree more
readily to the prosecution of certain
persons—such as those who criticise
government policy or are unpopular with the electorate. Politicisation may also
an issue where the Attorney-General refuses consent—for example, to
the prosecution of a person who is perceived to be politically
aligned to the
government of the day. As a consequence, the ALRC recommended removing the
requirement for the Attorney-General’s
consent to prosecution of sedition
The Australian
Government expressed support for this recommendation in its response to the ALRC
Submissions and consultations
9.168 In IP 34, the ALRC asked whether the Attorney-General’s
consent should be required for prosecutions under various secrecy
provisions.
9.169 In its submission, the AGD noted that:
Consent to prosecute provisions recognise the Attorney-General’s role as
the First Law Officer and the Attorney-General’s
ultimate responsibility
for the prosecution of Commonwealth offences. Consent provisions give the
Attorney-General a discretionary
power to decide whether criminal proceedings
should be commenced. The requirement for the Attorney-General’s consent is
imposed where a prosecution could affect Australia’s international
relations or national security. These are considerations
which the Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions (CDPP) would not be able to take into account
Prosecution Policy of the Commonwealth
Consent provisions provide the Attorney-General with an opportunity to receive
advice from relevant agencies on any sensitivities
or issues which may arise if
a prosecution is commenced. The Attorney-General’s consent may be
appropriate in certain cases
where there are matters of policy to be weighed up
that are best left to elected representatives to decide. This might include
consideration
of whether there is potential for further damage to be done by
airing the matter in court, or whether the prosecution could be detrimental
Australia’s foreign
9.170 The Australian Intelligence Community (AIC) stated that:
The AIC does not consider there has been any actual, or perceived, conflict of
interest in the Attorney-General’s consent being
required. Further,
seeking the Attorney-General’s consent to prosecute ameliorates the
potential strict application of these
secrecy laws to the circumstances of an
individual case.
9.171 In its submission, APRA noted that it is the CDPP, rather than the
Attorney-General, who makes a decision whether or not to
prosecute a breach of
s 56 of the APRA Act and that this is broadly consistent with the position
that decisions relating to prudential
regulation should be made independently of
the executive government.
9.172 The Treasury expressed the view that:
It is important for the prohibition on the disclosure of taxpayer information to
be clear and unambiguous. Therefore, in the absence
of any uncertainty as to the
application of the provisions, we do not consider that it would be appropriate
for the Attorney-General’s
consent to be
9.173 PIAC was opposed to the Attorney-General’s gatekeeper role in
relation to prosecutions for breach of Commonwealth secrecy
laws, stating
The fact that such prosecutions involve material that government asserts should
be kept secret, and the potential for party political
considerations to intrude
upon the decision-making process, makes such a role singularly
inappropriate.
Director of Public Prosecutions Act 1983
(Cth) provides that the performance of the CDPP’s functions is subject
to directions or guidelines given by the Attorney-General.
The Attorney-General
can provide directions or guidelines about the circumstances in which the CDPP
should institute or carry on
prosecutions for offences, including in relation to
particular cases. Such directions or guidelines must be published in the
Australian Government
and tabled in Parliament. The
ALRC’s view is that this is a more appropriate mechanism than a consent
requirement. In particular,
it ensures a level of transparency around any
intervention in the prosecutorial decision making process by the
Attorney-General.
9.175 As noted above, the ALRC expressed some concern in its report,
Fighting Words,
in relation to the requirement for the
Attorney-General’s consent to prosecution of sedition offences, and
recommended the
repeal of certain such
requirements.
Australian Government’s support for this recommendation, the ALRC does not
propose that the new general secrecy offence
should include a requirement for
the consent of the Attorney-General prior to the commencement of a prosecution
under the provision.
Infringement
9.176 An infringement notice is a notice authorised by statute setting out
the particulars of an alleged offence. It gives the person
to whom the notice is
issued the option of either paying the penalty set out in the notice or electing
to have the matter dealt with
by a court. Infringement notice schemes typically
set penalties at 20% or less of the maximum fine that could be imposed by a
9.177 Infringement notices are not administrative penalties. Rather, they are
an administrative device designed to dispose of a matter
involving a breach that
would otherwise have to be dealt with by a court—either by way of a
criminal prosecution or in civil
penalty proceedings.
9.178 To date, the ALRC has not identified any infringement notice schemes in
Commonwealth secrecy
provisions.
Regulation: Federal Civil and Administrative Penalties in Australia
Principled Regulation
the ALRC recommended that in criminal
penalty schemes, an infringement notice scheme should apply only to minor
offences of strict
or absolute
Submissions and consultations
9.179 In IP 34, the ALRC asked whether infringement notice schemes had a
role to play in enforcing breach of Commonwealth secrecy
9.180 Stakeholders were cautious about using infringement notices to enforce
secrecy offences. In its submission, the AGD stated that:
An infringement notice scheme would not be appropriate for enforcing and
punishing breaches of Commonwealth secrecy offences. Infringement
notice schemes
may be employed for minor offences, where a high volume of contraventions are
expected, and where a penalty must be
imposed immediately to be effective. None
of these circumstances appear to be applicable when considering breaches of
secrecy offences.
9.181 ASIC noted that:
If an infringement notice scheme was to be introduced, then, in order to accord
with the interim
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties and
Enforcement Powers
, the disclosure provisions to which the scheme applied
would need to be framed so that:
• they only cover minor breaches; and
• no proof of fault element or state of mind is
9.182 PIAC stated that:
PIAC does not believe an infringement notice regime is appropriate. Secrecy
offences—certainly those that impose criminal liability—should
be offences of strict or absolute liability, as opposed to requiring proof of a
fault element, or state of
ALRC’s views
9.183 The first tier general secrecy offence attaches strict liability to the
requirement of proving that the unauthorised disclosure
caused harm, or was
reasonably likely to cause harm, to one of the specified public interests.
However, the offence is still a serious
one, given the requirement that the harm
caused, or reasonably likely to be caused, is to significant public interests
national security, defence and international relations or the
enforcement of the criminal law. The ALRC proposes that the first tier
attract a maximum penalty of two years
imprisonment.
serious criminal offence, enforcement by way of infringement notice is not
appropriate.
9.184 The second and third tiers of the general secrecy offence and the
subsequent disclosure offence are more serious offences involving
recklessness,
knowledge or intention to cause harm. They attract higher maximum penalties of
five and seven years imprisonment, depending
on the public interest
None of these
offences could be described as ‘minor’ and, in the ALRC’s
view, it would not be appropriate to enforce
the provisions through an
infringement notice scheme.
Injunctions
9.185 In some situations, the Australian Government may become aware that an
unauthorised disclosure of Commonwealth information is
example, information may have been leaked, and publication by the media or on an
individual’s or oganisation’s
website appears imminent.
Keeping Secrets
, the ALRC analysed potential mechanisms to
prevent disclosure of classified and security sensitive Commonwealth information
circumstances.
ALRC considered that injunctions to restrain a breach of the criminal law
provided a potentially appropriate vehicle. However,
in the absence of an
express statutory power, courts have traditionally been reticent to issue such
injunctions.
9.187 The right for the Attorney-General to invoke the aid of the civil
courts in enforcing the criminal law has been described as
one which ‘is
confined, in practice, to cases where an offence is frequently repeated in
disregard of a usually inadequate
penalty … or to cases of
emergency’.
Commonwealth v Fairfax
, Mason J further noted that:
It may be that in some circumstances a statutory provision which prohibits and
penalizes the disclosure of confidential government
information or official
secrets will be enforceable by injunction. This is more likely to be the case
when it appears that the statute,
in addition to creating a criminal offence, is
designed to provide a civil remedy to protect the government’s right to
confidential
information.
9.188 In the ALRC report,
Principled Regulation
, it was noted that
injunctions are not in themselves penalties but are used in support of actions
seeking penalties. In the course
of that Inquiry, ASIC officers commented on the
usefulness of injunctions in acting quickly against offenders:
The foundation of the ASIC approach is to try and protect investors, so the
first step is always to act to protect, then start thinking
criminal penalties.
9.189 Section 17B of the
Taxation Administration Act 1953
is an example of a provision that expressly provides for injunctive relief:
Where a person has engaged, is engaging or is proposing to engage in any conduct
that constituted or would constitute a contravention
of a taxation law that
prohibits the communication, divulging or publication of information or the
production of, or the publication
of the contents of, a document, the Federal
Court of Australia may … grant an injunction restraining the person from
in the conduct … requiring the person to do any act or
9.190 The Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill also provides that, where someone is
engaging, or proposing to engage, in breach of the new
disclosure provisions,
the Commissioner can apply to the Federal Court for an
injunction.
The Explanatory
Material to the Draft Bill provides the following example:
Jerome, a journalist, unlawfully obtains information regarding the financial
affairs of a prominent businessman and decides to include
that information in
his newspaper the following day. The Commissioner, who has become aware of this
impending unlawful disclosure
of taxpayer information, applies to the Federal
Court for an injunction. The Federal Court issues an injunction against Jerome
him from publishing that information and also compelling him to
return the information to the Australian Taxation Office
Keeping Secrets
, the ALRC noted the potentially compelling
public interest in protecting classified and security sensitive information from
unauthorised
disclosure. The ALRC recommended that:
Sections 70 and 79 of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) and s 91.1 of the
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) should be amended to provide that, where the
courts are satisfied that a person has disclosed or is about to disclose
or security sensitive information in contravention of the criminal
law, the courts may grant an injunction to restrain such disclosure
disclosure.
9.192 In IP 34, the ALRC asked whether secrecy laws should expressly
provide for injunctions to restrain unauthorised disclosure of
Commonwealth
information and, if so, whether this should apply only to certain types of
Commonwealth information, for example, national
security or other sensitive
Commonwealth information.
Submissions and consultations
9.193 Stakeholders were generally supportive of providing the courts with
power to issue injunctions to restrain the unauthorised
disclosure of
Commonwealth information. For example, the AGD’s submission supported an
express provision allowing the grant
of such injunctions, but noted that:
On a practical level, it would be unlikely that there would be a significant
number of cases where an injunction would be sought
to protect unauthorised
handling of Commonwealth information, as it is rare to have forewarning that
unauthorised disclosure is likely
9.194 APRA submitted that it would be useful to have an express power in
s 56 of the APRA Act permitting APRA to obtain an injunction
disclosure of material in breach of that
The ATO noted that
s 17B of the
Taxation Administration Act
expressly provides for
injunctive relief and stated that:
The ATO considers this is a positive feature of tax secrecy provisions because
it is preferable to obtain injunctive relief in relation
to an unauthorised
handling of taxpayer information, rather than seeking to pursue a criminal
prosecution after the fact (at which
point the information may already be in the
public domain).
9.195 The Treasury agreed that the ability to obtain an injunction to prevent
a breach of a taxation law forms an important part of
the overall protection of
taxpayer information:
Where possible, it can be used to prevent the damage caused (both to the
individual and in the confidence in the tax system) which
is preferable to
punishing the conduct after the
9.196 The AIC supported the inclusion of ‘a statutory power to obtain
injunctions to restrain unauthorised handling of national
security-classified
information’.
expressed support noting that:
The availability of injunctions should not be limited to certain types of
Commonwealth information. If Commonwealth information is
regarded as being of
such a nature as to warrant the coverage of secrecy provisions, whose aim is to
deter and/or punish its unauthorised
disclosure, then it should also warrant the
protection of injunctions to prevent its disclosure. Prevention of unauthorised
should be the key priority. If secrecy provisions are unsuccessful in
achieving their desired deterrent effect, then injunctions
will be the only
remaining means of achieving the primary purpose of the secrecy
provisions.
9.197 PIAC agreed that:
where legislation prohibits and penalises the disclosure of Commonwealth
confidential information, it is reasonable that it also
provide a civil remedy,
by way of injunctive relief, where disclosure would otherwise amount to a breach
of the equitable duty of
confidence. If the basis upon which an injunction might
be obtained were governed by this principle, there is no apparent reason
should be limited to national security, or other ‘sensitive’
information.
9.198 Liberty Victoria sounded a note of caution, however:
The use of injunctive relief should be confined to [National Security
Information]. An overly zealous approach to secrecy is counter
government.
ALRC’s views
9.199 There was significant support among stakeholders for the inclusion of
an express power to issue injunctions in secrecy offences.
Although Liberty
Victoria would limit the use of the power to restraining disclosure of national
security information, the ALRC considers
that this would be too narrow.
9.200 The proposed new general secrecy and subsequent disclosure offences are
expressly limited to disclosures that involve actual
or potential harm to the
specific public interests discussed in Chapter 7. In the ALRC’s view,
all these specific public interests
merit the protection of the criminal law and
should be further protected by granting the court the power to issue an
injunction to
restrain a breach of the provisions. Preventing disclosure of such
information is a more effective mechanism to prevent the relevant
imposing a penalty after the damage is done. In considering whether to issue an
injunction to restrain a breach of the
provisions, the court will be required to
consider the potential for harm to the listed public interests.
9.201 The ALRC proposes that the general secrecy offence, and the subsequent
disclosure offence, should provide that, where a court
is satisfied that a
person has disclosed, or is about to disclose, information in contravention of
the provisions, the court may
grant an injunction to restrain such
disclosure.
Proposal 9–6
The proposed general secrecy offence, and the
subsequent disclosure offence, should provide that, where a court is satisfied
a person has disclosed, or is about to disclose, information in
contravention of the provisions, the court may grant an injunction
to restrain
such disclosure.
Australian Parliament—House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Whistleblower Protection: A Comprehensive Scheme for the Commonwealth Public
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences,
Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007),
Part 2.3 of the
Criminal Code
(Cth) is headed ‘Circumstances in which there is no
responsibility’.
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007),
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 4–1.
Question 4–2.
Public Interest
Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009;
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act
(Cth) s 56.
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976
The Treasury,
Discussion Paper for the Review of Taxation Secrecy and Disclosure
(2006), 19.
Explanatory
Material, Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer
Information) Bill 2009
Exposure Draft,
Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
(Cth) sch 1
item 1 subsection 355-45(2) table item
Ibid sch 1 item 1
subsection 355-45(2) table
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 4–2(a).
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009; Australian Bureau of Statistics,
24 March 2009; Australian Taxation Office,
16 February 2009; Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
19 February 2009.
of Human Services,
20 February 2009.
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
23 March 2009.
disclosures may also fall within the ‘conduct justified or excused by or
under law’ exception, discussed
Building and
Construction Industry Improvement Act 2005
Mining Industry (Long Service Leave) Payroll Levy Collection Act 1992
Taxation Administration Act 1953
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act 1986
Reserve Bank Act 1959
Discrimination Act 1992
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 10.5.
Government Attorney-General’s Department and the Australian Institute of
Judicial Administration,
The Commonwealth Criminal Code: A Guide for
Practitioners
(2002), 233.
19 February 2009.
Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions,
18 February 2009.
18 February 2009.
Proposal 15–1.
Proposal 15–4.
Proposal 15–7.
Superannuation
Industry (Supervision) Act 1993
s 252C(5)(b).
Administration Act 1985
Insurance Act 1973
Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
Australian Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
19 February 2009.
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Environment Protection (Alligator Rivers Region) Act 1978
Explanatory Material,
Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information)
(Cth), [4.19].
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
(Cth) sch 1 item 1 subsection 355-55(1) table item
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
sch 1, item 1, subsection 355-65(1), item 1 in table
Explanatory Material, Exposure
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
(Cth), [5.54].
Exposure Draft,
Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
(Cth) sch 1,
item 1, subparagraph 355-70
Explanatory Material,
Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information)
(Cth), [5.64].
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
(Cth) sch 1
s 355-70(7).
Commonwealth Director
of Public Prosecutions,
18 February 2009.
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions,
18 February 2009.
19 February 2009.
of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations,
19 February 2009.
Department of
Human Services,
20 February 2009.
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
Whistleblower Protection: A Comprehensive Scheme for
the Commonwealth Public Sector
Gene Technology Act
s 187(1)(f)
National Health Act 1953
Reserve Bank Act 1959
Exposure Draft,
Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
Explanatory Material, Exposure
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
(Cth), [4.15].
Australian Taxation
16 February 2009.
of Human Services,
20 February 2009;
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions,
18 February 2009; Australian Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
(Cth) sch 1 item 1,
Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
(ALRC 108) the ALRC
recommended that the privacy principles in the
should be amended to remove the requirement of ‘imminence’ and to
allow the disclosure of personal information
where necessary to lessen or
prevent a serious threat to an individual’s life, health or safety:
Explanatory
Material, Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer
Information) Bill 2009
[5.82]–[5.83].
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 10.3.
Government Attorney-General’s Department and the Australian Institute of
Judicial Administration,
The Commonwealth Criminal Code: A Guide for
Practitioners
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Department of
Human Services,
20 February 2009.
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
(Cth) sch 1 item 1,
Explanatory Material,
Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information)
(Cth), [5.85].
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
Whistleblower Protection: A Comprehensive Scheme for
the Commonwealth Public Sector
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Explanatory
Public Service Amendment Regulations (No 1) 2006
(Cth) (SLO No
183 of 2006).
The Treasury,
Discussion Paper for the Review of Taxation Secrecy and Disclosure
Explanatory Material,
Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information)
(Cth), [4.30].
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009; Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009; The Treasury,
19 February 2009; Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions,
18 February 2009.
18 February 2009.
of Human Services,
20 February 2009.
Engineering Co Ltd v Campbell Engineering Co Ltd
[1963] 3 All ER
Proposal 8–3.
(Cth) ss 79(2)(a)(ii),
This exception is discussed
further in Ch 5.
Law Enforcement
Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
s 18(3)(b).
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand Act 1991
Medical Indemnity
Health Insurance Act 1973
National Health Act 1953
Interest Disclosure Legislation in Australia
Aged Care Act 1997
Corporations (Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander) Act 2006
Workplace Relations
(Cth) sch 1,
Protected Disclosures Act
Whistleblowers Protection Act 2001
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1994
Public Interest Disclosure
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1993
Interest Disclosures Act 2002
Public Interest Disclosure Act
Public Interest Disclosure Act 2008
Whistleblowers Protection
(Vic) s 15.
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
Whistleblower Protection: A Comprehensive Scheme for
the Commonwealth Public Sector
[8.72]–[8.73].
Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 4–6.
Whistleblowers
10 March 2009; NSW Young
Lawyers Human Rights Committee,
4 March 2009; Community and Public Sector Union,
2 March 2009; Commonwealth Ombudsman,
19 February 2009; Liberty Victoria,
18 February 2009.
Press Council,
18 February 2009.
, 11–12 February
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
19 February 2009; Australian Press
18 February 2009; Liberty
18 February 2009.
18 May 2009.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
(Cabinet Secretary and Special Minister of State),
Launch of the Public
Service Ethics Advisory Service: 6 May 2009
http://www.smos.gov.au/speeches
Proposal 7–2.
Parliamentary
privilege is discussed in
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
Whistleblower Protection: A Comprehensive Scheme for
the Commonwealth Public Sector
(2009), Rec
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
Inquiry into Whistleblowing Protections Within the
Australian Government Public Sector: Terms of Reference
(2008) Parliament of
Australia, [8.35]–[8.48].
Crimes Act 1914
Proposal 8–3.
18 May 2009.
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
103 (2006),
Rec 5–1(d).
this amounts to $13,200:
Crimes Act 1914
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity,
18 February 2009.
18 February 2009.
Federal Police,
3 March 2009.
Press Council,
18 February 2009.
Proposal 7–2.
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Fighting Words: A Review of Sedition Laws in Australia
ALRC 104 (2006),
[12.86]–[12.88].
(Cth) s 80.2(1).
Proposal 8–3.
Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 5–5.
Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
Aged Care Act 1997
ss 86-2, 86-5.
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007),
Data-matching Program
(Assistance and Tax) Act 1990
Customs Administration Act
Australian Hearing
Services Act 1991
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009. See also The Treasury,
19 February 2009; Liberty Victoria,
18 February 2009; Australian Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Press Council,
18 February 2009.
(Cth) s 85. The Attorney-General’s consent is not
required for prosecutions under s 70 of the
Revised Explanatory
Memorandum, Criminal Code Amendment (Espionage and Related Matters) Bill 2002
Intelligence Services Act
respectively.
Intelligence Services Act 2001
(Cth) sch 1,
requires the consent of the Attorney-General to prosecute members of the
Committee on Intelligence and
Criminal Code
Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions,
Prosecution Policy of the Commonwealth
gov.au/Publications/ProsecutionPolicy/> at 26 August
2008, [2.25].
Ibid, [2.27].
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates,
House of Representatives, 4 December 1996, 7714,
(D Williams—Attorney-General). Under
of Public Prosecutions Act
, the CDPP can take over a private prosecution and
terminate it.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Fighting Words: A Review of Sedition Laws in Australia
104 (2006), Ch 13.
Government,
Government Response to ALRC Review of Sedition Laws in
(2008) <www.ag.gov.au> at 28 May 2009, response to
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 6–8.
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009.
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
19 February 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Law Reform Commission,
Fighting Words: A Review of Sedition Laws in
, ALRC 104 (2006),
examples of infringement notice schemes in other areas of Commonwealth law. For
example, infringement notices are alternative
to civil penalty proceedings for
alleged breach of continuous disclosure obligations: see
Corporations Act
Environment Protection and
Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
Regulations 1994
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil & Administrative Penalties in
, ALRC 95 (2002), Recs 12–1,12–2, 12–8. See
also Recs 12–3 to 12–7. Australian Government
Attorney-General’s
Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences,
Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007), 51 also
expresses the view that an infringement notice scheme should apply only to
offences which do not require
proof of fault and contain physical elements
readily capable of assessment by an enforcement
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 5–16.
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Proposal 9–3(a).
Proposal 9–3(b)
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security
Sensitive Information
, ALRC 98 (2004),
Union of Post Office Workers
[1977] UKHL 5
[1978] AC 435
, 481, where Lord Wilberforce
commented on the dangers of using the civil courts to impose injunctions, breach
of which may attract
punishments.
Commonwealth v Fairfax
[1980] HCA 44
(1980) 147 CLR 39
, 50. Mason J held that s 79 of the
was not such a
Australian Securities
& Investments Commission,
Consultation,
Sydney, 23 May
Taxation Administration Act
Exposure Draft,
Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
sch 1, item 1,
Explanatory
Material, Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer
Information) Bill 2009
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security
Sensitive Information
, ALRC 98 (2004),
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 6–4.
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
19 February 2009.
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
18 February 2009.
10. Specific Secrecy Offences:
Introduction
Reasonable likelihood of harm
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Fault element attaching to harm
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Whose conduct should be regulated?
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
What conduct should be regulated?
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Fault element attaching to disclosure
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
What information should be protected?
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
10. Specific Secrecy Offences:
Introduction
10.1 This chapter considers reform of specific secrecy criminal offence
provisions—that is, secrecy offences other than ss 70
and 79(3) of
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth), which have general application to Commonwealth
officers and information.
10.2 As discussed in Chapter 6, the ALRC proposes that ss 70 and 79(3)
be repealed and a new offence enacted in the
Criminal Code
(Cth) (the general secrecy offence). This new offence would
be of general application to current and former Commonwealth officers
relation to the handling of information to which such officers have, or had,
access to by reason of being
In association, there
would be an offence applying where any person knows that information has been
disclosed by a Commonwealth officer
in breach of the new general secrecy offence
(the subsequent disclosure
10.3 This chapter, and Chapters 11 and 12, review specific secrecy
offences in the light of the proposed general secrecy offence and
basis for that offence—an intention to promote more open government
balanced against the need to protect Commonwealth
information where unauthorised
disclosure may cause harm to specified public interests. The aim of this
exercise is to develop proposals
to promote consistency in, and simplification
of, Commonwealth secrecy offences.
10.4 These chapters highlight examples of where the scope of specific secrecy
offences differs from the proposed general secrecy offence.
While, in some
cases, these differences are significant and necessary, specific secrecy
offences should be framed more consistently
with the policy of the general
secrecy offence, and with each other. These chapters highlight aspects of the
proposed general secrecy
offence that might usefully be more broadly adopted.
10.5 The key elements of the offences considered in this chapter are:
requirements for a reasonable likelihood of harm; the parties
to offences; the
relevant conduct; and the nature of the information protected. Chapter 11
conducts the same exercise with regard
to exceptions, defences and
Reasonable likelihood
10.6 The proposed general secrecy offence would require that disclosure is
reasonably likely to cause harm to specified public interests.
As noted in
Chapter 5, such a criterion is rarely incorporated into existing specific
offence provisions.
10.7 A small number of secrecy offences, however, do incorporate a
requirement of harm. For example:
the ‘unauthorised disclosure of information’ offence in
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
(Cth) requires that a disclosure
‘is likely to be prejudicial to the security or defence of
Australia’ in order for an
offence to be
Pooled Development Funds Act 1992
(Cth) protects
information ‘the disclosure of which may reasonably be expected to affect
a person adversely in respect of the
lawful business, commercial or financial
affairs of the person’;
a secrecy offence in the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
(Cth) refers to the disclosure of information ‘considered
sacred or otherwise significant’ by a particular group of Aboriginal
persons or Torres Strait Islanders where disclosure would be ‘inconsistent
with the views or sensitivities of those Aboriginal
persons or Torres Strait
Islanders’;
one of the ‘official secrets’ offences in the
, requires that a communication be ‘with the intention of
prejudicing the security or defence of the Commonwealth or a part
dominions’.
illustrated by these examples, a harm requirement may come in the form of an
objective test or refer to the intention of the
person making a disclosure, as
in the case of the last example.
10.9 Further, the language used in some other secrecy provisions may make it
clear that, in practice, the offences are directed to
situations where harm to
the public interests identified in the proposed general secrecy offence is
anticipated. In particular, some
offences define the relevant information or
disclosure by reference, in part, to identifiable harms.
10.10 For example, the
Food Standards Australia New Zealand Act 1991
(Cth) provides that it is the duty of certain persons not to disclose ‘any
confidential commercial information in respect of
‘Confidential
commercial information’, for these purposes, is defined as:
(a) a trade secret relating to food; or
(b) any other information relating to food that has a commercial value that
would be, or could reasonably be expected to be, destroyed
or diminished if the
information were disclosed.
10.11 In many cases, the harm to which secrecy offences are aimed is
implicit. For example, the secrecy offences contained in
Transport Safety Investigation Act 2003
(Cth) are aimed primarily at
protecting the proper conduct of transport safety investigations. Arguably, the
disclosure of ‘restricted
information’, as defined in the
would be reasonably likely to
‘prejudice the investigation of a breach of a law imposing a penalty or
sanction’ in terms
of the proposed general secrecy offence.
10.12 In Chapter 7, the ALRC proposes that, under the proposed general
secrecy offence, the prosecution should be required to prove
that a particular
disclosure caused harm, was reasonably likely to cause harm, or was intended to
cause harm to specified public
interests, such as the national security, defence
or international relations of the Commonwealth. In the absence of any actual,
or intended harm to those public interests, the ALRC has formed the
preliminary view that unauthorised disclosure of Commonwealth
information is
more appropriately dealt with by the imposition of administrative penalties or
the pursuit of contractual or general
law remedies.
10.13 There are arguments, however, that including a requirement to show harm
would be inappropriate in the case of some specific
secrecy offences. For
example, in the case of intelligence and national security information, the
Review of Commonwealth Criminal
Law (Gibbs Committee) stated:
Undoubtedly, a member of the intelligence and security services stands in a
special position and it is not unreasonable, in the opinion
of the Review
Committee, that he or she should be subject to a lifelong duty of secrecy as
regards information obtained by virtue
of his or her position … the Review
Committee is satisfied that disclosures by such persons should be prohibited by
sanctions without proof of
10.14 Such an approach is evident in
Intelligence Services Act 2001
(Cth), which regulate the Australian
Secret Intelligence Service (ASIS), the Defence Imagery and Geospatial
Organisation (DIGO) and
the Defence Signals Directorate (DSD) respectively.
These secrecy provisions bind staff, contractors and others who interact with
ASIS, DIGO and the DSD. They create offences for communicating information that
was prepared by or on behalf of the organisations,
connected with or relating to
the performance of the organisations’ functions. The provisions do not
require that any such
disclosure causes, is likely to cause or be intended to
cause any harm to the public
Rather, there is an
implicit assumption that it is harmful to disclose such information.
10.15 Even in the area of national security information, however, not all
commentators agree that a blanket prohibition should apply.
While John McGinness
notes that proof of disclosure will generally impose a less onerous burden on
the prosecution than proof that
disclosure will, or is likely to, cause harm, he
expresses the view that:
One would hope that any reform in Australia … would proceed on the basis
that a test of harm resulting from disclosure should
apply for even the most
sensitive categories of national security and defence
information.
10.16 In the 2004 report,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified
and Security Sensitive Information
(ALRC 98), the ALRC recommended that
a duty of secrecy should only be imposed in relation to information that
genuinely requires protection
and where unauthorised disclosure is likely to
harm ‘the public
10.17 Chapter 7 considers in detail which public interests justify the
protection of secrecy provisions and examines the implications
for the drafting
of the proposed general secrecy offence. The concern in this chapter is about
the extent to which it is desirable
for specific secrecy offences to expressly
include an element requiring that the unauthorised conduct have a reasonable
of causing harm.
Submissions and
consultations
10.18 In the Issues Paper,
Review of Secrecy Laws
(IP 34), the
ALRC asked whether all secrecy provisions should ‘expressly require that
the unauthorised conduct cause, be likely
to cause, or be intended to cause harm
to a specified public
10.19 This question provoked divergent responses from stakeholders, relevant
both to the form of a general secrecy offence and to
reform of specific secrecy
offences. There were recurring themes, in relation to harm to public interests,
which are also considered
in detail in Chapter 7.
10.20 A number of stakeholders identified problems with the current lack of
any requirement for harm in the drafting of most secrecy
offences. For example,
Ron Fraser stated that:
There are problems in the breadth of coverage of many provisions and their
consequent lack of discrimination concerning the seriousness
of a disclosure;
their lack of reference (in most cases) to whether specific harm followed from
disclosure, or could have been anticipated
to follow, from disclosure of
specific information; their application in some cases to material disclosure of
which could be innocuous
or of benefit to the public interest in some way
10.21 The Public Interest Advocacy Centre (PIAC) considered that ‘the
potential for harm should be a primary consideration in
determining whether
information should be treated as secret’. PIAC submitted that even
information such as that relating to
defence, or information held by the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (ASIO), ‘should not be
treated as secret
if release or disclosure would not, and could not be
reasonably expected to, harm specified public
interests’.
regard, PIAC expressly opposed the approach taken by the Gibbs Committee.
10.22 The Law Council of Australia agreed that an element requiring that
unauthorised conduct cause harm ‘would address concern
scope of the current criminal secrecy provisions, which may capture disclosure
of information that is already in
the public domain or is otherwise
innocuous’.
Similarly, the
Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) stated that secrecy
provisions should not ‘expose a
person to liability for the disclosure of
information which would be of minimal effect’ and should protect only
‘information
that genuinely requires protection and/or that is likely to
harm the public interest or a private
10.23 Most agency stakeholders, however, opposed the incorporation of
reasonable likelihood of harm requirements into specific secrecy
The Australian
Intelligence Community (AIC) stated that
a test of the harm—whether likely, intended or actual harm—to a
specified public interest should not be a precondition
for secrecy provisions
relating to national security-classified information. The AIC notes that, in the
first instance, the national
security classifications applied to intelligence
information are based on a measure of the possible level of harm likely to
from the unauthorised disclosure of that information. By way of example,
a requirement to demonstrate harm would allow a person who
releases the name of
an ASIS officer to argue that they did not believe there was
counter-intelligence value in the disclosed information
and therefore there was
no intent to harm the public
10.24 The AIC considered that individuals, within or outside the intelligence
community, ‘should not be arbiters of which disclosures
constitute damage
to the public interest’. Such individuals are ‘not in a position to
have an appropriate understanding
or appreciation of the possible national
security impact of releasing that
information’.
10.25 The Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) considered that
the public interests being protected by the secrecy offences
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998
(APRA Act) are implicit
and, therefore, incorporating an express requirement for harm would be
‘unnecessary’.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) referred to the secrecy offence in the
Census and Statistics Act 1905
and submitted
The absolute nature of these provisions is its strength. If an approach were to
be adopted that required proof of harm (etc), it
would certainly have the impact
of weakening (in both perception and reality) the ABS’s ability to
maintain the secrecy of
identifiable
information.
10.26 Other agencies focused on the practical problems of incorporating a
requirement of harm element into specific secrecy offences.
The Australian
Taxation Office (ATO) stated that this would be difficult ‘as there may be
no public interest reason not to
disclose taxpayer
information’
is, apart from the overall interest in maintaining taxpayer confidence in the
10.27 As noted in Chapter 7, the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions (CDPP) considered that incorporating likelihood of harm
requirements in secrecy offences would create difficulties for the
prosecution.
Issues that would require attention would include, for example: who would give
evidence of the harm to the specified public interest?
Would that person need to
be deemed to be an ‘expert’ so that s/he could give opinion evidence
(and would the [
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth)] need to be amended accordingly)?
Would the act of giving such evidence cause further harm to the specified public
10.28 The Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department (AGD)
distinguished between secrecy offences dealing with different
information. The AGD submitted that ‘while harm to the public interest
should be a key consideration and policy rationale
for any secrecy provision, it
may not be necessary to expressly include this as an element in all secrecy
laws’. The AGD stated:
Some information may, by its very nature, be likely to cause harm, so it may not
add much to include this as an element of the offence.
Some examples may include
intelligence information, defence information, information with a national
security classification and
Cabinet documents … in these situations it
should not be necessary for the prosecution to have to establish proof of
10.29 The AGD considered that, for information that is not ‘by its very
nature’ likely to cause harm, it may be appropriate
to ‘link the
offence to the public interest it is intended to serve in order to avoid the
provision being unnecessarily broad’.
The AGD concluded that a
‘reasonably likely to cause harm’ formulation would be a useful
model for some secrecy
10.30 As discussed in Chapter 7, there are a range of public interests
that are capable of outweighing the public interest in open
government. These
interests form the policy rationale for the framing of the proposed new general
secrecy offence so that an unauthorised
disclosure of information must be
reasonably likely to cause harm to one of those public interests in order to
constitute a criminal
10.31 This same policy rationale should form one starting point for the
review of specific secrecy offences. In the ALRC’s view,
for an offence to
be committed, there should generally be a reasonable likelihood that the
disclosure of the information will cause
harm to some important public interest.
Where no such harm is likely, it is appropriate that the matter be subject only
to administrative
sanctions or contractual remedies, at least where the
individual concerned is a Commonwealth officer.
10.32 Most existing specific secrecy offences, however, do not incorporate
any such express requirement. For example, while many secrecy
offences appear to
be aimed primarily at protecting confidential commercial information held by
government agencies from unauthorised
disclosure, there is no express
requirement that an unauthorised disclosure be reasonably likely to harm
commercial interests.
be possible to incorporate in such offences a requirement that disclosure is
reasonably likely to ‘have a substantial
adverse effect on a person in
respect of his or her lawful business or professional affairs or on the
business, commercial or financial
affairs of an organisation’—to
adopt the relevant clause of the proposed general secrecy
10.33 There are strong arguments, however, that in some contexts it would be
inappropriate to include a reasonable likelihood of harm
requirement. These
contexts include situations where the likelihood of harm is self-evident, such
as in relation to information held
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act
(Cth) creates an offence that applies where an officer or employee of
ASIO communicates intelligence other than with the authority
Director-General of ASIO. If a harm element were to be incorporated in this
offence it might require, for example, that disclosure
of information be proven
‘reasonably likely to cause damage to the national security, defence or
international relations of
the Commonwealth’—again, to adopt the
relevant clause of the proposed general secrecy
10.35 As highlighted by the AIC, a harm requirement would allow a person to
contest the intelligence significance of the information
disclosed, presenting a
significant barrier to successful
prosecution.
Individual officers
or others are not necessarily in a position to understand the significance of
items of information to, for example,
a foreign intelligence service. Predicting
or assessing the likelihood of harm is extremely difficult in the context of
and intelligence information.
10.36 Arguably, imposing a requirement for harm in secrecy offences applying
to AIC agencies would also be inconsistent with the current
policy of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth) (FOI Act), which exempts AIC
agencies and documents from its operation. The Australian Government has
indicated that this position
will be retained under proposed reforms to the FOI
Act, and exemptions will be extended to include the Defence Department ‘in
respect of its collection, reporting and analysis of operational intelligence
and special access programs under which a foreign government
provides restricted
technologies’.
10.37 Other examples of circumstances in which a likelihood of harm
requirement would not be appropriate in secrecy offences are identified
submissions discussed above. The ALRC is interested in further comment on this
issue. In particular, many secrecy offences
are seen as protecting interests in
the effective operation of government—including the flow of information
to, and within,
government. Agencies may argue that, even where an unauthorised
disclosure is not reasonably likely to have a ‘substantial
adverse effect
on’ personal privacy or commercial affairs—in terms of the proposed
general secrecy offence—the
disclosure may affect the willingness of the
regulated community to provide information.
10.38 In some instances, it may be argued that the way in which specific
secrecy offences are framed, and the context in which they
operate, provide a
sufficient likelihood that harm will be caused by an unauthorised disclosure and
that an express requirement is
unnecessary—for example, where the
protected information is defined by reference to an identifiable
10.39 Recognising these complexities, the ALRC considers that the
incorporation of a reasonable likelihood of harm requirement should
nevertheless
be considered on a case-by-case basis as offences are reviewed, in accordance
with the proposals in
Chapter 12.
approach is also consistent with the ALRC’s proposal that s 38 of the
FOI Act be repealed.
Proposal 10–1
Specific secrecy offences should generally
incorporate a requirement that, for an offence to be committed, there must be a
likelihood that the disclosure of information will cause harm to some
specified public interest, except where there are clear countervailing
In what circumstances is it inappropriate for a secrecy offence
to require that a disclosure be reasonably likely to cause harm—for
example, in relation to the disclosure of national security classified
information or information concerning the defence or international
relations of
the Commonwealth?
Fault element
attaching to harm
10.40 The proposed general secrecy offence would require the following fault
elements attaching to harm:
in the case of the first tier offence: strict
so that no fault is
required to be shown as to the likelihood of harm; and
in the case of the other two tiers of the offence: recklessness,
knowledge or intention as to the likelihood of harm.
10.41 The great
majority of Commonwealth secrecy provisions do not stipulate fault elements. As
discussed in Chapter 7, under the
Criminal Code
, where legislation
creating an offence does not specify a fault element for a physical element
consisting of a circumstance or a
result, the fault element is
recklessness.
Under the Code,
recklessness can be established by proving intention, knowledge or
recklessness.
10.42 In the secrecy offence context, a ‘circumstance’ will
include, for example, that the information disclosed was acquired
in the course
of the person’s duties or is protected information, as defined by relevant
provision. ‘Results’ are
not often incorporated as an element in
existing secrecy offences, but would include, for example, that the disclosure
of the information
causes harm.
Circumstance or result
10.43 Some specific secrecy offences specify that a fault element other than
recklessness applies to a physical element consisting
of a circumstance or a
result. In most cases the fault element specified is knowledge relating to the
nature of the information.
For example:
section 91B
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
applies ‘if the person knows, or has reasonable grounds for believing,
that the information has been obtained under
section 90B
section 114
Development Allowance Authority Act 1992
(Cth) applies to a person who has commercial-in-confidence information because
of performing duties or functions under the Act and
knows that the information
is commercial-in-confidence information; and
section 323-50 of the
Private Health Insurance Act 2007
(Cth) applies where a person knows, or ought reasonably to know, that the
disclosure to the person is not an authorised disclosure.
other cases, specific secrecy offences provide that strict liability applies to
a circumstance or result. For example:
section 34ZS(3)
Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation Act 1979
(Cth) provides that strict liability may apply to the
circumstance that the information disclosed is ‘operational
information’
as defined by the Act;
section 58(3)
Child Support (Registration and
Collection) Act 1988
(Cth) provides that strict liability applies to the
circumstance that a disclosure or obtaining of information is a disclosure or
obtaining for the purposes of
of the Act; and
section 204(3)
Social Security (Administration) Act
(Cth) provides that strict liability applies to the circumstance under
‘that a person not authorised or required to do something is
not authorised or required by or under the social security law
Household Support Act 1992
Submissions
and consultations
10.45 In the AGD’s view, where difficulty arises in proving a fault
element in relation to an offence, this usually relates
to the fault element
applicable to a circumstance or result. The AGD advised that:
It is current Commonwealth criminal law practice that strict or absolute
liability should only be used in an offence where there
are well thought out
grounds for this. This reflects the basic premise that it is generally not in
the interests of fairness or justice
to subject people to criminal punishment
for unintended actions or unforeseen consequences unless these resulted from an
unjustified
risk (ie recklessness). Strict liability should be introduced only
after careful consideration on a case-by-case basis of all available
options and
should not be applied where the penalty for the offence includes imprisonment or
where there is a monetary penalty greater
than 60 penalty units.
Strict liability may be appropriate where it is necessary to ensure the
integrity of a regulatory regime such as those relating to
public health and
safety, the environment, or financial or corporate regulation … Absolute
liability offences are rare and
should be limited to jurisdictional or similar
elements of offences that are not relevant to the person’s
culpability.
10.46 In relation to fault elements, the CDPP noted that:
it can be appropriate to apply absolute liability to a circumstance which links
an offence to the legislative power of the Commonwealth
‘Commonwealth connector’). For example, it would be appropriate to
impose absolute liability to the circumstance
in s 79(1)(b) [of the
] that an official secret has been ‘entrusted to the
person by a Commonwealth officer’ (Note: currently recklessness applies
this circumstance).
10.47 The Treasury noted that some existing taxation secrecy offences contain
elements to which strict liability applies. For example,
under s 355-5(3) of
sch 1 of the
Taxation Administration Act 1953
(Cth), strict
liability is applied to the element of the offence that ‘the information
was disclosed to you, or obtained by
you, under an indirect tax
10.48 ASIC submitted that, if a reasonable likelihood of harm test were
introduced into secrecy offences, strict liability should
be applied to that
element of the offences ‘because it would be very difficult to prove that
a person intended or knew that,
their disclosure was likely to harm a specified
public interest’.
10.49 In the ALRC’s view, where specific secrecy offences incorporate a
reasonable likelihood of harm requirement, the same
fault elements should apply
as under the proposed general secrecy offence.
10.50 For offences punishable by imprisonment for more than a maximum of two
years, recklessness, knowledge or intention should generally
be the fault
elements. For other offences, strict liability should apply to the likelihood of
harm. That is, a person need not be
reckless as to the likelihood of harm, know
that harm might result, or intend harm in order to attract criminal liability
unauthorised disclosure.
10.51 Some specific secrecy offences stipulate that strict liability applies
to some other physical element consisting of a circumstance
or a result. For
example, as noted above,
Child Support (Registration and
Collection) Act 1988
(Cth) provides that strict liability applies to the
circumstance that a disclosure or obtaining of information is for the purposes
of the Act. Part IV deals with the collection of child support payments
by employer deduction from salary or wages. The secrecy offence
applies to the employers who make, or are liable to make, withholding payments,
and to their employees.
10.52 The application of strict liability ensures that the prosecution is not
required to prove that an employer or employee knew
or was reckless as to
whether, for example, the information was originally obtained in order to ensure
that periodic amounts payable
by a parent towards the maintenance of child are
made. Such a position may be justifiable, because a person’s knowledge of
such matters would be difficult for the prosecution to prove, and it may be
considered sufficient that a defence of honest and reasonable
mistake of fact is
available to the defendant under the
Proposal 10–2
(a) Where specific secrecy offences incorporate a
reasonable likelihood of harm requirement, recklessness should generally be the
fault element for offences punishable by imprisonment for more than a maximum of
(b) For other offences, strict liability should apply in relation to the
likelihood of harm.
Whose conduct should
be regulated?
10.53 The proposed general secrecy offence would apply to current and former
‘Commonwealth officers’. For these purposes,
a Commonwealth officer
is defined to include: individuals appointed or engaged under the
Service Act 1999
(Cth); individuals employed by the Commonwealth otherwise
than under the
Public Service Act
; individuals who hold or perform the
duties of an office established by or under a law of the Commonwealth; officers
or employees
of Commonwealth authorities; individuals and entities who are
contracted service providers for a Commonwealth contract; and individuals
exercise powers, or perform functions, conferred on them by or under a law of
the Commonwealth.
10.54 There is considerable variation in the way in which the parties subject
to specific secrecy offences are described. Secrecy
provisions are stated to
apply variously to Commonwealth officers; other individuals providing services
for, or on behalf of, the
Commonwealth; other specific categories of individual;
or any person.
10.55 At present, around 35% of Commonwealth secrecy provisions (about 130
offences) regulate the activities of categories of Commonwealth
officer. These
offences may apply to:
all Commonwealth
all officers of specific Commonwealth
specific agency heads or
of these offences (about 75%) regulate the activities of former, as well as
current, Commonwealth officers—for example,
by protecting information
acquired by a person ‘by reason of his or her being, or having been, an
officer or employee’
10.57 Around 15% of secrecy offences extend to individuals providing services
for or on behalf of the
Commonwealth.
In addition,
individuals engaged in federally funded or regulated areas of the private
sector—for example, health service
and employees of
financial institutions
also be subject to secrecy provisions. Some secrecy provisions extend to state
and territory government employees and local
government employees—for
example, to facilitate information transfer between federal and state taxation
authorities.
10.58 A diverse range of other individuals are regulated by Commonwealth
confidentiality or secrecy provisions. These include:
individuals assisting in epidemiological
individuals assisting transport security
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
prescribers;
participants in witness protection
legal practitioners representing persons involved in Australian
Crime Commission
examinations.
than 40% of secrecy offences are stated to apply to the handling of information
by ‘any person’. An example
is s 79 of the
which prohibits unauthorised handling or communication of official secrets by
any person, including members of the media.
Initial and
subsequent disclosures
10.60 The respective scope of the proposed general secrecy offence and
specific secrecy offences with regard to the parties covered
must be considered
in conjunction with provisions that extend the coverage of offence provisions to
subsequent disclosures.
10.61 The proposed subsequent disclosure offence would provide that, where a
person knows, or is reckless as to whether: information
has been disclosed by a
Commonwealth officer in breach of the general secrecy offence; and the
subsequent disclosure of the information
will harm, or is reasonably likely to
harm, one of the specified public interests, disclosure of that information by
that person
is also an offence.
10.62 About 30% of secrecy offences extend to some form of subsequent
disclosure. For example, s 8XB(1) of the
Taxation Administration Act 1953
(Cth) provides that a person ‘shall not directly or indirectly …
divulge or communicate to another person any taxation
information relating to a
third person … being information disclosed to or obtained by the person in
breach of a provision
of a taxation law (including this provision)’.
10.63 As with the subsequent disclosure offence, the
Administration Act
provision deals with disclosure of information received
as a result of a breach of a secrecy law. Other provisions deal with subsequent
disclosure where the information was obtained legally. For example, under
s 86-5 of the
Aged Care Act 1997
(Cth) it is an offence to disclose
protected information disclosed by the Secretary for a purpose other than that
for which the information
was originally disclosed.
Submissions and
consultations
10.64 In IP 34, the ALRC asked in what circumstances should secrecy
provisions regulate the behaviour of persons other than core Commonwealth
officers such as: consultants and others who provide goods and services to the
Australian Government; those who enter into arrangements
with the Australian
Government; and state and territory government
10.65 The ALRC also asked:
when should secrecy provisions regulate the behaviour of ‘any
in what circumstances should secrecy provisions regulate those who
have been but who are no longer Commonwealth officers;
whether all secrecy provisions should seek to regulate both initial
and subsequent unauthorised handling of Commonwealth
information.
stakeholders referred to the need for specific secrecy offences to apply to
parties other than Commonwealth
The Department of
Human Services (DHS), for example, submitted that:
it is important that staff (including contracted staff and staff of contracted
service providers (CSPs) and partners such as state
governments, NGOs and the
private sector) working for or with agencies and handling customer information,
appreciate the personal
nature of their obligation to protect the
confidentiality of a range of information entrusted to the agency. A secrecy
that creates an offence applying directly to individual employees is
an effective tool for reinforcing this
10.67 The DHS noted that, while the
Public Service Act
‘a mechanism for holding individual Australian Public Service employees
responsible for their behaviour, including
unlawful dealing with
information’, the Act
does not apply to other people who may come into possession of sensitive
information (for example, [contracted service providers]
and their employees,
ministerial staff, State, NGOs and private sector partners and those who receive
information in error).
10.68 The ATO emphasised the importance of secrecy provisions regulating
‘all persons, who in the context of employment or performing
services for
the Commonwealth, come into contact with protected information’ and that
protected tax information that is disclosed
to a state or territory government
employee remains protected by the tax law secrecy provision under which it was
10.69 Most stakeholders who addressed the issue considered that specific
secrecy offences should generally extend to former Commonwealth
officers and
that, if this were not the case, it would significantly undermine the utility of
secrecy provisions.
For example,
APRA stated that:
Former officers may no longer be bound by duties of confidentiality contained in
employment agreements and therefore a statutory
secrecy provision may often be
the only means of protecting the disclosure of information that the person had
access to during their
employment …
In APRA’s case, staff who
leave the agency may do so to take up employment with a financial sector entity,
and in these circumstances
it is particularly important that information they
have obtained during the course of their employment with APRA be kept
10.70 Stakeholders also highlighted the need for subsequent disclosure
provisions. The Treasury stated that provisions such as that
in s 8XB of
Taxation Administration Act
, ‘continue to be appropriate to
ensure the integrity of information and the integrity of authorised chains of
disclosure’.
10.71 Under the
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act
(Cth) (AML/CTF Act), the Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis
Centre (AUSTRAC) may disseminate AUSTRAC information to designated
agencies and
other persons, including state and territory government agencies and Royal
Commissions of Inquiry. The AML/CTF Act prohibits
the disclosure of AUSTRAC
information by designated agencies, subject to a range of
exceptions.
AUSTRAC submitted
State and Territory Government agencies which access AUSTRAC information should
be subject to the same disclosure provisions as Australian
Government agencies,
given that disclosure of AUSTRAC information may not be in the public interest
or might be harmful to individuals
or persons that are the subject of reports
… or that are reporting entities or cash dealers under those pieces of
legislation.
10.72 The Australian Federal Police (AFP) stated that secrecy offences should
cover subsequent use of information in circumstances
where a person
‘should reasonably be aware that the information they have obtained was,
at some point, disclosed on an unlawful
basis and/or is classified or protected
and should not be further used or disseminated’. This type of provision
was said to
particularly necessary in the spheres of criminal investigations and national
security where the disclosure of information can compromise
investigation, threaten the security of the Commonwealth and diminish the
confidence that Government holds in its agencies.
Breaches of secrecy laws in
these spheres have serious, long lasting effects irrespective of whether they
are coupled with potential
immediate consequences to life, property, and ongoing
operations.
10.73 Similarly, the Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity
(ACLEI) stated that:
ACLEI has a concern about inappropriate associations between current and former
staff of law enforcement agencies, including where
the former officer acts as an
intermediary for criminals. ACLEI notes that the same damage, and sometimes
more, can result from a
secondary disclosure as it can from the primary
disclosure.
Accordingly, ACLEI believes that the criminalisation of ‘subsequent
unauthorised disclosure’ would be a valuable deterrent
against corrupt
(intentional) disclosure.
10.74 The DHS noted that one advantage of subsequent disclosure provisions is
that they extend the ‘lifespan and consistency
of the protection of the
secrecy law to the information in the hands of a third party’.
In the absence of secondary obligations, there will be different rights and
obligations applying to identical information depending
on whose hands it is in.
This diminishes the level of protection warranted to the person whose
information is concerned when that
information was collected or created. Human
services agencies typically ensure that any contract for services where
sensitive information
will be exchanged contains a clause requiring the
[contracted service provider] to abide by the agency’s secrecy provision,
whether or not the contractor is legally bound by that provision under the terms
of the Act. However, the position with potential
partners such as state
governments, NGOs and private sector entities, is not clear particularly where
they may already be subject
to (legislative) regulation of their own which is at
variance with the agency’s secrecy
10.75 The general secrecy offence applies to current and former Commonwealth
officers, including Commonwealth service providers. The
subsequent disclosure
offence extends the reach of criminal sanctions to persons who know, or are
reckless as to whether, information
has been disclosed in breach of the general
secrecy offence.
10.76 Specific secrecy offences apply to categories of person that are both
broader and narrower than those covered by the proposed
general secrecy offence
and subsequent disclosure offence.
10.77 Many existing secrecy offences apply to parties other than Commonwealth
officers. The ALRC estimates that around 70% of existing
secrecy offences (about
245 offences) apply to some parties who do not fall within the extended
definition of Commonwealth officer
contained in the proposed general secrecy
10.78 In many cases, the need to cover other individuals as potential parties
to an offence is clearly justifiable, as with some secrecy
offences contained in
, which apply to ‘any
In other cases,
secrecy offences need to cover specific categories of individuals, such as
participants in witness protection
practitioners.
10.79 However, the language used in some secrecy offences, and the practical
context in which the provisions operate, mean that the
provisions will apply
mainly to Commonwealth officers—even if the offences are stated to apply
to ‘any person’.
For example, the information protected by such
provisions is often defined as information ‘acquired by the person in the
of performing duties or exercising powers or functions’ under
certain legislation;
information obtained for the purposes of certain legislation and held in the
records of specific
10.80 In the ALRC’s view, specific secrecy offences that are stated to
apply to ‘any person’ should be reviewed
to establish whether the
offences should apply only to ‘Commonwealth officers’ and subsequent
disclosure, as these are
defined in the general secrecy offence and the
subsequent disclosure offence respectively.
10.81 Specific secrecy offences that apply to Commonwealth officers should
also be reviewed to establish whether the offences should
be stated to apply to
both former and current Commonwealth officers. As discussed in Chapter 8,
in the case of the proposed general
secrecy offence, the requirement that any
disclosure must cause harm, be reasonably likely to cause harm, or be intended
harm, will limit the practical application of the offence to former
Commonwealth officers. As discussed above, most existing specific
offences, do not incorporate any such express requirement for
harm—although the ALRC has proposed that offences should
generally do
The existence, or otherwise,
of a harm requirement is one factor that should be taken into account in
reviewing this aspect of specific
secrecy offences.
Proposal 10–3
Specific secrecy offences that are stated to apply
to ‘any person’ should be reviewed to establish whether the offences
should apply only to ‘Commonwealth officers’ and to subsequent
disclosure, as defined in the general secrecy offence
and the subsequent
disclosure offence (Proposals 8–1, 8–3).
Proposal 10–4
Specific secrecy offences that apply to
Commonwealth officers should be reviewed to establish whether the offences
should be stated
to apply also to former Commonwealth officers.
What conduct should
be regulated?
10.82 The conduct covered by the proposed general secrecy offence is the
‘disclosure’ of information. As discussed in
Chapter 5, 90% of
secrecy provisions prohibit disclosing, divulging or communicating Commonwealth
information. A similar proportion
of specific secrecy offences (85%) prohibit
this kind of conduct. In addition, some secrecy offences prohibit unauthorised
soliciting,
of information, as well
as obtaining,
possessing,
making a record
information.
10.83 As discussed in Chapter 8, around 60% of Commonwealth secrecy
offences cover conduct other than (and usually in addition to)
the disclosure of
information. Most commonly, the other conduct involves ‘making a
record’ of information (found in around
A few existing
secrecy offences criminalise the mere possession or receipt of
information.
Submissions and
consultations
10.84 In IP 34, the ALRC asked whether it is appropriate for secrecy
provisions to regulate conduct other than the disclosure of
information—such
as the unauthorised receipt, collection, use or recording
of information.
Stakeholders
made comments relevant to the scope of specific secrecy offences, as well as to
the formulation of the proposed general
secrecy offence.
10.85 For example, a number of stakeholders submitted that secrecy offences
in their areas of interest should extend beyond the disclosure
of information.
The AIC stated that it supported
the current formulation of s 91.1 of the
Criminal Code
prohibits collection and recording of information. This formulation provides
scope to prevent espionage activities or possible
unauthorised disclosures of
national security-classified information that would not be possible if the
provision was limited to the
disclosure itself. Without the current formulation,
a person could only be prosecuted after they had committed the act of espionage
or unauthorised disclosure of information. By that time, any damage to national
security would have occurred.
10.86 The Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations (DEEWR)
also focused on the need to prevent harm, whether caused
by disclosure or other
conduct, such as access to departmental databases by staff members for personal
10.87 The ATO submitted that the access, use, recording and disclosure of
information should be subject to secrecy
provisions.
The Treasury stated
that recording, as well as disclosure, should be covered and that there may be
circumstances when other conduct,
such as accessing information, should also
fall within the ambit of specific secrecy
In this context, the
ATO and Treasury both noted that
Taxation Administration
(Cth) provides that a person ‘must not take action with the
intention of obtaining’ taxation information about another
ASIC submitted that
secrecy offences should extend to use, disclosure or
10.88 Other stakeholders accepted that it may be sufficient to proscribe
disclosure, rather than other aspects of
information-handling.
context, the DHS noted that:
Relevant agencies, including Medicare Australia, suggest that the absence of a
prohibition on use causes no practical difficulties
as other sanctions
(including under the
Public Service Act
to unauthorised collection and
10.89 In relation to the conduct that should be covered by secrecy
provisions, the AGD observed that:
The conduct that should be regulated by secrecy provisions will depend upon the
policy rationale and harm sought to be avoided. If
harm can be caused by
unauthorised handling, access or use of information, then it would seem
appropriate for these actions to also
prohibited.
10.90 In the ALRC’s view, the focus of secrecy offences should be on
the unauthorised disclosure of Commonwealth information.
As discussed in Chapter
8, some other activity, where it is ancillary to the primary offence, will be
covered by other provisions
Criminal Code
. These extensions of
criminal responsibility include attempt, aiding, abetting, procuring, incitement
and conspiracy.
responsibility will, therefore, extend to much activity that is preliminary to
disclosure. For example, the offence of incitement
may apply where a third party
solicits the unauthorised disclosure of information from a Commonwealth
10.91 Further, other provisions of the
Criminal Code
apply to the
unauthorised use of, or access to, Commonwealth information. For example, the
use of information is covered by the provisions
dealing with abuse of public
Unauthorised access
to, or modification of, data where held in a Commonwealth computer, is also the
subject of existing offence
provisions.
10.92 In some specific contexts it might be considered appropriate to
criminalise other aspects of unauthorised information-handling.
The majority of
taxation secrecy provisions contained in the exposure draft
Tax Laws Amendment
(Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill
, released by Treasury in March
2009 (Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill), refer to both the disclosure and recording
of taxpayer information.
is, it would be an offence to ‘make a record’ of information. The
explanatory material to the Tax Laws Exposure
Draft Bill provides the following
The offence provisions apply not only to the disclosure of taxpayer information,
but also to the recording of that information. This
recognises that it is
important not only to ensure that information is not disclosed unlawfully, but
that the information is not
recorded in another form that can be readily
accessed by others.
10.93 An example of the potential application of this offence is also
In the course of her duties as a taxation officer, Stacey found herself working
with the taxation files of a musical artist whom
she very much admired. Stacey
copied some details from the taxation files into her private diary. Even though
Stacey has not disclosed
that information, she has still committed an offence
through the recording of the information.
10.94 The ALRC is not convinced that it is appropriate for such conduct to
constitute a criminal offence—administrative sanctions
may be sufficient.
It is easier, however, to argue in favour of such an offence in relation to
information contained in taxation
files than is the case with some other
information. For example, under
Age Discrimination Act
(Cth), it is an offence for a member of the staff of the Australian
Human Rights Commission to ‘make a record of’ any
information
‘relating to the affairs of another person’ acquired because of
their employment. The harm involved in such
conduct is not immediately obvious
and administrative action may provide an adequate sanction.
10.95 In the ALRC’s view, specific secrecy offences that extend to
conduct other than the disclosure of information should be
reviewed to establish
whether this is necessary or desirable.
Proposal 10–5
Specific secrecy offences should generally not
extend to conduct other than the disclosure of information, such as making a
receiving or possessing protected information.
Fault element
attaching to disclosure
10.96 The proposed general secrecy offence would require intention as to the
disclosure of information.
10.97 As noted in Chapter 8, the great majority of Commonwealth secrecy
offences do not stipulate fault elements. Under the
Criminal Code
legislation creating an offence does not specify a fault element for a physical
element consisting of conduct, the fault element
In the secrecy
offence context, the relevant ‘conduct’ will usually be the
disclosing, divulging or communicating of
information.
10.98 The fault element for the conduct elements of almost all specific
secrecy offences (around 95%) is intention. In most cases,
this is because no
fault element is specified and, therefore, the
Criminal Code
that intention is required, reflecting the common law.
10.99 Only a few existing specific secrecy offences specify that some fault
element other than intention applies to the disclosure
or other handling of
information. For example:
s 23YO(1)(c)
, a person is guilty
of an offence if the person is reckless as to the disclosure of information
stored on the Commonwealth DNA database
system or National Criminal
Investigation DNA Database or any other information revealed by a forensic
procedure carried out on a
suspect, offender or volunteer; and
, a person is guilty of an
offence if the person is reckless as to the disclosure of age determination
information.
10.100 Some other specific secrecy offences provide
that strict liability applies to the relevant conduct. That is, there are no
elements for any of the physical elements of the offence and the defence
of mistake of fact is
For example,
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act 1993
(Cth), provides that certain persons must not disclose any information acquired
in connection with a complaint made to the Superannuation
Complaints Tribunal.
This offence is stated to be an offence of strict
Submissions and
consultations
10.101 The AGD emphasised that ‘the fault elements supplied by the
Criminal Code
should apply unless there is a justifiable reason for
departing from them’, although strict liability ‘may be
appropriate’
where it is necessary to ensure the integrity of a regulatory regime such as
those relating to public health and safety, the environment,
or financial or
corporate regulation … Absolute liability offences are rare and should be
limited to jurisdictional or similar
elements of offences that are not relevant
to the person’s
culpability.
10.102 The Law Council of Australia stated that it has concerns about the
introduction of strict liability or absolute
‘without substantial evidence that such liability is warranted and there
seems little such evidence in the context
of criminal secrecy
provisions’.
10.103 Treasury stated that, in its consideration of the consolidation of
taxation secrecy provisions, there had not been ‘any
reason to depart from
the default provisions of the
imposing strict liability was not considered necessary. The Tax Laws Exposure
Draft Bill does not apply strict liability
to any element of the equivalent
10.104 The ALRC proposes that the new general secrecy offence should require
intention as to the disclosure of information. This is
consistent with the
framing of most existing secrecy offences, and with the policy reflected by the
Criminal Code
10.105 However, as discussed in Chapter 8, there are some reasons to suggest
that— given the incorporation of a reasonable likelihood
of harm test in
the proposed general secrecy offence—recklessness as to disclosure should
be sufficient. That is, because the
reasonable likelihood of harm requirement
substantially narrows the scope of the offence—as compared with the
existing offence
in s 70 of the
—recklessness may be
considered an appropriate fault element.
10.106 If the general secrecy offence were to apply where a person was
reckless as to disclosure, questions would arise about whether
specific secrecy
offences should be framed in the same way, at least where specific offences also
incorporate a reasonable likelihood
of harm requirement.
10.107 Some existing offences apply strict liability to physical elements
dealing with conduct. For example,
Superannuation
(Resolution of Complaints) Act 1993
(Cth) applies strict liability
to an offence involving the disclosure of superannuation complaint information.
In the ALRC’s
view, specific secrecy offences that provide that strict
liability applies to one or all physical elements should be reviewed to
establish whether the application of strict liability remains justified.
Proposal 10–6
Specific secrecy offences should generally require
intention as the fault element for the disclosure of information.
Proposal 10–7
Specific secrecy offences that provide that strict
liability applies to one or all physical elements should be reviewed to
whether the application of strict liability remains justified.
What information
should be protected?
10.108 The proposed new general secrecy offence potentially applies to all
information to which a Commonwealth officer has, or had,
access to by reason of
being a Commonwealth officer. In contrast, most specific secrecy offences
prohibit the unauthorised handling
of specific categories of Commonwealth
information. These include, for example, offences that relate to the disclosure
information,
or information
concerning or relating to the affairs of another
confidential information—including confidential commercial
information,
information that is supplied in
confidence.
security information—information the unauthorised disclosure of which may
prejudice defence or
enforcement and intelligence information—information about the operations
or investigations of law enforcement
taxation information—information provided by a taxpayer to a
person or an agency pursuant to a legislative requirement contained
in taxation
legislation;
census and statistical
information—information collected and maintained by the ABS under the
Census and Statistics Act 1905
electoral information—information
collected and maintained by the Australian Electoral Commission under the
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
10.109 In IP 34, the ALRC asked whether secrecy provisions
should aim to protect specific types of information and, if so, what types
information should be protected by the
provisions.
Submissions and
consultations
10.110 In response, the AGD submitted that:
There may be specific types of information that, by their very nature, could
cause harm and it is in the public interest that these
protected from unauthorised disclosure. For example, the disclosure of Cabinet
documents, regardless of the
information contained in them, has the potential to
prejudice the effective working of government by diminishing the
government’s
faith that the Cabinet process provides a forum for free and
frank debate and consideration of issues. Similarly, the disclosure
information provided to government by individuals and other non-government
entities has the potential to harm public confidence
in the government’s
ability to keep such information in confidence and only use it for the purpose
for which it was provided.
10.111 A range of stakeholders commented on the information protected by
secrecy offences relevant to their activities. For example,
APRA stated that the
definitions of ‘protected information’ and ‘protected
documents’ in the APRA
effectively capture information which should be protected (eg commercial in
confidence information) while at the same time excluding
information which
should not be afforded protection (eg publicly available
information).
10.112 Similarly, other agencies highlighted the need to protect information
such as: information that ‘could have a negative
commercial impact on
commercial entities’;
law enforcement-related
information;
and commercially sensitive information and financial transaction
security classified
information;
and census and
statistical information.
10.113 DEEWR considered there to be merit in ‘greater scrutiny of the
agency legislation and
supports the proposition that not all information held by an agency warrants
additional protections in the
form of secrecy or confidentiality
provisions’.
the DHS stated that the breadth of some secrecy provisions may give rise to
unintended consequences.
For example, under the
Centrelink provisions a registered business name containing the name of a
customer (as a fictitious example,
‘Peter Piper Child Minding Pty
Ltd’) would seem to come within the definition of protected information
although it is
unlikely that this was intended. Similarly, information about
employees and contractors may fall within the same definitions if read
literally. If it were a prerequisite to the application of a secrecy law that
the information (both personal and non-personal) is
inherently confidential in
character, this would seem to overcome much of the problem. Dealings with
non-confidential personal information
would still be regulated by the
10.114 In practice, the information protected by specific secrecy offences
that apply to Commonwealth officers is usually a subset
of the information that
would be covered by the proposed new general secrecy offence. The general
offence applies to all information
to which a Commonwealth officer has, or had,
access to by reason of being a Commonwealth officer.
10.115 Most existing specific secrecy offences apply to a subset of this
information (such as personal information or confidential
information) acquired in the course of the officer’s
In other cases, the
information protected by specific secrecy offences that apply to Commonwealth
officers is effectively the same
in scope—for example, where the offence
applies to ‘any information acquired’ by a Commonwealth officer
reason of his or her office or employment under or for the purposes of
10.116 The reason the information protected by the proposed general secrecy
offence is framed broadly is that the offence also requires
that the nature of
the information is such that its disclosure is reasonably likely to cause harm
to specific public interests. Arguably,
the information protected by a specific
secrecy offence may, in practice, be adequately protected by the new general
10.117 For example, many specific secrecy offences apply to the unauthorised
disclosure of personal information or confidential commercial
information held
by Commonwealth officers.
general secrecy offence applies where disclosure of the same information would
have a substantial adverse effect on personal
commercial or financial affairs.
Proposal 10–8
Specific secrecy offences that apply to
Commonwealth officers should generally apply to all information to which a
Commonwealth officer
has, or had, access by reason of being a Commonwealth
Proposal 6–1.
Proposal 8–3.
Force Discipline Act 1982
Pooled Development Funds
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Act 2005
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) s 79(2).
Food Standards
Australia New Zealand Act 1991
meaning of ‘confidential commercial information’ is not always
defined: eg, the
National Health and Medical Research Council Act 1992
(Cth) is stated to protect ‘confidential commercial information’
provided to National Health and Medical Research Council
meaning of the term is not defined: see,
National Health and Medical Research
Council Act 1992
Transport Safety Investigation Act 2003
H Gibbs, R Watson and A Menzies,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law: Final Report
The text of
Intelligence Services Act 2001
(Cth) is set out in
Appendix 3.
J McGinness,
‘Secrecy Provisions in Commonwealth Legislation’
[1990] FedLawRw 3
Federal Law Review
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security Sensitive
Information
, ALRC 98 (2004),
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 3–7.
23 March 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Law Council of
27 February 2009.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
For example:
Australian Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009; Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009; Australian Bureau of Statistics,
24 March 2009; Department of Human
20 February 2009; The
19 February 2009; Australian
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009;
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009.
Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority Act 1998
Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009. Also Department of Human Services,
20 February 2009.
and Statistics Act 1905
Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
24 March 2009.
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions,
18 February 2009.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
National Health and
Medical Research Council Act 1992
Development Funds Act 1992
Proposal 7–1.
That is, the
Office of National Assessments, ASIO, ASIS, the Defence Intelligence
Organisation (DIO), DIGO and DSD. Existing secrecy
offences that apply to the
AIC were stated as:
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) ss 70, 79;
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 91;
Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation Act 1979
Intelligence Services Act 2001
: Australian
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009.
An alternative
approach might be to limit the application of the offence to the disclosure of
security classified information, on
the basis that the classification process
Australian Government Protective Security Manual
consideration of whether damage may be caused to national security: Australian
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Australian Government
Protective Security Manual (PSM)
Australian Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009.
(Cabinet Secretary and Special Minister of State),
Open and Transparent
Government—the Way Forward
http://www.smos.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp_20090324.html
at 24 March
As in the provisions discussed
Food Standards Australia New Zealand Act 1991
Pooled Development Funds Act 1992
Consistently with
Proposal 7–3, it would also be appropriate, where a reasonable
likelihood of harm requirement is incorporated
in a specific secrecy offence, to
consider whether there should be a defence applying in circumstances where the
person can prove
that he or she neither knew, nor could reasonably be expected
to have known, that the disclosure of the information was likely to
specified harm.
Proposal 4–1, and as recommended in Australian Law Reform Commission
and Administrative Review Council,
Open Government: A Review of the Federal
Freedom of Information Act
, ALRC 77 (1995),
, where strict liability applies to a particular physical element of the
offence: (a) there are no fault elements for that physical
element; and (b) the
defence of mistake of fact under s 9.2 is available in relation to that
physical element:
Criminal Code
(Cth) ss 6.1,
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions,
18 February 2009.
Taxation Administration Act 1953
(Cth) sch 1,
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
(Cth) ss 6.1(2), 9.2.
See Proposal 8–1.
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
For example,
Postal Corporation Act 1989
‘employees of Australia Post’;
Customs Administration Act
applies to ‘a person performing duties in the
Australian Customs Service as a person employed or engaged by the Commonwealth,
a Commonwealth agency, a State or a State
For example,
National Health and Medical Research Council Act 1992
applies to the Chief Executive Officer of the National Health and Medical
Research Council and the Commissioner of
Complaints.
For example,
Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
For example,
Sports Anti-Doping Authority Act 2006
(definition of
‘entrusted person’),
Australian Trade Commission Act
(definition of ‘consultant’),
National Health Act
Anti-Money Laundering
and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
Taxation Administration
(Cth) s 13J.
Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981
Inspector of Transport
Security Act 2006
National Health Act
s 135AAA(1).
Witness Protection Act 1994
Australian Crime
Commission Act 2002
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 3–1.
Question 3–2.
Question 3–3.
Question 3–5.
For example,
Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre,
2 March 2009; Department of Human Services,
20 February 2009; Australian Taxation Office,
16 February 2009; Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
of Human Services,
20 February 2009.
Australian Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009;
NSW Young Lawyers Human Rights Committee,
4 March 2009; Department of Human Services,
20 February 2009; Department of Education, Employment and
Workplace Relations,
19 February 2009; The
19 February 2009; Australian
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009;
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
19 February 2009.
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
Australian Transaction
Reports and Analysis Centre,
2 March 2009.
Federal Police,
3 March 2009.
Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity,
18 February 2009.
of Human Services,
20 February 2009.
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) ss 15XS,
Witness Protection Act 1994
Crime Commission Act 2002
For example,
(Cth) s 86-2.
Student Assistance Act 1973
(1) (definition
of ‘protected
information’).
Proposal 10–2.
For example,
A New Tax System (Family Assistance)(Administration) Act 1999
For example,
(Cth) s 79(6).
A New Tax System (Family Assistance)(Administration) Act 1999
For example,
Defence (Special Undertakings) Act 1952
For example,
A New Tax System
(Australian Business Number) Act 1999
For example,
(Cth) s 86-5.
Criminal Code
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) ss 79(4)–(6), 83;
Defence (Special Undertakings) Act 1952
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 3–4.
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009.
Department of
Education, Employment and Workplace Relations,
19 February 2009. DEEWR also noted that ‘greater clarity between what
constitutes a use as opposed to a disclosure of information
Australian Taxation
16 February 2009.
19 February 2009.
Australian Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
Law Council
of Australia,
27 February 2009;
Department of Human Services,
20 February 2009; Australian Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
of Human Services,
20 February 2009.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Criminal Code
Ibid ss 477.1,
See, eg Exposure Draft,
Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
paras 355-20(1)(b)(i), 355-155(1)(a)(i), 355-265(1)(a).
Unauthorised access to taxpayer information will also continue to be an offence
Taxation Administration Act 1953
Explanatory Material,
Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information)
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 5.6(1).
ss 6.1, 9.2.
Superannuation
(Resolution of Complaints) Act 1993
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Criminal Code
, absolute liability applies where there are no fault
elements for any of the physical elements of the offence; and the defence of
mistake of fact is unavailable:
Criminal Code
(Cth) ss 6.2,
Law Council of Australia,
27 February 2009.
19 February 2009.
Consolidation of taxation secrecy provisions is discussed in more detail in
Exposure Draft,
Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
paras 355-20,
Education Support Act 2003
(Cth) s 179-10, sch 1 (definition of
‘personal information’);
Aged Care Act 1997
Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Act 2005
s 193S(3)(a)
A New Tax System
(Australian Business Number) Act 1999
Tax Assessment Act 1936
For example,
Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Code Act 1994
(Cth) s 162(1);
Gene Technology Act 2000
For example,
Equal Opportunity
for Women in the Workplace Act 1999
(Cth) s 32;
Corporations (Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander) Act 2006
(Cth) ss 604-
For example,
Defence Act
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Designs Act 2003
Criminal Code
For example,
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
Australian Crime
Commission Act 2002
Law Enforcement Integrity
Commissioner Act 2006
System (Bonuses for Older Australians) Act 1999
Support (Assessment) Act 1989
Inspector-General of
Taxation Act 2003
Statistics Act 1905
Commonwealth Electoral Act
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 2–5.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998
Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Department of Climate Change,
23 February 2009.
Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity,
18 February 2009.
Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre,
2 March 2009.
Australian Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009.
Bureau of Statistics,
24 March 2009.
of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations,
19 February 2009.
Department of Human Services,
20 February 2009.
Higher Education Support Act 2003
(Cth) s 179-10;
Development Funds Act 1992
For example, under
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
s 81(1)(a).
Dental Benefits Act 2008
(definition of
‘entrusted public official’).
11. Specific Secrecy Offences:
Exceptions and Penalties
Introduction
Exceptions and defences
Exceptions versus defences
Codification of permissible disclosure
Public interest disclosure
Consistency of exceptions
Key principles
Appropriateness of criminal penalties
Consistency of penalties
Penalties and the
Offences protecting similar information
Level of maximum penalty
Penalty benchmarks
Comparing penalties
Role of judicial discretion
Short sentences of imprisonment
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
11. Specific Secrecy Offences:
Exceptions and Penalties
Introduction
11.1 This chapter discusses how specific secrecy offences should be framed in
order to be more consistent with the proposed new general
secrecy offence, and
with each other, and highlights aspects of the general secrecy offence that
might usefully be more broadly adopted.
The key elements of the offences
considered in this chapter are exceptions and defences, and penalties.
and defences
11.2 The proposed general secrecy offence would be subject to exceptions,
where the disclosure is:
in the course of a Commonwealth officer’s functions or
authorised by the relevant agency head or minister, and the agency
head or minister certifies that the disclosure is in the public
of information
that is already in the public domain as the result of a lawful
disclosure.
11.3 Most Commonwealth secrecy provisions contain
express exceptions or defences relating to the prohibited handling of
information.
These are summarised in Chapter 5 and include, for example,
exceptions allowing information handling in the performance of a person’s
functions and duties as an employee or officer; and as required or authorised by
11.4 Individual secrecy offences often contain a number of different
exceptions; and exceptions in each category are framed in many
different ways.
The exceptions contained in the proposed general secrecy offence are also
commonly incorporated into specific secrecy
offences, in one form or another.
For example, the most common exceptions in specific secrecy offences are those
that permit disclosure
in the performance of a person’s functions and
duties; or as required or authorised by law. Exceptions that fall into one or
both of these categories are present in approximately 65% of secrecy offences.
In addition, about 20% of offences permit disclosure
with the authority of the
head of an agency or some other specified person, such as a minister.
11.5 Other common exceptions contained in specific secrecy offences are those
that authorise disclosure to specified persons or entities,
such as another
Commonwealth agency (present in more than 35% of offences); and permit
disclosure for the purposes of legal proceedings
(20%), or for law enforcement
versus defences
11.6 A distinction may be made between exceptions and defences to
Commonwealth secrecy offences. As noted in Chapter 9, an
‘exception’
is a provision that limits the scope of conduct
prohibited by a secrecy offence; a ‘defence’ is a provision that may
be relied on by a person whose conduct is prohibited by a secrecy offence.
11.7 In some respects, the distinction between an exception and a defence may
be of limited significance. In raising either, the defendant
faces an evidential
burden. At common law, a defence is raised where, in the opinion of the trial
judge, sufficient evidence is before
the court to make it a genuine issue. In
this sense, an evidential burden is placed upon a defendant to raise a
Criminal Code
(Cth) provides that a defendant who ‘wishes to
rely on any exception, exemption, excuse, qualification or justification
by the law creating an offence bears an evidential burden in relation
to that matter’.
prosecution must prove all the elements of an offence, positive and negative,
and must also disprove any defences
11.8 While framing a provision as a defence, rather than as an exception,
does not alter evidential or legal burdens of proof, it
may have procedural
disadvantages for a defendant. That is, a defendant will be forced to wait until
the defence case is called before
being able to lead evidence justifying a
disclosure that would otherwise breach a secrecy provision.
Submissions and
consultations
11.9 In the Issues Paper
Review of Secrecy Laws
(IP 34), the ALRC
asked whether provisions in Commonwealth secrecy laws permitting the handling of
information should generally be
framed as exceptions or
11.10 The Law Council of Australia stated that, where relevant, there should
only be exceptions rather than defences to secrecy offences
for two main
(a) The levelling of a charge tends to stigmatise notwithstanding the existence
of an ultimately proven complete defence.
(b) There are procedural disadvantages for a defendant in claiming a defence
rather than being able to claim an
ALRC’s views
11.11 In practice, while exceptions are commonly included in Commonwealth
secrecy laws, only a few secrecy offences expressly provide
11.12 As discussed in Chapter 9, the Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department (AGD)
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Guide to Framing
Commonwealth Offences
) states that
a matter should be included in a defence, thereby placing the onus on the
defendant, only where the matter is peculiarly within the
knowledge of the
defendant; and is significantly more difficult and costly for the prosecution to
disprove than for the defendant
11.13 Defences may be available by virtue of the operation of the
, which contains a number of defences of general application to
Commonwealth offences. These include the defences of mistake or ignorance
fact, duress and lawful authority.
The AGD observed that these provisions:
are intended to codify the general defences available at common law. While
specific defences are not excluded by the Code, careful
consideration should be
given to whether a proposed defence is already adequately covered by the general
defences in the Code.
11.14 In the ALRC’s view, in the interests of consistency, specific
secrecy offences that include defences should be reviewed
to assess whether
these defences are appropriate, in view of the general principles of criminal
responsibility set out in ch 2 of
Criminal Code
11.15 Where a defence is found to be appropriate, consideration should be
given to recasting the provision as an exception, rather
than as a defence.
Rather than attempting to protect legitimate disclosure through a
‘defence’ that arises after a person
has been found to satisfy all
the elements of the offence, the ALRC considers that it would be better to frame
secrecy offences in
such a way that they do not extend to legitimate activities
in the first place.
Proposal 11–1
Specific secrecy offences that include defences
should be reviewed to assess whether these defences are appropriate, in view of
general principles of criminal responsibility set out in ch 2 of the
Criminal Code
. Where such a defence is found to be appropriate,
consideration should be given to recasting the provision as an exception, rather
than as a defence.
Codification
of permissible disclosure
11.16 While many secrecy laws contain identical or similar exceptions and
defences— for example, providing that disclosure of
information is not an
offence when done in the performance of a person’s duties—some
provide detailed exceptions that
permit disclosure for specified purposes or to
specified persons or organisations.
11.17 A common formulation is to place a general prohibition on disclosure of
certain information and to codify circumstances in which
disclosure is allowed.
Some of these provisions are extensive. The
Law Enforcement Integrity
Commissioner Act 2006
(Cth), for example, contains exceptions to secrecy
obligations placed on staff members of the Australian Commission for Law
Enforcement
Integrity (ACLEI) allowing the Integrity Commissioner to disclose
information to the heads of a range of specified Commonwealth,
territory agencies.
secrecy offences follow a similar
11.18 For example, the
Aged Care Act 1997
(Cth) provides a general
prohibition on the disclosure of protected information by any person, subject to
a limited number of exceptions,
including where disclosure is in the performance
of a function or duty under the
In addition, the Secretary
may disclose protected information in at least 12 separately defined
circumstances,
such as ‘if
a person has temporarily taken over the provision of care through a particular
service to care recipients—to
the person for the purposes of enabling the
person properly to provide that
11.19 Many of these exceptions closely follow the wording of the Information
(Cth), which set out
limits on the use and disclosure of personal information held by
For example, in the
Aged Care Act
, the circumstances specified include where the Secretary
believes, on reasonable grounds, that disclosure of the information is
reasonably necessary for: enforcement of the criminal law;
or enforcement of a
law imposing a pecuniary penalty; or protection of the public revenue; to an
agency whose functions include that
enforcement or protection, for the purposes
of that enforcement or
protection.
11.20 Similarly,
Customs Administration Act 1985
(Cth) restricts the handling of information (‘protected
information’)
certain exceptions apply.
exceptions include disclosure as required or authorised by any other law; or in
the course of performing the person’s
11.21 In addition, if the ‘protected information’ also contains
personal information, it cannot be disclosed without the
consent of the person
to whom the information relates, or unless the disclosure is made for a
permissible purpose set out and
the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the
Australian Customs Service is satisfied that the disclosure is necessary for
such a purpose.
Again, these
permissible purposes have many similarities to use and disclosure that would be
permitted under the
11.22 In relation to provisions containing extensive codification of the
circumstances in which disclosure is allowed, John McGinness
stated that:
any attempt to include such a code leads to further complexity in a secrecy
provision and results in regular demands for amendment
to deal with changing
criteria for information sharing within
government.
11.23 The extensive codification of permissible disclosure needs to be
considered in the context of demands for the effective sharing
of Commonwealth
information, including to support ‘whole of government’ responses to
policy and administrative
challenges.
Submissions and consultations
11.24 In IP 34, the ALRC asked a number of questions relating to
exceptions and defences to secrecy laws. In particular, the ALRC
asked whether
secrecy provisions should establish a general prohibition on disclosure and then
attempt to codify, as in the examples
discussed above, the circumstances in
which disclosure is allowed.
11.25 The AGD stated that codifying the circumstances in which disclosure is
permitted ‘provides clarity and certainty to officers’
ensure that information collected by government agencies ‘is only used for
the purpose it is collected or other limited
appropriate
Similarly, the
Australian Intelligence Community (AIC) considered that ‘codification of
the circumstances in which disclosure
is allowed minimises the possible
loopholes through which secret information may be publicly
disclosed’.
11.26 A number of other Australian Government agency stakeholders highlighted
the advantages of such an approach to framing secrecy
provisions.
The Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) observed, for example, that the approach
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998
(Cth) (APRA
Act) has ‘worked well’. APRA stated that:
If the secrecy provision is designed to protect information generated by
government (augmenting the employee’s duty of fidelity),
then it may need
to be drafted using general language.
If, as with s 56 of the APRA Act, it is designed to protect information provided
to government by third parties (either voluntarily
in confidence or under
compulsion), then it can and should be drafted in more specific terms,
especially having regard to the need
to provide clear
exceptions.
11.27 Some stakeholders referred to the decision of the High Court in
Johns v Australian Securities Commission
as one of the
reasons secrecy offences need to be associated with comprehensive statutory
exceptions.
High Court confirmed that a statute which confers a power to obtain information
for a particular purpose limits, expressly or
impliedly, the purposes for which
the information obtained can then be used or disclosed. An agency that obtains
information in the
exercise of such a power is subject to a statutory duty of
confidentiality. The information may not be used or disclosed except as
authorised by the statute.
11.28 The Treasury identified the limitations imposed by
‘the capacity of regulators to share certain information absent a
legislative basis authorising disclosure’ as one
reason for the enactment
of comprehensive exceptions to the prohibition on disclosure of information set
out in s 155AAA of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
11.29 On the other hand, some stakeholders noted the possible inflexibility
of codifying statutory exceptions to secrecy
Ron Fraser observed
that lengthy lists of exceptions, while often designed to facilitate the
disclosure of information to other public
authorities,
may create problems
in practice.
There is often a need to add to these [exceptions and related guidelines], or
amend them, to enable the agency to do its job properly
eg, provision of
information to another Commonwealth or State agency that is not specified in the
exceptions, or return of innocuous
information to providers of it where this is
not specified. The fact that exceptions to the secrecy prohibitions occur in
legislation makes this difficult to achieve quickly. It is, however,
highly desirable for transparency reasons that provisions imposing
penalties, and the exceptions from them, appear in primary legislation. This is
an example of the inflexibility and contradictions
inherent in the classic
secrecy provision.
11.30 The tension in this area ‘between flexibility and
accountability’ was also highlighted by the Department of Human
(DHS). The DHS stated:
The more prescriptive the secrecy provision, the less able it is to deal with
changes to methods and extent of service delivery.
Whilst this may be a
deliberate legislative decision, it creates service delivery frustrations which
may be difficult to justify
in practice to all those concerned including
customers … At the same time, if secrecy provisions are to instil a level
comfort that information is being handled properly, there needs to be
accountability and scrutiny beyond the limited interests of
the agency which has
possession of the information.
11.31 Some stakeholders identified alternatives to prescriptive statutory
provisions, such as authorisation by the minister or agency
head. The DHS noted
that ministerial determinations allowing disclosure in the public interest offer
‘the capacity to respond
to changes more quickly than amendment to primary
legislation, whilst retaining a level of parliamentary
oversight’.
For example,
the disclosure of social security information by Centrelink is permitted where
the Secretary ‘certifies that it
is necessary in the public interest to do
so in a particular case or class of cases’. The issuing of such
certificates is subject
to Ministerial guidelines which are set out in a
disallowable instrument.
11.32 Other mechanisms include disclosure pursuant to memorandums of
understanding and internal guidelines. The AGD submitted that:
Including a provision to enable the agency head or other senior officers to
authorise disclosure may provide greater flexibility
as it may enable disclosure
in new or unforeseen circumstances. It also provides a level of accountability
by requiring a senior
officer to consider whether disclosure would be consistent
with policy considerations in a particular case. Memorandums of understanding
(MOU) or internal guidelines may also be used to set out circumstances when
information can be disclosed from one agency to another.
This may provide a more
flexible approach, as the detail of information sharing arrangements can be left
to documents more easily
ALRC’s views
11.33 A major rationale for many exceptions contained in secrecy offences
appears to be to clarify what kinds of use and disclosure
are part of the
functions of the agency, or are required or authorised by or under law, for the
purposes of the agency complying
11.34 The purpose of some exceptions is to protect privacy by detailing when
disclosure is authorised. The Australian Transaction
Reports and Analysis Centre
(AUSTRAC) noted, for example, that the provisions of the
Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
(Cth) (AML/CTF Act) that
comprehensively define authorised dealing with AUSTRAC information, were the
result of privacy concerns:
AUSTRAC notes that various privacy and civil liberties organisations, including
the Commonwealth Privacy Commissioner, participated
in the development of the
AML/CTF Act. There was a high level of support for stringent secrecy provisions,
given the nature of AUSTRAC
information.
11.35 It is not clear that expressing such provisions as exceptions to a
secrecy offence is a necessary or desirable approach. Secrecy
provisions could
be much simplified by relying on more generic exceptions that refer, for
example, to disclosure in the performance
of a function or duty under the Act or
as required or authorised by law. Where extensive provisions authorising
specific disclosure
are required, these can be retained, even if associated
specific secrecy offences are removed.
11.36 In the ALRC’s view, specific secrecy offences that include
extensive codification of permissible disclosure should be
reviewed to establish
whether these exceptions are necessary in view of the desirability of
simplifying secrecy offences.
Proposal 11–2
Specific secrecy offences that include extensive
codification of permissible disclosure should be reviewed to establish whether
exceptions are necessary in view of the desirability of simplifying
secrecy offences.
interest disclosure
11.37 Another issue raised in submissions concerned the relationship between
public interest disclosure, under proposed new Commonwealth
public interest
disclosure legislation, and exceptions or defences to specific secrecy
11.38 As discussed in more detail in Chapter 9, the House of Representatives
Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs
(the Standing Committee)
has recommended that the Australian Government introduce legislation, entitled
the Public Interest Disclosure
Bill, to provide ‘whistleblower’
protections in the Australian Government public
11.39 The details of the proposed public interest disclosure legislation are
set out in Chapter 9. In summary, the Standing Committee
recommended that a
broad range of Australian Government
be able to make public
interest disclosures about ‘serious
to their agency,
or to designated external authorities such as the Commonwealth Ombudsman. A
person who makes a public interest disclosure
in accordance with the legislation
would receive protections including immunity from: criminal liability (including
under secrecy
offences); liability for civil penalties and civil actions; and
administrative sanctions.
11.40 In addition, the Standing Committee recommended that protection extend
to a person who makes a disclosure to the media
where the matter has been disclosed internally and externally, and has not been
acted on in a reasonable time having regard to the
nature of the matter, and the
matter threatens immediate serious harm to public health and
11.41 The Standing Committee did not agree with suggestions that there be a
blanket exclusion for security matters from public interest
legislation or that the AIC agencies should be exempt from broader public
interest disclosure procedures.
It recommended that where ‘disclosable conduct concerns a Commonwealth
security or intelligence service, the authorised authorities
disclosures are the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security and the
Commonwealth
Ombudsman’.
11.42 In IP 34, the ALRC asked about the relationship between exceptions
and defences provided under Commonwealth secrecy laws and
possible new
Commonwealth public interest disclosure legislation and, specifically, whether
public interest disclosure should be
incorporated as an exception to criminal
offences for unauthorised handling of Commonwealth
information.
Such an exception
might apply to any ‘public interest disclosure’ or ‘protected
disclosure’, as defined in
new public interest disclosure legislation, or
to disclosure that fits some similar formulation.
11.43 The ALRC also asked whether new public interest disclosure legislation,
if enacted, should exclude disclosure by Commonwealth
officers employed by
certain agencies—such as those involved in protecting national
Submissions and consultations
11.44 As discussed in Chapter 9, a number of stakeholders supported
incorporating public interest disclosure as an exception to secrecy
The New South Wales Young Lawyers Human Rights Committee, for example, submitted
that ‘adequate protection must be
extended to whistle blowing activities
in the form of public interest exceptions to secrecy
The Commonwealth
Ombudsman also supported protection against prosecution for breach of a secrecy
provision for public interest
disclosures.
The Community and
Public Sector Union suggested that exceptions or defences to secrecy provisions
should include disclosure where
there is ‘suspicion of corrupt or illegal
behaviour, national security [concerns] or where there is a clear public
in disclosure’.
11.45 In contrast, a number of agencies argued against a public interest
disclosure exception relating to their relevant secrecy offences.
For example,
APRA stated that it would oppose the inclusion of a public interest disclosure
exception in s 56 of the APRA Act, because
‘uncertainty’ about
whether the exception would apply ‘may undermine the confidence of
regulated entities, particularly
regulated entities in financial difficulty,
from being completely frank with
11.46 Similarly, the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) stated that it did
not believe that the disclosure of statistical information
in breach of the
Census and Statistics Act 1905
(Cth) would ‘ever be in the public
interest when balanced against the detriment to the public interest of the
disclosure because
of the weakening of official statistics’.
The ABS believes there are no circumstances that could justify circumvention of
Census and Statistics Act 1905
secrecy provisions and no exceptions
for ABS officers would be appropriate. It is highly unlikely that any benefits
arising from
a disclosure made in the public interest would outweigh the
long-term damage to the ABS’s reputation as a trusted data custodian,
consequently the quality of ABS
statistics.
11.47 The Australian Federal Police (AFP) was also ‘averse to the
inclusion of public interest disclosure, or whistleblowing,
exemptions within a
proposed model secrecy offence framework’. Further:
Due to the nature of AFP operations, the associated requirement for complete
integrity of our information holdings and our existing
legislative framework for
secrecy and protected disclosure the AFP would pursue exclusion of AFP employees
from any general public
interest disclosure legislation for the Australian
Public Service or, at a minimum, restrict disclosures to an appropriate
agency such as the Commonwealth Law Enforcement Ombudsman or the
Australian Commission for Law Enforcement
11.48 The AGD stated that secrecy laws ‘should not prevent people
making lawful public interest disclosures in accordance with
any established
framework and legislation’, but suggested that in view of ‘the
sensitivity of information held by security
and intelligence agencies, it may be
appropriate for there to be different procedures in place’, including a
role for the Inspector-General
of Intelligence and Security in receiving and
investigating allegations in relation to security and intelligence
ALRC’s views
11.49 As discussed in Chapter 9, the ALRC assumes, for the purpose of this
Discussion Paper, that Commonwealth public interest disclosure
legislation—based in large extent on the recommendations of the Standing
Committee—will be enacted before the Australian
Government considers the
implementation of the ALRC’s final recommendations in this Inquiry.
11.50 The Standing Committee recommended that the protections provided under
the public interest disclosure legislation should include
immunity from criminal
If so, there may be
no useful purpose served by incorporating public interest disclosure exceptions
into secrecy offences that apply
in the same circumstances, as such exceptions
would provide no additional protection.
11.51 In the ALRC’s view, however, it would be appropriate to include,
in specific secrecy offence provisions that apply to
Commonwealth officers,
legislative notes referring to the fact that public interest disclosure
legislation may provide immunity from
criminal liability.
11.52 The ALRC’s final recommendations in this regard will depend,
among other things, on how any new public interest disclosure
legislation
defines the categories of individual who can be protected, the types of
disclosure that are protected, and the scope
of the protection for individuals
from administrative sanction and criminal and civil liability. As noted in
Chapter 9, the ALRC
may not have the benefit of considering the final form
of public interest disclosure legislation before finalising its
recommendations.
11.53 Chapter 9 discusses criticism of the scope of protection
recommended by the Standing Committee for individuals making public
disclosures to the media and other ‘third parties’. The ALRC notes
that, if the protection provided by public
interest disclosure legislation is
too limited, or the proposed legislation does not eventuate, it may be desirable
to incorporate
a public interest disclosure exception into the general secrecy
11.54 The ALRC agrees with the conclusion of the Standing Committee that
public interest disclosure legislation, if enacted, should
not exclude
disclosure by Commonwealth officers employed by certain agencies—such as
those involved in protecting national
security. This is consistent with
recommendations made in previous ALRC reports. Notably, in
Keeping Secrets:
The Protection of Classified and Security Sensitive Information
(2004), the ALRC recommended that the Commonwealth should legislate to introduce
‘a comprehensive public interest
disclosures scheme to cover all
Australian Government agencies, including defence, security and intelligence
Proposal 11–3
Specific secrecy offences that apply to
Commonwealth officers should generally be accompanied by a note
cross-referencing to the immunity
provided by proposed Commonwealth public
interest disclosure legislation.
Consistency
of exceptions
11.55 In IP 34, the ALRC noted that the exceptions and defences provided
by closely related secrecy legislation may vary significantly
and it is not
always clear that such variation is justifiable. Some of these apparent
inconsistencies are discussed below.
Disclosure to ministers
11.56 The Treasury’s review of taxation secrecy and disclosure
provisions (the Taxation Secrecy Review) highlighted that these
provisions can
result in different degrees of disclosure to ministers according to the type of
tax involved. In particular, information
obtained for income tax purposes can be
disclosed to a minister where it is in the performance of an officer’s
duties, but
there is an absolute prohibition on the disclosure to ministers of
information about indirect taxation, such as information relating
11.57 The exposure draft
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer
Information) Bill 2009
(Cth) (the Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill) aims to remedy
this by consolidating the relevant provisions in new sections of the
Administration Act 1953
(Cth), which would regulate disclosure to ministers
and committees of Parliament and provide an exhaustive list of the circumstances
where this can lawfully
11.58 Secrecy provisions applicable to the Australian Securities and
Investments Commission (ASIC) and APRA, which operate under similar
legislation, also take different approaches to disclosure to ministers. The
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
(Cth) provides
that disclosing information to the Minister amounts to ‘authorised use and
disclosure of the
information’.
The APRA Act
contains no similar exception to its secrecy provisions.
Performance of duties
11.59 Even where exceptions have a similar purpose, terminology is often
inconsistent. The DHS highlighted this inconsistency of terminology:
In human services legislation the concept of ‘performance of duties’
is expressed in a variety of ways, including:
• ‘in the performance of duties under or in relation to this
Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act
• ‘in the performance of duties, or in the exercise of powers or
functions under this Act’ (
National Health Act
• ‘authorised by or under the social security law’
(ss 203 and 204
Social Security (Administration) Act
This can be compared with other legislation eg
Assessment Act 1936
which merely refers to ‘in performance of an
officer’s duties’. Consistency of terminology would aid
understanding.
Disclosure with consent
11.60 Another issue concerns the application of secrecy laws to the
disclosure of personal information by Commonwealth officers with
the consent of
the person to whom the information relates. Some secrecy laws provide exceptions
where the disclosure of personal
information occurs with
Other secrecy laws,
such as those relating to officers of the Australian Taxation Office (ATO), do
not permit such disclosure.
11.61 The Treasury’s review of taxation secrecy and disclosure
provisions noted that permitting the disclosure of information
by the ATO with
taxpayer consent would be in line with other secrecy
The ATO itself observed
that there would be ‘administrative benefits if a taxpayer could consent
to his or her information being
released to a third
11.62 The Treasury advised, however, that some organisations, responding to
the review of taxation secrecy and disclosure provisions,
expressed concern
whether consent is informed and
Under the Tax Laws
Exposure Draft Bill, a taxpayer’s consent to the disclosure of information
would not authorise the disclosure
of that taxpayer’s information. The
explanatory material to the Bill states:
This approach avoids issues of whether the consent is informed and voluntary (as
opposed to, for instance, being a precondition for
a particular good or
service). This also recognises the fact that, if any entity requires the
taxpayer’s information, the taxpayer
is able to obtain that information
and pass it on.
Information in the public domain
11.63 Some secrecy offences provide exceptions where information is already
in the public domain.
secrecy laws, in contrast, may prevent the ATO from providing professional
regulatory bodies with publicly available information,
such as the fact that a
barrister has been convicted of a taxation
11.64 The ATO suggested that there should be a provision stating that
information already lawfully available to the public is not
protected by tax
secrecy provisions, including in order to investigate non-compliance with tax
laws by ATO employees.
Laws Exposure Draft Bill provides that a taxation officer who discloses
protected information does not commit an offence
if the information was
‘already lawfully available to the
11.65 Other stakeholders also supported the application of exceptions
relating to the disclosure of information that is in the public
The Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions (CDPP), for example, stated that:
If investigation agencies are unable to publicise the outcomes of prosecutions
the deterrent effect of successful prosecutions will
be undermined. The CDPP
also supports a defence or exception for the disclosure of de-identified
information about a person/s.
ALRC’s views
11.66 There is significant variation in the exceptions and defences that
apply to specific secrecy offences. The great majority of
these exceptions and
defences are iterations of the exceptions provided for by the proposed general
secrecy offence.
consistency in exceptions, as between the general secrecy offence and specific
secrecy offences, and between specific secrecy
offences, is desirable, there are
good reasons for many variations.
11.67 For example, the general secrecy offence would allow disclosure
authorised by the relevant agency head or minister. The exception
in the general
secrecy offence is in such general terms because it must apply to many
circumstances and provide sufficient flexibility
to enable information
11.68 While some secrecy offences contain a similar
most that permit
disclosure authorised by the agency head provide other criteria that must be
met. Under the AML/CTF Act, for example,
disclosure may be authorised by the CEO
of AUSTRAC where the information will be used for investigating a breach of a
Commonwealth.
11.69 The ATO emphasised that, in the context of taxation secrecy provisions,
it would not be appropriate for disclosure to be made
on the authority of a
specified person (such as an agency head), because ‘this approach would
provide less certainty for tax
officers and taxpayers because of its
discretionary nature’.
11.70 In contrast, the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
(Cth) allows the
Commissioner, a Second Commissioner, or a Deputy Commissioner of Taxation, or
other persons authorised by those
officers, to authorise disclosure to a wide
range of specified bodies and purposes, set out in thirty separate
subparagraphs.
11.71 Similarly, while it may be appropriate for some specific secrecy
offences to include an exception where disclosure is with the
consent of the
individual to whom the information relates, for the reasons discussed in
Chapter 9 it would be inappropriate in the
general secrecy offence.
11.72 Further, consent may not be an appropriate exception in the context of
some specific secrecy offences. The option of a consent
exception was rejected
in the Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill due to concerns about the validity of
consent and a concern that the ATO
is ‘not treated generally as a central
repository of financial information to be accessed for purposes unrelated to the
system or to government
administration’.
11.73 In the ALRC’s view, exceptions and defences applicable to
specific secrecy offences should be reviewed for consistency
with similar and
related secrecy offences. However, exceptions to specific secrecy offences apply
in a multitude of different circumstances
and information-handling contexts. For
this reason, this is not an area in which firm criteria against which to gauge
consistency
can be easily established, or where the general secrecy offence
necessarily serves as a useful model.
11.74 As set out in Chapter 9, the ALRC proposes that the new general
secrecy offence should have three tiers, with maximum penalties
as follows:
two years imprisonment for the first tier offence, where strict
liability attaches to the requirement to prove harm;
five years imprisonment for the second tier offence, where there is
intention or recklessness as to the reasonable likelihood of
harm to personal
seven years imprisonment for the third tier offence, where there is
intention or recklessness as to the reasonable likelihood of
harm to other
specified public
discussed in more detail below, the maximum penalties provided by specific
secrecy offences vary widely, from a fine of
to imprisonment for 25
The following table
provides a breakdown of the maximum penalties applicable to specific secrecy
offences, by percentage of offences
identified by the
Pecuniary penalty only
Imprisonment for 1 year or less
Imprisonment for 2 years
Imprisonment for 5 years
Imprisonment for 7 years
Imprisonment for 10 years
Imprisonment for 15 years or more
11.76 Before considering criminal penalties for specific secrecy offences,
and how to achieve greater consistency in penalties, it
is useful to examine
briefly some principles and legislative provisions that apply in determining
penalties for criminal offences
Maximum penalties
11.77 Provisions creating federal offences, including secrecy offences,
typically specify the maximum penalty for the offence, which
is intended for the
worst type of case covered by the
Parliament determines
the maximum penalties, and courts in sentencing federal offenders are required
to determine the sentence or
order ‘that is of a severity appropriate in
all the circumstances of the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
) states that
‘other than in rare cases, Commonwealth offences should carry a maximum
penalty rather than a fixed penalty and
should not carry a minimum
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth), the specified penalty for a Commonwealth
offence is to be read as being a maximum only, unless the contrary intention
11.79 The maximum penalty in provisions creating offences is normally
expressed in terms of a monetary penalty, penalty
or a term of
imprisonment. In the case of secrecy offences, in the majority of cases, the
court has the option of imposing a
a term of imprisonment or
both. There are, however, some secrecy provisions that specify a fine
Section 17A
reflects the common law
position that imprisonment is a sentencing option of last
The section provides
that a court is not to impose a sentence of imprisonment unless it is satisfied
that no other sentence is appropriate
in all the circumstances of the case.
11.81 Options apart from fines and imprisonment are available in sentencing
federal offenders. Some of these options are expressly
. Others are picked up from state and territory law by
and regulations made under the
contains a number of provisions relevant to
determining the fine that can be imposed on a natural person or corporation for
a federal secrecy provision.
Penalty conversions where only imprisonment
is specified
11.83 Where an offence provision refers only to imprisonment,
and (2A) of the
enable a court to impose a fine if it
considers it appropriate to do so.
Section 4B(2)
sets out a formula to
determine the amount of penalty units, being:
Term of Imprisonment x 5
Term of Imprisonment
is the maximum term of imprisonment,
expressed in months, by which the offence is punishable.
Section 4B(2)
plays a key role in
determining the maximum fines that can be imposed for breaches of federal
secrecy provisions as a significant
number of such provisions are expressed to
be punishable by imprisonment
For example, if a
provision specifies a term of imprisonment of two years, the applicable fine is
120 penalty units (24 x 5)—amounting
to $13,200 (120 x $110). Fines
referred to in this chapter have been calculated with reference to
, where applicable.
Section 4B(2A)
provides that if an offence provides for
imprisonment for life, the court may impose a maximum pecuniary penalty of 2,000
Penalty conversion where fine expressed in
monetary terms
11.86 A number of secrecy offences specify a maximum fine in dollar terms
rather than penalty units.
Section 4AB
sets out a formula for converting monetary
penalties expressed in dollar amounts to penalty
References to fines in
this chapter take into account the application of
applicable.
Alternate penalties for proceeding summarily
on an indictable offence
11.87 Summary offences are those that are either not punishable by
imprisonment, or are punishable by imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 12
months, unless the contrary intention
Indictable federal
offences are those that are punishable by imprisonment for a period exceeding 12
months, unless the contrary intention
11.88 Some federal secrecy provisions specify alternate maximum penalties,
depending on whether the offence is dealt with summarily
(that is, without a
jury) or on indictment.
provides that certain indictable offences punishable by
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 10 years may, unless the contrary
intention appears, be dealt with summarily where both the prosecutor and the
defendant consent.
11.89 Where a federal secrecy offence is able to be dealt with summarily
under the provisions of the
, the following reduced penalties
in the case of offences punishable by imprisonment for a period not
exceeding five years, the maximum penalty is reduced to a sentence
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 12 months or a fine not exceeding 60
penalty units or both; and
in the case of offences punishable by imprisonment for a period
greater than five years and less than 10 years, the maximum penalty
to a sentence of imprisonment not exceeding two years or a fine not exceeding
120 penalty units or
for corporations
11.90 Secrecy offence provisions typically specify the maximum fine or
sentence of imprisonment that can be imposed on a natural person.
They do not
usually specify separate maximum penalties for corporations, although a few
provisions do so.
11.91 Many of the sentences that can be imposed on natural persons cannot be
imposed on corporations—for example, a corporation
cannot be sentenced to
imprisonment.
Section 4B(3)
empowers a court sentencing a
corporation to impose a pecuniary penalty that is up to five times greater than
the maximum penalty
that could be imposed on a natural person convicted of the
same offence, provided that the contrary intention does not appear in
offence provision.
Appropriateness
of criminal penalties
11.92 In IP 34, the ALRC considered the circumstances in which it may be
appropriate for criminal penalties to apply when a secrecy
provision has been
breached. A range of relevant factors have been identified by commentators,
including: the nature of the information
the subject of protection; the intent
of the offender; the adverse consequences of a criminal conviction; the
seriousness of the
breach; and the effect on the public interest if the
information were to be
11.93 The ALRC asked when unauthorised handling of Commonwealth information
should be subject to criminal penalties; and which factors
should determine
whether or not it is appropriate for criminal penalties to
Submissions and consultations
11.94 The AGD emphasised that a criminal offence is the ultimate sanction for
breaching the law.
Criminal offences should be used where the relevant conduct involves
considerable harm to society, the environment or Australia’s
interests, including security interests. One important factor to consider when
deciding whether a criminal offence is appropriate
is the effect of a criminal
offence. A criminal conviction carries with it a social stigma, particularly
where the conviction is
accompanied by
imprisonment.
11.95 Stakeholders referred to factors that need to be taken into account in
determining whether criminal penalties are justified.
The Treasury stated that
these included the nature of the information protected, how it was obtained by
the agency holding it and
the potential impact of unauthorised
11.96 The Public Interest Advocacy Centre (PIAC) expressed broad agreement
that the factors identified in IP 34 should be taken into
determining whether criminal penalties should apply. However, in PIAC’s
Disclosure of information obtained in the course of official duties (apart from
information relating to defence, security and law
enforcement) should rarely, if
ever, amount to a criminal offence, as opposed to attracting a civil
11.97 Liberty Victoria agreed that criminal penalties should be applied if
there is ‘intent to mishandle information’.
Penalties should be
applied ‘on a sliding scale of punishment applied by the courts based on a
number of factors including
the classification of the information, and whether
or not the conduct was intended to cause
11.98 PIAC stated that ‘intent at the level of carelessness’
should not be enough to justify the imposition of criminal
liability, except
perhaps ‘where very serious damage to life and limb has been the direct
focused on intention as the critical factor in determining whether criminal
liability should apply, stating that there
is a stronger argument for such
penalties if the offender ‘deliberately discloses information for profit
or with malicious
ALRC’s views
11.99 Commonwealth information includes a range of highly sensitive
information—for example, national security information,
information
relating to defence, valuable commercial information and sensitive personal
information. The unauthorised disclosure
of Commonwealth information has the
capacity to cause real harm to important public interests. In the ALRC’s
view, criminal
penalties are appropriate, at least where unauthorised disclosure
is reasonably likely to cause such harm.
Consistency of
11.100 The Terms of Reference for this Inquiry require the ALRC to consider
options for ensuring a consistent approach across government
to the protection
of Commonwealth information.
A significant aspect of this consistency of approach is consistency of penalties
for secrecy offences.
11.101 The AGD
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
directs those
framing offences to ‘ensure [the] penalty fits with other penalties in
Commonwealth law’.
Penalties should be framed to maximise consistency with penalties for existing
offences of a similar kind or of similar seriousness.
Penalties within a given
legislative regime should reflect the relative seriousness of the offences
within that scheme.
11.102 The Senate Scrutiny of Bills Committee has stated that
‘consistency is the main aim of criminal law policy when determining
penalties’.
the Standing Committee has expressed the view that ‘consistency in the
range and expression of penalties in criminal
secrecy provisions is
desirable,’ although ‘there may need to be some flexibility
depending on the sensitivity of the
information to be
protected’.
11.103 More recently, the Taxation Secrecy Review recommended that penalties
for unauthorised disclosure of protected information
standardised.
reflected in the Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill, which provides a standard penalty
of imprisonment of up to two years and a
fine of up to 120 penalty units
11.104 There are a number of different ways of examining the consistency of
penalties provided in secrecy offences. Consistency can
be assessed by comparing
the penalties:
in secrecy offence provisions to those which would otherwise apply
if formulas in the
were to apply; and
between secrecy offence provisions that aim to protect similar types
information.
11.105 In IP 34, the ALRC detailed a range of inconsistencies in
penalties, identified on the basis of the above
comparisons.
In relation to
the provisions contained in the
, these inconsistencies
included that:
the fine to imprisonment ratio provided by some secrecy offences
differs—to varying degrees—from the standard ratio of
five penalty
units to one month of imprisonment (5:1 ratio) set out in
the maximum fines applicable to bodies corporate provided under some
secrecy offences differ from the ‘5 times’ multiplier
provided by
some indictable secrecy offences provide for penalties where the
offence is dealt with summarily that differ from those provided
some secrecy provisions specify a penalty punishable on summary
conviction when, under
, an offence carrying
that maximum penalty would otherwise be tried before a jury on
indictment.
IP 34, the ALRC asked questions about the circumstances in which such
inconsistencies might be
appropriate.
Stakeholders who
commented on these issues submitted that secrecy offences should provide
penalties that are consistent with the
general provisions of
and did not suggest any circumstances that might justify
departure from them.
ALRC’s view, there appears to be no justification for inconsistency
between the penalties in specific secrecy offences
and the approach prescribed
and such inconsistency should be remedied.
Proposal 11–4
In order to ensure consistency, secrecy offence
provisions should not specify:
(a) fines for individuals and corporations different from those that would
apply if the formulas set out in the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) were adopted;
(b) penalties different from those that would apply if the alternate
penalties for proceeding summarily on an indictable offence
set out in the
were adopted; or
(c) a penalty punishable on summary conviction when, under the
, an offence carrying that maximum penalty would otherwise be tried
before a jury on indictment.
Offences protecting
similar information
11.107 There is wide variation in the maximum penalties provided by secrecy
offences protecting very similar types of information.
Some of these variations
are discussed below, with reference to:
information relating to the affairs of a person;
information obtained in the course of duties;
information relating to law enforcement and investigations;
defence or security information;
confidential information;
information the disclosure of which is expected to prejudice
financial interests; and
initial and subsequent disclosure of the same
information.
Information
relating to the affairs of a person
11.108 Penalties for offences involving the unauthorised acquisition,
recording or disclosure of information about the affairs of
another person
differ widely. A small number of these offences carry a maximum penalty of a
Most, however, are
punishable either by a fine or a period of imprisonment, or both. The maximum
term of imprisonment for such offences
varies from three
with the majority
carrying the latter penalty and, therefore, qualifying as indictable
11.109 It is difficult to justify this level of inconsistency, which can be
illustrated by comparing the penalties for the following
two offences:
The maximum penalty that applies to officers performing functions
Health Insurance Act 1973
(Cth) for the unauthorised disclosure
of ‘information with respect to the affairs of another
person’—including,
for example, a person’s Medicare
records—is a fine of
The maximum penalty that applies to officers performing functions
National Health Act 1953
(Cth) for the unauthorised disclosure
of similar information is $5,500 or imprisonment for two years, or
Information
obtained in the course of official duties
11.110 The penalties for breaching secrecy provisions that protect
information acquired in the course of official duties also vary
widely. At least
one provision is punishable by a maximum penalty of a fine only, in the amount
The majority,
however, are punishable by a term of imprisonment and fine. The maximum term of
imprisonment varies from six
with the majority
carrying the latter term of imprisonment and a fine of $13,200.
11.111 One significant example of inconsistency is the penalties that attach
to provisions protecting information acquired in the
course of performing law
enforcement duties:
The maximum penalty that applies to members and staff of the
Australian Crime Commission (ACC) for recording, divulging or communicating
information acquired in the performance of their duties or functions is a term
of imprisonment for one year and a $5,500
The maximum penalty applying to members, employees and persons
engaged by the AFP for engaging in similar conduct is two years imprisonment
is not clear that there is any significant difference between the nature or
sensitivity of the information handled by the
ACC and the AFP that would justify
this disparity.
Information relating to law enforcement and investigations
11.113 There are a variety of secrecy provisions that aim to protect the
integrity of the investigation and law enforcement processes.
The particular
information which is targeted by these provisions varies in its specificity and
scope, making it more difficult to
draw general conclusions about consistency.
Further, some provisions include as an element of the offence the effect of the
of information of this
Some offences carry a
maximum penalty of a fine
The maximum terms of
imprisonment for offences in this category vary from one
11.114 Some examples of penalties that seem inconsistent are found in
provisions concerning investigation records:
Space Activities Act
investigation officer is subject to a maximum fine of $3,300 if he or she
discloses a ‘safety record’ in circumstances
other than those set
out in the provision. A ‘safety record’ includes all statements
taken in the course of investigation
of an accident, and all communications
between persons involved in operating a space object that is involved in an
Transport Safety Investigation Act 2003
person who is or has been a staff member is subject to a fine of $13,200 and
imprisonment for two years, if he or she discloses
‘restricted
information’.
definition of ‘restricted information’ is similar to the definition
of ‘safety record’ in the
Space Activities
or security information
11.115 Not surprisingly, the highest maximum penalties for breach of secrecy
provisions are found in provisions that protect defence
or security information.
The range of maximum penalties varies from imprisonment for ‘any
term’ and a fine of ‘any
to imprisonment
for six months and a fine of
11.116 The conduct prohibited by these provisions varies widely.
Nevertheless, some disparities appear hard to justify. For example:
the maximum penalty for espionage—where a person communicates
information concerning the Commonwealth’s security or defence,
to prejudice the Commonwealth’s security or defence, and the
person’s act is likely to result in the information
being communicated to
another country or a foreign organisation—is imprisonment for 25
the maximum penalty for a defence member or defence civilian who
discloses information likely to be prejudicial to the security or
Australia without lawful authority is imprisonment for 2
Confidential
information
11.117 A number of secrecy provisions aim to protect information that is
supplied in confidence, or is confidential in nature. Most
such provisions are
punishable on breach with a maximum penalty of two years imprisonment and a fine
of $13,200.
11.118 In comparison, the maximum penalty for the unauthorised disclosure,
production, recording or use of any confidential information
acquired in the
course of duties under the
Equal Opportunity for Women in the Workplace Act
(Cth) is significantly less—imprisonment for three months and a
fine of $2,750.
Disclosure of information prejudicial to financial
11.119 Under the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Act 2005
an officer of an Indigenous Land Corporation is subject to a maximum term of
imprisonment for one year and a $6,600 fine if
he or she discloses information
that relates to the affairs of a person obtained in the course of duties where
disclosure could reasonably
be expected to substantially prejudice the
person’s commercial
11.120 In contrast, under the
Pooled Development Funds Act 1992
a person who discloses information ‘which may reasonably be expected to
affect a person adversely in respect of the
lawful business, commercial or
financial affairs of the person’, is subject to double the above-mentioned
maximum penalty—that
is, two years imprisonment and a fine in the amount
of $13,200.
Initial and subsequent
11.121 Many secrecy provisions apply only to the initial unauthorised
handling of Commonwealth
information.
typically an unauthorised disclosure by an officer of the relevant agency who
possesses the protected information. Other
secrecy provisions also seek to
regulate the conduct of those persons who receive protected information pursuant
to an initial disclosure—whether
authorised or unauthorised.
11.122 Existing penalties for initial and subsequent disclosure of protected
information are sometimes consistent, as in the AML/CTF
Aged Care Act
11.123 In other cases, penalties differ. For example, under the
Insurance Act
, where protected information is disclosed to a person in
contravention of
, the person is guilty of an offence if he or she
discloses the information to another person where he or she knows, or reasonably
ought to know, that the disclosure is in
The maximum penalty
for this subsequent disclosure is two years
imprisonment.
making the initial unauthorised disclosure is liable only to a fine of
Submissions and consultations
11.124 Stakeholders highlighted lack of consistency in existing penalties for
breach of secrecy provisions.
The DHS, for example, noted that penalties vary across its portfolio
legislation.
For example, the penalty for an employee disclosing (however termed) protected
information ranges from $500 (
Health Insurance Act
) to 2 years
imprisonment and 120 penalty units ($13,200 at the time of writing) (
Benefits Act
). Medicare Australia advises that the information protected
Health Insurance Act
Dental Benefits Act
essentially the same.
11.125 The DHS stated that these anomalies are even more noticeable within
agencies subjected to more than one secrecy provision.
For example, a Medicare
Australia employee who discloses information protected under the
faces a maximum fine ten times that of an officer committing the
same offence under the
Health Insurance Act
, and only the former attracts
a sentence of imprisonment.
Even within the same Act there are apparent inconsistencies. Under the
Insurance Act
a person who offers to supply protected information can be
imprisoned for 2 years, whereas the maximum penalty for actually doing
$500. Under Centrelink’s legislation, the Secretary can authorise
disclosure in the public interest, but cannot authorise
use on the same
11.126 ACLEI noted that inconsistent penalty provisions apply to employees of
the ACC and the AFP, and submitted that the former should
be made consistent
with that which applies under the
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
The Law Council agreed
that ‘currently there is a high degree of inconsistency among the various
pieces of legislation, without
any apparent reason for the
inconsistency’.
11.127 In IP 34, the ALRC asked about the best way to achieve
consistency in the maximum criminal penalties for breach of secrecy
provisions,
and what factors should be taken into account in arriving at penalties for
secrecy offences—such as the type of
information protected, conduct
proscribed, the fault element, and whether or not the conduct harmed the public
11.128 The AGD stated that it is ‘a well established legal principle
that similar offences should have similar penalties’.
The AGD noted that
maximum penalties can be set by reference to the fault elements that apply, as
well as to the potential harm that
could be caused by the relevant
11.129 The Law Council submitted that maximum penalties for secrecy offences
should be ‘identified and set by reference to the
kind of information
protected’.
ASIC agreed
that the factors mentioned in IP 34 were relevant and also referred to the
relevance of harm to ‘private’
interests, such as commercial
interests. PIAC submitted that:
the preferred approach should be to seek consistency in maximum penalties based
on the following factors: the nature and volume of
the material in question; the
nature and extent of any harm or potential harm to identified public interests;
the intent and motive
of the defendant; the level of seniority and office held
by the defendant; and any countervailing public interest
11.130 The ALRC also asked whether penalties should be consistent for both
the initial and subsequent unauthorised handling of Commonwealth
information.
stakeholders who addressed the issue considered that penalties should generally
be the same for both.
example, as noted in Chapter 9, the AGD stated that
if the fault elements and harm caused by the conduct are the same, it would be
reasonable for the penalty to be the same regardless
of whether the offence is
one of first or subsequent unauthorised
11.131 PIAC submitted the penalties for subsequent handling ‘should be
of a lower order, except where intent to damage Australia’s
interest is
ALRC’s views
11.132 There is wide variation in the maximum penalties provided by secrecy
offences protecting very similar types of information.
These penalties should be
reviewed for consistency with the proposed new general secrecy offence and
subsequent disclosure offence.
In this regard, as discussed below, penalty
benchmarks should be established and applied in drafting secrecy offences.
11.133 In the ALRC’s view, the maximum penalties for both the initial
and subsequent unauthorised handling of Commonwealth information
consistent, where the fault elements are the same and similar harm is caused by
the conduct.
Proposal 11–5
The penalties for specific secrecy offences should
be reviewed for consistency with the general secrecy offence and the subsequent
disclosure offence (Proposals 9–3 to 9–5), and in accordance
with Proposals
11–7 to 11–11.
Proposal 11–6
The maximum penalties for the initial and
subsequent unauthorised handling of Commonwealth information under specific
secrecy offences
should generally be the same, subject to relevant differences
in relation to fault elements or the reasonable likelihood of harm.
Level of maximum
11.134 One mechanism by which the maximum penalties for specific secrecy
offences might be made more consistent is through the application
of benchmarks
for particular categories of offences, to guide those who draft Commonwealth
offence provisions.
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
states that relevant
penalty benchmarks are to be taken into account in setting penalties for
offences, and sets out penalty benchmarks
for certain classes of
The Guide specifies
a penalty benchmark of two years imprisonment or 120 penalty units for breach of
secrecy provisions—citing
as examples provisions which relate to both
unauthorised
disclosure of Commonwealth information.
11.136 The other benchmarks specified in the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
are relevant in gauging the relative criminality of secrecy
offences compared with other Commonwealth offences. For example, the
specifies the same penalty benchmarks for breaching confidentiality requirements
and for making false statements in applications
It also sets out
the following benchmarks:
six months imprisonment or 30 penalty units for offences by
50 to 60 penalty units for failure to lodge reports or returns;
12 months imprisonment or 60 penalty units for making false
statements in notices or applications or failing to provide information
five years imprisonment or 300 penalty units for corruption and
abuse of public office; and
life imprisonment for treason, certain war crimes and terrorist
11.137 In assessing what levels of penalty should apply to particular secrecy
offences, there is scope for comparing levels of penalty
to proscribed conduct
across different types of protected information. A value judgement about the
comparative importance of protecting
different types of information may be
implicit in the levels of maximum penalties attached to the unauthorised
handling of those
11.138 For example, under the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
, an officer of an ILC is subject to a maximum term of imprisonment for
one year and a $6,600 fine if he or she discloses information
that is considered
sacred or otherwise significant by a particular group of Aboriginal persons or
Torres Strait Islanders; and the
disclosure would be inconsistent with the views
or sensitivities of those
In contrast, as
discussed above, the usual maximum penalty for disclosing confidential
information is twice that level—two
years imprisonment and a fine of
$13,200. In addition, the maximum penalty attaching to the unauthorised
disclosure of information
expected to affect adversely a person’s
financial affairs
cases is greater than the penalty attaching to the unauthorised disclosure of
sacred information.
11.139 It may also be asked whether, for example, it is appropriate that the
maximum term of imprisonment for offences relating to
disclosing information
likely to prejudice the defence or security of
or breaching orders
made in the interests of the defence of
is the same as
those attaching to many offences concerning the disclosure of information
related to the affairs of a
Role of judicial
11.140 Both the Australian Parliament, in setting maximum penalties for
offences, and sentencing courts play an important part in
endeavouring to ensure
that an appropriate type and level of penalty is imposed on an offender.
11.141 In sentencing a federal offender,
requires a court to take into account specified factors, to the extent
that they are relevant and known. Among the factors that are
to be considered
are the ‘nature and circumstances of the offence’ and ‘any
injury, loss or damage resulting from
the offence’. Each of these factors
is addressed below.
11.142 The ‘nature and circumstances’ of the offence would entail
a consideration of, for example: the sensitivity of
the information the subject
of unauthorised conduct (for example, whether it was national security
information); the type of conduct
proscribed (for example, disclosure or mere
receipt); and whether the conduct was
intentional.
11.143 The factor of ‘any injury, loss or damage resulting from the
offence’ would entail a consideration of the consequences
of breaching a
secrecy provision; for example, whether the breach endangered life or safety, or
prejudiced national security, an
investigation, or a person’s financial
interests. Many secrecy offences do not contain an element of a likelihood of
an identifiable public interest. For such offences, the prosecution does
not need to prove beyond reasonable doubt that harm did
or was likely to ensue
in order to establish criminal liability. However, where the conduct, in fact,
harms the public interest,
the fact and degree of harm are relevant aggravating
factors to be considered in sentencing.
11.144 Some secrecy provisions, however, require proof that the unauthorised
handling of Commonwealth information risked, or caused,
harm to an identifiable
public interest.
of harm to the public interest would be a relevant factor in sentencing.
11.145 Finally, the
Defence Act 1903
(Cth) contains an anomalous
penalty provision that allows a judge unfettered discretion with respect to the
level of penalty that
may be imposed for breach of s 73A of the Act
(‘Unlawfully giving or obtaining information as to defences’), when
with on indictment. Section 73F provides that this offence attracts a
maximum penalty of imprisonment ‘for any term’
or a ‘fine of
any amount’ or both.
Short sentences of
imprisonment
11.146 The ALRC has identified seven secrecy offences that specify maximum
terms of imprisonment of three
Such penalties are
contrary to the advice contained in the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
which directs those framing Commonwealth offences to
refrain from imposing terms of imprisonment of less than six months. It states
Avoiding provision for short term prison terms underlines the message that
imprisonment is reserved for serious offences and also
avoids the potential for
burdening State/Territory correctional systems with minor
11.147 In contrast, in
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal
, the ALRC recommended that sentences of imprisonment of less than
six months should continue to be available in the sentencing of
The ALRC expressed
the view that the federal sentencing regime protects against the inappropriate
imposition of short
The abolition of
short sentences may have perverse consequences, resulting in offenders receiving
longer sentences of imprisonment
than would otherwise have been
Submissions and
consultations
11.148 In IP 34, the ALRC asked whether there should there be benchmarks
for the maximum levels of criminal penalties that apply to
secrecy offences and,
if so, what should those benchmarks be. For example, should higher maximum
penalties apply to offences involving
the unauthorised handling of national
security information, or an element of likelihood of harm to the public
11.149 Stakeholders supported the need for
benchmarks.
PIAC and the Law
Council submitted, for example, that benchmarks based on a categorisation of
offences are needed to promote consistency.
ASIC referred to the benchmarking
approach taken in the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
extremely useful
11.150 The AGD noted that currently most secrecy offences carry a maximum
penalty of two years imprisonment and that this ‘seems
appropriate penalty for the majority of secrecy offences’, adding
Generally, those secrecy offences involving particularly sensitive or national
security information impose higher maximum penalties.
The underlying principle
for the imposition of higher maximum penalties in this latter category of
offences is that there are certain
unauthorised disclosure of which could cause significant harm to the public
interest and as
such require additional protection. By its nature, the
unauthorised disclosure of national security information will carry a higher
likelihood of harm to the public interest. For example, national security
information that has been received from sensitive sources
such as foreign
governments could not only damage international relations with that government
but also jeopardise the security or
11.151 Stakeholders agreed that the provisions of the
Defence Act
allowing the imposition of a maximum penalty of imprisonment ‘for any
term’ should be
PIAC considered that
appropriate, or of assistance in ensuring certainty, fairness and consistency of
punishment as between similar offenders and offences,
for a court to be given no
guidance at all by the legislature as to the maximum penalty which is to apply
to particular crimes.
11.152 In this regard, the AGD also stated that:
It is generally not appropriate for an offence provision to fail to set a
maximum penalty. A specified maximum penalty provides certainty
and clarity in
the maximum penalties an individual can face. It enables the public to readily
see the seriousness and potential consequences
of breaching a secrecy provision.
A specified maximum penalty also provides guidance to the judiciary on
sentencing levels deemed
appropriate by the Australian Parliament for the
11.153 The starting point for achieving greater consistency should be the
maximum penalties proposed for the new general secrecy offence:
imprisonment for the first tier offence; and, for the other two tiers of the
offence, where there is recklessness as to
the reasonable likelihood of harm,
five or seven years imprisonment, depending on the nature of the
11.154 In the ALRC’s view, a maximum penalty of two years imprisonment
and a fine of 120 penalty units is a reasonable benchmark—particularly
given that a maximum penalty of two years imprisonment is consistent with more
than 60% of existing secrecy offences. However, there
is a need for a broader
spectrum of penalty benchmarks, which reflect the ALRC’s proposals on how
the general and specific
secrecy offences should generally be framed.
11.155 In particular, the ALRC proposes that specific secrecy offences should
generally incorporate a requirement that, for an offence
to be committed, there
must be a reasonable likelihood that the disclosure of information will cause
harm to some specified public
The maximum penalty
applying to secrecy offences which require a reasonable likelihood of harm
should be higher than secrecy offences
that do not contain such an element. Such
an approach is currently taken under the
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
(Cth), which provides a maximum penalty of two years imprisonment for the
unauthorised use, recording or disclosure of protected
information;
and a maximum
penalty of 10 years imprisonment where the same conduct ‘endangers the
health or safety of any person or prejudices
the effective conduct of an
investigation into a relevant
11.156 Consistently with the more serious tiers of the general secrecy
offence, a specific secrecy offence which requires that a person
reckless as to whether, or intend the disclosure of Commonwealth information to
cause harm, should generally provide for
a penalty of a maximum of five or seven
years imprisonment. The level of penalty should depend on the nature of the
harm. A lesser
maximum penalty should apply where the interests being protected
concern personal privacy; the business or professional affairs of
a person; or
the business, commercial or financial affairs of an organisation. As discussed
in Chapter 9, while harm to these interests
may have serious consequences,
these would not usually involve risks to life or safety.
11.157 As discussed in Chapter 6, criminal penalties for disclosure of
Commonwealth information should be reserved for serious offences,
given that there are a range of other mechanisms in place to protect
Commonwealth information, including administrative
sanctions, contractual
obligations and the general law. In the ALRC’s view, the need for secrecy
offences that are currently
punishable by imprisonment for less than six months,
or by pecuniary penalties only, should be reviewed and considered for
Proposal 11–7
Guidance on benchmark penalties for specific
secrecy offences, consistent with Proposals 11–8 to 11–11, should be
incorporated
into the Attorney-General’s Department’s
Framing Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Proposal 11–8
Subject to Proposals 11–9 and
11–10, specific secrecy offences should generally provide for a maximum
penalty of two years
imprisonment, or a pecuniary penalty not exceeding 120
penalty units, or both.
Proposal 11–9
Specific secrecy offences should generally provide
that, where a person knows, is reckless as to whether, or intends the disclosure
of Commonwealth information to:
(a) have a substantial adverse effect on personal privacy; or
(b) have a substantial adverse effect on a person in respect of his or her
lawful business or professional affairs or on the business,
commercial or
financial affairs of an organisation,
the penalty should be a maximum of five years imprisonment, or a pecuniary
penalty not exceeding 300 penalty units, or both.
Proposal 11–10
Specific secrecy offences should generally
provide that, where a person knows, is reckless as to whether, or intends the
of Commonwealth information to:
(a) harm the national security, defence or international relations of the
Commonwealth;
(b) prejudice the prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution or
punishment of criminal offences, breaches of a law imposing
a penalty or
sanction, the enforcement of laws relating to the confiscation of the proceeds
of crime, or the protection of the public
(c) endanger the life or physical safety of any person; or
(d) pose a serious threat to public health or public safety
the penalty should be a maximum of seven years imprisonment, or a pecuniary
penalty not exceeding 420 penalty units, or both.
Proposal 11–11
Specific secrecy offences that provide for
maximum penalties of imprisonment for less than six months, or by pecuniary
penalties only,
should be reviewed and considered for repeal.
Thomson Legal and Regulatory,
of Australia
, Evidence, [16.3.4].
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 13.3(3). The Code states that the
‘exception, exemption, excuse, qualification or justification need not
accompany the
description of the offence’. Notes in some Commonwealth
secrecy laws refer to this provision of the
Criminal Code
Building and Construction Industry Improvement Act 2005
Taxation Administration Act 1953
Thomson Legal
and Regulatory,
The Laws of Australia
, Evidence,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 4–3.
Law Council of
27 February 2009.
For example,
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Act 2005
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences,
Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007),
Criminal Code
ss 9.1, 10.2, 10.5.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
conclusion was reached in relation to the framing of sedition offences in
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Fighting Words: A Review of Sedition Laws
in Australia
, ALRC 104 (2006),
Law Enforcement Integrity
Commissioner Act 2006
System (Australian Business Number) Act 1999
(Cth) ss 86-2, 86-3;
Dental Benefits Act 2008
(Cth) s 86-2.
Ibid s 86-3(g). The
Secretary of the Department may also, for example, disclose protected
information: where it is necessary in the
public interest to do so; to a person
who is expressly or impliedly authorised by the person to whom the information
relates to obtain
it; to the Chief Executive Officers of Medicare Australia and
Centrelink, the Secretaries of Departments administering social security
veterans’ entitlements, or to a state or territory for certain purposes;
to prevent or lessen a serious risk to the safety,
health or well‑being of
an aged care recipient; to a body responsible for standards of professional
conduct; or for enforcement
of the criminal law, enforcement of a law imposing a
pecuniary penalty, or protection of the public revenue:
Aged Care Act
(Cth) s 86-3.
Aged Care Act 1997
information’ is defined as ‘information that directly or indirectly
comes to the knowledge of, or into
the possession of, a person while he or she
is performing his or her duties’:
Customs Administration Act 1985
ss 16(2)(c)
(3A)–(3H) sets out these
exceptions.
, IPPs 10, 11; sch 3, NPP 2.
J McGinness, ‘Secrecy Provisions
in Commonwealth Legislation’
[1990] FedLawRw 3
Federal Law Review
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 2–6.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009. The AGD also expressed reservations about the potential
inflexibility of this approach.
Australian Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009. The AIC noted that this is the current approach under
Intelligence Services Act 2001
For example, Australian Securities
& Investments Commission,
17 March 2009; Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre,
2 March 2009; Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
24 March 2009; The
19 February 2009; Australian
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009;
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Australian Securities Commission
[1993] HCA 56
(1993) 178 CLR
Australian Securities &
Investments Commission,
17 March 2009;
The Treasury,
19 February 2009.
Australian Securities Commission
[1993] HCA 56
(1993) 178 CLR 408
, 424 (Brennan
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) s 155AAA does not itself directly create a criminal offence. Breach
of the secrecy obligations set out in s 155AAA may, however,
offence under
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) s 70.
23 March 2009; Australian Securities & Investments
Commission,
17 March 2009;
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
For example,
Health Insurance Act 1973
23 March 2009.
Department of
Human Services,
20 February 2009.
Social Security
(Administration) Act 1999
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre,
2 March 2009.
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
Whistleblower Protection: A Comprehensive Scheme for
the Commonwealth Public Sector
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 4–6.
Question 4–7.
Lawyers Human Rights Committee,
4 March 2009.
Commonwealth
19 February 2009.
and Public Sector Union,
2 March 2009.
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Bureau of Statistics,
24 March 2009.
Federal Police,
3 March 2009.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
Whistleblower Protection: A Comprehensive Scheme for
the Commonwealth Public Sector
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security
Sensitive Information
, ALRC 98 (2004), Rec 3–1. The ALRC also
recommended that this scheme should provide special procedures for dealing with
disclosures
from and about the defence, intelligence and security agencies and
concerning classified and security sensitive information, including
disclosure should be made to the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
in the first instance: Rec 3–2. See also:
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Integrity: But Not by Trust Alone: AFP & NCA Complaints and
Disciplinary Systems
, ALRC 82 (1996),
The Treasury,
Discussion Paper for the Review of Taxation Secrecy and Disclosure
(2006), 21. See
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
s 16(2), (2A); cf
Taxation Administration Act 1953
See Explanatory
Material, Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer
Information) Bill 2009
(Cth), [4.12]; Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment
(Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
(Cth) sch 1
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission Act 2001
Department of Human
20 February 2009.
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998
s 56(4)(b);
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
(Cth) s 16.
The Treasury,
Discussion Paper for the Review of Taxation Secrecy and Disclosure
(2006), 27.
Australian Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
19 February 2009.
Explanatory Material, Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of
Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
For example,
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 91.2;
Offshore Minerals Act 1994
some cases, the information protected by secrecy offences is defined to exclude
information that has lawfully been made available
to the public: eg,
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998
(Cth) s 56(1)
definitions of ‘protected document’ and ‘protected
information’.
New South Wales
Bar Association,
Submission to Treasury Review of Taxation Secrecy and
Disclosure Provisions
, 26 September
Australian Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
(Cth) sch 1
[355-20]–[355-40].
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009; Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre,
2 March 2009; Liberty Victoria,
18 February 2009; Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions,
18 February 2009.
For example,
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993
252C(5)(b).
Anti-Money Laundering
and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
Australian Taxation
16 February 2009.
Tax Assessment Act 1936
(Cth) s 16(4)(a)–(m). The Tax Laws
Amendment Exposure Draft Bill would, in the main, retain these provisions in a
form: See Explanatory Material, Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment
(Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
(Cth), 75, Table
Explanatory Material, Exposure
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
(Cth), [4.16].
Proposal 9–3.
Bank Act 1959
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 91.1.
Percentages do not add up to 100 due to rounding to nearest
Ibbs v The Queen
[1987] HCA 46
(1987) 163 CLR 447
Veen v The Queen [No 2]
[1988] HCA 14
(1988) 164 CLR
Crimes Act 1914
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences,
Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007), 39. The ALRC
has previously recommended that no mandatory minimum term of imprisonment should
be prescribed
for any federal offence: Australian Law Reform Commission,
Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
, ALRC 103 (2006),
A penalty unit
is defined in the
Crimes Act 1914
as $110, unless the
contrary intention appears.
discussed below, if the offence provision does not specify a maximum fine, there
is a formula for calculating the maximum fine
For example,
Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Act 2005
Superannuation (Resolution of
Complaints) Act 1993
Child Support (Registration and
Collection) Act 1988
Ombudsman Act 1976
Civil Aviation Regulations 1988
reg 132(3).
See R Fox and A
Sentencing: State and Federal Law in Victoria
(1999), [9.205].
This approach was endorsed by the ALRC in Australian Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
, ALRC 103 (2006),
A detailed examination of
sentencing options for federal offenders is discussed in Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
103 (2006), Ch 7.
Examples of
such provisions are discussed below in the section on consistency of
For example,
Institute of Health and Welfare Act 1987
Trade Commission Act 1985
each provide for a maximum fine of
For example, if a secrecy
provision specifies a fine of $2,000, with the application of
, the fine is actually $2,200.
Examples of such provisions are
discussed below in the section on consistency of penalties.
Crimes Act 1914
Some secrecy offences such as s 79(2), (5) of the
cannot be dealt with summarily:
For example,
Discrimination Act 1984
Defence Act 1903
The ALRC made a number
of recommendations about sentencing options that should be available in
sentencing corporations in Australian
Law Reform Commission,
Same Crime, Same
Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
, ALRC 103 (2006),
See Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
[5.39]–[5.43].
Question 5–1.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
19 February 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
18 February 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
of Reference are set out at the front of this Discussion
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences,
Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007),
Parliament of Australia Senate
Scrutiny of Bills Committee,
Scrutiny of Bills Eighth Report of 1998
(1998), [3.8].
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
In Confidence: A Report of the Inquiry into the
Protection of Confidential Personal and Commercial Information Held by the
Commonwealth
The Treasury,
Discussion Paper for the Review of Taxation Secrecy and Disclosure
Principle 6.
Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information) Bill 2009
1 item 1 ss 355-20, 355-155,
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
[5.48]–[5.77].
For example,
the ratio provided by the
Excise Act 1901
(Cth) s 159 is more than
20:1 (500 penalty units and 2 years imprisonment). Under the
Institute of Health and Welfare Act 1987
, the ratio is less
than 2:1 (20 penalty units and 1 years imprisonment). Drafting guidelines for
Commonwealth offences instruct drafters
to adopt the 5:1 ratio ‘unless
there are grounds to depart from it’: Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences,
Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007),
For example,
Defence Act
prescribes a maximum fine for a body corporate 10
times that which can be imposed on a natural
For example,
Services Act 1986
Telecommunications (Interception
and Access) Act 1979
provide for a maximum term of six
months imprisonment on a summary conviction, which is 50% less than would
otherwise apply under
Crimes Act 1914
For example,
(Interest on Overpayments and Early Payments) Act 1983
provides for a maximum penalty of two years imprisonment and an $11,000 fine,
punishable on summary conviction.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper
34 (2008), Questions 5–2,
Australian Securities
& Investments Commission,
17 March 2009; Public Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009; Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009; The Treasury,
19 February 2009.
fuller discussion of this variation is set out in Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
[5.61]–[5.75].
For example,
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Act 2005
Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988
Health Insurance Act 1973
For example,
Statistics Act 1977
Social Welfare Commission (Repeal)
A New Tax System (Bonuses for Older Australians) Act 1999
Aged Care Act 1997
(Cth) s 86-2;
Discrimination Act 1992
Higher Education Funding Act
Disability Services Act 1986
National Health Act 1953
Health Insurance
National Health Act 1953
Ombudsman Act
Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry (Repeal) Act 1986
For example,
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act 1986
Customs Administration Act 1985
Australian Federal
Police Act 1979
Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation Act 1979
Trade Practices Act 1974
ss 95ZP, 95ZQ.
Penalties for
breach of secrecy provisions protecting information relating to law enforcement
and investigations are considered
Australian Crime
Commission Act 2002
Australian Federal
Police Act 1979
For example,
Protection Act 1994
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
For example,
Space Activities Act 1998
Australian Federal Police
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
For example,
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
Witness Protection
Space Activities Act 1998
Transport Safety
Investigation Act 2003
It includes all
statements obtained in the course of an investigation, and all communication
with a person involved in the operation
of a transport vehicle that is or was
the subject of an investigation: Ibid
Defence Act 1903
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) s 79(4).
Criminal Code
Defence Force
Discipline Act 1982
For example,
Technology Act 2000
Chemical Weapons (Prohibition) Act
Pooled Development Funds Act 1992
Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Act 2005
Pooled Development
Funds Act 1992
For example,
Data-matching Program (Assistance and Tax) Act 1990
Customs Administration Act 1985
Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
Aged Care Act
(Cth) ss 86-2, 86-5.
Health Insurance Act 1973
For example, Law
Council of Australia,
27 February 2009; Department of Human Services,
20 February 2009; Australian Commission for Law
Enforcement Integrity,
18 February 2009.
Department of Human Services,
20 February 2009.
Australian Commission for
Law Enforcement Integrity,
18 February 2009, referring to
Australian Crime Commission Act
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
Law Council of
27 February 2009.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper
34 (2008), Question 5–4.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Law Council
of Australia,
27 February 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 5–5.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009; Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009; The Treasury,
19 February 2009.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007),
Data-matching Program
(Assistance and Tax) Act 1990
Customs Administration Act
Australian Hearing Services Act 1991
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences,
Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007),
Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Act 2005
For example
Development Funds Act 1992
(two years imprisonment and fine
of $13, 200).
Defence Force
Discipline Act 1982
imprisonment).
Designs Act
Patents Act 1990
For example,
Taxation Administration Act 1953
Such factors may also
influence the determination by the Australian Parliament of the level of maximum
penalty that should apply
Equal Opportunity for
Women in the Workplace Act 1999
(Cth) s 32;
Broadcasting Services
(Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Act 1992
Defence (Inquiry) Regulations 1985
(Cth) regs 62, 63;
Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981
Port Statistics Act 1977
Social Welfare Commission
(Repeal) Act 1976
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences,
Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
103 (2006), Rec 7–8.
noted above,
Crimes Act 1914
provides that a sentence of
imprisonment should not be imposed for a federal offence unless the court is
satisfied that no other
sentence is appropriate in the circumstances of the
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Same Crime, Same Time: Sentencing of Federal Offenders
103 (2006), [7.70]–[7.72].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper
34 (2008), Question 5–6.
For example, Australian Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009; Public Interest
Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009; Law
Council of Australia,
27 February 2009.
Australian Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009; Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Proposal 9–3.
Proposal 10–1.
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
12. Specific Secrecy Offences:
Simplification and Consistency
Introduction
Replication of secrecy offences
ALRC’s views
Identifying examples of substantial replication
Examples of substantial replication
Case study:
Crimes Act 1914
Overlap with espionage offences
Substantial replication of the general secrecy offence
Submissions and consultations
Consistency in secrecy offences
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Consolidation of secrecy offences
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Implementation
Drafting directions and guidance
ALRC’s views
12. Specific Secrecy Offences:
Simplification and Consistency
Introduction
12.1 This chapter continues the focus on consistency in, and simplification
of, specific secrecy offences by examining when specific
secrecy offences may be
considered to substantially replicate the proposed new general secrecy offence
to be enacted in the
Criminal Code
(Cth) (the general secrecy
The chapter examines the
criteria involved in assessing whether there is substantial replication and
identifies examples of offences
that, subject to more detailed review, might be
repealed on this basis.
12.2 The chapter also discusses concerns about lack of consistency in the
drafting of specific secrecy offences and ways to address
this problem,
including through the consolidation of secrecy offences.
12.3 Finally, the chapter suggests a process for implementing reform of
secrecy provisions, with a view to promoting more open government.
number of federal secrecy offences—there are more than
350—comprehensive review and reform will be an ongoing
process requiring
the involvement of many agencies of the Australian Government. This chapter
develops proposals to ensure that this
process is informed by the ALRC’s
conclusions, primarily through the development of detailed drafting directions
guidance against which existing and proposed specific secrecy offence
provisions can be evaluated.
Replication
of secrecy offences
12.4 The Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department (AGD)
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
) states the principle
Criminal Code
offences of general relevance to Commonwealth
administration should not be replicated, and explains:
Broadly framed provisions of general application were placed in the
to avoid the technical distinctions, loopholes, additional prosecution
difficulty and appearance of incoherence associated with having
slightly different provisions to similar effect across Commonwealth law. There
are also some provisions concerning offences
intended that these will be transferred to the
Criminal Code
course. Where a relevant
Criminal Code
applies, separate provision should not be made in another
12.5 In its submission to this Inquiry, the AGD submitted that enacting a
clarified and more targeted general secrecy offence in the
Criminal Code
‘could result in greater reliance on the general offence, and
consequently, fewer secrecy provisions being inserted in various
Commonwealth
Acts’. Further,
It would also tend to reduce the perceived need for including specific secrecy
laws in other legislation on the basis that it is
not sufficiently clear whether
the general offence would apply, or to create a specific duty for the purpose of
the general offence.
12.6 It is Australian Government policy that
Criminal Code
offences of
general relevance to Commonwealth administration should not be replicated in
other laws. Therefore, new secrecy offences
should not be enacted if they
substantially replicate the proposed general secrecy offence in the
12.7 In addition, any existing secrecy offences that replicate the general
secrecy offence should be considered for repeal, as the
opportunity arises. Such
an approach would be consistent with the ALRC’s function to review laws
to, among other things, simplify
the law and propose the repeal of obsolete or
unnecessary laws.
12.8 In practice, there is no secrecy offence that exactly replicates the
terms of the proposed general secrecy offence. The main
reason for this is that
the proposed general secrecy offence requires that the disclosure be reasonably
likely to cause harm to specified
public interests—for example, if the
disclosure is reasonably likely to prejudice the prevention, detection,
investigation,
prosecution or punishment of criminal
12.9 Leaving aside the requirement for a reasonable likelihood of harm, the
major respects in which the scope of existing specific
secrecy provisions may
differ from the general secrecy provision include where:
the parties regulated extend beyond Commonwealth officers, as
defined in the general secrecy provision;
conduct other than the disclosure of information is
covered—such as soliciting, receiving, obtaining, possessing, making a
record of, or using information;
the information protected includes information other than that to
which a Commonwealth officer has, or had, access to by reason of
Commonwealth officer;
exceptions to a prohibition on disclosure differ significantly from
those provided by the general secrecy offence; or
penalties differ significantly from those provided by the general
secrecy offence.
12.10 In practice, therefore, any review of
existing provisions should examine whether specific secrecy offences can be
that ‘substantially replicate’ the proposed general
secrecy offence. An offence will do so when it is of such similar
effect to the
general secrecy offence that it is unnecessary and should be considered for
repeal. The corollary is that secrecy offences
should be retained where they
differ in significant and necessary ways from the proposed general secrecy
12.11 While the principle that secrecy offences should be repealed where they
substantially replicate the proposed general secrecy
offence is straightforward,
identifying these offences is a complex task in practice. Specific secrecy
offences differ in many and
various respects from the general secrecy offence,
and from each other.
12.12 The extent to which these differences alone may justify the retention
of specific secrecy offences is discussed below. In practice,
specific secrecy
offences will differ from the general secrecy offence in more than one aspect,
and usually in at least three or
Reasonable likelihood of harm
12.13 The fact that a reasonable likelihood of harm test is not incorporated
in a specific secrecy offence should not, of itself,
mean that the offence
should be retained where it otherwise substantially replicates the general
secrecy offence.
12.14 For example, none of the secrecy offences in the
Aged Care Act
require that a
disclosure be reasonably likely to cause harm. There seems no reason to assume
that the unauthorised disclosure of
information of the type covered by these
offences is, by its very nature, likely to cause harm.
12.15 As discussed in Chapters 7 and 10, the ALRC considers that
criminal penalties are generally only justified where harm is reasonably
to result from an unauthorised disclosure of Commonwealth information.
Therefore, offences such as those in the
Aged Care Act
require some other
significant and necessary difference from the general secrecy offence in order
to justify retention.
12.16 Some offences need to cover specific categories of parties, such as
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
prescribers,
or participants in
witness protection programs.
this ground alone, such offences can be considered to differ in a significant
and necessary way from the proposed general secrecy
offence—and therefore
to justify retention.
12.17 However, the fact that a specific secrecy offence extends to parties
other than Commonwealth officers, as defined in the general
secrecy offence,
should not, of itself, mean that the offence should be retained where it
otherwise substantially replicates the
general secrecy offence—considered
in conjunction with the subsequent disclosure offence.
12.18 Specific secrecy offences that are stated to apply to ‘any
person’ should be reviewed for substantial replication
of the general
secrecy offence (in accordance with Proposal 10–3), where the information
protected is defined as information
acquired by the person in the course of
performing duties or exercising powers or functions under specific legislation;
or as information
obtained for the purposes of specific legislation and held in
the records of specific agencies (or similar formulations).
12.19 For example, the
Student Assistance Act 1973
(Cth) creates an
offence applying to a person who discloses to any other person information that
the person knows or ought reasonably
to know is protected
information.
information’ is defined, in summary, as information about a person that
has been obtained for the purposes
of this Act and is held in the records of the
Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations (DEEWR) or
Centrelink.
12.20 In practice, it is questionable whether such an offence would ever
apply to someone who is not a Commonwealth officer under
the extended definition
provided by the proposed general secrecy offence; or someone who knows or has
reasonable grounds to believe
that information has been disclosed by a
Commonwealth officer in breach of the general secrecy offence—that is, a
person covered
by the proposed subsequent disclosure offence.
12.21 The fact that a specific secrecy offence extends to conduct other than
the disclosure of information should not, of itself,
mean that the offence
should be retained where it otherwise substantially replicates the general
secrecy offence.
12.22 In the ALRC’s view, while it may be appropriate in some contexts
to criminalise other aspects of unauthorised information-handling,
generally sufficient that such conduct as ‘making a record’ be the
subject of administrative action, rather than
a criminal offence.
12.23 Due to the operation of the
Criminal Code
, the fault element for
the conduct elements of almost all specific secrecy offences is intention. The
equivalent fault element in
the proposed general secrecy offence is also
intention, so inconsistency on this basis will be rare.
Information protected
12.24 The information protected by specific secrecy offences that apply to
Commonwealth officers is usually a subset of the information
that would be
covered by the general secrecy offence. The proposed general secrecy offence
applies to all information to which a
Commonwealth officer has, or had, access
by reason of being a Commonwealth officer.
12.25 The fact that a specific secrecy offence is framed to protect a
narrower category of information, therefore, should not of itself
mean that the
offence should be retained. For example, a secrecy offence in the
Technology Act 2000
applies only to ‘confidential commercial information’ rather than to
any information held by an officer of the Gene Technology
Regulator by reason of
being such an officer. As confidential commercial information to which a
Commonwealth officer has access is
covered by the general secrecy offence, there
needs to be some other significant and necessary difference from the general
offence in order to justify the retention of this specific offence.
Exceptions and defences
12.26 There are many reasons that specific secrecy offences have exceptions
and defences that diverge from, or are more specific than,
those in the general
secrecy offence. In some cases, such offences can be considered to differ in a
significant and necessary way
from the proposed general secrecy
offence—and justify retention.
12.27 However, whether a difference in applicable exceptions, of itself,
justifies the retention of a specific secrecy offence needs
to be assessed on a
case by case basis. While some secrecy regimes justifiably involve detailed
codification of authorised disclosure—for
example, in the area of
taxation—in other cases, where exceptions are more detailed or more
specific than those set out in
the general offence, the differences may not be
significant.
12.28 For example, the secrecy offence contained in
AusCheck Act 2007
(Cth) provides for exceptions where disclosure is for
the purposes of the AusCheck scheme; or to the AFP for the purposes of the
AusCheck scheme. These exceptions, while specific, would be covered by the
‘in the course of an officer’s functions or
duties’ exception
contained in the proposed general secrecy offence and the defence of
‘lawful authority’ provided
12.29 In any case, more extensive provisions authorising certain specific
uses and disclosures of information could be retained, even
where the related
secrecy offences themselves are repealed. For example, the circumstances in
which the Secretary of the Department
of Health and Ageing may disclose
protected information set out in the
Aged Care Act 1997
could be retained, and
inform the application of the exceptions that apply to the general secrecy
offence and the application of
IPP 11.1(d) of the
such disclosure.
12.30 The proposed general secrecy offence would attract a maximum penalty of
seven years imprisonment. As discussed in Chapter 11,
there is wide
variation in the maximum penalties provided by specific secrecy offences and the
ALRC proposes new penalty benchmarks,
which also allow for a maximum penalty of
seven years.
12.31 There may be some circumstances where specific secrecy offences merit
or warrant a higher penalty.
so, this might justify the retention of a specific secrecy offence, which would
otherwise substantially replicate the general
secrecy offence.
Proposal 12–1
Commonwealth secrecy offences should generally
(a) repealed where the scope of the offences substantially replicates the
proposed general secrecy offence; and
(b) retained where the offences differ in significant and necessary ways
from the proposed general secrecy offence.
Identifying
examples of substantial replication
12.32 A number of specific secrecy offences may warrant repeal on the basis
that the scope of the offences substantially replicates
the proposed general
secrecy offence. The following examples illustrate how these offences might be
identified.
12.33 In each case, a secrecy offence provision is compared with the general
offence provision across the main elements of the offences.
The results are
discussed in the text and summarised in a simple table. These examples should
not, however, be taken as indicating
that the ALRC has concluded that these
secrecy offences should be repealed, if the new general secrecy offence proposed
by the ALRC
is implemented.
of substantial replication
AusCheck Act 2007
15 Protection of information
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person is or was an AusCheck staff member; and
(b) when the person is or was an AusCheck staff member, the person obtained
information relating to the AusCheck scheme; and
(c) the person discloses the information to someone else.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 2 years.
(2) Each of the following is an exception to subsection (1):
(a) a disclosure for the purposes of the AusCheck scheme;
(b) if the information is AusCheck scheme personal information—a
disclosure with the consent of the individual to whom the
AusCheck scheme
personal information relates;
(c) if the information is AusCheck scheme personal information—a
disclosure to the individual to whom the AusCheck scheme personal
information
(d) a disclosure to the Australian Federal Police for the purposes of the
AusCheck scheme.
12.34 The secrecy provision contained in
AusCheck Act
(Cth) concerns the operation of the Australian Government entity that
is responsible for identifying individuals who should not be
eligible for an
Aviation Security Identification Card or a Maritime Security Identification Card
issued under transport security
legislation.
12.35 On balance, this provision appears to substantially replicate the
general secrecy offence, leaving aside the reasonable likelihood
requirement.
12.36 AusCheck staff members are ‘Commonwealth
as defined by
the general secrecy offence; and the information protected is that to which a
Commonwealth officer has, or had, access
by reason of being a Commonwealth
officer. There is no difference in the conduct and fault elements (disclosure
and intention).
12.37 The exceptions contained in
and (d) would be covered by
the ‘in the course of a Commonwealth officer’s functions or
duties’ exception in the
general secrecy offence; or the general defence
relating to ‘conduct justified or excused by or under a law’
‘consent’ exceptions contained in
and (c) of the
AusCheck Act
do not replicate those in the general secrecy provision. It
is doubtful whether this has any practical significance. Arguably, such
disclosures would generally be made ‘in the course of a Commonwealth
officer’s functions or duties’ and are permissible
In the event that such disclosures are not within the functions or duties of
officers, and are reasonably likely to cause harm, criminal
penalties seem
appropriate.
12.38 The penalty for contravention of the offence in
imprisonment for two years. This is the same as the penalty for the first tier
of the general secrecy offence.
12.39 The results of a comparison with the elements of the general secrecy
offence are summarised in the following table. A tick represents
substantial
replication between the offence and the proposed general secrecy offence, with
respect to the relevant element of the
offences. A dash represents no
substantial replication.
AusCheck Act 2007
Replication
Likelihood of harm
Information protected
Defence Act 1903
73A Unlawfully giving or obtaining information as to defences
(1) A person who is a member of the Defence Force or a person appointed or
engaged under the
Public Service Act 1999
is guilty of an offence if:
(a) the person communicates to any other person any plan, document, or
information relating to any fort, battery, field work, fortification,
work, or to any defences of the Commonwealth, or to any factory, or air force
aerodrome or establishment or any other
naval, military or air force
information; and
(b) the communication is not in the course of the first-mentioned person’s
official duty.
12.40 Again, on balance, this provision appears to substantially replicate
the general secrecy offence, leaving aside the reasonable
likelihood of harm
requirement.
12.41 Members of the Defence Force and Australian Public Service employees
are ‘Commonwealth officers’ and the information
protected would
generally be information to which a Commonwealth officer has, or had, access by
reason of being a Commonwealth officer.
There is no difference in the conduct
and fault elements (disclosure and intention).
12.42 The exceptions contained in s 73A(1)(b) would be covered by the
‘in the course of a Commonwealth officer’s functions
duties’ exception contained in the proposed general secrecy offence; or
the general defence relating to ‘conduct justified
or excused by or under
a law’ provided by the
12.43 Section 73F states that:
(2) The punishment for an offence under section 73A shall be:
(a) if the offence is prosecuted summarily—a fine not exceeding $200 or
imprisonment for 6 months or both; or, in the case of
a body corporate, a fine
not exceeding $2,000; or
(b) if the offence is prosecuted upon indictment—a fine of any amount or
imprisonment for any term, or both.
12.44 The penalty provision under
Defence Act
anomalous in that it allows a judge unfettered discretion with respect to the
level of penalty that may be imposed, when dealt
with on indictment.
12.45 The results of a comparison with the elements of the general secrecy
offence can be summarised as follows:
Defence Act 1903
Replication
Likelihood of harm
Information protected
Chemical Weapons (Prohibition) Act 1994
102 Secrecy
(1) For the purposes of this section, an
eligible person
person who is or has been:
(a) the Secretary to, or other officer of, the Department; or
(b) the Director or the acting Director; or
(c) a member of the staff referred to in
(d) engaged as a consultant to the Director; or
(e) a national inspector; or
(f) any other Commonwealth officer.
(2) Subject to this section, an eligible person must not either directly or
indirectly, except for the purposes of this Act, for
the purpose of complying
with Australia’s obligations under the Convention, or for the purpose of a
prosecution for an offence
against this Act:
(a) make a record of, or divulge or communicate to any person, any confidential
information concerning the affairs of another person
acquired by the eligible
person in the performance of duties in relation to this Act; or
(b) produce to any person a confidential document relating to the affairs of
another person given for the purposes of this Act; or
(c) make a record of, or divulge or communicate to any person, any confidential
information contained in the Register of Permits
and Notifications.
12.46 On balance, this provision appears to substantially replicate the
general secrecy offence, leaving aside the reasonable likelihood
requirement.
12.47 Any ‘eligible person’ under the Act would also be a
‘Commonwealth officer’ and confidential information
acquired in the
performance of duties in relation to the Act would generally be covered by the
general secrecy offence. There is
no difference in the conduct and fault
elements (disclosure and intention).
12.48 The exceptions contained in s 102(2) would be covered by ‘in
the course of a Commonwealth officer’s functions or
duties’ and the
general defence relating to ‘conduct justified or excused by or under a
law’ provided by the
12.49 The penalty for contravention of the offence in s 102(2) is
imprisonment for two years.
is the same as the penalty proposed for the first tier general secrecy
12.50 The results of a comparison with the elements of the general secrecy
offence can be summarised as follows:
Chemical Weapons (Prohibition) Act 1994
Replication
Likelihood of harm
Information protected
Case study:
Crimes Act 1914
12.51 In Chapter 6, the ALRC proposes that s 79(3) of the
be repealed and replaced, along with s 70, with a new general secrecy
offence. Section 79 contains four other, narrower, secrecy
offences, which
are set out in s 79(2), (4), (5) and
12.52 The following section discusses whether these offences should be
retained, repealed or replaced by new offences in the
Criminal Code
part, the answer to this question depends on the extent of any overlap between
these offences and
offences in s 91.1 of the
Criminal Code
dealing with
espionage and similar activities (the espionage
the proposed new general secrecy
12.53 A version of s 79 formed
part of the first
when enacted in 1914 and was based on
provisions of the (now repealed)
Official Secrets Act 1911
As noted in
Chapter 5, when revising the espionage offences in 2001, the Government
intended to repeal and replace s 79 with an updated
offence in the
Attorney-General, the Hon Daryl Williams AM QC MP, stated that the proposed
updated provisions did not substantially change
the law. However, there were
some differences.
In particular,
the proposed offence of ‘receiving information’ did not require the
person to know, or have reasonable
grounds to believe, that the information had
been unlawfully communicated to
Following some criticism
of the proposed offences, particularly by media
organisations,
the Government
withdrew these provisions of the amending Bill.
12.54 In 2004, the ALRC recommended that the Australian Government review
s 79 to clarify and modernise the language and intent of
the provision and
to ensure that an appropriate public policy balance is found across the range of
offences created by the
Overlap with
espionage offences
12.55 As discussed in Chapter 6, the information protected by s 79
is, in part, defined by a circular concept—that is, information
its nature or the circumstances in which it is obtained, it is a person’s
duty to keep secret. In addition, s 79(2),
(4), (5) and (6) protect
information
made or obtained in contravention of Part VII of the
(ie, in contravention of s 79 itself, or by ‘unlawful
soundings’ prohibited by s 83);
made or obtained in contravention of the espionage offences; or
relating to a prohibited place or anything in a prohibited
12.56 Information in
these categories is likely to concern security and defence matters. In this
regard, the offences in s 79 are
similar to the espionage offences, which
focus on the disclosure of information ‘concerning the
Commonwealth’s security
or defence’ to a foreign country or
organisation with the intention of prejudicing the Commonwealth’s security
or defence,
or giving an advantage to another country’s security or
12.57 The secrecy offence most similar to the espionage offences is
s 79(2), which concerns the disclosure or other handling of information
with the intention of prejudicing the Commonwealth’s security or defence.
However, s 79(2) has application to a broader category
of information than
the espionage offences, and does not require that the information was
communicated, or was likely to be communicated,
to a foreign country or
organisation.
12.58 Section 79(4) makes it an offence for a person to:
retain prescribed information ‘when he or she has no right to
retain it or when it is contrary to his or her duty to retain
fail to comply with a direction given by a lawful authority with
respect to the retention or disposal of prescribed
information;
‘fail to take reasonable care of [prescribed information] or
to ensure that it is not communicated to a person not authorized
to receive it
or so conducts himself or herself as to endanger the safety of the
information’.
12.59 Sections
79(5) and (6) make it an offence to receive prescribed information knowing or
having reasonable grounds to believe,
at the time when he or she receives it,
that it is communicated to him or her in contravention of the espionage offences
12.60 These offences, like s 79(2), have application to a broader
category of information than the espionage offences, and do not
require that the
information was communicated, or was likely to be communicated, to a foreign
country or organisation. Unlike s 79(2),
the offences do not require any
intention to prejudice the security or defence of the Commonwealth.
Substantial replication of the general
secrecy offence
12.61 There is also some overlap between the offences in s 79 of the
and the proposed general secrecy offence. Again, the
similarity is greatest in the case of s 79(2).
12.62 The requirement for harm is similar—the proposed general secrecy
offence refers to ‘damage to the security, defence
or international
relations of the Commonwealth’. The fault elements are the same: that is,
intention with respect to the conduct
and the likelihood of harm. The breadth of
the information covered is
12.63 However, the s 79 offences are not confined in operation to
Commonwealth officers, but apply to any person. The offences would
nevertheless
overlap in this respect with the proposed subsequent disclosure offence, which
would apply where a person receives information
knowing, or reckless as to
whether, the information has been disclosed in breach of a secrecy offence, and
then on-discloses the
information knowing, or reckless as to whether, the
disclosure would harm, or is reasonably likely to harm, a specified public
12.64 The offences in s 79 also refer to conduct—such as receiving,
retaining and failing to comply with directions with respect
information—not covered by the general secrecy offence.
Submissions and consultations
12.65 In IP 34, the ALRC asked whether, given the overlap between s 70
, s 79 of the
and s 91.1 of
Criminal Code
, any of the offences in s 79 should be replaced by
updated offences in the
Criminal Code
and, if so, how should those
offences be framed.
12.66 The Law Council of Australia noted that the overlap between the
provisions in the
Criminal Code
uncertainty and stated that it
would like to see greater clarity in respect of the overlap and favours a repeal
of the relevant
secrecy provisions, with those offences
incorporated in a modified form into the
Criminal Code
. This would reduce
the uncertainty that currently
12.67 The AGD and the Australian Intelligence Community (AIC) agreed that
there may be scope to review and consolidate the offences
in ss 70 and 79 of the
and s 91.1 of the
However, both agencies
were concerned to ensure that in consolidating the offences, the distinctive
elements of each offence were
preserved. The AIC submitted that ‘while
there is some overlap between the three provisions, there are also important
differences
relating to the scope of each Act’ and that ‘it is
essential to preserve each of the different aspects of the current
provisions in
any consolidation’.
12.68 In particular, the AGD submitted that it was important to retain an
offence like that in s 79(2), and that such an offence should
not be limited to
Commonwealth officers:
The offence at subsection 79(2) of the
requires proof of an intention
to prejudice the security or defence of the Commonwealth, and this offence
carries a maximum penalty
of 7 years imprisonment. It would seem important to
retain an offence along this line, with a sufficiently high penalty, to act as
strong deterrent to anyone who might act with intention to prejudice national
security or defence.
12.69 The AGD also considered that there would be merit in retaining an
offence like that in s 79(4) relating to the unauthorised
retention or handling
of certain documents and information, submitting that:
There would seem to be merit in retaining a provision along these lines, as it
draws attention to the need to treat documents containing
highly sensitive
information with the highest degree of care to minimise the risk of inadvertent
disclosure or unauthorised
ALRC’s views
12.70 The offences in s 79(2), (4), (5) and (6) of the
differ in two key respects from the proposed general secrecy offence. First,
offences apply to any person, rather than only to
Commonwealth officers and, secondly, the
offences cover
conduct other than the unauthorised disclosure of information.
12.71 To the extent that conduct is not already covered by the espionage
offences, these differences may justify the enactment of
an updated offence
derived from s 79. The ALRC proposes that aspects of s 79 should be
incorporated in a new offence to be enacted
Criminal Code
proposed security offence).
Proposed security offence
12.72 In the ALRC’s view, an offence similar in scope to that in s
79(2) is required to protect against the disclosure of information
intention to prejudice the security or defence of the Commonwealth.
12.73 In the ALRC’s view, it would be appropriate for the proposed
security offence to cover a category of information similar
to that protected by
the espionage offences—that is, information ‘concerning the
Commonwealth’s security or defence’.
12.74 This would mean that the scope of the proposed security offence is
narrower than the offence in s 79(2). In the ALRC’s
view, however, it
is unlikely that the unauthorised handling of information that does not,
objectively, ‘concern’ security
or defence would be capable of
causing harm. In any case, where the person is a Commonwealth officer, the
general secrecy offence
may apply where there is disclosure with an intention to
cause ‘damage to the security, defence or international relations
Commonwealth’.
12.75 The expression ‘security or defence’ is defined in s 90.1
Criminal Code
to include ‘the operations, capabilities and
technologies of, and methods and sources used by, the country’s
intelligence
or security agencies’. A non-exhaustive list of information
concerning security or defence could also be provided, including
information:
obtained in contravention of s 91.1 of the
concerning prohibited places; or
obtained by unlawful
discussed in Chapter 8, the ALRC considers that the proposed general
secrecy offence should be limited to prohibiting the
unauthorised disclosure of
Commonwealth information. Other conduct, such as obtaining information, may be
covered by the provisions
Criminal Code
where it is ancillary to
the primary offence.
12.77 In the ALRC’s view, the focus of specific secrecy offences should
also generally be on the disclosure of information,
rather than on other
conduct. In Chapter 10, the ALRC proposes that specific secrecy offences should
generally not extend to conduct
such as just making a record, receiving or
possessing protected
information.
12.78 It may be appropriate to regulate other activity where the information
concerns the security or defence of the Commonwealth.
An analogy may be drawn
with the espionage offences, which refer to a person who ‘makes, obtains
or copies a record’.
In this area, it can be argued that it is necessary
to criminalise acts preparatory to disclosure, to prevent harm to security or
defence interests.
12.79 In the ALRC’s view, the proposed security offence should cover
situations where a person, without lawful authority and
intending to prejudice
the security or defence of the Commonwealth,
information
concerning the Commonwealth’s security or defence. An offence of this kind
may apply where a person obtains such
information other than by an unlawful
disclosure by a Commonwealth officer.
12.80 The use of the word ‘obtains’ rather than
‘receives’, as used in the offences in s 79(5) and (6), is
consistent with the wording of the espionage offences. While
‘obtains’ imports a more active role than ‘receives’,
there may be no significant difference with s 79(5) and (6), because these
offences are not committed where a person ‘proves
that the communication
was contrary to his or her desire’.
12.81 Section 79(2)(c) makes it an offence for a person to fail to comply
with a direction given by a lawful authority with respect
to the retention or
disposal of the information. Lawful directions may cover more than retention or
disposal, and include requirements
regarding the storage, copying or other
handling of the information. The proposed security offence should provide that a
person commits
an offence if the person fails to comply with a direction given
by a lawful authority with respect to the
of information concerning
the Commonwealth’s security or defence with the intention of prejudicing
the Commonwealth’s
security or defence.
12.82 The proposed security offence should be located in pt 5.2 of the
Criminal Code
, which also contains the espionage offences. Consistently
with the general secrecy offence and the penalty benchmarks proposed in
Chapter 11, the offence should be punishable by a maximum penalty of ten
years imprisonment and a fine of 600 penalty units.
12.83 There is considerable overlap between the proposed general secrecy
offence and the proposed security offence. Circumstances
would arise only rarely
in which the proposed security offence would operate where the general secrecy
offence (and associated subsequent
disclosure offence) would not—for
example, when:
a person obtains information concerning the Commonwealth’s
security or defence but is not complicit in the disclosure of the
information;
a person, other than a Commonwealth officer, discloses information
concerning the Commonwealth’s security or defence, which
was not disclosed
first by a Commonwealth officer, so that the subsequent disclosure offence does
not operate.
12.84 Given this limited operation, the need for the
proposed security offence may be challenged. The ALRC would welcome further
on this point.
Repeal of s 79
12.85 In Chapter 6, the ALRC proposes that s 79(3) be repealed and
replaced with the proposed general secrecy offence. For the reasons
above, s 79(2) should also be repealed and replaced with the proposed
security offence. The offences in s 79(4), (5) and
(6) should also be
12.86 The offence in s 79(4) applies to various aspects of the
unauthorised handling of information including where a person:
retains the information;
fails to comply with lawful directions with respect to the retention
or disposal of the information; or
fails to take reasonable care of the information or ensure it is not
communicated.
12.87 While strict rules about the handling of
national security classified information are necessary, s 79(4) may impose
penalty on a person who: acts without an intention to cause harm to
security or defence (or any other interest); inadvertently handles
information; and may not be aware of the nature of the information.
12.88 The offence criminalises failing to ‘take reasonable care’
of information.
This is not an
appropriate standard on which to base criminal liability and is inconsistent
with the standard fault elements under
Criminal Code
and guidance on
framing criminal offences.
12.89 At least some aspects of the conduct covered by s 79(4) would be
addressed by the proposed security offence. For example, failure
to comply with
lawful directions—including those derived from the requirements of the
Australian Government
Protective Security Manual
intention to prejudice the Commonwealth’s security or defence, would
constitute an offence.
12.90 There appears to be no justification for retaining the offences of
receiving information currently set out in s 79(5) and (6)
. It is difficult to identify the harm caused by the mere receipt of
information, particularly as there is no need to show that the
person intended
to use the information in any way. The ALRC notes in this regard that the
Official Secrets Act 1989
(UK), which replaced the UK equivalent of
s 79 in the
Official Secrets Act 1911
(UK), does not make receipt of
official information an offence.
12.91 Further, soliciting or receiving information from a Commonwealth
officer in contravention of the proposed general secrecy offence
ancillary offence such as aiding and abetting or procuring the commission of the
proposed general secrecy offence. Part
Criminal Code
that a person guilty of an ancillary offence set out in that part is guilty of
the offence itself.
Proposal 12–2
Section 79 of the
Crimes Act 1914
should be repealed and a new provision inserted in the
Criminal Code
(Cth) making it an offence for a person, without lawful authority and
intending to prejudice the Commonwealth’s security or
defence, to:
(a) disclose or obtain information concerning the Commonwealth’s
security or defence; or
(b) fail to comply with a direction given by a lawful authority with
respect to the use of information concerning the Commonwealth’s
or defence.
The offence should be punishable by a maximum penalty of ten years
imprisonment and a fine of 600 penalty units.
Consistency in
secrecy offences
12.92 Concern has long been expressed about the
number and diversity of Commonwealth secrecy provisions and the lack of
consistency
in the drafting of offences and associated
The Terms of
Reference for this Inquiry refer to the desirability of having consistent laws
and practices in relation to the protection
of Commonwealth
information.
Submissions and
consultations
12.93 Stakeholders highlighted a range of concerns about lack of consistency
and unwarranted complexity in existing secrecy laws.
The Department of Human
Services (DHS) examined the extent to which there is divergence in secrecy laws
directly relevant to its
responsibilities. The DHS provided detailed information
highlighting significant inconsistencies in secrecy provisions across 12
Some of the
inconsistencies were summarised as follows:
In relation to coverage, for example:
• 4 out of 12 laws regulate uses by employees;
• 9 out of 12 regulate collections (or ‘making records’) by
officers (the
Health Insurance Act
National Health Act
in this regard);
• 10 out of 12 have provision for public interest certificates (all but
those relating to [the Child Support Agency]); and
• 6 out of 12 are referenced in Schedule 3 of the FOI Act.
Penalties also vary across the portfolio. For example, the penalty for an
employee disclosing (however termed) protected information
ranges from $500
Health Insurance Act
) to 2 years imprisonment and 120 penalty units
($13,200 at the time of writing) (
Dental Benefits Act
). Medicare
Australia advises that the information protected under the
Health Insurance
Dental Benefits Act
is essentially the
12.94 The DHS noted that inconsistency creates a number of complications,
including where agencies share information in circumstances
where the disclosing
agency’s secrecy obligations follow the information and the receiving
agency’s secrecy obligations
also apply to the collection or recording of
the information. Further,
There is also the potential for misunderstanding and confusion where one
employee provides services or advice on behalf of more than
one portfolio
agency, or where one agency seeks information from another agency which is
regulated by a different set of secrecy
laws. Often secrecy laws require a deal
of experience and understanding in the agency’s particular context, and
customers and
officers from other agencies may have difficulty understanding
their operation in particular circumstances or where the variations
between the
regimes are subtle. A coordinated and more consistent approach would be
beneficial.
12.95 The Social Security Appeals Tribunal (SSAT) also highlighted
difficulties in dealing with multiple secrecy provisions:
The SSAT’s jurisdiction extends across the areas of social security,
family assistance, student assistance and child support.
Each of these
these enactments [and attendant regulations]
has within it a series of
secrecy/confidentiality provisions which add a further layer to the requirements
imposed upon the SSAT
by the privacy
legislation.
12.96 The SSAT referred, in particular, to widely varying definitions of the
information protected by different secrecy laws:
Some of these definitions are extremely broad, such as the definition of
‘protected information’ in our child support
the definition of ‘personal information’ in the
catch virtually all information that can identify a person. Alternatively, the
definition of ‘protected information’
in our social security/family
assistance jurisdictions is extremely narrow and catches only information that
is, or was, held in
certain enumerated agencies and departments. Certain of this
information may be disclosed to the appropriate authorities; other information
cannot be so disclosed. Other sorts of information are tied to the prejudicial
effect to the working of government, or where the
information is received in
confidence. Some provisions catch our tribunal members; whereas, other
provisions catch only our APS staff.
Some provisions catch everyone. So,
overall, the plethora of provisions and definitions give rise to a great deal of
confusion and
difficulty of
application.
12.97 Specific secrecy offences vary in many
ways, some more justifiable than others. Chapters 10 and 11 discuss how
specific secrecy
offences should be framed in order to be more consistent with
the proposed new general secrecy offence, and with each other, and
aspects of the general secrecy offence that might usefully be more broadly
12.98 In this context, the ALRC makes a number of proposals intended to guide
the framing of specific secrecy offences. These proposals
provide that specific
secrecy offences:
should generally incorporate a requirement that, for an offence to
be committed, there must be a reasonable likelihood that the disclosure
information will cause harm to some specified interest (Proposal
incorporating a reasonable likelihood of harm requirement, should
generally have recklessness as the fault element for more serious
(punishable by imprisonment for more than a maximum of two years), and for other
offences, strict liability should apply
in relation to the likelihood of harm
(Proposal 10–2);
that are stated to apply to ‘any person’, should be
reviewed to establish whether the offences should apply only to
‘Commonwealth
officers’ and subsequent disclosure, as defined in the
general secrecy offence and the subsequent disclosure offence (Proposal
that apply to Commonwealth officers, should be reviewed to establish
whether the offences should be stated to apply also to former
Commonwealth
officers (Proposal 10–4);
should generally not extend to conduct other than the disclosure of
information, such as making a record, receiving or possessing
information (Proposal 10–5), and should generally require intention as the
fault element for the disclosure of information
(Proposal 10–6);
that specify that strict liability applies to one or all physical
elements should be reviewed to establish whether the application
liability remains justified (Proposal 10–7);
that apply to Commonwealth officers, should generally apply to all
information to which a Commonwealth officer has, or had, access
by reason of
being a Commonwealth officer (Proposal 10–8);
that include defences, should be reviewed, in accordance with the
proposals in Chapter 11, to assess whether these defences are appropriate,
in view of the general principles of criminal responsibility set out in
ch 2 of the
Criminal Code
. Where such a defence is found to be
appropriate, consideration should be given to recasting the provision as an
exception, rather
than as a defence (Proposal 11–1);
that include extensive codification of permissible disclosure,
should be reviewed to establish whether these exceptions are necessary
desirable (Proposal 11–2);
that apply to Commonwealth officers, should generally be accompanied
by a note cross-referencing the immunity provided by Commonwealth
interest disclosure legislation (Proposal 11–3);
should be reviewed to ensure that penalties are consistent with the
general secrecy offence and the subsequent disclosure offence,
in accordance
with Proposals 11–4 to 11–11.
12.99 Review of secrecy
offences against these criteria would, in the ALRC’s view, significantly
improve the consistency of
secrecy offences, reduce complexity and make the law
more accessible. In addition, the consolidation of secrecy offences should be
considered, as discussed below.
Consolidation of
secrecy offences
12.100 Consolidation is another mechanism by which to promote consistency in,
and simplification of, specific secrecy offences. This
may involve consolidating
secrecy provisions in the same legislation into a single provision or division
in that Act or regulation.
Secrecy provisions also may be consolidated across a
number of pieces of legislation, such as those administered by the same
12.101 While many Acts contain a single consolidated provision, division or
part dealing with secrecy or confidentiality, a different
approach has been
adopted in some cases. The
Veterans’ Entitlements Act 1986
for example, contains a number of secrecy provisions in similar terms dealing
with the disclosure of confidential information
in determinations in relation to
different entitlements.
approach appears to give rise to unnecessary duplication.
12.102 The proposed consolidation of taxation secrecy and disclosure
provisions is an example of the second form of consolidation.
In 2006, the
Treasury undertook a review of taxation secrecy and disclosure provisions (the
Taxation Secrecy Review).
discussion paper, the Treasury noted that taxation secrecy provisions are
located in numerous different Acts, differ in their
language and scope, and have
inconsistent penalties.
it noted that some provisions merely duplicate provisions located in other
12.103 The Taxation Secrecy Review proposed that the secrecy and disclosure
provisions across all laws administered by the Commissioner
of Taxation
(including laws governing superannuation, excise, and Australian Business Number
and Tax File Number disclosures) be
standardised and consolidated into a single
piece of legislation.
12.104 In March 2009, the Assistant Treasurer and Minister for Competition
Policy and Consumer Affairs, the Hon Chris Bowen MP, released
consultation an exposure draft
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer
Information) Bill
(Tax Laws Exposure Draft Bill). The Tax Laws Exposure Draft
Bill proposes to consolidate, into a single comprehensive framework within
Taxation Administration Act 1953
(Cth), taxation secrecy and disclosure
provisions that are currently found across 18 pieces of taxation
legislation.
12.105 In IP 34, the ALRC asked whether secrecy provisions should be
consolidated, wherever possible, into a single provision in each
regulation.
The ALRC also asked
whether, given that the consolidation of taxation secrecy laws is being
considered, there are other legislative
areas in which consolidation would be
appropriate.
Submissions and
consultations
12.106 Stakeholders agreed that, where possible, secrecy provisions should
be consolidated, but emphasised that consolidation is
appropriate.
DEEWR, for example,
stated that:
To assist with clarity, avoid confusion and minimise the length of an Act or
regulation, it would be highly desirable, where possible,
for secrecy provisions
to be consolidated into a single provision.
Additionally, where it is suitable and possible, the Department recognises the
benefits in having a level of consistency in secrecy
provisions across different
legislative frameworks. However, caution should be exercised to avoid
standardising secrecy provisions
simply for the sake of it, as differing
contexts are likely to necessitate some level of
12.107 The Treasury outlined some of the reasons why consolidation was
considered appropriate for taxation secrecy and disclosure
provisions:
• All the provisions are obviously administered by the same agency.
• While the provisions do vary to some extent, there are general
principles common to all provisions.
• It is consistent with a broader initiative to consolidate existing
taxation administrative provisions into a single piece
legislation.
12.108 The AIC stated that it supported ‘simplicity and transparency in
the principles that drive protection’ and acknowledged
‘consolidation of existing secrecy provisions could simplify
arrangements’. However, the AIC did not support ‘the
updating or
consolidation of secrecy laws where this would reduce the current
protections’. In particular, the AIC considered
there is no need to consolidate the secrecy provisions set out in the
Criminal Code
Intelligence Services Act
ASIO Act into single provisions in each Act. In contrast to the example of the
Veterans Entitlements Act 1986
, cited in the Issues paper, these
provisions are set out clearly and logically, in the context of those
12.109 The Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity stated that it
‘prefers a situation where the main secrecy provisions
that apply to law
enforcement agencies are retained in each agency’s principal
statute’. Similarly, the DHS noted that:
Most portfolio agencies expressed a preference for maintaining the existing
separate secrecy laws and noted that any moves towards
greater consistency (for
example, by one portfolio wide legislative provision) should not detract from
the capacity of the applicable
secrecy laws to respond to the particular needs
and functions of each agency.
12.110 The AGD observed that, while consolidation of secrecy laws may help to
reduce complexity in some cases, this will depend upon
the objectives and
overall drafting of each Act:
By way of example, the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act
contains a number of secrecy provisions, which would not seem to
benefit significantly by consolidating them into a single provision
or a single
part of the Act. In particular, section 34ZS contains a secrecy offence that
relates specifically to a particular type
of warrant. It would not be very
logical to remove it from Division 3 of Part III of the Act and place it with
other secrecy offences,
as it would be separated from the provisions to which it
directly relates.
12.111 In some instances, consolidation of secrecy offences within a statute
may be desirable in order promote consistency and accessibility
of law. On the
other hand, the AGD
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences
sets out the
principle that offences should generally be located with other provisions with
the same substantive subject matter,
rather than being grouped together in an
‘Offences’ part. The Guide explains this principle as follows:
The placement of offences with related substantive provisions assists the reader
to identify and understand the relationship between
the two. Where provisions
are separate, the offence provision and substantive provisions should explicitly
refer to each other, so
that those subject to the law and those administering
the law can readily ascertain the relationship between the
provisions.
12.112 The Taxation Secrecy Review provides a good model for consolidation of
secrecy provisions across a number of statutes administered
by the same agency
or agencies. This kind of exercise might usefully be repeated, for example, in
relation to secrecy provisions
contained in human services legislation.
Proposal 12–3
The Australian Government should review
Commonwealth secrecy offences that are retained with a view to consolidation,
where possible,
(a) a single provision or part where multiple secrecy provisions exist in
the same Act;
(b) one Act where multiple secrecy provisions exist in more than one Act
for which the same Australian Government agency is, or
agencies are,
responsible.
Implementation
12.113 Implementation of the ALRC’s proposals for reform of specific
secrecy offences will be a lengthy and complex process.
The elements of each
specific secrecy offence need to be analysed in the light of each proposal and
the role and purpose of the secrecy
12.114 The ALRC does not expect the Australian Government—assuming that
it agrees with the conclusions of the ALRC’s final
Report in this
Inquiry—to introduce an ‘omnibus’ secrecy offences reform bill
dealing with changes to secrecy offences
across the Commonwealth statute book.
Rather, it is anticipated that there will be ongoing review of secrecy offences,
as the opportunity
12.115 In some cases, an agency may undertake a review of secrecy offences
across the statutes for which the agency has responsibility
or across a
portfolio or functional area—as in the case of the recent review of
taxation secrecy and disclosure provisions
undertaken by
In other cases, review
might be more ‘opportunistic’—such as when amendments to
legislation are being contemplated,
making it convenient to review and amend a
related secrecy provision; or where new legislation is being drafted.
Drafting directions
and guidance
12.116 One means to ensure that the recommendations of the Final Report of
this Inquiry are taken into account when secrecy provisions
are being reviewed
or drafted is through the issuing of drafting directions or other guidance.
12.117 The AGD provides guidance relevant to the drafting of secrecy
offences. The Department is responsible for assisting the Attorney-General
ensure that criminal law enforcement provisions are framed in a sound, effective
and coherent manner. The AGD scrutinises all
offence, civil penalty and law
enforcement provisions in proposed legislation and provides policy advice and
assistance to instructing
agencies in tailoring these
provisions.
As part of this role
the AGD has produced the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
contains general advice on, for example, not replicating
Criminal Code
offences, separating the physical elements of offences, and using standard fault
12.118 Drafting Directions are instructions issued by First Parliamentary
Counsel, the head of the Office of the Parliamentary Counsel
(OPC). The OPC is
established under the
Parliamentary Counsel Act 1970
(Cth) and its
principal functions are drafting bills for introduction into either House of the
Parliament and drafting amendments
of bills. All drafters are required to comply
with the directions, which ensures that a consistent approach is taken to
amendments.
12.119 Current drafting directions cover a wide range of topics, including
some limited aspects of drafting secrecy provisions.
Drafting Direction No.
deals with offences, penalties, self-incrimination, secrecy provisions
and enforcement powers. This direction provides that secrecy
provisions should
take into account the possibility that information may be the subject of inquiry
by the Parliament or a parliamentary
committee and that, in such cases, the
secrecy provision should specify the circumstances in which information may be
disclosed to
the Parliament or parliamentary
12.120 The OPC’s
Drafting Direction No. 3.5
states that
legislative drafters should have regard to the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
in drafting provisions covered by the Guide, but should bear in
mind that ‘the Guide is neither binding nor conclusive, and
Commonwealth criminal law policy necessarily develops in response to changes in
Government policy, novel legal issues, and emerging
enforcement
circumstances’.
12.121 The ALRC noted in IP 34 that the options for reform of secrecy
provisions include the development of guidance on whether it
is appropriate to
introduce or retain a secrecy provision in federal legislation and model secrecy
provisions to assist in drafting
future Commonwealth secrecy laws. In response,
the AGD stated that:
Although it is probably not possible or desirable to formulate a single model
secrecy provision, there would certainly seem to be
scope for greater
consistency between secrecy provisions which seek to achieve a similar
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security
Sensitive Information
(ALRC 98), the ALRC recognised that ‘a
certain amount of flexibility across the range of Commonwealth secrecy
provisions is
acceptable’, but expressed concern about the lack of
consistency in the fundamental principles underpinning the
provisions.
12.123 The proposals made by the ALRC in this Discussion Paper are intended
to establish a principled basis for review of existing
secrecy provisions, based
on an understanding of the appropriate relationship between the interests
protected by secrecy and interests
in open and accountable government. This
understanding is reflected in the proposed framing of the new general secrecy
12.124 In the ALRC’s view, the proposed new general secrecy offence
provides an appropriate model for the framing of secrecy
offences. Specific
secrecy offences should be framed in order to be consistent, as far as possible,
with the general secrecy offence
and with each other. Significant departures
from the approach taken in the general secrecy offence need to be justified.
12.125 There is need, in this regard, for both general policy guidance,
including in relation to when the enactment of specific secrecy
offences may be
justified, and more detailed drafting advice. The
Guide to Framing
Commonwealth Offences
—or a new AGD guide dealing specifically with
secrecy offences—would be an appropriate source of guidance to be used by
agencies early in the development of legislative proposals.
12.126 OPC Drafting Directions could draw from this document to provide more
detailed directions aimed at technical drafting matters,
giving effect to the
desired policy framework. For example, the ALRC has proposed that the OPC
should issue Drafting Directions requiring
that any proposed:
secrecy provision should indicate expressly whether it overrides the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth) (Proposal 4–2); and
non-disclosure provision should indicate expressly whether it
overrides the
Archives Act 1983
(Cth) in the open access period (Proposal
12.127 In conjunction with the development and
publication of guidance on when the enactment of specific secrecy offences is
and how such offences should be framed, the AGD should have a role in
encouraging the proposed ongoing review of existing secrecy
Proposal 12–4
The Australian Government should review
Commonwealth secrecy offences that are retained for consistency with the
proposed general
secrecy offence, in accordance with Proposals 10–1 to
10–8, 11–1 to 11–11,
12–1 and 12–3.
Proposal 12–5
The Attorney-General’s Department should
incorporate guidance in the
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Civil
Penalties and Enforcement Powers
dealing with:
(a) the circumstances in which the enactment of a specific secrecy offence
may be justified;
(b) the drafting of secrecy provisions so that specific secrecy provisions
are consistent with, and do not replicate the scope
of, the general secrecy
This guidance should incorporate the drafting advice contained in Proposals
10–1 to 10–8, 11–1 to 11–11, 12–1
Discussed in Chs 6 to
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences,
Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007),
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Australian Law
Reform Commission Act 1996
Aged Care Act 1997
ss 86-2, 86-5 to 86-7.
Health Act 1953
s 135AAA(1).
Witness Protection
Student Assistance Act 1973
Gene Technology Act
(Cth) s 10.5, applying where ‘the conduct constituting the
offence is justified or excused by or under a
Aged Care Act 1997
(Cth) s 86-3.
A small number of
existing secrecy offences provide for a maximum penalty of more than seven
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 91.1 (25 years imprisonment);
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
imprisonment);
Witness Protection Act 1994
imprisonment).
Aviation Transport
Security Act 2004
Maritime Transport and Offshore Facilities
Security Act 2003
operates as a division of the Australian Government Attorney-General’s
Department.
Criminal Code
, IPPs 10, 11.
Criminal Code
Chemical Weapons
(Prohibition) Act 1994
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) s 79 is set out in full in
Appendix 5.
The espionage
offences are described in Ch 5.
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 21
October 1914, 264 (W Hughes—Attorney-General), 265. See also
Criminal Code Amendment
(Espionage and Related Offences) Bill 2001
R Sharman, ‘Espionage and
Related Offences Bill’
(2002) 21(1)
Communications Law Bulletin
9. The explanatory memorandum stated that the Bill ‘substantially
replicates section 79 of the
except to the extent that
Division 82 has been re-drafted to be consistent with rest of the
’: Revised Explanatory Memorandum, Criminal Code Amendment
(Espionage and Related Matters) Bill 2002 (Cth), [25]. See also
Criminal Code Amendment
(Espionage and Related Offences) Bill 2001 (Cth) cl
R Sharman, ‘Espionage and
Related Offences Bill’
(2002) 21(1)
Communications Law Bulletin
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security Sensitive
Information
, ALRC 98 (2004), Rec
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) s 79(1)(a),(c). ‘Prohibited place’ is defined in
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) s 80 and includes defence property and
installations.
As discussed in
Ch 5, there is also overlap between s 79 and s 70 of the
Crimes Act 1914
That is, given the operation
of s 79(1)(b), as discussed in
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 2–3.
Law Council
of Australia,
27 February 2009.
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009;
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Proposal 10–5.
(Cth) s 79(4)(c).
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing
Commonwealth Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Edition (2007), 4.4.
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Australian Government
Protective Security Manual (PSM)
Departmental Committee on
Section 2 of the Official Secrets Act 1911,
Report of the Committee
1 (1972), [232]–[233].
example, see Australian Parliament—House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
In Confidence: A Report of the
Inquiry into the Protection of Confidential Personal and Commercial Information
Held by the Commonwealth
(1995), 95,
The Terms of Reference are set
out at the front of this Discussion
Dental Benefits Act 2008
Medical Indemnity Act 2002
A New Tax System (Family
Assistance)(Administration) Act 1999
Social Security
(Administration) Act 1999
Aged Care Act 1997
Australian Hearing Services Act 1991
Child Support (Assessment)
Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988
Disability Services Act 1986
Student Assistance Act
Health Insurance Act 1973
National Health Act
Department of Human
20 February 2009.
Social Security Appeals
17 February 2009.
Veterans’ Entitlements
ss 35H(7)(a)
The Treasury,
Paper for the Review of Taxation Secrecy and Disclosure Provisions
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 2–7.
Question 2–4.
For example,
Australian Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009; NSW Young Lawyers Human Rights Committee,
4 March 2009; Department of Education,
Employment and Workplace Relations,
19 February
2009; Australian Taxation Office,
16 February 2009; Australian Taxation Office,
16 February 2009; Australian Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations,
19 February 2009.
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009.
Department of
Human Services,
20 February 2009.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition (2007),
The Treasury,
Discussion Paper
for the Review of Taxation Secrecy and Disclosure Provisions
Exposure Draft,
Tax Laws Amendment (Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information)
Attorney-General’s Department,
Criminal Law
http://www.ag.gov.au
at 14 April
For example, Australian
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Guide to Framing Commonwealth
Offences, Civil Penalties and Enforcement Powers
Interim Edition
Parliamentary Counsel,
Drafting Direction No 3.5: Offences, Penalties, Self-Incrimination, Secrecy
Provisions and Enforcement Powers
, Office of Parliamentary Counsel, 13
November 2007, [58]–[62].
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security
Sensitive Information
, ALRC 98 (2004), [5.118].
13. Administrative Obligations in
the Australian Public Service
Introduction
The Australian Public Service
Framework for secrecy obligations in the APS
Secrecy obligations under the general law
Secrecy obligations under the
Public Service Act
Role for secrecy provisions in the
Public Service Act
Relationship between secrecy obligations and other APS requirements
Prejudice to the effective working of government
Submissions and consultations
Options for reform
ALRC’s views
Information communicated in confidence
Duplicating ‘harm to the effective working of government’?
ALRC’s views
Exceptions and defences
ALRC’s views
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Processes for dealing with breaches
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
13. Administrative Obligations in
the Australian Public Service
Introduction
13.1 The administrative setting is the context in which persons employed by
an Australian Government agency will most commonly interact
with obligations of
secrecy. The employment relationship imposes secrecy obligations on Commonwealth
employees, breach of which may
give rise to administrative disciplinary
penalties. The information-handling policies and practices of Australian
Government agencies
set the framework for how employees and others interpret and
comply with these obligations of secrecy. For persons that deal with
Government agencies other than in an employment relationship, contractual
provisions may impose obligations of secrecy.
13.2 The following three chapters of this Discussion Paper focus on the
administrative secrecy framework in the Australian Government.
This chapter
considers the administrative secrecy obligations of persons engaged as
Australian Public Service (APS) employees under
Public Service Act
(Cth), and makes a number of proposals for clarifying and consolidating
these obligations. Procedural safeguards for the investigation
and enforcement
of administrative secrecy obligations are also discussed.
13.3 Chapter 14 proposes models for harmonising the administrative
secrecy regimes that apply to Commonwealth employees other than
employees—such as members of the Australian Defence Force, members of the
Australian Federal Police (AFP) and employees
of public authorities—with
Public Service Act
framework. The chapter also considers mechanisms
for regulating persons who are not in an ongoing employment relationship with
Australian Government, such as private sector contractors and former
Commonwealth employees.
13.4 Chapter 15 discusses the tools available to Australian Government
agencies to foster effective information-handling practices;
for example,
through developing and implementing information-handling policies and engaging
employees in training and development
The Australian Public
Public Service Act
provides the legislative framework for the
APS. The APS is defined in s 7 of the Act as comprising agency heads and
employees of:
Commonwealth departments of State;
executive agencies established by the Governor-General under
Public Service
statutory agencies, being bodies declared by an Act to be a
statutory agency for the purposes of the
Public Service
June 2008, more than 160,000 people were engaged as APS
with employees and
agencies covered by the
Public Service Act
accounting for over two-thirds
of the Commonwealth public
Framework for secrecy
obligations in the APS
Secrecy obligations
under the general law
13.7 Aspects of the general law impose duties on employees (including APS
employees) not to disclose information in certain circumstances
where this would
be contrary to the wishes of their employer. As discussed in Chapter 5,
general law obligations include: the equitable
doctrine of breach of confidence,
the duty of fidelity and loyalty, and the contractual requirement for employees
to obey ‘lawful
and reasonable directions’ issued by their employer.
These may supplement the statutory secrecy obligations that apply to APS
employees, discussed later in this chapter.
Breach of confidence
13.8 The elements of an action for breach of confidence are discussed in
detail in Chapter 5. As noted in that chapter, the general
principle is
that the court will restrain the publication of confidential information where
it has been obtained improperly or surreptitiously,
or where the information
imparted in confidence ‘ought not to be
This doctrine may
be invoked to restrain an APS employee from disclosing Commonwealth information
in certain situations.
injunction will only be awarded, however, where the court determines that the
disclosure would be likely to injure the public
interest. The mere fact that the
disclosure would expose the government to public discussion and criticism is not
sufficient to enliven
Duty of fidelity and loyalty
13.9 As discussed in Chapter 5, under the common law, every employee is
subject to a duty of fidelity and loyalty (or good faith).
The duty of fidelity
has largely been imposed in situations involving confidential information and
has been expressed as requiring
an employee not to use information obtained in
the course of his or her employment to the detriment of the
A further incident of the
duty is compatibility between an employee’s conduct and the necessary
confidence between employer
President, Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
’), Finn J noted there was little judicial
consideration of the way in which the duty applies to ‘the distinctive
of public sector employment’ in the Australian
Finn J advised, however, that any such consideration would need to take
into account ‘the precepts of loyalty, neutrality and
impartiality which
are hallmarks of a public service in a system of responsible
government’.
Duty to obey lawful and reasonable
13.11 Another aspect of an employee’s duties that may give rise to a
particular obligation of confidentiality is the requirement
on every employee to
obey lawful and reasonable orders of an employer that fall within the scope of
the contract of employment.
the case of
R v Darling Island Stevedoring & Lighterage Co Ltd; Ex parte
, Dixon J expressed the common law standard or test as
If a command relates to the subject matter of the employment and involves no
illegality, the obligation of the servant to obey it
depends at common law upon
its being reasonable. In other words, the lawful commands of an employer which
an employee must obey are
those which fall within the scope of the contract of
service and are reasonable.
13.12 How does this apply to APS employees?
Section 13(5)
Public Service Act
expressly requires that an APS employee ‘must
comply with any lawful and reasonable direction given by someone in the
Agency who has authority to give the
direction’.
A supervisor
has implied authority to direct subordinate staff: he or she does not require an
express authorisation by the agency
head to issue
directions.
13.13 The test for the lawfulness of a direction given to an APS employee is
likely to be broader than the contractual formulation.
The Australian Government
Solicitor (AGS) has advised that:
Whilst public servants are in an employment relationship, that relationship has
a constitutional and statutory setting which includes
values and interests which
go beyond bare matters of employment. A direction to an APS employee can be
lawful if it involves no illegality
and if it is reasonably adapted to protect
the legitimate interests of the Commonwealth as employer or to discharge the
obligations
of the Commonwealth as an employer. Also, the direction must be
reasonable in all the
circumstances.
Secrecy obligations
Public Service Act
Public Service Act
is the principal legislation regulating
employment relations in the APS. Section 13 of the Act sets out the APS
Code of Conduct,
which binds APS employees, the secretary of a department, the
head of an executive agency or statutory agency, and statutory
officeholders.
The Code of
Conduct requires, among other things, that an APS employee:
comply with all
applicable Australian laws, when acting in the course of APS employment, which
includes secrecy laws;
maintain appropriate confidentiality about dealings that the
employee has with any minister or minister’s member of
comply with any other conduct requirement that is prescribed in the
regulations.
Regulation 2.1
Public Service Regulations 1999
(Cth) is the only other conduct
requirement currently prescribed in the regulations. The regulation is set out
in full in Appendix
5. The regulation requires that:
(3) An APS employee must not
disclose information which the APS employee obtains or generates in connection
with the APS employee’s
employment if it is reasonably foreseeable that
the disclosure could be prejudicial to the effective working of government,
the formulation or implementation of policies or programs.
(4) An APS employee must not disclose information which the APS employee obtains
or generates in connection with the APS employee’s
employment if the
information:
(a) was, or is to be, communicated in confidence within the government; or
(b) was received in confidence by the government from a person or persons
outside the government;
whether or not the disclosure would found an action for breach of confidence.
13.16 Exceptions to the prohibitions on disclosure apply where:
the information is disclosed in the course of the employee’s
the information is disclosed in accordance with an authorisation
given by an agency head;
the disclosure is otherwise authorised by law; or
the information is lawfully in the public
regulation also expressly preserves an agency head’s authority to give
‘lawful and reasonable directions’
regarding the disclosure of
information.
Role for secrecy
provisions in the
Public Service Act
13.18 Considering the confidentiality obligations imposed on employees under
the general law, and the criminal secrecy offences that
apply to Commonwealth
officers and others, a question arises as to whether administrative secrecy
provisions such as those in the
APS Code of Conduct serve any additional
13.19 Soon after the
Public Service Bill 1997
was introduced into
Parliament, Dr Peter Shergold, the then Public Service Commissioner, expressed
the view that the benefit of a
Code of Conduct is that it provides
a public statement of the standards of behaviour expected of those who work in
public employment … While it is not possible
to guarantee integrity by
legislation, it is vital that the public knows what standards of conduct they
are to expect from public
servants. At the same time individual public servants
themselves need to be clear on the ethical standards that are required of
13.20 Shergold further commented that:
If all that was required of a
Public Service Act
was a legislative statement of
how to select, appoint, manage and terminate employees we might as well not
bother. It is not a legal
necessity. The
Workplace Relations Act 1996
suffice quite well. The sole purpose of a
Public Service Act
should be to
protect the public interest of citizens. Only where the employment relationship
is intrinsic to the articulation of
the public interest should it be set out in
separate legislation. That is the new, bold approach of the legislation
introduced into
Parliament a fortnight
13.21 In the Issues Paper,
Review of Secrecy Laws
(IP 34), the
ALRC asked whether there were any secrecy provisions which, if breached, should
only give rise to administrative
Stakeholders
suggested that administrative penalties may be preferable to criminal
proceedings for relatively minor
or where the harm
caused by the breach was likely to be relatively
Dr Ian Turnbull suggested
that administrative penalties could be appropriate where no personal benefit is
gained from the disclosure
of information and there is no substantial loss to
another person or damage to a public
Liberty Victoria was
of the view that administrative penalties should be used where there was no
intentional or reckless
ALRC’s views
13.22 Articulating secrecy provisions in the APS Code of Conduct provides a
clear statement to APS employees and members of the public
of the level of
protection of Commonwealth information that can be expected from APS employees.
As recognised by stakeholders, administrative
secrecy obligations may be the
only remedy available, or the most appropriate remedy, to address situations
where there is no reasonable
likelihood of harm as a result of an unauthorised
disclosure or where an APS employee had no intention to cause harm.
13.23 By addressing the distinct context of obligations associated with
employment in the public sector, administrative secrecy provisions
protect different interests from those recognised in the criminal context. In
the following sections of this chapter, the
secrecy provisions in the APS Code
of Conduct will be assessed in light of their capacity to satisfy the objects in
Public Service Act
of establishing ‘an apolitical public service that is efficient and
effective in serving the Government, the Parliament and
the Australian
Relationship between
secrecy obligations and other APS requirements
13.24 As the Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department (AGD)
commented in its submission on IP 34, requirements in
Public Service
other than express secrecy provisions may constrain the manner in which
an APS employee communicates official information. For example,
the APS Code of
Conduct requires APS employees to exercise discretion when commenting on
government policy in order not to infringe
the value of an apolitical public
The Code of Conduct
also requires that an APS employee:
does not make improper use of inside information, or his or her
duties, status, power or authority, in order to gain a benefit or
advantage for
the employee or for any other
behaves at all times in a way that upholds the integrity and good
reputation of the
13.25 In their
submissions on IP 34, the Australian Press Council and Australia’s
Right to Know (ARTK) coalition both suggested
that legislation that permits
government information to be kept secret or confidential should include a
provision making it an offence
to withhold information from the public for an
improper purpose; for example, concealing corruption or
maladministration.
requirements for the disclosure of information are outside the scope of this
Inquiry: these are matters for consideration in
the context of freedom of
information (FOI) laws. What the media submissions highlight, however, is the
necessary balance between
obligations of disclosure and secrecy provisions in
the information-handling framework for APS
13.26 In Chapter 15, the ALRC discusses the information-handling
policies of Australian Government agencies. The requirements in these
for the disclosure of Commonwealth information will sometimes incorporate
objectives beyond secrecy alone. These may include,
for example, safeguards to
ensure that the agency provides information that is accurate and not misleading,
and that the agency is—and
is seen to be—apolitical.
Information-handling policies also may include requirements for employees to
release information
circumstances.
Prejudice to the
effective working of government
13.27 As noted above, reg 2.1(3) of the
Public Service
Regulations
prohibits an APS employee from disclosing information obtained
or generated in connection with that person’s employment
if it is reasonably foreseeable that the disclosure could be prejudicial to the
effective working of government, including the formulation
or implementation of
policies or
13.28 This requirement was introduced in 2006, following the decision of
that its more expansive predecessor was inconsistent with the implied
constitutional guarantee of freedom of communication about
government and
political matters.
13.29 The Explanatory Statement for the replacement regulation describes its
scope as follows:
Depending on the circumstances, this restriction could cover information such as
opinions, consultation, negotiations (including
contract), incomplete research, or advice or recommendations to the Government,
leading or related to,
the development or implementation of the
Government’s policies or programs. The legitimate interest of government
in regulating
access to such classes of information is recognised in the
Freedom of Information Act
13.30 The width of the regulation has been further clarified by the
Australian Public Service Commission (APSC) in its
APS Values and Code of
Conduct in Practice
APS employees need to consider on each occasion whether the disclosure of
information could damage the effective working of government,
including, for
example, in relation to unclassified information and in circumstances where
there is no relevant Agency Head direction
The exemptions set out in the FOI Act are a useful starting point in determining
which categories of information may potentially
fall within the scope of
regulation 2.1.
13.31 Several other jurisdictions have also linked a public servant’s
obligation of non-disclosure to potential prejudice to
the role or functions of
government. For example, s 57 of the
Public Sector Management Act
(SA) sets out a general prohibition on the disclosure of official
information by South Australian government employees, except to
the extent that
the disclosure is authorised under the regulations. One such exception applies
where the disclosure or comment:
(i) does not give rise to any reasonably foreseeable possibility of prejudice to
the Government in the conduct of its policies, having
regard to the nature of
the disclosure or comment, the employee’s current position or previous
positions in the Public Service
and the circumstances in which the disclosure or
comment is made; and
(ii) is not made with a view to securing a pecuniary or other advantage for the
employee or any other person; and
(iii) does not involve—
(A) any disclosure of information contrary to any law or lawful instruction or
direction; or
(B) any disclosure of trade secrets or information of commercial value the
disclosure of which would diminish its value or unfairly
advantage a person in
commercial dealings with the Government; or
(C) any disclosure of information in breach of intellectual property
13.32 Another example is found in one of the standards of conduct that the
UK Civil Service Management Code
requires departments and agencies to
include in staff regulations, namely that
civil servants must not seek to frustrate the policies or decisions of Ministers
by the use or disclosure outside the Government
of any information to which they
have had access as civil
13.33 A key consideration in assessing whether there is a need to reform the
prohibition on an APS employee disclosing information
‘prejudice the effective working of government’ is whether or not
the prohibition is consistent with the implied
constitutional guarantee of
freedom of communication about government and political matters.
13.34 As discussed in detail in Chapter 2, in
found that the predecessor to reg 2.1 impaired the implied freedom of
political communication in an unnecessary and unreasonable
way. On that basis,
it was inconsistent with the
Constitution
and invalid. The
amended regulation, however, was upheld by Refshauge J, of the ACT Supreme
R v Goreng Goreng
Refshauge J expressed the view that the regulation was not a
‘catch-all’ provision like its predecessor, but rather a
focused and targeted provision that sought to protect a legitimate government
Submissions and
consultations
13.35 In IP 34, the ALRC asked whether reg 2.1 of the
Service Regulations
provides an appropriate model for protecting
Commonwealth information in a way that is consistent with the implied
constitutional
freedom of political
communication.
13.36 The AGD noted that the constitutionality of the provision had been
upheld by the ACT Supreme Court and suggested that the regulation
useful guide for some other secrecy
The AGD supported
reg 2.1 as ‘an example of a general secrecy law designed to protect
sensitive government information that
is reasonably likely to cause some
identifiable harm’.
13.37 Other stakeholders, however, raised concerns about the potential width
of the provision. The ARTK coalition commented that phrases
such as the
‘effective working of government’ are overly broad and subjective
and that there is potential for the phrase
to be construed so broadly that it
could encompass almost any administrative or governmental
13.38 The Community and Public Sector Union (CPSU) submitted that
reg 2.1 ‘does not adequately prescribe the employment related
of the duties regarding disclosure of information, nor provide adequate defences
for disclosure’.
Public Interest Advocacy Centre (PIAC) expressed the view that prohibiting the
disclosure of information that could prejudice
the ‘effective’
working of government is far too broad:
Understood at its simplest, an action is
if it brings about an
expected result. Expressed at such a high level of generality, the interest
sought to be protected (‘the
workings of
government’) may frequently be in tension with other important public
interests, such as the
transparent
workings of
government.
13.39 PIAC was also concerned that reg 2.1 does not give any guidance
of prejudice required, or require that countervailing
public interests favouring disclosure be taken into
13.40 Whistleblowers Australia submitted that the regulation was
‘almost puerile’, as ‘it neither ensures ready
information nor does it provide security where it is needed’. The
organisation questioned whether employees would
be able to foresee the likely
impact of a disclosure on the effective working of government. Would this
depend, for example, on whether
a leaked policy document was accepted or
rejected by the Australian public?
The regulation is so imprecise and unclear as to dissuade any reasonably
cautious employee from making any comments about the public
unnecessarily burdens the employee, because it lacks precision and does not
afford clear advice about what may or may
not be disclosed. The purpose of the
regulation appears to be to maintain control over public interest disclosures,
and that cannot
be an appropriate constitutional purpose adapted for a
legitimate end.
13.41 Ron Fraser commented that, although reg 2.1 ‘had survived
one constitutional challenge, and may continue to do so’,
the scope of the
provision is still ‘very wide and relatively
unspecific’.
questioned whether reg 2.1 should be reframed to include an element of
actual or intended damage, and remodelled to incorporate
some or all of the
elements of the common law duty of good faith and
13.42 The Australian Intelligence Community (AIC) advised that reg 2.1
was not an appropriate model to protect national security-classified
information.
Options for
13.43 The principal concern that stakeholders raised about reg 2.1 is
its uncertain scope. These submissions mirror reservations that
Refshauge J
expressed in the
Goreng Goreng
case, where it was with
‘considerable hesitation’ that he upheld reg 2.1 as meeting the
requisite standard of certainty,
on the basis ‘that public servants will,
by and large, comprehend what is
encompassed’.
13.44 One option for reducing the current uncertainty about the scope of
reg 2.1 is to amend the provision to reflect more closely
the conduct
requirements found in other secrecy provisions. Two aspects of the regulation
appear to be particularly broad—the
application to information that an APS
employee obtains or generates ‘in connection with’ his or her
employment; and
the requirement that the disclosure ‘could be
prejudicial’ to the effective working of government.
13.45 Contention also surrounds the subjective nature of the determination of
whether a particular disclosure would cause harm to
‘the effective working
of government’. A clearer and more targeted definition of harm could be
developed by linking APS
employees’ obligations of non-disclosure to other
information-management regimes in the APS such as the
Freedom of Information
(Cth) (FOI Act).
13.46 Each of these options for reform are considered below.
‘In connection
13.47 Secrecy provisions commonly include a requirement that there be a
particular connection between the information that is the
subject of protection
and the manner in which the information came into the possession of a regulated
The most frequently used
formulation is that the regulated party has acquired the information ‘in
the course of’, or
‘in the performance of’, his or her
functions or
Other secrecy provisions are framed causatively—that is, that the
regulated party has acquired the information ‘because
‘by reason of’, his or her official
13.48 The obligations of
reg 2.1 apply to information that an APS employee obtains or generates
‘in connection with’ his
or her employment. This is an unusual
formulation. The ALRC has identified only 10 other secrecy provisions that use
the phrase ‘in
connection with’ to limit the scope of information
protected. The majority of these are information-handling rules for Australian
Government agencies and other legal
as compared with
obligations of non-disclosure that apply to
individuals.
13.49 The scope of information acquired ‘in connection with’ an
officer’s functions or duties has not been judicially
considered in the
context of reg 2.1 or other secrecy provisions. Some limited guidance,
however, may be drawn from the interpretation
of this phrase in other
legislation. In adjudicating on the exemption from the requirement to provide a
statement of reasons for
decisions under the
Administrative Decisions
(Judicial Review) Act 1977
(Cth) for decisions ‘in connection
with’ a criminal offence, Davies J noted that:
Expressions such as ‘relating to’, ‘in relation to’,
‘in connection with’ and ‘in respect
of’ are commonly
found in legislation but invariably raise problems of statutory interpretation.
They are terms which fluctuate
in operation from statute to statute ... The
terms may have a very wide operation but they do not usually carry the widest
ambit, for they are subject to the context in which they are used, to
the words with which they are associated and to the object
or purpose of the
statutory provision in which they
13.50 Whether or not an act is done in connection with a person’s
employment has been considered in the context of
Discrimination Act 1984
(Cth) (SDA), which makes an employer liable for
certain acts done by an employee ‘in connection with the employment of the
employee’. In the case of
South Pacific Resort Hotels Pty Ltd v
, for example, the Federal Court accepted that sexual harassment by a
fellow employee that occurred while both were off-duty and while
they were not
performing any function related to their employment nonetheless fell within the
scope of the provision.
sufficient nexus arose out of the fact that the incident occurred on the
employer’s land and in a building in which some
(but not all) staff
resided. Black CJ and Tamberlin J noted that:
it could not be said here that the common employment was unrelated or merely
incidental to the sexual harassment of one by the other.
The expression ‘in connection with’ in its context in
the SDA is a broad one of practical application and … the facts here point
readily to the conclusion that Mr Anderson’s
conduct in the staff
accommodation was ‘in connection with’ his employment within the
of the SDA …
We would add that the expression chosen by the Parliament … would seem, on
its face, to be somewhat wider than the familiar
expression ‘in the course
of’ used with reference to employment in cases about vicarious liability
at common law or in
the distinctive context of workers compensation
Reasonably foreseeable that the disclosure
could be prejudicial
13.51 The secrecy obligations in reg 2.1 apply ‘if it is
reasonably foreseeable that the disclosure
prejudicial to the
effective working of
government’.
This sets out
an objective test, based on what a reasonable person would decide in the same
circumstances and with the same
information.
In a motion for
disallowance of the
Public Service Amendment Regulations 2004
(Cth)—which included an identical provision to the current
reg 2.1—Senator Kim Carr commented that:
‘could be prejudicial’ is … an extremely broad definition of
an action and one which I say is aimed at intimidating
public servants into not
speaking out on any matter, because any action ‘could be
prejudicial’ if the political masters
of the Public Service deem it to be
13.52 The operation of a small number of secrecy provisions depends on the
disclosure of information resulting in an identified consequence.
For example,
various secrecy provisions in the
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) prohibit
disclosure of the name of a non-citizen or ‘any information that
identify the
non-citizen’.
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
(Cth) prohibits the disclosure of
‘information from which another person
infer the existence or
nature of a production
A higher threshold
is set by several provisions that require that the disclosure of information
would be ‘likely’ to
lead to identification of a
Auditor-General
(Cth) requires an even greater degree of certainty—that
information must not be included in public reports that ‘would’
contrary to the public
Effective working of government
13.53 In submissions on IP 34, many stakeholders raised concerns about
the subjective and imprecise nature of the formula of harm
effective working of government’ where it stands alone. Other laws and
practices that characterise the sensitivity
of Commonwealth information could be
used to provide clearer guidance to APS employees and agencies about the
application of the
regulation. These include the FOI Act and security
classifications.
13.54 The FOI Act provides members of the public with a general right of
access to documents held by Australian Government agencies
and ministers unless
an exemption applies.
discussed in Chapter 4, exempt documents under the FOI Act include, for
example, documents:
where disclosure
could damage identified interests of the Australian Government, such as
security, defence or international relations,
relations with a state or
territory, law enforcement operations and public safety or the life or physical
safety of any person; and
that involve a particular class of information, such as information
communicated in confidence to the Australian Government by or
on behalf of
another government, Cabinet or Executive Council documents, information subject
to certain specified secrecy provisions,
internal working documents and trade
secrets or other commercial
information.
13.55 Exemptions
also apply to documents that have originated with, or been received from,
certain agencies—principally agencies
of the Australian Intelligence
13.56 A number of submissions in response to IP 34 suggested that the
secrecy obligations of Commonwealth officers should be more
closely aligned with
the FOI Act. As noted by the Treasury:
The purposes of the FOI law and taxation secrecy provisions are broadly
consistent. One is designed to promote access to records
to support a desire of
open and transparent government and the other is to give effect to the
legitimate expectations of taxpayers
that their sensitive information will be
treated appropriately. Given the consistency in purpose, the issue becomes how
be reconciled
legislatively.
13.57 A similar point was made by the Department of Human Services (DHS),
which suggested that the basis for exempting information
from disclosure under
the FOI Act could also provide the basis for the scope of the information
required to be protected by secrecy
provisions. The DHS submitted that:
where secrecy provisions cover information which is innocuous and its disclosure
would cause no harm, there would seem to be no justification
for a provision
prohibiting its disclosure.
13.58 The CPSU suggested that any changes to secrecy provisions to clarify
their scope or application should be tailored to fit with
the principles of open
and transparent government and legislation dealing with FOI and privacy. Secrecy
provisions and public access
to information should not be viewed as opposed to
one another, but complementary.
The ARTK coalition also supported a coherent approach to secrecy provisions and
other legislation, such as
Security classification
13.59 Another practice governing the handling of Commonwealth information is
the security classification system set out in the
Australian Government
Protective Security Manual
As discussed in
Chapter 3, an agency’s decision to give information a security
classification is based on a determination of
the damage that could be caused to
national security (in the case of national security information) or other
interests (in the case
of non-national security information) if the information
were to be compromised. The PSM sets out minimum procedural requirements
use, storage, transmission and disposal of security classified
information.
13.60 In its submission, the AIC expressed the view that ‘national
security-classified information should be treated as a specific
category of
information for the purposes of secrecy
provisions’.
The CPSU also
linked its discussion to the security classification system, submitting
legislative secrecy provisions should not apply generally to all Commonwealth
information, but should distinguish between classified
or secret information and
other types of information which may nonetheless still be not publicly
13.61 As noted in Chapter 3, in its discussion of the appropriate
relationship between secrecy laws and the FOI Act, Liberty Victoria
that a ‘more consistent and principled approach’ to the disclosure
of information would be to replace the existing
FOI exemptions with an exemption
provision based on the classification system in the PSM. Under the
organisation’s proposed
system, all non-classified information would,
prima facie, be subject to
production.
13.62 For the APS to serve the needs of the Australian Government, the
Parliament and the Australian public, in accordance with the
objects of the
Public Service Act
, there must be confidence that APS employees will not
disclose information in potentially harmful circumstances. Agencies rely on
employees complying with internal processes for the release of official
information to ensure that only material that is accurate
and properly
reflective of the views of the Australian Government is issued in their name.
Ministers and others seeking to engage
in sensitive policy discussions with the
APS must trust that these deliberations will be treated confidentially. Members
of the public
also expect the APS to accord information that they provide to it
with a high level of respect. Important aspects of government administration,
such as the taxation and welfare systems, rely on citizens making full
disclosure of sensitive personal and financial information,
trusting that such
information will not be disclosed publicly.
13.63 In the ALRC’s view, a provision in the Code of Conduct
prohibiting the disclosure of information harmful to the ‘effective
working of government’—as set out in reg 2.1 of the
Service Regulations
—is an appropriate mechanism to accommodate the
broad-ranging situations that may warrant disciplinary action. Defining the
more narrowly risks omitting situations that could legitimately be the subject
of disciplinary proceedings. However, valid concerns
have been raised that APS
employees have insufficient guidance on what disclosures will be—or might
be—encompassed by
the regulation.
13.64 These concerns may be reduced by making some minor reforms to the
application of the regulation. First, the scope of the conduct
regulated can be
narrowed to reflect more closely other secrecy provisions. Secondly, a framework
can be developed for interpreting
when a disclosure will cause harm to the
effective working of government. These options for reform are explained more
fully below.
Narrowing the scope of conduct
13.65 Regulation 2.1 protects information from disclosure in a broader
set of circumstances than many other secrecy provisions. In
particular, the
regulation covers:
information that an APS employee obtains or generates ‘in
connection with’ his or her employment; and
disclosures where it is reasonably foreseeable that the disclosure
could be prejudicial to the effective working of
government.
13.66 In relation to the first element, reg 2.1
could apply where an APS employee obtains information in a situation
considerably
divorced from his or her actual duties of employment. For example,
an APS employee may be introduced to a person as a result of his
employment and develop a personal friendship. If that person later gives the APS
employee information in his or her personal
capacity, and the APS employee
further discloses this information (again in his or her personal capacity), it
is possible that the
information could have been received by the APS employee
‘in connection with’ his or her employment. This scenario is
unlikely to satisfy narrower formulations in other secrecy provisions, which
require, for example, that the information was received
‘in the course
of’ the APS employee’s employment.
13.67 In Chapter 8, the ALRC expresses the view that the proposed new
general secrecy offence should apply to ‘any information
to which a person
has, or had access, by reason of his or her being, or having been, a
Commonwealth officer’.
equivalent formulation would appear advantageous for a revised
In particular,
this ensures that the administrative secrecy provision only extends to
situations where there is a causal connection
between the information that is
the subject of disclosure and an APS employee’s employment. Where an APS
employee has obtained
Commonwealth information outside his or her public
employment, then the ALRC considers that normally he or she should be able to
participate freely in discussion and debate on the information.
13.68 As noted above, reg 2.1 also applies to disclosures where it is
reasonably foreseeable that the disclosure could be prejudicial
to the effective
working of government. This threshold may be too low. Given the inherent
uncertainty in determining whether or not
a particular disclosure would result
in such harm, a rigorous threshold is important to forestall the potentially
indiscriminate
application of the provision. At this stage, the ALRC considers
the appropriate threshold to be where the disclosure is ‘reasonably
likely’ to be prejudicial to the effective working of
government.
This formulation
balances the difficulty for a disciplinary authority of proving that a
disclosure would, in fact, harm the effective
working of government, with the
need to set a threshold high enough to avoid the provision being used as a
catch-all. A requirement
of a ‘reasonable likelihood’ of harm is
also consistent with the threshold that the ALRC has set out in the proposed
general secrecy offence.
Developing an interpretive
13.69 The ALRC reaches the preliminary view, as noted above, that ‘harm
to the effective working of government’ remains
suitable as the
overarching element for the administrative secrecy obligations of APS employees.
However, other laws and practices
that govern the flow of Commonwealth
information could play a useful role in interpreting whether information
disclosed by an APS
employee is of such a nature as to harm the effective
working of government.
13.70 As noted in Chapter 4, s 3(1)(b) of the FOI Act provides that
the objects of the Act include the creation of a general right
of access to
Commonwealth information, limited only to the extent
necessary for the protection of essential public interests and the private and
business affairs of persons in respect of whom information
is collected and held
by departments and public
authorities.
13.71 The FOI Act sets out a range of circumstances in which an Australian
Government agency can deny a request for access to Commonwealth
documents. In
developing these FOI exemptions, the Australian Parliament has indicated the
level of protection. The ALRC has
formed the preliminary view that the FOI exemptions can be relied on as
indicative of the circumstances
in which disclosure has the potential to
prejudice the effective working of government. Both the Explanatory Statement
for reg 2.1
APS Values and Code of Conduct in Practice
support the use of the FOI framework as a guide for assessing whether the
disclosure of information harms the effective working
of government. This also
facilitates a complementary approach to secrecy and FOI in an agency’s
information-handling regime.
13.72 Under s 14 of the FOI Act, Australian Government agencies are
encouraged to make information available outside the FOI regime.
The exposure
draft of the
Freedom of Information Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth) further
emphasises the informal release of information by extending the current
protections against civil and criminal liability
for the provision of
information under the FOI Act to agencies and officers that publish information
other than under the FOI Act.
Accordingly, the ALRC proposes that, in interpreting whether or not the
disclosure of certain information would be reasonably likely
to harm the
effective working of government, disciplinary authorities should consider the
likelihood of that information being released
under the FOI Act or through some
other means.
13.73 The ALRC has not included the security classification of a document
under the PSM as an express consideration for interpreting
the likelihood of
harm based on the nature of information that has been disclosed by an APS
employee. This is consistent with the
ALRC’s focus on assessing the
consequences of the disclosure of information on a case-by-case basis, rather
than relying on
a proxy status such as its classification level. Where
Commonwealth information has been mis-classified, or over-classified, for
example, its security classification may not be a good indication of the harm
that disclosure of the information is likely to cause.
13.74 The security
classification of a document, however, could point towards the likelihood that
circumstances
of disclosure could harm the effective working of
government. The nature of information is not usually sufficient, in and of
to determine the likelihood of harm to the effective working of
government resulting from unauthorised disclosure by an APS employee.
situations, this harm will result, not from the sensitive nature of the
information, but because of the circumstances of
disclosure. For example, a
senior APS employee could give a ‘tip off’ to a journalist that he
or she should lodge an
FOI request with regard to certain documents because
exposure would be likely to cause public embarrassment to the Australian
Government.
Or an APS employee could consistently fail to follow an
agency’s policy for the release of information, leading to the disclosure
of inaccurate or superseded material. In both of these situations, the
circumstances surrounding the disclosure may breach the necessary
confidence between employer and employee even though the actual information
disclosed is unlikely to cause harm in and
13.75 In order to determine whether or not the circumstances of a disclosure
of information by an APS employee are reasonably likely
to harm the effective
working of government, a disciplinary authority should consider whether or not
the employee has taken reasonable
steps to comply with the agency’s
information-handling policy or another lawful and reasonable direction regarding
the disclosure
of information. This test would encompass both an APS employee
who intentionally breaches the policies and processes in place for
information
handling, as well as an employee who performs his or her information-handling
responsibilities without due care and diligence.
Applying the interpretive
13.76 The respective importance of the factors identified above will differ
on a case-by-case basis. Where, for example, the information
disclosed is of a
particularly sensitive nature, the disclosure could harm the effective working
of government even where the circumstances
of disclosure evidence little or no
moral culpability on the part of the APS employee. Similarly, the more
reprehensible the conduct
of the APS employee, the less sensitive the
information may need to be before a disciplinary authority is satisfied that the
was reasonably likely to cause the requisite harm.
13.77 Although the ALRC considers that the nature of the information
disclosed and the circumstances of disclosure will be the most
common indicia of
the likelihood of the requisite harm, situations may arise where other factors
are relevant. To accommodate this
possibility, the ALRC’s proposal for an
interpretive framework is framed non-exhaustively.
Regulation 2.1
Public Service Regulations 1999
(Cth) should be amended to apply to information:
(a) to which an Australian Public Service employee has access by reason of
his or her employment; and
(b) where the disclosure is reasonably likely to prejudice the effective
working of government.
Regulation 2.1
Public Service Regulations 1999
(Cth) should specify that, in determining whether a disclosure of information is
reasonably likely to prejudice the effective working
of government, the
disciplinary authority should have regard to factors such as:
(a) the nature of the information disclosed, including the likelihood that
it would be subject to release under the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth) or through some other means; and
(b) the circumstances in which the disclosure is made, including whether the
Australian Public Service employee took reasonable steps
to comply with the
agency’s information-handling policy or any lawful and reasonable
direction concerning the disclosure of
information.
Information
communicated in confidence
13.78 As set out above, reg 2.1(4) of the
Public Service
Regulations
prohibits an APS employee from disclosing information which the
employee has obtained or generated in connection with his or her
employment if
the information:
(a) was, or is to be, communicated in confidence within the government; or
(b) was received in confidence by the government from a person or persons
outside the government;
whether or not the disclosure would found an action for breach of
confidence.
13.79 The Explanatory Statement for the revised regulation advises that:
Information will be taken to be received in confidence by the government from a
person or persons outside the government where the
provision of the information
is subject to an express confidentiality condition (whether in a contract or
otherwise), and in other
circumstances where it is clear that the information is
provided on the basis that it is to be used only for the purpose for which
provided. Again, the nature and context of the information may make it clear
that the information is disclosed on a confidential
basis (eg information
provided by a foreign State about its likely position in a treaty negotiation or
information provided by a
commercial entity which would be useful to its
competitors).
13.80 The Explanatory Statement notes that other circumstances that may
indicate that the information has been given in confidence
include where
information is given to an employee on the understanding that it is only to be
disclosed in the course of official
duties—for example, where the
information has been given a security
classification.
Duplicating
‘harm to the effective working of government’?
13.81 In Proposal 13–2, the ALRC formulates a test for assessing
the harm to the effective working of government that could
result from the
disclosure of Commonwealth information for the purpose of reg 2.1(3). This
involves interpreting harm both as a function
of the nature of the information
disclosed and the circumstances of disclosure. An indication that harm could
result from the nature
of the information is that the information would not be
subject to release under the FOI Act or otherwise.
13.82 Given this proposal, is there a need for an additional secrecy
provision for the specific instance of information communicated
in confidence? A
number of exemptions in the FOI Act protect confidential information held by the
Australian Government from access
in certain circumstances. First, a document
may be classified as an exempt document under the FOI Act ‘if its
disclosure under
this Act would found an action, by a person (other than an
agency or the Commonwealth), for breach of
confidence’.
13.83 As discussed in Chapter 5, the equitable action for breach of
confidence applies to ‘confidential information improperly
surreptitiously obtained or of information imparted in confidence which ought
not to be divulged’.
Commonwealth v Fairfax
, the High Court accepted that—although the
equitable action was developed to protect the personal, private and proprietary
interests of the citizen—the principles could be applied to protect
information in the hands of government. To do so, not only
must the confidential
nature of the information be shown, but also that an unauthorised use of that
information would be to the detriment
of the party communicating
Significantly, the
decision noted that mere exposure of the government to public discussion and
criticism will not constitute a relevant
detriment. Rather,
the court will determine the government’s claim to confidentiality by
reference to the public interest. Unless disclosure is
likely to injure the
public interest, it will not be
13.84 Documents also may be exempt documents under the FOI Act if
would divulge any information or matter communicated in confidence by or on
behalf of a foreign government, an authority of a foreign
government or an
international organization to the Government of the Commonwealth, to an
authority of the Commonwealth or to a person
receiving the communication on
behalf of the Commonwealth or of an authority of the
Commonwealth.
13.85 There is substantial overlap between reg 2.1(4)—information
communicated in confidence—and the ALRC’s proposed
reg 2.1(3)—information which, if disclosed, would be
‘reasonably likely to be prejudicial to the effective working
government’. To the extent that the prohibition on the disclosure of
information communicated in confidence applies beyond
the limits of
reg 2.1(3)—for example, where the disclosure of Commonwealth
information received in confidence is unlikely to
injure the public
interest—the ALRC is not convinced that there is a valid public policy
basis for exposing an APS employee
to disciplinary action.
13.86 Consequently, in the ALRC’s preliminary view, the prohibition on
the disclosure of confidential information set out in
reg 2.1(4) of the
Public Service Regulations
is unnecessary and should be removed. As this
issue was not expressly canvassed in IP 34, the ALRC is particularly
interested in hearing
from stakeholders whether there is information protected
by the provision that would not otherwise be covered through reg 2.1(3),
disclosure of which should warrant disciplinary action.
13.87 The above analysis has focused on situations where the nature of the
information disclosed by an APS employee warrants disciplinary
action under
reg 2.1(3). It is also important to note that sometimes disciplinary action
could be justified on the basis of the circumstances
surrounding the disclosure
of information communicated in confidence: for example, an employee who fails to
take reasonable steps
to comply with the requirements of the PSM for dealing
with security classified information.
Proposal 13–3
The express prohibition
on the disclosure of
information communicated in confidence set out in reg 2.1(4) of the
Public Service Regulations 1999
(Cth) should be removed.
Exceptions and
13.88 The prohibitions set out in regs 2.1(3) and (4) of the
Service Regulations
do not prevent an APS employee from disclosing
information if:
(a) the information is disclosed in the course of the APS employee’s
(b) the information is disclosed in accordance with an authorisation given by
an Agency Head; or
(c) the disclosure is otherwise authorised by law; or
(d) the information that is disclosed:
(i) is already in the public domain as the result of a disclosure of
information that is lawful under these Regulations or another
(ii) can be disclosed without disclosing, expressly or by implication, other
information to which subregulation (3) or (4)
Public Service Regulations
do not include an express
exception or defence for public interest disclosures by APS employees. Some
protection, however, is provided
by s 16 of the
Public Service Act
which states that:
A person performing functions in or for an Agency must not victimise, or
discriminate against, an APS employee because the APS employee
has reported
breaches (or alleged breaches) of the Code of Conduct to:
(a) the [Public Service] Commissioner or a person authorised for the purposes
of this section by the Commissioner; or
(b) the Merit Protection Commissioner or a person authorised for the purposes
of this section by the Merit Protection Commissioner.
(c) an Agency Head or a person authorised for the purposes of this section by
an Agency Head.
13.90 The relationship between the above provision and s 70 of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) is explained in the
APS Values and Code of
Conduct in Practice
a public interest disclosure that is made in accordance with the [Public
Service] Act and regulations (that is, to the relevant Agency
Head, the Public
Service Commissioner, the Merit Protection Commissioner or persons authorised by
them) is not considered an unauthorised
disclosure of information or an offence
under s 70 of the
13.91 Accordingly, where an APS employee discloses information within the
parameters of s 16 of the
Public Service Act
, he or she will not be
liable to disciplinary action.
13.92 However, the scope of protection is not comprehensive. In particular, a
disclosure will only fall within the scope of the provision
where it raises a
breach, or alleged breach, of the Code of Conduct. This excludes several types
of disclosures that the House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs, in its February 2009 report into whistleblowing
within the Australian Government public sector, recommended should
fall within the scope of public interest disclosure legislation—for
example, a disclosure that alleges dangers to public health or safety, damage to
the environment or wastage of public
Section 16 only
protects disclosures that an APS employee makes to the agency head, the Public
Service Commissioner, the Merit Protection
Commissioner or an authorised
representative of one of these. The House of Representatives Standing Committee
noted the need for
a public interest disclosure system to provide multiple
avenues for reporting disclosures and recommended that bodies authorised
receive and investigate public interest disclosures should also include the
Commonwealth Ombudsman and integrity
13.93 In its submission on IP 34, the CPSU stated that there was a
‘clear consensus’ among its members about the inadequacy
whistleblower protections in s 16 of the
Public Service Act
CPSU recommended that secrecy provisions in the
Public Service Act
include an express exception dealing with protected
disclosures.
13.94 The secrecy provisions in the
Public Service Act
should include
a clear statement that individuals who make public interest disclosures in
accordance with Commonwealth public interest
disclosure legislation should be
immune from administrative disciplinary penalties.
13.95 In this Discussion Paper, the ALRC has assumed that Commonwealth public
interest disclosure legislation will be enacted and
that the terms of this
legislation will largely reflect the recommendations in the 2009 House of
Representatives Standing Committee’s
report. This legislation would
provide immunity from liability under reg 2.1 for disclosures made in the
public interest.
13.96 In Chapter 9, the ALRC proposes that the general secrecy offence
should include a note cross-referencing to the immunity provided
by Commonwealth
public interest disclosure
legislation.
However, if such
legislation provides insufficient protection, or is not enacted, then the ALRC
envisages that there may be a need
to include an express public interest
exception. The ALRC’s view is that the same approach should apply in the
administrative
13.97 The ALRC has not been made aware of any issues with the exceptions
currently set out in reg 2.1. These exceptions all appear
important limitations to the potential for an APS employee to be made subject to
disciplinary action for the disclosure
of Commonwealth information. The
ALRC’s view, therefore, is that these exceptions should be retained. The
exceptions are consistent
with those included by the ALRC in the proposed
general secrecy offence.
Proposal 13–4
Regulation 2.1
Public Service
Regulations 1999
(Cth) should include a note cross-referencing to the
immunity provided by proposed Commonwealth public interest disclosure
legislation.
13.98 Under the
Public Service Act
, an agency head may impose one of
the following penalties for a breach of the Code of Conduct: termination of
employment; reduction
in classification; re-assignment of duties; reduction in
salary; deductions from salary, by way of fine, which is not to exceed 2%
APS employee’s annual
Provided it is
clearly cast as management action and not a penalty, an agency head also may
prescribe other action in order to reduce
the risk of further
misconduct.
13.99 Within these parameters, the decision whether to impose an
administrative penalty for a breach of the Code of Conduct, and what
administrative penalty to impose, are discretionary matters for each agency
head. The House of Representatives Standing Committee
on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs noted that:
The culture of each organisation is a significant variable in any discussion
concerning consistency in the application of administrative
sanctions. Increased
emphasis may be placed on the security of third party information in some
departments than others because of
the nature of a department’s operation.
For example, as officers of some departments are subject to legislation which
criminal sanctions on the disclosure of particular information, it may
be expected that stronger disciplinary action would be taken
against those
officers than officers in other departments where penal sanctions do not
13.100 In its guide on handling misconduct, the APSC notes that the purpose
of the Code of Conduct ‘is to ensure effective administration
maintain public confidence in the integrity of an organisation’s processes
and practices rather than to punish
individuals’.
for breach therefore ‘should focus on reducing or eliminating the
likelihood of future similar
behaviour’.
goes on to advise that:
Sanctions are intended to be proportionate to the nature of the breach, provide
a clear message to the relevant employee that their
behaviour was not
acceptable, and act as a deterrent to the employee and others … The
sanction should focus on the seriousness
of what the employee has done—the
number of elements breached is not, of itself, a relevant consideration. Prior
is also relevant to the imposition of a sanction and might usefully
be taken into account by the sanction delegate where:
• it indicates that the employee was, or should have been, well aware of
the standard of conduct expected and the potential
consequences of misconduct
• it demonstrates that the employee is apparently unwilling to adhere to
the standard of conduct
13.101 Termination of employment, for example, is considered by the APSC to
be appropriate only where the misconduct is sufficiently
serious that the
employee should no longer remain in the APS; or where the employee has, by his
or her actions, repudiated a basic
element of the employment
relationship.
advises that agencies should develop guidance materials, including an
explanation of the penalties that can be imposed for
breach of the Code of
Conduct, factors to be considered in determining an appropriate penalty and
agency-specific examples of the
circumstances in which particular penalties may
be appropriate.
Submissions and
consultations
13.102 In IP 34, the ALRC asked whether the range and level of
administrative penalties available for breaches of secrecy provisions
by Commonwealth officers were adequate and
appropriate.
The ALRC also
questioned whether administrative penalties for breach of similar types of
secrecy provisions were being applied consistently
across Australian Government
13.103 Only a small number of stakeholders made submissions on these
questions. The AGD noted that the range and level of administrative
available for breaches of secrecy provisions by Commonwealth officers were the
same as those that apply for all breaches
of the Code of Conduct. Consistency of
application is assisted by the APSC’s guidance to agencies on the
interpretation and
application of the
Public Service
The AIC supported
the range and level of administrative penalties currently available for breaches
of secrecy provisions.
13.104 Liberty Victoria and Whistleblowers Australia were of the view that
any penalties imposed for the unauthorised handling of
information should be
commensurate with the potential harm that could result from the
disclosure.
The DHS commented
that the range of penalties for breach of the Code of Conduct
should reflect the circumstances of the breach, the seniority of the employee,
the seriousness of the consequences of the breach
and whether the employee has
breached the provision
previously.
13.105 The penalties that an Australian Government agency may impose on an
APS employee who has breached a secrecy requirement in
Public Service
are the same as those that apply to all other breaches of the APS Code
of Conduct. Submissions to this Inquiry have not expressed
particular concern
reform of the range of administrative
penalties for breach of secrecy
provisions.
13.106 However, there is scope for clarifying the manner in which an agency
will apply administrative penalties for breaches of secrecy
provisions. In
Chapter 15, the ALRC proposes that Australian Government agencies should
develop and implement policies clarifying
the application of relevant secrecy
laws to their information
These policies may
be useful in advising APS employees about the administrative penalties that
could result from breach of a secrecy
obligation, including the factors that
will be considered in determining penalties, such as the potential harm caused
to the agency
by the circumstances of disclosure or the nature of the
information, any prior unauthorised disclosures, and the seniority of the
Proposal 13–5
The information-handling policies developed by
Australian Government agencies in accordance with Proposal 15–1
should clearly
set out the disciplinary penalties that could result from breach
of secrecy obligations, including the factors that will be considered
determining any such penalty.
for dealing with breaches
13.107 This final section of the chapter discusses various processes that an
Australian Government agency must follow in making a
determination that an APS
employee has breached the requirements of the Code of Conduct, and the manner in
which the agency can deal
with a finding of breach. It also considers situations
where an APS employee suspected of breaching a secrecy law may be subject
both administrative and criminal proceedings.
Determining breaches of the Code of
Public Service Act
requires agency heads to establish
procedures for determining whether an APS employee has breached the Code of
Conduct. The Act sets
out minimal requirements for such procedures—namely
(a) must comply with basic procedural requirements set out in
Commissioner’s Directions; and
(b) must have due regard to procedural fairness; and
(c) may be different for different categories of APS
13.109 Chapter 5 of the
Public Service Commissioner’s
Directions 1999
(Cth) requires:
an APS employee to be given information, and a reasonable
opportunity to make a statement, before a determination is made in relation
suspected breach of the Code of
the process for determining whether an APS employee has breached the
Code of Conduct to be carried out informally and
expeditiously;
an agency head to take reasonable steps to ensure that a person who
determines whether an APS employee has breached the Code of Conduct
appears to be, independent and
a written record to be prepared noting the outcome of the
investigation.
AGS has advised that the procedures set out in the
Public Service Act
and associated instruments
are not an exhaustive statement of procedural fairness. Rather, the steps that
will satisfy procedural
fairness obligations will depend on the circumstances of
Suspension of employment and reassignment of
13.111 An APS employee may be suspended from duties where the agency head
believes on reasonable grounds that the employee has, or
may have, breached the
Code of Conduct and suspension is in the public, or the agency’s,
13.112 Suspension is subject to the following conditions:
other than in exceptional circumstances, suspension without
remuneration is to be for no longer than
the agency head must review the suspension at reasonable
the agency head must immediately end the suspension if he or she no
longer believes on reasonable grounds that the APS employee has,
or may have,
breached the Code of Conduct, or that suspension is in the public, or
agency’s, interest;
the agency head must immediately end the suspension if a sanction
has been imposed on the employee for the relevant breach of the
agency head is normally required to exercise his or her powers of suspension
having ‘due regard for procedural
requirement need not apply where the agency head is satisfied, on reasonable
grounds, that it would not be appropriate in the
circumstances.
However, it
would be unusual for a decision maker to be satisfied on a reasonable basis that
according procedural fairness would
be inappropriate. The AGS notes that:
It might be appropriate not to accord procedural fairness in circumstances where
there is urgency or some overriding public interest,
for example, safety
concerns. Even in such cases, an opportunity to comment might properly be
provided after the initial suspension,
and any comments taken into account on a
review of the suspension.
13.114 An agency head also determines whether a suspension is to be with or
without remuneration. Factors that may influence this
decision include, for
example, the seriousness of the suspected misconduct and the estimated duration
of the misconduct
proceedings.
13.115 As an alternative to suspension, an agency head may temporarily
reassign an employee’s duties while the employee is investigated
suspected breach of the Code of
Review of findings of breach
13.116 An APS employee is entitled to seek review of an agency-level decision
in most cases, other than where the employee’s
employment has been
terminated, by applying to the Merit Protection Commissioner
Where a person’s
employment has been terminated, the employee may seek redress under the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(Cth). Employees also have the right to seek
judicial review by the Federal Court of the agency-level decision.
13.117 The APS has noted that, in general terms, a review by the MPC will
• whether the agency’s Code procedures comply with the
• whether these procedures were substantially complied with by the agency
in the course of determining whether there was a
breach of the Code
• on the evidence available, what act or acts were committed by the
relevant employee
• did they amount to a breach of the Code
• if yes, was the sanction appropriate in all the
circumstances?
13.118 The MPC is not empowered to make a binding decision as a result of a
review of an employment action. Rather, the agency head
‘consider’ the MPC’s recommendation and make a decision
whether to confirm, vary or set aside and substitute
a new action for the action
that was under review.
MPC is not satisfied with the response by the agency head, the MPC may report
the matter to the relevant Minister, the Prime
Minister or
Parliament.
In 2007–08,
the MPC reported that ‘virtually all recommendations made in relation to
applications for review of action
were accepted in full by the relevant agency
Concurrent administrative and criminal
proceedings
13.119 An APS employee suspected of breaching a secrecy law may be subject to
both administrative and criminal
proceedings.
In its Legal
Misconduct in the Australian Public Service
, the AGS noted
Where an APS employee engages in conduct which can be both a breach of the Code
and a breach of the criminal law, the agency needs
to make a management decision
matter should be referred
to the Australian Federal Police (the AFP) and/or the
Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) for criminal investigation and/or possible
prosecution. If a criminal investigation or prosecution takes place, the agency
needs to consider whether it should proceed with
misconduct action or should
defer any such action pending the outcome of the criminal investigation or
prosecution.
13.120 The APSC has advised that an agency generally should not proceed with
a disciplinary action if the police or prosecuting authorities
consider that
this action could prejudice criminal
proceedings.
Ultimately,
however, the decision whether to proceed with administrative action in parallel
with the criminal process is at the discretion
of the relevant agency.
13.121 Concurrent criminal and disciplinary proceedings may give rise to
practical difficulties—for example, in the context
of an accused’s
right to silence. An APS employee subject to Code of Conduct proceedings may
decline to provide information
on the basis of the privilege against
self-incrimination.
as explained in a briefing note by the AGS:
Where the conduct in question involves a possible criminal offence, as well as
breaches of the Code, there is no automatic rule that
administrative action must
await the outcome of the criminal proceedings. The fact that the employee
chooses not to provide evidence
or submissions in a misconduct process because
of a concern to protect rights in relation to a current or possible future
process (such as the right to silence or the privilege against
self-incrimination) does not prevent a misconduct process from
proceeding.
Goreng Goreng v
the Federal
Court considered whether an agency should postpone its review of an
employee’s suspension in connection with a
Code of Conduct investigation.
The applicant argued that, as she was choosing to exercise her right of silence
in the associated
criminal proceedings, she would be unable to participate fully
in the administrative hearing. Flick J accepted that there was a
real risk that the applicant cannot address in detail the facts
essential to both the review process and the criminal proceedings’,
that the ‘substantial overlap of facts and issues of credit’ in the
criminal and administrative proceedings resulted
in ‘real prejudice or
injustice’.
However, this did not ‘ordain the postponement, perhaps for an indefinite
period, of an administrative
absence of any legislative provisions to the contrary, Flick J held that
whether or not administrative processes were postponed
pending the resolution of
criminal proceedings was a discretionary matter for the agency.
13.123 In its 2002 report,
Principled Regulation
(ALRC 95), the
ALRC considered the necessary procedural safeguards to deal with concurrent
criminal and civil penalty
proceedings.
commented that, although the double jeopardy principle has primarily been
applied in the context of criminal punishment,
the underlying rationale that a
person should not be punished twice for substantially the same act
appears no less applicable to parallel civil penalty and criminal penalty
… for the same conduct. It seems to follow that,
if one of the rationales
and aims of double jeopardy is to protect against double punishment, and if
civil penalties are, at least
to some extent, punitive in nature, double
jeopardy protection should be extended to subsequent civil penalty proceedings
same conduct.
13.124 The ALRC recommended that where legislation provides for exposure to
parallel criminal proceedings and civil penalty proceedings
for the same or
substantially the same conduct, the legislation should also provide that:
civil penalty proceedings against a person must be stayed if
criminal proceedings for the same, or substantially the same, conduct
commenced, or have already been commenced, against that person;
no, or no further, civil penalty proceedings may be taken against a
person if that person has been convicted of that criminal offence;
if the person is not convicted of that criminal offence, the civil
penalty proceedings may be
ALRC also recommended that evidence of information given or documents produced
by a person in civil penalty proceedings
should not be admissible in criminal
proceedings against the person for the same or substantially the same
This responded to
concerns that:
where the same conduct attracts both civil penalty liability and criminal
liability, the use of evidence in more than one proceeding
blurs the important
distinctions between the criminal and civil process. Importantly, the criminal
standard of proof requires the
prosecution to establish its case ‘beyond
reasonable doubt’ whereas civil penalty proceedings are characterised by a
variable standard of proof at or above the balance of probabilities.
Further, evidence collected in a civil penalty proceeding may be subject to less
protection than the criminal process. The civil
process utilises discovery and
interrogatories in order to disclose relevant information and seek admissions of
factual material.
Criminal procedure, on the other hand, applies procedural
protections to investigation and prosecution, and protections such as the
privilege against self-incrimination. The accused is not required to specify its
defence, discover documents or answer interrogatories
before trial. To allow
evidence given in civil penalty proceedings to be used without control in
subsequent criminal proceedings
would be unjust.
13.126 In 2008, the NSW Industrial Relations Commission used similar
reasoning to justify delaying unfair dismissal proceedings to
await the outcome
of related criminal proceedings:
Ordinarily, where the incident or incidents from which an employee was dismissed
also involve criminal proceedings against him, any
[unfair dismissal]
application would be delayed to await the outcome of those criminal proceedings.
There are a number of reasons
why such a delay … is appropriate. For one
thing, the standard of proof before the Commission is the civil standard of the
balance of probability and not the criminal standard of proof beyond reasonable
doubt. … Furthermore, there would be considerable
logistical difficulties
for [an] … applicant in properly advancing a case, with the criminal
proceedings hanging over his head.
He would have a right of silence … but
the question remains whether, in the light of his right to remain silent, he
in a position to present proper argument in his own
Submissions and
consultations
Processes for dealing with
13.127 In IP 34, the ALRC asked about the effectiveness of the processes
set out in the
Public Service Act
and related instruments for dealing
with suspected breaches of secrecy
provisions.
13.128 The AGD supported the processes set out in the
Public Service
, and advised that these provide a useful mechanism to deal with minor
breaches or conduct that could, if left unchecked, lead to
a more serious breach
of a secrecy provision.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) advised that it has not
had any cases in which it has had recourse to
the processes set out in the
Public Service Act
and related instruments for investigating and
enforcing suspected breaches of secrecy
provisions.
13.129 The Australian Press Council noted that where a Commonwealth officer
makes a public interest disclosure to the media, this
frequently results in the
imposition of severe administrative penalties, such as termination of
employment. It submitted that, before
a severe administrative penalty is
imposed, the officer should have the opportunity to have his or her case heard
by a court or tribunal
that can adjudicate on questions of public interest and
intent, as well as make findings of
Concurrent administrative and criminal
proceedings
13.130 In IP 34, the ALRC asked whether there was a need for any
safeguards to apply where secrecy provisions could give rise to both
administrative and criminal proceedings. In particular, the ALRC questioned
whether legislation should provide for a stay of administrative
proceedings to
accommodate current or future criminal
13.131 The Australian Press Council and PIAC supported a requirement for a
stay of administrative proceedings pending the outcome
of a concurrent criminal
However, other
stakeholders expressed significant opposition. The AFP considered it to be
unnecessary for an administrative process
relating to the improper disclosure of
information to be stayed pending the result of a criminal prosecution. To do so
could constitute
a ‘significant and unreasonable delay to the
administrative
13.132 The AGD was of the view that each agency should retain discretion to
decide how to proceed on a case-by-case basis. The AGD
noted that legal
proceedings can be lengthy and requiring such a stay could impose an unnecessary
burden on the person involved and
the agency if they have to await the outcome
of such proceedings before taking any administrative
ASIC suggested that a
stay of administrative proceedings could create an ‘unreasonable and
unnecessary’ exposure to further
unauthorised
disclosures.
13.133 Liberty Victoria submitted that the right to silence represents
a fundamental part of our criminal justice system but one which is increasingly
dispensed with in administrative proceedings. Where
self incriminating
information might be critical to Australia’s security, it is important
that an administrative proceeding
is not stayed pending the outcome of a
criminal proceeding (where the privilege against self incrimination may prevent
critical information
from coming to light). However, where there is no bar to an
admission in an administrative proceeding being used against an accused
criminal proceeding, an accused may refuse to provide information critical to
Australia’s security. It is therefore in
Australia’s interests to
ensure self incriminating information obtained in an administrative proceeding
is not used against
the same accused in a criminal
proceeding.
13.134 Other stakeholders also considered the potential use of information
obtained through administrative proceedings. In the event
that a stay were
refused, PIAC suggested that consideration be given to providing for use and
derivative use immunity to apply to
any evidence given in such
circumstances.
Whistleblowers
Australia advised of the need for ‘a clear delineation between
investigations carried out for a disciplinary
process, as opposed to
investigations in relation to criminal
Processes for dealing with
13.135 The ALRC has not been made aware of any particular concerns about the
procedural requirements set out in the
Public Service Act
and related
instruments for handling suspected breaches of secrecy provisions. Accordingly,
the ALRC is not proposing reforms to
these requirements.
Concurrent administrative and criminal
proceedings
13.136 There are compelling arguments against requiring a stay of
administrative proceedings pending the outcome of a concurrent criminal
As stakeholders have noted, criminal proceedings are often lengthy. Delaying
administrative proceedings for this period of
time is likely to result in
practical difficulties for an agency seeking to take administrative action, both
in relation to the agency’s
immediate options for preventing the APS
employee from making further unauthorised disclosures and successfully making
out a breach
of the administrative provision in the future.
13.137 The policy considerations applicable to concurrent administrative and
criminal proceedings can be distinguished from those
that apply to concurrent
civil and criminal proceedings. A key rationale for the recommendation in
ALRC 95 for an automatic stay
of civil proceedings on the commencement of
substantially similar criminal proceedings was a concern that a person could be
twice for substantially the same act. This argument is not as
compelling in the administrative disciplinary context. Rather than
punitive in nature, proceedings for a suspected breach of the Code of Conduct
are directed towards the ‘efficient administration’
of the public
service and the maintenance of ‘public
confidence’.
similarities with the protective function of professional disciplinary
proceedings, as explained in
Pillai v Messiter [No 2]
The public needs to be protected from delinquents and wrong-doers within
professions. It also needs to be protected from seriously
incompetent
professional people who are ignorant of basic rules or indifferent as to
rudimentary professional
requirements.
13.138 In the ALRC’s view, a mandatory stay of administrative
proceedings is not an appropriate safeguard for concurrent administrative
criminal proceedings for breach of a secrecy
The ALRC considers
that a more suitable focus is ensuring the substantive fairness of such
proceedings. Preventing evidence of information
given or documents produced by
an APS employee for the purpose of administrative proceedings from being
admitted in related criminal
proceedings goes a long way to addressing these
procedural concerns.
13.139 In particular, inclusion of such a non-admissibility provision in the
Public Service Act
would facilitate the full participation of an APS
employee in administrative proceedings regardless of any decision to take
of his or her right to silence in related criminal proceedings. It
also recognises the distinctions between the evidentiary and procedural
safeguards available in criminal and administrative proceedings, and thereby
upholds the integrity of the criminal process.
13.140 The ALRC’s proposal is framed consistently with provisions
governing the non-admissibility of evidence obtained in civil
proceedings in
subsequent criminal
proceedings.
These have been
interpreted as providing a use, but not a derivative use, immunity. In
ALRC 95, the ALRC supported this balance in
the following terms:
It would seem fair that evidence obtained by discovery and proved to a civil
standard in a civil proceeding cannot be used in a subsequent
proceeding in relation to the same conduct. It is also desirable that
regulators, with their wide range of investigatory
powers, should take care when
gathering and using evidence. The operation of [the non-admissibility provision]
means that when a
regulator commences civil penalty proceedings it will have to
be mindful of how it obtains and uses evidence so as not to preclude
undermine a later criminal proceeding.
On the other hand, it seems desirable that regulators should be able to adduce
evidence flowing from a chain of inquiry started by
evidence given in civil
penalty proceedings. To prevent ‘derivative use’ would mean that in
most cases commencing criminal
proceedings would be frustrated. Therefore, if it
became apparent during the course of civil proceedings that the conduct was
than originally thought and criminal in nature, the criminal conduct could
not be punished accordingly.
13.141 In the ALRC’s preliminary view, the same reasoning applies to
concurrent administrative and criminal proceedings.
Proposal 13–6
Public Service Act 1999
(Cth) should
provide that evidence of information given or documents produced by an
Australian Public Service employee for the purpose
of administrative
disciplinary proceedings with respect to secrecy obligations is not admissible
in criminal proceedings against
the employee for the same, or substantially the
same, conduct.
Executive agencies include, eg, the
Bureau of Meteorology; CrimTrac Agency; Insolvency and Trustee Service
Australia; National Archives
of Australia; and Old Parliament House: Australian
Public Service Commission,
Australian Public Service Agencies
<www.apsc.gov.au/apsprofile/agencies.htm> at 31 March
Statutory agencies may employ all
of their staff under the
Public Service Act 1999
(Cth), as is the case,
for example, with the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, the Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission,
the Australian National Audit Office,
Centrelink and Medicare Australia. Other statutory agencies, such as the
Australian Bureau
of Statistics and the Australian Electoral Commission have
dual staffing powers under the
Public Service Act
and another Act:
Australian Public Service Commission,
Australian Public Service Agencies
(2009) <www.apsc.gov.au/apsprofile/agencies.htm> at 31 March
Australian Public Service
Commission,
State of the Service Report 2007–08
(2008), 16.
Ibid, 2. This
figure excludes permanent members of the Australian Defence
Commonwealth v Fairfax
[1980] HCA 44
(1980) 147 CLR 39.
Damages or an account
of profits may also be
Commonwealth v Fairfax
[1980] HCA 44
(1980) 147 CLR 39
Faccenda Chicken
Ltd v Fowler
[1986] 1 All ER 617
Thomson Legal and
Regulatory,
The Laws of Australia
, vol 26 Labour Law [26.1.131]
(as at 28 May 2009). A term of mutual trust and confidence is also implied into
all employment contracts:
[26.1.120].
Bennett v President,
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
[2003] FCA 1433
(2003) 134 FCR 334
R v Darling Island
Stevedoring & Lighterage Co Ltd; Ex parte Halliday
[1938] HCA 44
(1938) 60 CLR 601.
A requirement to obey lawful and reasonable directions is implied in the
contract of employment between a public servant and the
Commonwealth:
(1984) 4 FCR 141.
Darling Island Stevedoring & Lighterage Co Ltd; Ex parte Halliday
[1938] HCA 44
Public Service Act 1999
P Vermeesch,
Legal Briefing
No 80: Misconduct in the Australian Public Service
(2006) Australian
Government Solicitor.
Ibid. Where a
direction is incompatible with the implied constitutional freedom of political
communication then it will not be ‘lawful
and reasonable’:
Bennett v President, Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
[2003] FCA 1433
134 FCR 334.
Public Service Act
Public Service
Regulations 1999
reg 2.1(5).
reg 2.1(6).
The 1997 Bill was in
essentially the same terms as the
Public Service Bill 1999
(Cth), which was
enacted as the
Public Service Act 1999
(Cth). For a legislative history
Public Service Act 1999
(Cth), see Explanatory Memorandum,
Service Bill 1999
(Cth), [14]–[26].
Shergold, ‘A New
Public Service Act
: The End of the Westminster
Tradition?’ (1997) 85
Canberra Bulletin of Public Administration
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 5–13.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009; Department of Human Services,
20 February 2009; Australian Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
I Turnbull,
17 February 2009.
18 February 2009. The
Australian Securities and Investment Commission (ASIC) submitted that
administrative penalties would be appropriate
where an unauthorised disclosure
is inadvertent: Australian Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
Service Act 1999
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Service Act 1999
Australia’s Right
6 March 2009; Australian
Press Council,
18 February 2009.
Commonwealth officers, including APS employees, who disclose corruption or
maladministration may arise as an aspect of
whistleblower protection, which is
considered throughout this Discussion
See also Ch 4, which
considers the relationship between secrecy laws and other information-handling
regimes, such as FOI laws and
Public Service Regulations 1999
reg 2.1(3).
President, Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
[2003] FCA 1433
(2003) 134 FCR 334.
is considered further in
The now repealed
and replaced reg 7(13) of the
Public Service Regulations
(Cth) provided that: ‘An APS employee must not, except in the course of
his or her duties as an APS employee or with the Agency
Head’s express
authority, give or disclose, directly or indirectly, any information about
public business or anything of which
the employee has official
knowledge’.
Explanatory
Public Service Amendment Regulations (No 1) 2006
(Cth) (SLO No
183 of 2006).
Australian Public
Service Commission,
APS Values and Code of Conduct in Practice
<www.apsc.gov.au> at 23 September
Public Sector Management
Regulations 1995
Minister for the Civil
Service (UK),
Civil Service Management Code
<www.civilservice.gov.uk/iam/codes/csmc/index.asp> at 17 September
Bennett v President, Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
[2003] FCA 1433
(2003) 134 FCR
R v Goreng Goreng
Ibid, [37].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper
34 (2008), Question 3–8.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009. Circumstances where the Department did not consider
reg 2.1 to be an appropriate model were offences that needed to
be tailored
to specific regulatory or agency requirements. This issue is discussed in
Australia’s Right to
6 March 2009. See also: R
23 March 2009.
Community and
Public Sector Union,
2 March 2009. The
CPSU was also concerned about the current connection between reg 2.1 and
s 70 of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth). See also N Rogers,
9 December 2008, who answered this
question in the negative.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
also suggested that the secrecy provisions in
Intelligence Services Act 2001
(Cth) could be inconsistent with the
implied constitutional freedom of political
communication.
Whistleblowers
10 March 2009.
Whistleblowers Australia also raised concerns about the use of ‘lawful and
reasonable directions’ by an
23 March 2009. Accordingly, Mr Fraser submitted that the
provision was more appropriate for administrative measures than criminal
penalties, as is currently the situation as a result of s 70 of the
Crimes Act 1914
23 March 2009.
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009.
No rationale was provided for this
R v Goreng Goreng
In its mapping
exercise, the ALRC identified more than 130 secrecy provisions that include a
requirement for a particular nexus
between the information protected and the
party regulated.
The ALRC has
identified this formulation in approximately 25% of all secrecy provisions that
specify the requisite connection between
the party regulated and the information
protected. See, eg,
Building and Construction Industry Improvement Act
A New Tax System (Australian Business Number) Act
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
Excise Act 1901
Technology Act 2000
Australian Hearing Services Act
Export Finance and Insurance Corporation Act
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
Water Act 2007
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
Bankruptcy Regulations 1996
(Cth) regs 8.05O, 8.32;
Trade Practices Act 1974
Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Act 2005
National Water Commission Act
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act
v Health Insurance Commission
[1987] FCA 286
(1987) 15 FCR
South Pacific Resort
Hotels Pty Ltd v Trainor
[2005] FCAFC 130
(2005) 144 FCR
Public Service
Regulations 1999
(Cth) reg 2.1 (emphasis
Explanatory Statement,
Public Service Amendment Regulations (No 1) 2006
(Cth) (SLO No 183 of
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 16 June 2005, 38 (K
Migration Act
Proceeds of Crime Act
(emphasis added). See also:
Australian Crime
Commission Act 2002
Ombudsman Act 1976
Referendum (Machinery
Provisions) Act 1984
Banking Act 1959
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
Auditor-General Act
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth) is discussed in Ch 4. See also
Ch 2 in relation to the FOI Act as an expression of ‘open
government’ principles.
The Treasury,
19 February 2009. See also Australian
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
Department of
Human Services,
20 February 2009.
and Public Sector Union,
2 March 2009.
Australia’s Right to Know,
6 March 2009.
Government Attorney-General’s Department,
Australian Government
Protective Security Manual (PSM)
Australian Intelligence
6 March 2009.
Community and
Public Sector Union,
2 March 2009.
18 February 2009.
Proposal 8–5.
Proposal 13–1.
Proposal 13–1.
Proposal 7–1.
The objects
clause in the
Freedom of Information Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft focuses on providing members of the public with
access to government information, without further reference
to the exemptions
from this right of access. See
Freedom of Information Amendment (Reform) Bill
(Cth)—Exposure Draft,
The protections against
civil and criminal liability are set out in
of Information Act 1982
(Cth). Proposed extensions to this framework are set
out in sch 6 of the
Freedom of Information Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft.
Proposal 13–2.
previous discussion of the duty of fidelity and
Public Service Regulations
(Cth) reg 2.1(4).
Explanatory
Public Service Amendment Regulations (No 1) 2006
(Cth) (SLO No
183 of 2006), 3.
Freedom of Information Act
The exemption does not apply to certain official documents
unless the disclosure would constitute a breach of confidence owed to
or body other than: a minister or ministerial officer or an Australian
Government agency or officer of an agency. The
Freedom of Information Amendment
(Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft does not amend this
Commonwealth v
[1980] HCA 44
(1980) 147 CLR 39
, 50, citing Swinfen Eady LJ in
Lord Ashburton v
(1913) 2 Ch 469
Commonwealth v Fairfax
[1980] HCA 44
(1980) 147 CLR 39
Freedom of Information Act
An equivalent exemption applies to information or
matter communicated in confidence by or on behalf of a state: s 33A. The
Freedom of Information Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft
does not amend these exemptions.
Public Service Regulations 1999
reg 2.1(5).
Public Service
(Cth) s 16. Regulation 2.4(1) of the
Public Service
Regulations
requires agency heads to establish procedures to manage
whistleblowing reports in accordance with minimum
requirements.
Australian Public
Service Commission,
APS Values and Code of Conduct in Practice
<www.apsc.gov.au> at 23 September
The House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs
recommended that the types of disclosures to
be protected by the Public Interest
Disclosure Bill should include serious matters related to: illegal activity;
corruption; maladministration;
breach of public trust; scientific misconduct;
wastage of public funds; dangers to public health; dangers to public safety;
to the environment; official misconduct; and adverse action against a
person who makes a public interest disclosure under the legislation.
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
Whistleblower Protection: A Comprehensive Scheme for
the Commonwealth Public Sector
Ibid, Ch 7,
Recs 17, 18.
Community and
Public Sector Union,
2 March 2009.
Proposal 9–2.
Proposal 9–1.
Service Act 1999
Public Service Regulations 1999
(Cth) reg 2.3. Australian Parliament—House of Representatives
Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
In Confidence: A
Report of the Inquiry into the Protection of Confidential Personal and
Commercial Information Held by the Commonwealth
(1995), 85 opposed an
increase in the maximum fine payable under the
Public Service Act
basis that ‘it would make the fine more akin to a criminal penalty than an
administrative sanction’.
Public Service Act 1999
Australian Public
Service Commission,
Handling Misconduct: A Human Resources
Practitioner’s Guide to the Reporting and Handling of Suspected and
Determined Breaches
of the APS Code of Conduct
(2008), 55. In the
context of unauthorised disclosure of information, this hypothetically could
involve restricting an employee’s
access to certain
information.
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
In Confidence: A Report of the Inquiry into the
Protection of Confidential Personal and Commercial Information Held by the
Commonwealth
(1995), 81.
Australian Public Service Commission,
Handling Misconduct: A Human Resources
Practitioner’s Guide to the Reporting and Handling of Suspected and
Determined Breaches
of the APS Code of Conduct
(2008), 55.
Ibid, 58. The
APSC also discusses circumstances that could warrant a reduction in
classification; reassignment of duties; reduction
in salary; deductions from
salary; and
reprimand: 58–61.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 5–12.
Question 5–15.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009.
ASIC advised that it has not had any instances of unauthorised disclosures that
have given rise to the application
of administrative penalties: Australian
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
Whistleblowers Australia,
10 March 2009; Liberty Victoria,
18 February 2009.
Department of Human Services,
20 February 2009.
changes are to be made to the administrative penalty framework, these should be
considered as a part of an overall review of
the Code of Conduct and related
provisions. For example, the ALRC questions whether the cap on fines at 2% of
the APS employee’s
annual salary is too low for this to be an effective
Proposal 15–1.
Public Service Act 1999
Agency heads also must take
reasonable steps to ensure that employees have ready access to the documents
that set out these procedures.
Public Service Commissioner’s Directions 1999
P Vermeesch,
Briefing No 80: Misconduct in the Australian Public Service
Australian Government Solicitor.
Public Service Regulations 1999
reg 3.10(3).
P Vermeesch,
Briefing No 80: Misconduct in the Australian Public Service
Australian Government Solicitor.
Australian Public Service Commission,
Handling Misconduct: A Human Resources
Practitioner’s Guide to the Reporting and Handling of Suspected and
Determined Breaches
of the APS Code of Conduct
(2008), 35. Other relevant
considerations include: obligations under the
Financial Management and
Accountability Act 1997
(Cth) and whether suspension without remuneration
would give the employee an added incentive to cooperate with the
investigation.
Public Service
Service Regulations 1999
(Cth) reg 5.24. Some exceptions apply to
reviewable actions, including where the affected person has applied to have the
action reviewed
by a court or tribunal, or for actions mentioned in sch 1
Public Service Regulations
reg 5.23(2).
Australian Public
Service Commission,
Handling Misconduct: A Human Resources
Practitioner’s Guide to the Reporting and Handling of Suspected and
Determined Breaches
of the APS Code of Conduct
Public Service Regulations
(Cth) reg 5.32.
Public Service Act 1999
Australian Public Service
Commissioner,
Annual Report 2007–08
The potential for a person to
be subject to multiple proceedings for the same conduct is not unique to secrecy
laws. The ALRC made
a number of recommendations about multiple proceedings and
multiple penalties in its report, Australian Law Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil & Administrative Penalties in
, ALRC 95 (2002),
P Vermeesch,
Briefing No 80: Misconduct in the Australian Public Service
Australian Government Solicitor.
Advice from the AGS referred to in Australian Public Service Commission,
Handling Misconduct: A Human Resources Practitioner’s Guide to the
Reporting and Handling of Suspected and Determined Breaches
of the APS Code of
(2008), 16–17.
Legal Briefing No 80: Misconduct in the Australian Public
(2006) Australian Government Solicitor. However, in
Goreng Goreng
, Flick J noted uncertainty regarding the manner in which the
right to silence operates upon an administrative decision-making process:
Goreng Goreng v Jennaway
[2007] FCA 2083
(2007) 164 FCR
P Vermeesch,
Legal Briefing No 80: Misconduct in the Australian Public Service
Australian Government Solicitor.
Goreng Goreng v Jennaway
[2007] FCA 2083
(2007) 164 FCR
Ibid, [48].
Ibid, [48]–[50].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil &
Administrative Penalties in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002),
Ibid, [11.37].
Ibid, [11.74]–[11.75].
Zonneveld v South Eastern Sydney and Illawarra Area Health Service
[2008] NSW IR Comm 1119.
Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 6–5.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
Press Council,
18 February 2009.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper
34 (2008), Question 6–9.
Public Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009; Australian Press Council,
18 February 2009.
Australian Federal Police,
3 March 2009. The AFP further noted that its professional standards
framework affords different evidence gathering powers, including
powers, and a lower burden of proof. Therefore, the outcome of an administrative
process may be different to that in a parallel
proceeding.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009. The Department noted with favour the current APSC
guidelines, which recognise that an agency should not undertake administrative
proceedings where a law enforcement agency considers this could be prejudicial
to criminal proceedings.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
18 February 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009. ASIC also suggested that restrictions may be imposed on
the admissibility in criminal proceedings of any information
provided by an
accused during an administrative hearing: Australian Securities &
Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
Whistleblowers Australia,
10 March 2009.
Public Service Commission,
Handling Misconduct: A Human Resources
Practitioner’s Guide to the Reporting and Handling of Suspected and
Determined Breaches
of the APS Code of Conduct
(2008), 55.
Messiter [No 2]
(1989) 16 NSWLR 197
The permissibility of
concurrent criminal proceedings has also been accepted in the context of
professional disciplinary proceedings.
Legal Profession Act 2004
(NSW), which provides that ‘a complaint may be made and dealt with even
though the Australian legal practitioner concerned
is the subject of proposed or
current criminal or civil proceedings relating to the subject matter of the
complaint’:
Legal Profession Act 2004
equivalent provision is set out in
Legal Profession Act 2006
Corporations Act 2001
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil & Administrative
Penalties in Australia
, ALRC 95 (2002), [11.81]–[11.82].
14. Regulating Beyond the
Public Service Act
Introduction
Commonwealth employees outside the APS
Members of the ADF
Members of the AFP
Employees of ASIO and ASIS
Employees and office holders of statutory authorities
Ministerial staff and employees of parliamentary departments
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Former Commonwealth employees
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Persons outside Commonwealth employment
Contracted service providers
Members of boards and committees
State and territory public sector employees
No relationship with the Commonwealth
Lawful and reasonable employer directions
ALRC’s views
14. Regulating Beyond the
Public Service Act
Introduction
14.1 In Chapter 13, the ALRC discusses the administrative secrecy
framework that applies to Australian Public Service (APS) employees
Public Service Act 1999
(Cth). However, many individuals that
have access to Commonwealth information are not APS employees. This includes
individuals employed
by or on behalf of the Commonwealth under another statutory
regime; former employees of the Commonwealth; and individuals who are
have never been, in an employment relationship with the Commonwealth.
14.2 This chapter first considers the administrative secrecy framework that
governs Commonwealth employees engaged under a statutory
regime other than the
Public Service Act
. A particular focus of proposals is consolidating and
harmonising these administrative secrecy obligations with the
Public Service
14.3 The chapter goes on to consider the secrecy obligations of former
Commonwealth employees and other individuals who have never
employment relationship with the Commonwealth, and options for enforcing these
obligations. The chapter makes a number
of proposals to ensure that individuals
who fall outside the various administrative regimes but have, or have had,
access to Commonwealth
information are constrained by contractual obligations,
or are made aware of their obligations of confidentiality under the general
In particular, the proposals are directed towards impressing on those who access
Commonwealth information the personal nature
of secrecy obligations.
14.4 The final section of this chapter discusses the administrative secrecy
obligations of Commonwealth employees other than those
expressly set out in
their terms and conditions of employment—in particular, lawful and
reasonable directions issued by Australian
Government agencies.
Commonwealth
employees outside the APS
14.5 As discussed in detail in Chapter 13, the
Public Service Act
and related instruments establish a comprehensive administrative secrecy regime
for APS employees.
Regulation 2.1
Public Service Regulations 1999
imports into the APS Code of Conduct a duty on APS employees not to disclose
official information in certain circumstances—in
particular, where
disclosure could harm the effective working of
government.
Exceptions to the
application of the secrecy requirement include, for example, where the
disclosure was in the course of the APS
or the information was
disclosed in accordance with an authorisation by the agency
Public Service Act
specifies the administrative disciplinary penalties that an agency head may
impose when an APS employee is found to have breached
the APS Code of Conduct.
The Act also requires agency heads to comply with procedural safeguards when
investigating and enforcing
14.6 However, many Commonwealth employees, including those who may handle the
most sensitive Commonwealth information, fall outside
the ambit of the
Service Act
and therefore are not subject to the APS Code of Conduct. These
members of the Australian Defence Force (ADF);
members of the Australian Federal Police (AFP);
employees of the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation
(ASIO) and the Australian Security Intelligence Service (ASIS);
employees and office holders of statutory authorities and
corporations; and
ministerial staff and employees of parliamentary
departments.
14.7 The disciplinary framework that applies to these
employees is summarised below.
Members of the ADF
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
(Cth) (DFD Act) establishes
the disciplinary regime applicable to ADF members. There are two secrecy
provisions in the DFD Act. Section
16 prohibits communicating with, or
giving intelligence to, the enemy. Section 58 prohibits the unlawful
disclosure of information
likely to be prejudicial to the defence or security of
14.9 Responsibility for investigating suspected breaches of the DFD Act rests
with the service police forces under the overall command
Provosts-Marshall. Service police forces decide whether or not to investigate
incidents, refer offences to civilian criminal
authorities for investigation,
and, when required, conduct investigations and provide evidence to support
prosecutions of service
14.10 The manner in which a charge for breach of the DFD Act is dealt
with—and the potential punishment for any finding of breach—depends
on the ‘service tribunal’ to which the hearing of the breach is
allocated: a summary authority, or the Australian Military
Summary authorities comprise
officers of the ADF. They try service offences in a manner broadly akin to a
civilian criminal trial,
in accordance with detailed procedural requirements set
Summary Authority Rules 2008
(Cth). Although the Rules reflect
many of the due process requirements of the general law, there are also some
significant departures.
For example, while an accused person has a right to
representation by a member of the ADF, there is no automatic right to a legal
representative.
14.11 The AMC is a permanent military court independent of the ADF chain of
command. The AMC is comprised of military judges, who
are serving members of the
ADF appointed by the Minister. Depending on its seriousness, an offence may be
dealt with by a military
judge alone, or by a military judge and military jury.
Proceedings in the AMC are conducted in accordance with the
Military Court Rules 2007
14.12 The DFD Act sets out the punishments that a service tribunal may impose
on a convicted person. These range in severity from
imprisonment for life or for
a specified period, to dismissal or suspension from the ADF, reduction in rank
or reprimand.
Members of the
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
(Cth) (AFP Act) and the
Australian Federal Police Categories of Conduct Determination 2006
establish the disciplinary regime relevant to AFP
appointees.
14.14 The AFP Act sets out the overarching disciplinary framework for
misconduct by AFP appointees. The Act provides for four categories
conduct issues of escalating
seriousness:
Category 1: inappropriate conduct that relates to minor management
or custom service matters, or reveals a need for improvement in
performance, and
does not warrant being treated as category 2 or 3
Category 2: minor misconduct or inappropriate conduct that reveals
unsatisfactory behaviour which would otherwise be category 1 conduct
warrants, because of its repeated nature, to be treated as category 2
Category 3: serious misconduct, conduct that raises the question
whether termination action should be taken; or conduct that involves
a breach of
the criminal law or serious neglect of duty, apart from conduct that raises a
corruption issue;
Conduct giving rise to a corruption issue.
conduct that falls within categories 1, 2 and 3 is described in the
Australian Federal Police Categories of Conduct Determination
. Breach of
a secrecy provision could amount to category 2 conduct if it involves
‘accidental or unintentional access or disclosure
of information which the
AFP appointee had a duty not to disclose or should not have had
A more serious
breach could fall within category 3 conduct if it involves: ‘improperly
disclosing or failing to protect from
improper disclosure, sensitive information
held by the AFP’, ‘unlawfully or improperly accessing AFP
information’,
or breaching any criminal law other than one relating to
Commonwealth fraud.
14.16 Category 1 and 2 conduct issues are dealt with by an
appointee’s supervisor. The AFP Act sets out detailed procedural
requirements for handling these
These include
requirements for a manager to ensure that the AFP officer and the complainant
(if any) have an adequate opportunity
to be heard in relation to the issue; and
to ensure that the AFP officer is involved, as far as practicable, in the
resolution of
the issue. Where a manager is satisfied, on reasonable
grounds, that an AFP appointee has engaged in Category 2 conduct, the manager
may take remedial action, training and development action, or both, against the
14.17 More formal investigation processes apply to category 3 conduct
and corruption issues. Investigations are conducted by an allocated
an AFP unit specifically constituted to undertake investigations of misconduct
by AFP appointees.
Commonwealth Ombudsman must be notified of any investigation of a
category 3 conduct issue.
Where an investigator is satisfied, on reasonable grounds, that an AFP appointee
has engaged in Category 3 conduct, the investigator
may recommend any one or
more of the following: termination; remedial action; training and development
action; or any other action
that the Commissioner can take in relation to the
AFP appointee.
Employees of ASIO and
14.18 Unlike other officers of the Australian Intelligence Community
employees of ASIO and
ASIS are not employed under the
Public Service Act
Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
(Cth) (ASIO Act) provides
the legislative basis for the employment of ASIO employees. The
Intelligence
Services Act 2001
(Cth) provides the legislative basis for the employment of
ASIS employees. While ASIO and ASIS employees are subject to criminal
administrative secrecy obligations or penalties are set out in their respective
legislation.
14.19 Under s 86 of the ASIO Act, the terms and conditions of employment
of officers and employees of ASIO ‘are determined from
time to time by the
Director-General’. The Act provides only minimal requirements for such
employment conditions—principally,
that an officer’s employment can
only be terminated in accordance with a term or condition of his or her
employment.
While information on
ASIO’s terms and conditions of employment is not publicly available, ASIO
advises that ‘ASIO’s
conditions of service are similar to those of
the Australian Public
Intelligence Services Act
is somewhat more prescriptive as
regards the terms and conditions of ASIS employment. As with ASIO, the
Director-General of ASIS
may determine the terms and conditions on which
employees are to be employed. However, the Director-General of ASIS is obliged
consult with affected employees about these
conditions.
Further, the Act
prescribes that:
Although employees of ASIS are not employed under the
Public Service Act
, the Director-General must adopt the principles of that Act in relation
to employees of ASIS to the extent to which the Director-General
considers they
are consistent with the effective performance of the functions of
14.21 The Director-General is also under an obligation to establish staff
grievance procedures, adopting the principles of the
Public Service Act
to the extent that they are consistent with the effective performance of the
functions of ASIS.
procedures must include:
(a) initial consideration of grievances by the Director-General or a person
authorised in writing by the Director-General; [and]
(b) establishment of Grievance Review Panels chaired by independent Chairs to
make determinations reviewing initial consideration
grievances.
Employees and office
holders of statutory authorities
14.22 A Commonwealth statutory authority can be defined as any public sector
entity created by a specific law of the
Commonwealth.
In accordance with
this definition, there are over 160 statutory authorities in the Commonwealth
sphere, with diverse legal frameworks
and governance
structures.
There is variation
in whether the authority is an agency prescribed under the
Financial Management and
Accountability Act 1997
or an authority subject to
Commonwealth Authorities and Companies Act 1997
Every Commonwealth
statutory authority must operate in accordance with the governance framework set
out in one of these Acts.
14.23 The functions performed by statutory authorities also vary widely. For
example, some of the statutory authorities subject to
the CAC Act, such as the
ALRC, undertake a public policy function, largely separate from the commercial
sphere. Others, such as the
Australian Postal Corporation, undertake functions
that are more closely akin to business activities in the private sector.
Roger Wettenhall has commented on the lack of a clear classification
system for public sector entities, and the challenges that this
We all know that structures abound with formal titles such as
‘department’, ‘division’, ‘bureau’,
‘commission’, ‘council’, ‘authority’ and so
on, but we lack a classificatory system which might
align such apparent
class-names with agreed sets of purposes or operating conditions. There is room
for confusion when a department
here seems to be discharging similar functions
to a bureau or a commission there, or when a board is renamed a commission
as a sort of rejuvenating exercise, without major structural redesign.
Equally unhelpfully, moderns in the [New Public Management]
tradition sometimes
abandon explanatory class-names altogether—as in recent Australian cases
such as Transport Australia, Environment
Australia, or Planning and Land
Management.
14.24 The conduct requirements—including the secrecy
obligations—that apply to employees of Commonwealth statutory authorities
depend on the status of the employing authority under the
Public Service
. For many statutory authorities, the statutory office holder and his or
her staff constitute a ‘statutory agency’ within
the meaning of the
Public Service Act
such cases, the administrative framework in the
Public Service Act
applies—including the APS Code of Conduct and procedures for suspected
breaches of the Code.
14.25 For statutory authorities that employ staff other than under the
Public Service Act
, the terms and conditions of employment are usually
left to a Certified Agreement or the discretion of the authority itself (or a
particular person or persons within the
authority).
The terms and
conditions of appointment of statutory office holders generally are at the
discretion of the responsible minister or
Governor-General.
14.26 The terms and conditions of employment for some, but not all, statutory
authorities include express secrecy obligations. These
differ in respect of
their level of detail and the degree to which they diverge from the APS Code of
Conduct. Differences also arise
with regard to the administrative penalties made
available to the authority and the processes for dealing with suspected
For example, one of the Key Performance Indicators in the Employee
Collective Agreement for the Australian Institute of Criminology
‘staff [will] conduct themselves in a manner which is consistent with the
Public Service Code of
14.27 Somewhat more targeted requirements are set out in the terms and
conditions of employment for the Australian Prudential Regulation
(APRA). Section 48AC of the
Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority Act 1998
(Cth) (APRA Act) requires that the Chair must
determine a Code of Conduct for APRA, but does not include any guidance on the
of the Code.
Code of Conduct was issued on 1 July 2007 and includes a provision
If you have access to confidential or sensitive information you should respect
that confidentiality/sensitivity. You should take
care to follow correct
procedures, to ensure that information is not released to any unauthorised
parties, including those who could
seek to benefit financially or in other ways
from its disclosure. Your attention is drawn to sections 56 and 57 of the
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998
that relate to
secrecy and to sections 70 and 79 of the
Crimes Act 1914
. Copies of the
sections are available from the General Manager Human
14.28 The APRA Code also includes a number of procedures that are
‘designed to ensure that a staff member under investigation
fairly and is given a reasonable opportunity to respond to allegations’.
In particular, the Code provides that:
Prior to any decision about action [for breach of the standards of conduct]
being taken, there will be discussion with the staff
member concerned who will
be given the opportunity to respond to any allegations. Where a serious breach
of conduct is involved the
staff member may be required to attend a formal
interview. Any person or organisation they choose may represent the staff member
at this interview. In all cases, the decision reached is to be documented and
the staff member informed of the outcome without undue
14.29 The APRA Code provides for a range of administrative penalties ranging
from counselling or mediation for minor breaches through
to transfer from a
position, suspension from duty, exclusion from a performance payment or a
reduction in pay or classification level
for more serious or ongoing breaches.
Provided a member of APRA’s Executive Group gives approval, an employee
may be dismissed
for major breaches or a failure to heed reprimands or
14.30 Part 3 div 4 of the CAC Act sets out some of ‘the most
significant duties’ of officers and employees of Commonwealth
authorities
governed by that Act.
provisions are a mix of civil and criminal penalty provisions. The ALRC has not
classified any of these provisions as secrecy
provisions. However, s 22
imposes an obligation on officers and employees to exercise their powers with
care and diligence and in
good faith; and ss 24 and 25 impose an obligation
not to use their position—or information gained because of their
position—to
gain personal advantage or cause detriment to the Commonwealth
or to another person.
civil penalty provisions. Where a court has determined that an officer has
contravened one of these obligations, the relevant
minister may apply for a
pecuniary penalty order in an amount of up to $200,000. In making such an order,
the court must be satisfied
that the contravention ‘materially prejudices
the interests of the Commonwealth authority or Commonwealth company’;
‘materially
prejudices the ability of the Commonwealth authority or
Commonwealth company to pay its creditors’; or ‘is
14.31 No equivalent obligations or penalties are set out in the FMA Act.
Ministerial staff
and employees of parliamentary departments
Employees of parliamentary
departments
14.32 The parliamentary departments—being the Department of the Senate,
the Department of the House of Representatives and the
Department of
Parliamentary Services—provide information, advice and support to the
Houses of Parliament, and to committees,
senators and members.
14.33 Prior to 1999, employees of the parliamentary departments were governed
by the same legislation as the
This changed with the
introduction of the
Parliamentary Service Act 1999
(Cth), which
establishes a separate and independent framework for the employment of staff in
the Parliamentary Departments. The framework follows
that established by the
Public Service [Act]
except where differences are necessary to reflect
the unique character of the parliamentary service and the obligation of
parliamentary
staff to serve the
Parliament.
14.34 Under the
Parliamentary Service Act
, employees of parliamentary
departments must comply with the Parliamentary Service Code of
Many of the obligations
imposed by this Code are equivalent to those set out in the APS Code of
For example, a
parliamentary department employee is under a duty to comply with all applicable
Australian laws when acting in the
course of his or her
employment;
and to maintain
‘appropriate confidentiality’ about dealings that he or she has with
Houses of Parliament and parliamentary
committees and their
14.35 The Parliamentary Service Code of Conduct also requires employees to
‘comply with any other conduct requirement that is
made by either House of
the Parliament or by
determinations’.
Clause 2.3.1 of
Parliamentary Service Determination 2003/2
provides that:
Parliamentary Service employees must not, directly or indirectly, give or
disclose to any person any information about the affairs
of any other person or
body which they acquire in the course of their employment unless:
(i) they are required to do so in the course of their duties; or
(ii) they have the Secretary’s express authority to do so.
Parliamentary Service Act
sets out an
exhaustive list of the penalties that a secretary may impose on a parliamentary
service employee who breaches the Code
Procedures for
determining whether an employee has breached the Code of Conduct must
‘have due regard for procedural fairness’
and comply with any
requirements in a direction from the Parliamentary Service
Commissioner.
Staff of ministers and other members of
14.37 People employed by Members of Parliament (including ministers and other
parliamentary office-holders) are engaged under the
Members of Parliament
(Staff) Act 1984
(Cth) (MOPS Act). As at 1 June 2008, 1,374 people
were employed under the MOPS
14.38 In its 2003 inquiry into the framework for employment and the
management of staff under the MOPS
the Senate Finance and
Public Administration References Committee remarked on the ‘almost
complete control’ the Act gives
the Prime Minister over the conditions of
employment for MOPS staff—including the power to determine whether a
parliamentarian
may employ staff; and to set and vary the terms and conditions
of employment of staff.
Act itself does not directly impose any secrecy obligations on employees, nor is
the ALRC aware of such obligations arising
as a consequence of other employment
frameworks for MOPS staff, other than those arising under the general
14.39 In the specific context of ministerial staff, however, additional
conduct requirements apply. The
Code of Conduct for Ministerial Staff
tabled in Parliament on 26 June 2008 and came into operation on
1 July 2008,
setting out
the standards that ministerial staff are expected to meet in the performance of
their duties. Many of these standards
are essentially the same as those set out
in the APS Code of Conduct and the Parliamentary Service Code of
Other conduct
requirements are specifically tailored to issues arising out of the particular
functions of ministerial staffers, such
as a requirement for staff to
‘acknowledge that ministerial staff do not have the power to direct APS
employees in their own
right and that APS employees are not subject to their
direction’.
Code of Conduct for Ministerial Staff
does not include a
secrecy provision equivalent to reg 2.1 of the
Public Service
Regulations 1999
(Cth) (or the related duty in the Parliamentary Service
Code of Conduct). The Code does, however, require ministerial staff to
appropriate confidentiality about their dealings with their
Minister, other Ministers, other Ministerial staff, and APS and Parliamentary
Service employees’.
14.41 The Senate Finance and Public Administration Reference Committee has
supported distinguishing between the conduct requirements
of ministerial staff
and other MOPS employees in the following terms:
Ministerial advisers are in many ways functionally the same as public servants:
they are employees of the executive arm of government,
there to implement the
government’s policies. This is why in most jurisdictions …
ministerial staff are public servants
subject to a number of special conditions.
It is their attachment to the executive arm that distinguishes them from all
employees, who, even though they may have partisan loyalties, serve
the needs of their employer as a Member of
Parliament.
Submissions and
consultations
Framing the administrative secrecy
requirements
14.42 The ALRC did not ask a specific question in the Issues Paper,
of Secrecy Laws
administrative secrecy obligations that should apply to Commonwealth employees
other than those employed under the
Public Service Act
stakeholders, however, made comments that are relevant to this issue.
14.43 Ron Fraser suggested that administrative secrecy requirements should
apply consistently across all Australian Government
James Renwick
submitted that, because leaks often come from ministerial offices, secrecy laws
should apply to ministerial staff in
addition to Commonwealth public
14.44 The Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) advised
that it employs staff under s 120(3) of its Act, in addition
employed under the
Public Service Act
. ASIC includes a clause in its
contracts of employment that requires those engaged under s 120(3) to
comply with the APS Code of
Conduct and other ASIC policies and procedures.
Failure to do so may lead to termination of the
14.45 The Community and Public Sector Union (CPSU) focused on the protection
of those who make public interest disclosures, and expressed
concern that this
category could be artificially constrained to persons directly engaged by APS
agencies. The CPSU submitted that
all administrative secrecy requirements that
apply to Commonwealth employees should include an exception for public interest
disclosures.
Processes for investigation and
enforcement
14.46 In IP 34, the ALRC asked how effective the processes were for
dealing with breaches of secrecy laws by Commonwealth officers
other than APS
employees. In particular, the ALRC questioned whether the legislation under
which these officers were employed should
adopt the processes for dealing with
misconduct set out in the
Public Service Act
. The ALRC also asked whether
there should be a process for merits review of any penalties
14.47 The Public Interest Advocacy Centre (PIAC) agreed that procedures
modelled on those that apply to APS employees should be adopted
generally for
Commonwealth officers, and that an avenue for merits review should be made
The Australian
Government Attorney-General’s Department (AGD) submitted that it
can see value in such processes being generally consistent with similar
processes that are applicable to APS employees. The majority
of disciplinary
processes for non-APS Commonwealth officers incorporate natural justice
principles, such as the ability to respond
to allegations and options for
reconsideration of a decision. Where there is no merits review of penalties
imposed on non-APS Commonwealth
officers, consideration could be given to the
appropriateness of introducing such a
14.48 The Australian Intelligence Community advised that,
Where an agency’s officers are not employed under the
Public Service
, equivalent conditions of service are put in place under that
agency’s administrative arrangements. For example, in accordance
Intelligence Services Act
, ASIS adopts the principles
and ethics of the Australian Public Service to the extent the Director-General
considers they are consistent
with the effective performance of the functions of
ASIS. Similar arrangements exist for ASIO employees, who are employed under the
14.49 APRA submitted that s 48AC of the APRA Act already sets out
processes for dealing with suspected misconduct. APRA did not support
development of separate processes for dealing with conduct relating to breach of
secrecy provisions.
advised that it has in place a robust framework for detecting, investigating and
dealing with breaches of secrecy laws by
appointees.
14.50 An overarching theme of this Discussion Paper is that—except in
the most serious cases—the unauthorised disclosure
of Commonwealth
information should generally be dealt with through administrative disciplinary
proceedings, rather than through the
criminal law. It is therefore important to
ensure that a sound administrative secrecy regime is in place for all
Commonwealth employees—not
only APS employees. A just and effective
administrative regime involves consideration not only of the conduct regulated
by the secrecy
obligation, but also of the procedural framework through which an
Australian Government agency deals with breaches, and suspected
breaches, of the
obligation.
Framing administrative secrecy
requirements
14.51 What obligations of secrecy should apply to Commonwealth employees who
are not employed under the
Public Service Act
14.52 In Chapter 13, the ALRC proposes that the duty of non-disclosure
that governs APS employees should apply to information that
has come to the
employee’s knowledge or possession by reason of his or her being an APS
employee, where the disclosure is reasonably
likely to be prejudicial to the
effective working of government.
14.53 Many Commonwealth employees that are not employed under the
Service Act
perform substantially similar duties to APS employees. Whether
or not the person is employed under the
Public Service Act
necessarily depend on considerations of duties of confidentiality and
non-disclosure, but may be based on other considerations,
such as labour market
forces. The ALRC considers that the obligation of non-disclosure set out in
reg 2.1 of the
Public Service Regulations
should apply to these
employees. This will ensure, in the administrative setting, that there is
‘a consistent approach across
government to the protection of Commonwealth
information’—a key objective in the Terms of Reference for this
14.54 The appropriateness of equivalent administrative secrecy obligations
for employees inside and outside the APS is illustrated
by those statutory
authorities that employ staff under both the
Public Service Act
enabling legislation. The ALRC acknowledges the advice from ASIC (one such
authority) that the staff that it employs other
than under the
Public Service
are nevertheless required to comply with the APS Code of Conduct. Other
statutory authorities—for example, the Australian Institute
of Criminology
and the ALRC itself—have voluntarily taken on the APS Code of Conduct as
the template for their employee conduct
requirements.
14.55 The ALRC considers that reg 2.1 could be adopted as the
administrative secrecy requirement for a particular class of Commonwealth
employees even where the entire APS Code of Conduct should not apply. For
example, some of the conduct requirements in the Parliamentary
Service Code of
Conduct differ from those that apply to the APS because of the political
environment within which parliamentary departments
operate. However, the ALRC is
not aware of any rationale to justify the minor differences between reg 2.1
and the administrative
secrecy requirements that currently apply to employees of
parliamentary departments and ministerial staff employed under the MOPS
14.56 In some situations, however, the duties of a Commonwealth employee may
be sufficiently different from those in the APS to warrant
administrative secrecy obligations. For example, it has been argued that, for
the ADF to function effectively, members must
work within a very different
disciplinary regime from that which applies elsewhere in the public service. As
one stakeholder submitted
to the Senate Foreign Affairs Defence and Trade
References Committee inquiry into the effectiveness of Australia’s
justice system:
a democracy cannot maintain an effective Defence Force without that force being
subject to a code of disciplinary legislation that
specifically covers the
purposes, situations, conditions and exigencies of war. No extension of civil
codes of law can, or necessarily
should, meet those
requirements.
14.57 The duties of a Commonwealth employee also might not easily translate
to the APS framework for an individual (other than a ministerial
employed under the MOPS Act. These employees work for the legislative, rather
than the executive, arm of government. This
may result in a different
relationship with Commonwealth information which may justify a different secrecy
obligation. The secrecy
obligations that apply to employees of statutory
authorities that perform a predominantly commercial role might also warrant
consideration.
14.58 The above examples do not represent the concluded views of the ALRC on
the administrative secrecy obligations that should apply
to specific
Commonwealth employees. Rather, they are intended to illustrate the ALRC’s
current thinking about how the Australian
Government should determine whether or
not a Commonwealth employment relationship should be governed by equivalent
secrecy requirements
to those that apply to the APS.
Processes for investigation and
enforcement
14.59 As noted above, the
Public Service Act
and related instruments
provide high-level procedural safeguards for the investigation and determination
of suspected breaches of
secrecy provisions. These reflect general
administrative law principles,
including requirements that:
the procedure for determining whether any Australian Government
employee has breached an administrative secrecy provision has ‘due
to procedural fairness’;
employees are given information, and a reasonable opportunity to
make a statement, before a determination of breach is
processes for determining breaches are carried out informally and
expeditiously;
a person who determines whether an employee has breached an
administrative secrecy requirement is, and appears to be, independent
14.60 These obligations are likely to be appropriate for the vast
majority of Australian Government employment situations. In limited
circumstances, however, particular features of the employing agency may warrant
a different approach.
14.61 For example, the
Public Service Act
includes a mechanism for
merits review of Code of Conduct determinations. Depending on the structure of
the employing agency, providing
for an independent merits review may not be
feasible. In other situations, the functions of the agency, and the nature of
the employment
duties, may justify departure from procedures required under the
Public Service Act
14.62 For example, the heightened difficulty of investigating misconduct in
the context of law enforcement, and the special position
of trust that is
accorded to law enforcement officers, may justify some variations from the
procedural safeguards set out in the
Public Service Act
. In the report,
Integrity: But Not by Trust Alone
, the ALRC noted the special
difficulties in investigating police misconduct:
• police know the system and are likely to have early warning of any
interest in their activities
• they are skilled in investigation techniques and counter
surveillance
• they are likely to have corrupt associates willing to cover for them
• they are experienced in being interviewed, in being cross examined and
in giving evidence
• their good credibility and character are readily assumed by jurors,
courts and tribunals
• they can exert considerable personal influence over internal informants
and internal investigators particularly if they hold
14.63 What, if any, variations will be warranted should be considered by the
Australian Government on an agency-by-agency basis.
Proposal 14–1
Australian Government agencies that employ persons
other than under the
Public Service Act 1999
(Cth)—including
agencies prescribed under the
Financial Management and Accountability Act
(Cth) and bodies subject to the
Commonwealth Authorities and
Companies Act 1997
(Cth)—should:
(a) include in the agency’s terms and conditions of employment the
requirements set out in reg 2.1 of the
Public Service Regulations
(Cth), to the extent that these requirements are consistent with the
agency’s functions and structure; and
(b) adopt the safeguards set out in the
Public Service Act
for dealing
with suspected breaches of reg 2.1, to the extent that these safeguards are
consistent with the agency’s functions
and structure.
Former Commonwealth
14.64 Administrative disciplinary penalties only apply to current
Commonwealth employees. They do not apply, for example, to a person
employment has terminated prior to the disclosure of secret information, or who
has resigned when an investigation into that
person’s conduct commenced.
How, therefore, can official information held by former Commonwealth employees
best be protected?
14.65 The equitable duty of confidence provides some protection for
information in the hands of former employees. As discussed in
this duty restricts an employee from using or disclosing certain confidential
information obtained during the course of
employment. In the case of
Commonwealth v Fairfax,
Mason J commented that, in the context of
government information, disclosure would be restrained where this would be
to the public interest because national security, relations with
foreign countries or the ordinary course of business of government
prejudiced’.
14.66 In the case of
Faccenda Chicken Ltd v Fowler
, Neill LJ of
the Civil Division of the Court of Appeal of England and Wales set out the law,
as it applies to former employees, as
The implied term which imposes an obligation on the employee as to his conduct
after the determination of the employment is more
restricted in its scope than
that which imposes a general duty of good faith. It is clear that the obligation
not to use or disclose
information may cover secret processes of manufacture
… or designs or special methods of construction … and other
information
which is of a sufficiently high degree of confidentiality as to
amount to a trade secret.
The obligation does not extend, however, to cover all information which is given
to or acquired by the employee while in his employment,
and in particular may
not cover information which is only ‘confidential’ in the sense that
an unauthorised disclosure
of such information to a third party while the
employment subsisted would be a clear breach of the duty of good
14.67 Neill LJ then considered the factors that should be taken into
account in determining whether a particular item of information
falls within a
former employee’s duty of confidentiality:
The nature of the employment
. Thus employment in a capacity where
‘confidential’ material is habitually handled may impose a high
obligation of confidentiality
because the employee can be expected to realise
its sensitive nature to a greater extent than if he were employed in a capacity
such material reaches him only occasionally or incidentally. (b)
The nature of the information
In our judgment the information will only be protected if it can
properly be classed as a trade secret or as material which, while
not properly
to be described as a trade secret, is in all the circumstances of such a highly
confidential nature as to require the
same protection as a trade secret eo
14.68 Although the court considered that it was ‘clearly
impossible’ to provide a list of matters that would qualify as
secrets or their equivalent, a relevant factor was the restriction of the
circulation of information to a limited number of
Whether the employer
‘impressed on the employee the confidentiality of the information’
will also be significant.
14.69 The question of what would qualify as a ‘trade secret’ or
equivalent in the context of information in the possession
of a former
government employee has not been the subject of judicial consideration in
Australia or elsewhere.
Submissions and
consultations
14.70 In IP 34, the ALRC asked in what circumstances should secrecy
provisions regulate former Commonwealth officers and others who
positions subject to secrecy
provisions.
The submissions on
IP 34 that addressed this issue are discussed in detail in Chapter 7,
in the context of the general secrecy offence.
14.71 As noted in that chapter, there was widespread support among government
and other stakeholders for applying secrecy provisions
to former Commonwealth
The submissions of
the AGD and the Treasury, for example, pointed to the potential for the purpose
of provisions aimed at protecting
sensitive information to be frustrated simply
by a person leaving the service of the Australian
Government.
The Department of
Human Services (DHS) noted that the period after a person leaves Australian
Government employment is ‘a period
of increased risk of disclosure, since
they are no longer under the watchful eye or normative influence of the
employing agency’.
14.72 Although ASIC supported the application of secrecy provisions to former
Commonwealth officers, it submitted that it ‘may
be improper to impose the
same secrecy obligations on a former Commonwealth officer as are imposed on
current officers’. Accordingly,
a former officer’s obligations of
non-disclosure should be limited ‘to the extent that they will continue to
information that, if disclosed, could injure the private and public
interests that the secrecy provisions were designed to
14.73 PIAC submitted that the equitable duty of confidence provided an
appropriate level of protection for government information
held by former
Commonwealth officers.
14.74 In some circumstances, the time when a Commonwealth employee leaves his
or her employment will be associated with a risk of
the unauthorised disclosure
of official information. It is possible, for example, that an employee’s
resignation will be associated
with an ongoing grievance with the agency, or
other employees of the agency, for which vindication is sought. Even where no
dispute has occurred, the fact that a former employee is no longer under
the direct control or influence of the employing agency
may provide a greater
opportunity to disclose Commonwealth information and fewer inhibitions not to
disclose. Therefore, there should
be some way of protecting official information
in the hands of former employees.
14.75 In the ALRC’s view, however, it is not feasible to impose ongoing
administrative secrecy obligations on those who leave
Commonwealth employment.
The ability of an agency head to impose administrative penalties arises out of
the statutory nature of the
employment relationship. In the case of a former
employee, this relationship clearly no longer exists. Further, the penalties
may be imposed under administrative disciplinary regimes have little, if
any, practical application to persons that are not in an
ongoing employment
relationship with the Commonwealth. Of the administrative penalties that an
agency head may impose for breach
of the APS Code of Conduct, for example, only
a fine has the potential to translate to the context of former employees. Even
the quantum of the fine is determined with reference to the
employee’s salary.
14.76 In Chapter 8, the ALRC expresses the view that the proposed
general secrecy offence should encompass former Commonwealth employees.
will serve as a valuable deterrent for a former employee who is considering
disclosing information.
situations, a specific secrecy offence may also apply to the unauthorised
disclosure of information by a former Commonwealth
14.77 The equitable duty of confidence continues to apply to an employee when
he or she is no longer in an employment relationship—albeit
limited manner. The issue of what government information will qualify as a
‘trade secret’ or information which
‘is in all the
circumstances of such a highly confidential nature as to require the same
protection as a trade secret’
remains open for judicial
determination.
However, this
will depend on the extent to which the employee can be expected to realise the
information’s sensitivity, including
the number of people that had access
to the information and the degree to which the employing agency impressed the
confidential nature
of the information on the former employee. Under these
criteria, for example, security classified information (which has a limited
circulation and clear indication of confidentiality) may well be caught by an
ongoing equitable duty.
14.78 For criminal secrecy offences and the equitable duty of confidence to
satisfy the objective of deterrence, however, the ongoing
nature of these laws
must be made clear to employees at the time of separation. The ALRC proposes,
therefore, that Australian Government
agencies should remind their employees, on
termination, of the employee’s continuing legal responsibilities. This
done, for example, during an employee’s exit interview. This
reminder is also an opportunity for agencies to reinforce the
personal nature of
non-disclosure obligations, as discussed in the context of contracted service
providers, below.
Australian Government agencies should remind employees, on
termination, of their continuing liability under the general secrecy offence
any relevant specific secrecy offence, and of their obligations under the
equitable duty of confidence.
Persons outside
Commonwealth employment
14.79 In the following section, the ALRC considers the responsibilities of
non-disclosure placed upon individuals who have access
to Commonwealth
information for reasons other than an employment relationship. These
private-sector employees who access Commonwealth information under a
contract for services;
members of Commonwealth boards and committees;
state and territory public sector employees; and
individuals without any clear relationship to the
Commonwealth.
service providers
14.80 The Commonwealth outsources a wide variety of functions to contracted
service providers. In the 2007–08 financial year,
Australian Government
agencies reported the award of almost 70,000 contracts and standing offer
arrangements with a value of $10,000
or more—amounting to a combined value
of approximately $26.4 billion.
Many of these contracts are with private sector service
14.81 Depending on the services being rendered, a contracted service provider
could be given access to extensive and/or highly sensitive
Commonwealth
information. Hypothetically, for example, a contracted service provider could be
asked to determine how resources should
be allocated among various aged-care
facilities. To carry out this task, the contracted service provider may need the
agency to provide
information as wide-ranging as budget estimates for the
facilities, the current rate of use of each of the facilities, demographic
details of the people who have used them, and the reasons for use. A further
illustration of the sensitive nature of information
that may be released to
private sector contractors can be drawn from an article in
The Canberra Times
April 2009, reporting that staff of a company, outsourced by the Australian
Taxation Office to conduct its call centre work, could
gain access to private
income tax records. In particular, the article raised concerns that access was
not conditional on the obligation
‘to comply with the strict code of
behaviour imposed on public
14.82 In other situations, the information warranting protection may be
generated by the contracted service provider itself. This
can be illustrated in
the context of contractors responsible for providing immigration detention
services, and sub-contractors responsible
for providing health services, to
detainees of the (now closed) Baxter Detention
These service
providers had the responsibility of gathering highly sensitive information about
the operation of a government facility.
14.83 Since persons engaged by contracted service providers are not in an
employment relationship with the Commonwealth, administrative
penalties do not
apply to their information-handling practices. Accordingly, the principal
mechanism of controlling the flow of Commonwealth
information is contractual.
14.84 In addition to—or in the absence of—a contractual
relationship, an equitable duty of confidence may be enlivened
contractor has accessed Commonwealth information that is inherently confidential
and imparted in circumstances of confidentiality.
Guidance on Confidentiality in Procurement
14.85 The Department of Finance and Administration (now the Department of
Finance and Deregulation) has issued
Financial Management
Guidance No 3—Guidance on Confidentiality in Procurement
(FMG 3). The FMG 3 provides general advice on managing confidential
information in contracted relationships as well as model confidentiality
for Australian Government agencies to include in contracts that they enter
Confidential information
14.86 The FMG 3 advises that ‘confidential information’
information that is either:
• required to be kept confidential due to the operation of legislation;
• determined by an agency to be
confidential.
14.87 Legislative requirements to keep information confidential include, for
example, information within the scope of a secrecy provision
and information
governed by the
(Cth). Where there is no legislative
requirement to maintain confidentiality, an agency may make a determination that
information
held by the Australian Government or a contracted service provider
should be treated as confidential.
14.88 An Australian Government agency does not have unlimited discretion to
designate what information under a contract is confidential.
The Australian
Government Solicitor (AGS) has advised that:
There are limits on the kind of information which can be protected as
confidential under a contract. For example, if an attempt is
made to protect
from disclosure certain Government
Information
as confidential
information when an analysis of public interest issues leads to a conclusion
that the information is not confidential
in nature (‘inherently
confidential’), a court may refuse to enforce a contractual obligation not
to disclose that information.
14.89 The FMG 3 suggests that it may be appropriate for an Australian
Government agency to determine that information should be treated
confidential under a contract where:
disclosure would be contrary to the public interest—for
example, because it could compromise national security or defence or
Cabinet deliberations;
the Australian Government holds intellectual property rights over
the information; or
the contracted service provider demonstrates that the commercial
sensitivity of the information warrants
confidentiality.
14.90 Where
an agency has determined that information must be kept confidential, it will
usually protect this information by including
a specific confidentiality clause
in the contract. Clauses can protect the confidentiality of all or part of the
contract itself;
or information obtained or generated in performing the
suggests that a specific confidentiality clause could be used, for example,
where ‘the contract is for a consultant
to prepare a confidential report
which is expected to deal with sensitive public
interests’.
Confidential Commonwealth
information
14.91 Not all confidential information under a contract for services is under
the control of the Commonwealth. For example, trade
secret information that a
private sector partner provides to an Australian Government agency is likely to
be confidential information
the use and disclosure of which is under the control
of the contracting partner. The question, therefore, is when will
‘confidential
information’ also be ‘confidential Commonwealth
information’?
14.92 The model confidentiality clause set out in the FMG 3 provides
that ‘a Party must not, without the prior written consent
of the other
Party, disclose any Confidential Information
of the other Party
third party’.
FMG 3 does not specify what information will be ‘of the other
14.93 One guide to when information will be ‘Commonwealth
information’ is the definition of ‘official information’
Australian Government Protective Security Manual
(PSM)—that is,
‘any information that is developed, received or collected by or on behalf
of the Commonwealth Government,
through its agencies and
contractors’.
Commonwealth ownership of information is expressly identified in the contract,
however, the courts will determine the question
of whether information is
‘of the Commonwealth’ in accordance with general principles for
interpreting express contractual
terms. This is a pragmatic judgment,
the ascertainment of the meaning which the document would convey to a reasonable
person having all the background knowledge which
would reasonably have been
available to the parties in the situation in which they were at the time of the
Exceptions to the obligation of
confidentiality
14.94 The model confidentiality clause in FMG 3 sets out exceptions to
the obligation of non-disclosure, where information is:
disclosed to a party’s advisers or employees in order to
comply with obligations, or to exercise rights, under the contract;
disclosed to a party’s internal management personnel to enable
effective management or auditing of contract-related activities;
authorised or required by law to be disclosed; or
otherwise in the public
individual employees
14.95 As noted by the AGS,
An organisation’s employees are not a party to any confidentiality
agreement that the organisation may enter into with the
agency. The same goes
for subcontractors and the employees of subcontractors as well as the employees
of subsidiary and holding companies
for the commercialisation partner. The
contract itself would not be able to impose any direct penalty on the employees
for releasing
confidential … information belonging to the
14.96 Accordingly, where an agency wishes to ensure greater protection for
confidential information, it may enter into confidentiality
arrangements with
nominated personnel of the contracted service provider, including subcontractors
and their personnel.
The purpose of entering into these arrangements with nominated personnel is not
primarily so the agency can take direct action against
or sue individuals (as
this is highly unlikely in practice) but, rather, to act as a clear reminder to
those individuals of their
responsibilities to protect the confidentiality of
the agency’s intellectual property that they may see. This method can be
highly effective when used in conjunction with a confidentiality agreement with
the commercialisation partner. The element of personal
responsibility that is
missing from the agreement with the partner is provided through the agreements
with the individuals.
14.97 In addition to a requirement for the contracted service provider to
arrange for the provision of confidentiality undertakings
from its personnel,
confidentiality agreements could require a contracted service provider to:
limit the release of Commonwealth confidential information on a
‘need to know’ basis—for example, by requiring
the provider to
provide a list of personnel who may gain access to the information, for the
agency’s approval; or
ensure that its nominated personnel have been informed of the
confidential information that requires protection, or trained in how
information in compliance with the
model confidentiality clause set out in the FMG 3 provides the option for
an agency to require a contracting party to obtain
written undertakings from
individuals (other than Commonwealth employees) who have access to confidential
Commonwealth information
Inclusion of a requirement for written undertakings is optional. The FMG 3
that an undertaking is likely to be relevant
when the Commonwealth is seeking to obtain the maximum protection for sensitive
Commonwealth information or when the Commonwealth
intends to disclose
confidential information to third party
consultants.
14.99 The equitable duty of confidence may also restrain individuals who
receive confidential Commonwealth information in accordance
with a contract for
services from disclosing the information without authorisation. As discussed in
Chapter 5, equity may provide
a remedy for the unauthorised use of
confidential information which has been imparted in circumstances importing an
obligation of
confidence. This obligation is independent of any contractual or
employment relationship—although the confidential nature of
information may derive from the terms of the contract.
14.100 In some circumstances, the proposed general secrecy offence will apply
to a person who discloses Commonwealth information that
he or she obtained under
a contract for services.
Specific secrecy offences also may be
Applying the APS Code of Conduct
14.101 Another option for imposing secrecy obligations on the personnel of
contracted service providers is to include a contractual
requirement that some,
or all, of those who have access to information must comply with the APS Code of
Conduct or some other administrative
secrecy template. This is similar to the
approach that has been taken, for example, in the
Code of Conduct for
Victorian Public Sector Employees
Public sector employers are to require contractors or consultants engaged in or
by their public body (including contractors or consultants
engaged through an
employment agency) to comply with this Code of Conduct and relevant policies and
procedures, where the contractors
or consultants:
• supervise public sector employees;
• undertake work that is of a similar nature to the work undertaken by
public sector employees at a premise or location generally
regarded as a public
sector workplace; and
• use or have access to public sector resources or information that are
not normally accessible or available to the
Submissions and consultations
14.102 In IP 34, the ALRC asked in what circumstances should secrecy
provisions regulate the behaviour of persons other than Commonwealth
such as consultants and others who provide goods and services to the Australian
Government and those who enter into arrangements
with the Australian
Government.
14.103 Australian Government agencies expressed broad support for applying
secrecy laws to consultants and contracted service providers.
APRA, for example,
submitted that it may be appropriate for a secrecy provision to apply to:
IT consultants who, in the process of providing IT services, have access to
protected information or documents in APRA’s computer
systems; consultants
retained to provide assistance in investigations, eg forensic accountants;
professional advisers; secondees
from other regulators; temporary staff supplied
by agencies (who are employed by the agency rather than APRA); and persons
as, or working for, external administrators (eg an [authorised
deposit-taking institution] statutory manager appointed under the
Banking Act
14.104 The Treasury expressed the view that it was appropriate for secrecy
obligations to have a wide application to reflect the increasing
use of private
individuals and entities to assist in the provision of government
The New South Wales
(NSW) Young Lawyers Human Rights Committee agreed that all people who handle
government information should be
subject to secrecy laws, including any person
or organisation hired by the Australian Government to perform work on its
14.105 The CPSU recommended that secrecy provisions, along with associated
statutory exceptions and ‘protected disclosure’
legislation, should
apply to private sector consultants and companies who do business with
government as well as other Australian
ASIC agreed that
secrecy provisions should regulate anyone who provides goods and services to the
Commonwealth, such as contractors,
regardless of the arrangements under which
they are engaged to provide those goods and
14.106 The DHS noted the important role that secrecy provisions play in
imparting a level of personal responsibility to staff. The
DHS advised of the
importance of contracted staff and staff of contracted service providers
appreciating the personal nature of their
obligations.
14.107 On the other hand, Australia’s Right to Know coalition submitted
Confidentiality provisions in contracts should only cover material which is
truly confidential, such as a trade secret. The terms
of an agreement between a
commercial entity and the government will not normally be entirely confidential,
and often the terms and
desirability of such contracts should be subject to
public scrutiny. This is especially the case for contracts involving the sale
or provision of public facilities, infrastructure or services.
Many recent contracts impose a general obligation of confidentiality over
material that is not truly confidential so that there is
a contractual
obligation not to reveal the information. This device should not be permitted or
condoned in either government departments
or in bodies established or funded by
government, privately contracted government services and government-subsidised
private sector
ALRC’s views
14.108 Contractual confidentiality provisions are a valuable tool for
protecting Commonwealth information that is disclosed to, or
generated by,
private sector contracted service providers and subcontractors. Clearly drafted
confidentiality clauses provide certainty
to contracted service providers as to
the manner in which they should deal with particular Commonwealth information.
Such service
providers may be sued for breach of contract for inappropriate
disclosures, or restrained from disclosing inappropriately in an action
breach of confidence.
14.109 However, contractual requirements only apply to the contracting
organisation itself—no obligations are directly imposed
on employees who
deal with the information.
14.110 Where an employee of a contracting organisation wrongly discloses
confidential Commonwealth information—thereby leaving
the organisation
open to an action in breach of contract—it is for the employing
organisation to take steps independently to
discipline that employee. However,
the ALRC agrees with the DHS about the value of impressing upon employees their
personal responsibilities
for protecting information received under a contract
with the Australian Government. The ALRC proposes that Australian Government
agencies should require contracting organisations to ask employees who receive
or generate confidential information under the contract
to agree to comply with
the confidentiality requirements.
14.111 At this stage, the ALRC has not specified the way in which this
agreement must be sought. In the ALRC’s view it will
normally be
appropriate for the contracting organisation to decide how it will assure itself
of the compliance of its personnel.
In some circumstances, however, the
potential consequences of disclosure of Commonwealth information will warrant an
Australian Government
agency requesting the contracted service provider to
arrange for subcontractors, employees, and others to provide a signed deed of
confidentiality.
to require such a deed is already made clear in the FMG 3 and, therefore,
is not the subject of an ALRC proposal.
14.112 In Chapter 15, the ALRC further considers the responsibility of
private sector organisations that perform services for or on
behalf of the
Australian Government to make employees who have access to Commonwealth
information aware of their obligations of secrecy,
including the circumstances
in which liability could
These obligations may
include the equitable duty of confidentiality and the general secrecy offence,
in addition to contractual confidentiality
requirements.
14.113 The model exceptions to the obligation of non-disclosure set out in
the FMG 3 allow the necessary flexibility for a contracted
service provider
to perform its functions effectively. The ALRC proposes that confidentiality
clauses should also include an exception
for conduct that amounts to a public
interest disclosure under public interest disclosure legislation. This is
consistent with the
recommendation of the House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, in its report on whistleblowing
in the Commonwealth public sector, that people who are entitled to make a
protected disclosure should include contractors and consultants
engaged by the
public sector and their
14.114 The ALRC is not proposing that contracts for services should include,
as a matter of course, a requirement for personnel to
comply with the APS Code
of Conduct. The Australian Government enters into contracts in a wide variety of
circumstances. In many
of these situations it is unsuitable to impose on
contracting personnel a duty of non-disclosure ‘where the disclosure is
likely to be prejudicial to the effective working of
government’.
example, where a contract involves access only to limited Commonwealth
information, it normally will be clearer to identify the
precise information
that is the subject of protection. Even where a contract sets out a broader
relationship between the Australian
Government and a private sector provider, it
may be unreasonable to expect personnel of that provider to ascertain the
circumstances
when disclosure of information is likely to be prejudicial to the
government. Commonwealth information can be sufficiently protected
by requiring
personnel to comply with the contractual confidentiality clause.
Proposal 14–3
Australian Government agency that enters into a contract for services involving
access to Commonwealth information should include
in the contract a
confidentiality clause that:
(a) clearly sets out the categories of information that are confidential
Commonwealth information;
(b) requires persons (other than Commonwealth employees) who have access to
confidential Commonwealth information by reason of the
contract to agree to
comply with the contractual confidentiality requirements; and
(c) permits the disclosure of confidential Commonwealth information where the
disclosure amounts to a public interest disclosure under
proposed Commonwealth
public interest disclosure legislation.
Members of boards
and committees
14.115 The various roles of government boards and committees have been
explained as follows:
Governing Boards
are empowered to govern the management of the
organisation which are subject to control and direction of the Minister but the
circumstances
in which ministerial control and direction are exercised are
Advisory Boards
provide advice to a portfolio Minister on matters
relevant to the management of an authority but the Minister retains unfettered
right to control and direct the Board and the [Chief Executive Officer].
Advisory Committees, Councils etc
provide advice on policy or operational
issues with little or no policy determination or operational executive
14.116 Depending on the functions of a Commonwealth board or committee, and
the context in which it operates, members may handle highly
information. Advisory committees and councils, for example, typically perform a
deliberative function for an Australian
Government agency or minister. As part
of this role, committee members may be privy to internal policy discussions,
unauthorised
disclosure of which could cause harm to the implementation of
government policies or programs. In other situations, members may come
possession of information that requires protection because it is personal or
commercially-sensitive information. For example,
sponsors of pharmaceuticals
that are seeking to have a product added to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) must provide members
of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee
(PBAC) with extensive commercial information. This includes, for example, a
between the clinical benefits of the product and other similar
pharmaceuticals (including information from any unpublished studies)
evaluation of the economic implications of listing the product on the
14.117 The terms and conditions of appointment of members of boards and
committees directly established under legislation are usually
at the discretion
of the Governor-General or responsible minister. The establishing legislation,
however, often provides for the
prospect of termination of membership in the
‘misbehaviour’.
14.118 The terms and conditions of appointment of members of advisory
committees or councils without an express legislative foundation
determined by the responsible minister or agency. The conduct requirements that
apply to members of Commonwealth boards and
committees are not usually publicly
ALRC’s views
14.119 Members of Commonwealth boards and committees will often have access
to sensitive information. It is important, therefore,
to make sure that these
members are subject to sufficient requirements of confidentiality. A logical
place for these to be located
is in the terms and conditions of appointment.
However, what level of confidentiality should be imposed on members of boards
committees?
14.120 In this Discussion Paper, the ALRC proposes that APS employees, and
most other Commonwealth employees, should be under a duty
not to disclose
information that has come to their knowledge or into their possession by reason
of being an APS employee, where the
disclosure is reasonably likely to be
prejudicial to the effective working of government. In certain situations, the
structure and
function of an employing agency will warrant the imposition of
some other administrative secrecy
requirement.
14.121 In the ALRC’s preliminary view, it is reasonable to impose
equivalent secrecy requirements on members of boards and committees
that apply in a related Commonwealth employment context—in particular, a
Commonwealth employee who accesses similar
information to the board or
committee. For example, members of PBAC, discussed above, could be made subject
to equivalent secrecy
obligations to those that apply to employees of the
Therapeutic Goods Administration, who provide the secretariat for PBAC.
14.122 Often this will mean that members of boards and committees will be
subject to a duty analogous to that set out in reg 2.1 of
Service Regulations
—that is, a duty not to disclose information that
has come to a member’s knowledge or into a member’s possession
reason of being a member of the board or committee, where the disclosure is
reasonably likely to be prejudicial to the effective
working of government. The
relevant exceptions to the obligation of non-disclosure—for example, for
information that is already
in the public domain—should also be imported.
Where the most closely related Commonwealth employment situation for a board
committee involves different non-disclosure requirements from those set out in
those different
obligations are also likely to be appropriate for the board or committee.
14.123 There may be some boards and committees that perform such a distinct
role or have access to such particular information that
no reasonable comparison
can be made with the secrecy obligations that apply to Commonwealth employees.
In these circumstances, the
duty of non-disclosure should be at the discretion
of the responsible minister or agency.
14.124 The ALRC further proposes that the terms and conditions of appointment
of members of Commonwealth boards and committees should
specify the right to
terminate the member for breach—for example, through a broader misconduct
provision or as a stand-alone
ground for termination. This ensures that there is
a mechanism to enforce the obligation of secrecy.
Proposal 14–4
The Australian Government should include in the
terms and conditions of appointment for members of boards and committees:
(a) secrecy requirements equivalent to those imposed on Commonwealth
employees in a related employment context, to the extent that
these requirements
are consistent with the board’s or committee’s function and
structure; and
(b) the right to terminate the appointment of a member in the event of a
breach of the secrecy obligation.
State and territory
public sector employees
14.125 In IP 34, the ALRC asked in what circumstances Commonwealth secrecy
provisions should apply to—among others—state
and territory
government employees.
Employees of state and territory governments may receive Commonwealth
information, for example, in connection with an inter-jurisdictional
14.126 Public sector employees in most Australian states and territories are
subject to duties of non-disclosure either through legislation
or whole of
government codes of conduct. In NSW, for example, the
Model Code of Conduct for
NSW Public Agencies
, issued by the Department of Premier and Cabinet,
requires NSW Government agencies to have in place ‘clearly documented
regarding the storage, disclosure and distribution of confidential or
sensitive personal, commercial or political
information’.
must handle such information in accordance with these procedures and ‘must
take special precautions to make sure
that it is not disclosed without clear
authority’.
14.127 The Victorian public sector is governed by the
Code of Conduct for
Victorian Public Sector
This document
has been issued by the Victorian Public Sector Standards Commissioner under the
authority provided by
Public Administration Act 2004
(Vic). Under the Code, employees must
only disclose official information or documents acquired in the course of their
public employment when required to do so by law,
in the legitimate course of
duty, when called to give evidence in court, or when proper authority has been
14.128 South Australia has in place the most detailed codification of the
circumstances when the disclosure of official information
by public sector
employees will be permissible. Under s 57 of the
Public Sector
Management Act 1995
(SA), an employee is liable to disciplinary action if he
or she discloses information gained in his or her official capacity, except
authorised under the regulations. That is, where disclosure:
(a) is required as part of the employee’s official duties; or
(b) is required or authorised under the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1993
or is otherwise required by
(c) is made with the permission of the Chief Executive of the administrative
unit in which the employee is employed; or
(i) does not give rise to any reasonably foreseeable possibility of prejudice
to the Government in the conduct of its policies, having
regard to the nature of
the disclosure or comment, the employee’s current position or previous
positions in the Public Service
and the circumstances in which the disclosure or
comment is made; and
(ii) is not made with a view to securing a pecuniary or other advantage for the
employee or any other person; and
(iii) does not involve—
(A) any disclosure of information contrary to any law or lawful instruction or
direction; or
(B) any disclosure of trade secrets or information of commercial value the
disclosure of which would diminish its value or unfairly
advantage a person in
commercial dealings with the Government; or
(C) any disclosure of information in breach of intellectual property
14.129 In the ACT, a public servant is prohibited, without lawful authority,
from disclosing ‘any information acquired by him
or her as a consequence
of his or her employment’ or ‘any information acquired by him or her
from any document to which
he or she has access as a consequence of his or her
employment’.
State Service Act 2000
(Tas) requires Tasmanian public servants to
maintain ‘appropriate confidentiality’ about information that they
in the course of
employment.
Public sector
obligations under the Western Australian legislation include an obligation not
to use ‘for any purpose other
than the discharge of official duties as an
officer, information gained by or conveyed to that officer through employment in
14.130 The Queensland regime focuses on the procedure for developing public
sector codes of conduct, as opposed to the substantive
content of agency
The ALRC anticipates,
however, that the vast majority of public sector codes will include a duty of
non-disclosure. For example,
Code of Conduct for People Working in
Queensland Transport
prevents an employee from using or disclosing any
‘sensitive’ or ‘confidential’ information that he or she
gains by working for the department other than in limited
circumstances.
14.131 All Australian governments have agreed through a memorandum of
understanding to comply with the minimum protective security
standards contained
in the PSM for handling national security
information.
Submissions and consultations
14.132 A small number of stakeholders expressed support for applying secrecy
provisions to state and territory public sector employees.
The Australian
Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre (AUSTRAC) expressed the view that state
and territory government agencies
that access AUSTRAC information should be
subject to the same non-disclosure provisions as Australian Government
14.133 The ATO noted, in relation to state and territory government
employees, that any information disclosed to such a person remains
‘protected tax information’ and therefore protected under the tax
secrecy provision under which it was disclosed. The
ATO considered this was
appropriate.
ALRC’s views
14.134 The ALRC does not consider at this stage that there is a need to
propose any reforms to the administrative framework for state
and territory
public sector employees who access Commonwealth information. These persons are
subject to state and territory legislative
and administrative secrecy
requirements. In the particular context of national security information, the
states and territories have
agreed to comply with protective security measures
set out in the PSM. Similar arrangements could be made to accommodate any other
specific concerns about information-sharing with state and territory public
sectors that arise in the
No relationship with
the Commonwealth
14.135 The discussion above has focused on people who are connected to the
Commonwealth, either through employment or some other relationship.
sometimes information will come into the hands of people who do not have any
relationship with the Commonwealth. For example,
the case of
R v Goreng Goreng
concerned the disclosure of certain
information by Ms Tjanara Goreng Goreng to her daughter and to a member of the
administration
of an Indigenous
Although both
criminal and administrative disciplinary penalties were available in
relationship to the conduct of Goreng Goreng herself,
no administrative (or
other non-criminal) penalties would have been available to address any further
disclosure by her daughter or
the community member.
14.136 The Australian Press Council noted the difficulties that the lack of
disciplinary penalties can create for private sector employees,
such as the
Whereas the conduct of government employees is regulated by legislation and
internal administrative procedures, which specify the
officer’s duties and
obligations with regard to information handling, a journalist or editor is
subject only to criminal legislation
… This raises difficulties, which
need to be considered when framing secrecy legislation. Because media
professionals are not
subject to the disciplinary processes, which are available
in relation to public servants, a situation may arise where a minor disclosure
that is ostensibly in the public interest is treated as a breach of secrecy
warranting criminal conviction. By contrast, a public
servant making a
disclosure of the same information for the same purpose might instead by
disciplined by way of a range of internal
mechanisms, even though the duty
breached is arguably a higher one than that breached by the
journalist.
14.137 In Chapter 6, the ALRC discusses the three civil penalty secrecy
provisions currently on the Commonwealth statute book. The
ALRC suggests that
two of these potentially could be recast as criminal provisions or contractual
requirements. Section 276 of sch
Workplace Relations Act
(Cth), however, does not fall neatly into either of these
constructions. This raises the question whether gaps remain in the ALRC’s
proposed framework for regulating the disclosure of Commonwealth information
and, if so, whether there is a role for civil penalty
provisions in addressing
this gap. In particular, the ALRC is interested in stakeholders’ views on
the appropriateness of applying
civil penalty provisions to private sector
persons who have access to Commonwealth information other than in a contractual
14.138 As discussed elsewhere in this Discussion Paper, the equitable duty of
confidence results from the nature of information and
the circumstances of its
disclosure: it is not contingent on a particular relationship between the
parties. Enforcement of these
duties via the action for breach of confidence or
damages for breach of contract may provide an adequate alternative to criminal
proceedings for persons that are not otherwise in a relationship with the
Commonwealth.
Are there any situations in which neither administrative
penalties nor contractual remedies apply to an unauthorised disclosure of
Commonwealth information? If so, are civil penalties a suitable way to address
these gaps in application or are there other, better
ways of dealing with these
situations?
reasonable employer directions
14.139 The employment
obligations of Commonwealth employees are not limited to requirements directly
set out in the
Public Service Act
or other express terms and conditions
in the employment contract. Obligations under another law, for example, a
criminal secrecy
offence, could be implied as a necessary incident of an
employment contract if, without it, the contract would be ‘seriously
undermined’.
as set out below, all employees, including Commonwealth employees, must comply
with any ‘lawful and reasonable direction’
issued by their
14.140 The scope of the common law duty to comply with lawful and reasonable
directions is discussed in detail in Chapter 13. In particular,
are obliged to comply with a command that ‘relates to the subject matter
of the employment’, ‘involves
no illegality’ and is
‘reasonable’.
the context of the public service, a somewhat broader test for the lawfulness of
directions is likely to apply.
14.141 Employer directions have the potential to override many of the
administrative reforms suggested in this Discussion Paper. Whistleblowers
Australia advised in its submission on IP 34, for example, that the Chief
Executive Officer of the Australian Customs Service had
previously issued a
direction that ‘any and all information obtained by or generated in the
Customs service’ was protected
information and subject to a duty of
non-disclosure. Whistleblowers Australia commented that ‘some
boundaries’ must be
placed on what secrecy directions can be given by an
agency head.
Bennett v President, Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
held that a direction issued by an Australian Government agency to employees
will not be ‘lawful and reasonable’
where it infringes the implied
constitutional guarantee of freedom of communication about government and
political matters.
expressed by Finn J:
It is not sufficient simply to contend that [an agency] gave lawful and
reasonable directions with which [the employee] was bound
to comply when there
would be a real issue between the parties as to whether the directions given
were lawful and reasonable.
14.143 A focus of the ALRC’s proposals in this and the preceding
chapter is on establishing a consistent and effective administrative
framework in the Australian Government. In particular, the ALRC is of the view
that the conduct requirements in reg 2.1 of
Public Service
Regulations
, as revised in Proposals 13–1 to 13–3, should
be the standard administrative secrecy obligation that applies to Commonwealth
employees. In Chapter 15, the ALRC proposes that Australian Government
agencies should develop and implement information-handling
policies that clarify
the application of this obligation in the particular context of their
information holdings.
combination provides a sufficiently nuanced secrecy framework to avoid the need
for agencies to issue further directions to
their employees on the
non-disclosure of information.
14.144 There may be some limited situations where
the potential consequences of the disclosure of Commonwealth information, or
circumstance, justify an agency giving directions to its employees over
and above the requirements set out in reg 2.1. For example,
an agency that
very rarely deals with national security information may need to access
classified material for the purposes of a
particular project. The agency could
issue a direction to its employees imposing specific information-handling rules
for the classified
material. In this context, the principal limitation to an
agency’s discretion is the relationship between the direction and
implied constitutional freedom of political communication.
14.145 The ALRC proposes that Australian Government agencies that have in
place administrative secrecy requirements which differ from
the revised
reg 2.1, including ‘lawful and reasonable directions’ issued to
employees, should review these requirements
for consistency with the implied
constitutional freedom of political communication.
Proposal 14–5
Australian Government agencies should review
administrative secrecy requirements that differ from the revised reg 2.1 of
Public Service Regulations 1999
(Cth), including ‘lawful and
reasonable directions’ issued to employees to ensure that these are
consistent with the
implied constitutional freedom of political
communication.
An APS employee is defined in
Public Service Act 1999
(Cth) to mean a person engaged under
—that is, a person engaged by an Agency Head for the purposes of
the agency—or under
—that is, a person engaged as an APS
employee by the Public Service Commissioner in a specified agency as the result
of an administrative
rearrangement. An agency is defined in
department, an executive agency established by the Governor-General, or a
statutory agency.
Proposals 13–1 to 13–3 propose reforms to the secrecy
requirements in reg 2.1 of the
Public Service Regulations 1999
reg 2.1(5)(a).
reg 2.1(5)(b).
Parliament of
Australia—Senate Foreign Affairs Defence and Trade References Committee,
The Effectiveness of Australia’s Military Justice System
(2005), [3.8].
Defence Force
Discipline Act
also provides for the appointment of Discipline Officers to
deal with minor infractions:
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
An AFP appointee is defined
to include: a Deputy Commissioner; an AFP employee; a special member; or a
special protective service
officer: see
Australian Federal Police Act
As discussed below, the content of these misconduct categories is
described in the
Australian Federal Police Categories of Conduct
Determination 2006
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
Australian Federal
Police Categories of Conduct Determination 2006
Australian Federal Police
div 3 subdiv C.
Where the issue relates to a member of the section, or it would otherwise be
inappropriate for the issue to be investigated by a
member of the unit, the
Commissioner must allocate the issue to a suitably qualified person who is not a
member of the unit:
The AIC covers the Office
of National Assessments (ONA), ASIO, ASIS, the Defence Intelligence Organisation
(DIO), the Defence Signals
Directorate (DSD) and the Defence Imagery and
Geospatial Organisation (DIGO).
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Intelligence Services Act 2001
ASIO and ASIS employees
are also subject to the general secrecy offences in ss 70 and 79 of the
Crimes Act 1914
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Section 90 of the Act also provides that the regulations may deal with
matters relating to employment conditions for temporary and
casual staff. No
such regulations have been made.
Australian Security and Intelligence Organisation,
Conditions of Service
(2008) <www.asio.gov.au
/Careers/Content/Conditions.aspx> at 10 October 2008. The similarities
between the terms and conditions of employment for ASIO
staff and APS employees
was also noted in the submission by the AIC on IP 34: Australian
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009.
Intelligence Services Act 2001
Director-General also must implement a determination of a Grievance Review Panel
to the extent that it is within his or her power
Intelligence
Services Act 2001
the Corporate Governance of Statutory Authorities and Office Holders
Schedule 1 of the
Financial Management and Accountability Regulations
(Cth) lists 85 bodies that are ‘prescribed agencies’ for
the purpose of the
Financial Management and Accountability Act 1997
The CAC Act defines
‘Commonwealth authority’ as a body created by legislation with a
separate legal identity from the
Commonwealth and with the power to hold money
on its own account:
Commonwealth Authorities and Companies Act 1997
R Wettenhall,
‘Exploring Types of Public Sector Organizations: Past Exercises and
Current Issues’ (2003) 3
Public Organization Review
Australian Public Service Commission (APSC) has issued a list of all Australian
Public Service Agencies, including statutory
agencies that employ some or all of
their staff under the
Public Service Act 1999
(Cth): Australian Public
Service Commission,
Australian Public Service Agencies
<www.apsc.gov.au/apsprofile/agencies.htm> at 31 March 2009. As at
12 February 2009, there were 63 statutory agencies
that employed all
staff under the
Public Service Act
. A further 14 statutory agencies had
dual staffing powers.
The enabling
legislation for some statutory authorities impose aspirational requirements for
these terms and conditions of employment.
For example, the
Australian Postal
Corporation Act 1989
(Cth) requires Australia Post to ‘endeavour to
achieve and maintain high standards as an employer in relation to terms and
conditions of employment, occupational health, industrial safety, industrial
democracy, non-discriminatory employment practices and
other matters’:
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Act 1983
Special Broadcasting Service Act 1991
In some situations, the terms and
conditions of appointment are set by, or on the advice of, the Remuneration
Tribunal: Remuneration
http://www.remtribunal.gov.au
Australian Institute of
Criminology,
Employee Collective Agreement 2006–2009
<http://www.aic.
gov.au/institute/agreement/agreement.pdf> at 7 April 2009,
Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority Act 1998
Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority,
APRA Code of Conduct
<http://www.apra.gov.au/
Any other disciplinary
actions, with the exception of formal warnings, must be approved by the relevant
Executive General Manager:
Commonwealth
Authorities and Companies Act 1997
The Act also sets out
criminal offences for officers who are reckless or intentionally dishonest in
exercising their powers, or
use their position, or information gained from their
position, with the intention of gaining an advantage for themselves or causing
detriment to the Commonwealth or another, or recklessly as to whether they or
another would gain an advantage or cause such detriment:
Commonwealth Authorities
and Companies Act 1997
(Cth) sch 2
The governing Act was the
Public Service Act 1922
Explanatory Memorandum, Parliamentary Service Bill 1999
Parliamentary
Service Act 1999
Public Service Act 1999
Parliamentary Service
provides that these are: termination of employment; reduction in classification;
re-assignment of duties; reduction in salary; deductions
from salary, by way of
fine; and a reprimand.
Department of Finance
and Deregulation,
Members of Parliament (Staff) Act 1984
Annual Report
Inquiry had its genesis in the Inquiry of the Senate Select Committee on a
Certain Maritime Incident (the ‘children overboard’
Parliament of
Australia—Senate Finance and Public Administration References Committee,
Staff Employed under the
Members of Parliament (Staff) Act 1984
(2003), [2.13]. The Prime Minister may also issue directions under the
Public Service Act 1999
These have been used, for
example, to preserve a right of return for APS employees who have taken a
position as a MOPS employee:
Prime Minister’s Public Service Directions
November 2008, three types of employment relationships were in place for
employees under the MOPS Act: Individual Australian
Workplace Agreements, for
employees above the level of Adviser; Determination 2007/PM/1 under the MOPS
Terms and Conditions of Employment for Employees Above the Level of
Commonwealth
Members of Parliament
Staff Collective Agreement 2006–09
, for employees at or below the
level of Adviser: Department of Finance and Deregulation,
Parliament (Staff) Act 1984
Annual Report
(Cabinet Secretary and Special Minister of State),
Code of Conduct for
Ministerial Staff
http://www.smos.gov.au/media/code_of_conduct.html
at 31 March
Ibid, cll 1, 2, 3 provides,
eg, that staff must: behave honestly and with integrity in the course of their
employment; act with
care and diligence in the performance of their duties; and
disclose and take reasonable steps to avoid any conflict of interest in
connection with their employment.
Ibid, cl 11.
Parliament of
Australia—Senate Finance and Public Administration References Committee,
Staff Employed under the
Members of Parliament (Staff) Act 1984
(2003), [5.5].
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34
23 March 2009.
11 December 2008.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
Community and
Public Sector Union,
2 March 2009.
Public interest disclosures are discussed in
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 6–6.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009. The CPSU also supported extending the procedural
safeguards in the
Public Service Act
to persons other than APS employees:
Community and Public Sector Union,
2 March 2009.
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009.
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009. See also N Rogers,
9 December 2008. The AGD also noted that procedural safeguards in the
Public Service Act
operate more broadly than just breaches of secrecy
provisions: Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Federal Police,
3 March 2009.
Proposal 13–1.
of Reference are set out at the beginning of this Discussion
Parliament of
Australia—Senate Foreign Affairs Defence and Trade References Committee,
The Effectiveness of Australia’s Military Justice System
(2005), [2.10], citing the submission of Mr Neil James of the Australian
Defence Association.
Douglas and M Jones,
Administrative Law: Commentary and Materials
Public Service Act
Service Commissioner’s Directions 1999
Ibid cl 5.4. The
Commissioner’s Directions also require a written record to be prepared
noting the outcome of the investigation:
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Integrity: But Not by Trust Alone: AFP & NCA Complaints and
Disciplinary Systems
, ALRC 82 (1996), [9.141]. These factors had been
identified in the interim report of the Royal Commission into the NSW Police
Commonwealth v Fairfax
[1980] HCA 44
(1980) 147 CLR 39
Faccenda Chicken Ltd v Fowler
[1986] 1 All ER
(emphasis added).
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 3–3.
Australian Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009; NSW Young Lawyers Human Rights Committee,
4 March 2009; Australian Federal
3 March 2009; Australian
Bureau of Statistics,
24 March 2009;
Department of Human Services,
20 February 2009; Department of Education, Employment and Workplace
19 February 2009; The Treasury,
19 February 2009; Australian Taxation
16 February 2009; Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009; The Treasury,
19 February 2009.
of Human Services,
20 February 2009.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Penalties for
breach of the APS Code of Conduct are discussed in
As discussed in Ch 7,
the proposed general criminal offence will apply where a disclosure would be
reasonably likely to cause harm
to certain specified public interests including,
eg, the security, defence or international relations of the Commonwealth:
secrecy offences are discussed in
Chicken Ltd v Fowler
[1986] 1 All ER 617
, 626. As discussed in
case shows that there is a high threshold before
the equitable action will arise in the context of government information:
Commonwealth v Fairfax
[1980] HCA 44
(1980) 147 CLR
Department of Finance and
Deregulation,
Statistics on Australian Government Procurement Contracts
http://www.finance.gov.au/publications/statistics-on-commonwealth-purchasing-contracts/index.html
at 15 April 2009. Agencies subject to the FMA Act are required by the
Commonwealth Procurement Guidelines
to publish standing offer
arrangements and contracts with a value of $10,000 or more, to demonstrate
openness, transparency and accountability
for procurement decisions. From
1 January 2005, CAC Act bodies subject to the
CAC Act Procurement
are also required to publish details of certain contracts and
standing offers.
Other than the
private sector, the Australian Government may also enter into contracts with
Commonwealth statutory entities and
state and territory departments and
M Mannheim, ‘Concern
over Access to Tax Records’,
The Canberra Times
(Canberra), 27
April 2009, 3.
A description of the
contractual and subcontractual arrangements for service provision at the Baxter
Detention Centre is set out
S v Secretary, Department of Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2005] FCA 549
(2005) 143 FCR
Australian Government
Department of Finance and Administration,
Financial Management Guidance
No 3: Guidance on Confidentiality in Procurement
2007, [3.1].
Information in this context is defined as ‘information about government
which has been generated by government’:
Australian Government Solicitor,
Legal Briefing No 64: Identifying and Protecting Confidential Information
Ibid. The AGS goes on to
consider the circumstances in which an equitable obligation to protect
information arises in the absence
Australian Government
Department of Finance and Administration,
Financial Management Guidance
No 3: Guidance on Confidentiality in Procurement
2007, [3.9]–[3.14]. The four criteria that must be met for a
contracted service provider’s commercial information
confidential are the information to be protected is specifically identified; the
information must be commercially sensitive
and therefore not generally known or
ascertainable; disclosure would cause unreasonable detriment to the owner of the
information
or another party; and the information was provided under an
understanding that it would remain
confidential: [3.15]–[3.22].
Ibid, [5.6].
Ibid, [5.9].
Appendix 3, cl B3(1) (emphasis
Australian Government
Attorney-General’s Department,
Australian Government Protective
Security Manual (PSM)
(2005), pt C,
N Seddon and M Ellinghaus,
Cheshire and Fifoot’s Law of Contract
(8th ed, 2002), [10.31],
Maggbury Pty Ltd v Hafele Australia Pty Ltd
[2001] HCA 70
(2001) 210 CLR
, [11]. This phrase was originally stated by Lord Hoffman in
Investors Compensation Scheme Ltd v West Bromwich Building Society
[1997] UKHL 28
1 All ER 98
also apply to permit the Commonwealth to disclose information to the responsible
minister, a House or Committee of Parliament
or shared within the Commonwealth
to serve legitimate interests.
Commercial Notes No. 25: Protecting Commonwealth Information
Ibid. The AGS notes,
however, that private sector organisations may resist having confidentiality
undertakings imposed on their
personnel—for example, because they are of
the view that these people are already sufficiently bound by confidentiality
obligations.
Australian Government
Department of Finance and Administration,
Financial Management Guidance No 3:
Guidance on Confidentiality in Procurement
The elements of the
proposed general secrecy offence are discussed in detail in
Specific secrecy
offences are discussed in
Government State Services Authority,
Code of Conduct for Victorian Public
Sector Employees
http://www.ssa.vic.gov.au/
2009, [1.4].
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 3–1. This question was not specifically directed to the
administrative context.
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009. See also Australian Federal Police,
3 March 2009; Department of Climate
23 February 2009; Department
of Human Services,
20 February 2009;
Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations,
19 February 2009; Confidential,
19 February 2009; Australian Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
The Treasury,
19 February 2009.
Young Lawyers Human Rights Committee,
4 March 2009. PIAC agreed that persons who contract with or act as
consultants to the government should be regulated by the same
set of secrecy
provisions that govern the agency or Commonwealth officers with which they are
dealing: Public Interest Advocacy Centre
9 March 2009.
and Public Sector Union,
2 March 2009.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
of Human Services,
20 February 2009.
Australia’s Right to Know,
6 March 2009.
the discussion of the deed of confidentiality for the Trusted Information
Sharing Network in Ch 3.
Proposal 15–7.
Australian Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on
Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Whistleblower Protection: A Comprehensive
Scheme for the Commonwealth Public Sector
The duty of
non-disclosure in the APS Code of Conduct is discussed in detail in
New South Wales
Premier’s Department,
Conduct Guidelines for Members of NSW Government
Boards and Committees
(2001), 2. Although this description was in the
context of the NSW Government, the same definitions apply in the context of the
Government.
of Health and Ageing,
1995 Guidelines for the Pharmaceutical Industry on
Preparation of Submissions to the PBAC
http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/health-pbs-general-pubs-pharmpac-gusubpac.htm
at 21 April
Heritage Council Act 2003
Fuel Quality Standards
Regulations 2001
(Cth) reg 12(a);
Plant Breeder’s Rights Act
(Cth) s 64(5).
Proposal 14–1.
situations where the obligation of non-disclosure that applies to a Commonwealth
employee may differ from reg 2.1 are discussed
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 3–1.
Wales Premier’s Department,
Model Code of Conduct for NSW Public
Victorian Government State
Services Authority,
Code of Conduct for Victorian Public Sector Employees
http://www.ssa.vic.gov.au/
Ibid, [3.4]. The
Public Sector Employment and Management Regulations 1998
(NT) sets out
similar requirements for the disclosure of official information. Disclosure is
permitted ‘as required by law’
or ‘where proper authority has
been given’: [10.1].
Public Sector Management Regulations 1995
Public Sector
Management Act 1994
State Service Act
Service Regulations 1988
Public Sector Ethics Act
(Qld) provides that a code ‘may contain anything the responsible
authority considers necessary or useful for achieving the
purpose of a code of
Disclosure is permitted, eg, where an employee is lawfully allowed to disclose
the information; the information is on the public
record; the information was
supplied for a purpose which allows disclosure; or where the consent of the
individual has been obtained:
Queensland Transport,
Code of Conduct for
People Working in Queensland Transport
(2008), 17–18.
South Wales Department of Premier and Cabinet,
NSW Policy and Guidelines for
Protecting National Security Information
Australian Transaction
Reports and Analysis Centre,
2 March 2009.
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009. See
also Department of Climate Change,
23 February 2009.
example, such arrangements could be considered as part of a framework for
sharing inter-jurisdictional criminal history information
with children. The need for information sharing in this context was affirmed by
the Council of Australian Governments
on 29 November 2008: Council of
Australian Governments (COAG),
Council of Australian Governments’
Meeting Communiqué,
29 November
R v Goreng Goreng
[2008] ACTSC 74.
This case is discussed in
Australian Press
18 February 2009.
Liverpool CC v Irwin
[1976] UKHL 1
[1977] AC 239
, approved and followed in
Australian Airlines Limited
(1995) 185 CLR 410. The APS Code of Conduct
requires that APS employees must comply with all applicable Australian laws when
in the course of APS employment:
Public Service Act 1999
R v Darling Island
Stevedoring & Lighterage Co Ltd; Ex parte Halliday
[1938] HCA 44
(1938) 60 CLR
Legal Briefing No 80: Misconduct in the Australian Public
(2006) Australian Government Solicitor. The AGS has advised that a
direction to an APS employee can be lawful if it involves no illegality;
reasonably adapted to protect the legitimate interests of the Commonwealth; and
is reasonable in all the circumstances:
Whistleblowers Australia,
10 March 2009.
v President, Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
[2003] FCA 1433
(2003) 134 FCR
The implied constitutional
freedom of political communication is discussed extensively in
Bennett v President,
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
[2003] FCA 1433
(2003) 134 FCR
Proposal 15–1.
15. Fostering Effective
Information-Handling Practices
Introduction
An effective information-handling culture
Risk factors for inappropriate information handling
Agency policies and guidelines
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Memorandums of understanding
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Training and development programs
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Oaths, affirmations and acknowledgements of secrecy
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Information and communication technology systems
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s views
Avenues for employee queries and concerns
ALRC’s views
Fostering effective information handling at the agency level
Commonwealth Ombudsman
Australian Public Service and Merit Protection Commissioners
Australian National Audit Office
Information Commissioner
Overseeing specific sectors
Submissions and consultations
ALRC’s view
Fostering effective information handling in the private sector
15. Fostering Effective
Information-Handling Practices
Introduction
15.1 Previous chapters of this Discussion Paper have focused on the legal
obligations of non-disclosure that should attach to Commonwealth
officers and
others who handle Commonwealth information. Secrecy laws, however, do not
operate in a vacuum. Other laws and practices
will influence whether or not an
entity publishes or an individual discloses Commonwealth information, including
freedom of information
(FOI) and privacy laws, and the broader
information-handling culture within which the individual is situated.
15.2 Australian Government agencies employ a range of strategies to guide the
release of Commonwealth information by individual officers,
developing and implementing written policies, manuals and guidelines
governing when Commonwealth information should be shared and
when it should be
kept secret, such as the
Australian Government Protective Security Manual
(PSM), agency policies on information handling, and memorandums of understanding
raising individual officers’ awareness of their
information-handling obligations through leadership and development programs
oaths of secrecy; and
implementing infrastructure suitable for handling and securing
particular types of Commonwealth information; in particular, information
communication technology (ICT) systems.
15.3 Australian Government
agencies also have frameworks in place governing the disclosure of information
in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth) (FOI Act)
and as a matter of general policy and practice. The relationship between secrecy
and the FOI Act is discussed in
detail in Chapter 4.
15.4 This chapter discusses the extent to which the above strategies
contribute to the compliance of Commonwealth officers with secrecy
other information-handling obligations, and makes suggestions for possible
improvements. The chapter goes on to consider
information handling at the level
of Australian Government agencies, and in particular the role of independent
oversight bodies in
fostering an effective information-handling culture at the
agency level. Finally, the chapter considers the handling of Commonwealth
information in the private sector.
An effective
information-handling culture
15.5 The overarching premise of this chapter is the need for Australian
Government agencies and others to foster an effective information-handling
culture, rather than what has been described as a ‘culture of
15.6 As has been commented on extensively in the context of freedom of
information, there are compelling drivers for agencies and
officers to sacrifice
the goals of openness and accountability because of a real or perceived need for
non-disclosure. The ‘culture
of secrecy’ was criticised by the ALRC
and the Administrative Review Council in the 1995 report,
Open Government: A
Review of the Federal
Freedom of Information Act 1982
In 2008, the
Independent Review Panel examining the
Freedom of Information Act 1992
(Qld) discussed the tension inherent in information management:
Inherent at an organisational level, the urgency of the everyday imperatives in
modern government can pull the public sector’s
information culture towards
information protection in the interests of issues management, at the expense of
the important but less
urgent information goals for transparency in government.
Culture brings a more complex setting. Access to government information reaches
to the core of political and bureaucratic interests
and operates beyond purely
legal considerations and dispassionate calculations on the public
15.7 In its submission to the Issues Paper,
Review of Secrecy Laws
the Australian
Government Attorney-General’s Department (AGD) noted that a number of
reviews have considered the impact of
secrecy laws on information sharing and
indicated that cultures of secrecy within some of the relevant agencies pose a
greater barrier
to information sharing than legislative
restrictions.
15.8 An effective information-handling culture minimises unauthorised
handling of Commonwealth information, while encouraging information
appropriate circumstances—or, to put this in another way, it produces an
administrative regime that institutes a
suitable balance between the ‘need
to know’ and the ‘need to share’ principles.
Risk factors for
inappropriate information handling
15.9 The Queensland Crime and Misconduct Commission (QCMC) has identified a
number of risk factors that are associated with the unauthorised
disclosure of
official information, including intentional non-compliance—that is, the
deliberate ‘leaking’ or inappropriate
withholding of Commonwealth
information—and unintentional non-compliance.
15.10 The QCMC notes that, among other factors, the
of information may be motivated by:
personal motivations, such as the sale of information for profit or
personal advantage, or dissatisfaction with the stifling of debate,
ignoring of the officer’s individual or professional views;
disgruntlement because of, for example, a failure to gain promotion,
dismissal or other disciplinary action; and
an inappropriate organisational culture such as a failure to
consistently condemn the misuse or unauthorised release of information
practice of misuse or unauthorised release by senior
management.
factors for the
unintentional
release of information include:
inadequate or unclearly articulated policies and procedures on
information management;
procedural issues, such as a failure to classify sensitive
information properly or poor recordkeeping practices; and
failings in network and computer security, such as inadequate
guidelines on password use and computer security, the unauthorised
electronic material from the office or malicious network
15.12 Similar
issues may contribute to a failure to share information in appropriate
circumstances. For example, personal motivations
may result in a Commonwealth
officer deliberately withholding information where disclosure could reveal
malfeasance. Information-handling
policies that do not clearly identify the
circumstances in which information can be disclosed to Australian Government
agencies or
others may result in an officer not revealing information that could
properly be shared—or a lengthy delay before such sharing
15.13 In the following sections of this chapter, the ALRC considers
strategies that can be put in place by Australian Government agencies
to encourage compliance with secrecy laws on the one hand, and
information-handling objectives—such as privacy and
Agency policies and
15.14 The guide issued for Australian Public Service (APS) employees by the
Australian Public Service Commission (APSC),
APS Values and Code of
Conduct in Practice
, advises that:
Agencies should establish clear policies and guidelines so that employees are
aware of the provisions that govern the management
of information. In addition,
agencies may care to consider issuing directions:
• that require APS employees to comply with agency-level protective
security policies and instructions developed on the basis
of the PSM;
• to specific groups of APS employees working with particular kinds of
information (for example, APS employees working on a
particular tender
• that require APS employees to seek advice if they are unsure about
whether to disclose information and to keep a record of
that advice if
authorised to disclose information.
15.15 Agency policies and guidelines can foster compliance with secrecy laws
and other information-handling obligations by instilling
confidence in agency
employees and others about the types of information that can be disclosed and
the processes for disclosure.
example, the
Protocol Governing the Disclosure of Information Between the
Child Support Agency and Centrelink
specifically identifies the information
that can lawfully be shared between Centrelink and the Child Support Agency
Where an agency requests
information other than the data items that have been expressly authorised under
the protocol, it must specify
why the information is needed and the legislative
basis for the disclosure.
15.16 In some situations, an Australian Government agency may issue a policy
to deal with a specific contentious or problematic secrecy
issue. This is
illustrated, for example, by the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) practice
Disclosure to Ministers of Information about the Affairs of
, which clarifies the circumstances in which ATO officers can
provide information about a taxpayer to a minister, including for the
responding to ministerial correspondence with the individual about whom the
information relates.
15.17 Agency policies can also promote awareness among employees of the
avenues through which an employee can raise queries and concerns
secrecy and other information-handling
obligations.
15.18 Tensions can arise, however, where an agency policy imposes more
restrictive information-handling obligations than required
by law. This issue
came into focus, for example, in hearings before the Senate Select Committee on
a Certain Maritime Incident (the
Children Overboard affair). The Committee heard
evidence about the Department of Defence’s public affairs policy, which
essentially
required all information to be released only by the Minister’s
media adviser. In its final report on the incident, the Senate
Select Committee
noted that:
the strictly centralised control of information through the Minister’s
office … meant that Defence was unable to put
out even factual information
without transgressing the public affairs
Submissions and
consultations
15.19 In IP 34, the ALRC asked whether agencies’ policies on
information handling were consistent with Commonwealth secrecy
particular, the ALRC sought views on whether agency policies were imposing more
restrictive information-handling practices
than those required under the related
secrecy provisions.
15.20 Several Australian Government agencies advised that their
information-handling policies were consistent with relevant secrecy
provisions.
Other agencies
justified the need for departure from the legislative standards in some
circumstances. For example, the Australian
Securities and Investments Commission
(ASIC) advised that, in the management of high profile investigative or
regulatory matters,
it sometimes applies more stringent secrecy controls than
those set out in Commonwealth secrecy laws and other relevant standards
guidelines.
15.21 The AGD commented that agency policies on information handling are not
solely directed towards an objective of secrecy:
Where agency policies are broader than secrecy laws, this may reflect the
different objectives behind these policies. For example,
agencies may have a
policy that all media enquiries are to be referred to the public affairs area or
to the Minister’s Office.
Such policies may be directed towards ensuring
the dissemination of accurate information and also at upholding the value of an
public service.
15.22 On the other hand, the Public Interest Advocacy Centre (PIAC) expressed
the view that, if agency policies purported to impose
higher levels of secrecy
than those that arise under Commonwealth secrecy laws, the agency should have to
make out a ‘convincing
case’ to justify
Liberty Victoria noted the
‘impossible position’ that Commonwealth officers can be placed in
when there is conflict between
agency policies and guidelines, and legislative
secrecy requirements.
15.23 The Community and Public Sector Union (CPSU) commented on the need to
clearly identify the source and effect of secrecy obligations.
recommended that Commonwealth information should be clearly divided into secret
information that is subject to criminal
sanctions; Commonwealth information that
may be subject to other non-disclosure or confidentiality duties; and other
Commonwealth
information. It expressed the view that guidance materials on these
employment-based duties should be provided to APS employees and
management.
15.24 The Australian Press Council and PIAC both submitted that individual
agency information-handling policies should be publicly
The Press Council
noted that this would facilitate actions for judicial review and ‘enable
citizens to develop an understanding
of the extent and character of secrecy
processes’.
submitted that:
any regulatory mechanisms that define the duty of officers to keep information
confidential should be contained in legislation that
is subject to parliamentary
scrutiny, not in subordinate legislation … It is not appropriate that
governments can extend or
alter the level of secrecy, which officers are
obligated to administer, without having to justify the change to the elected
representatives
of the Australian
15.25 PIAC also commented on the need to clarify the relationship between
agency information-handling policies and the ‘lawful
and reasonable
direction’ requirement under
Public Service Act
15.26 The primary objective of agency information-handling policies is to
clarify for Commonwealth officers and others who handle
Commonwealth information
the application of secrecy laws and other information-handling obligations.
Agency policies can also satisfy
a secondary role of assisting members of the
public in understanding the standard of openness that they should expect from
government.
15.27 As discussed in detail below, recognising the role of agency policies
as one of clarifying the application of information-handling
obligations goes a
long way towards addressing the possible tension where agency policies require a
different level of secrecy to
that imposed under related Commonwealth secrecy
provisions.
15.28 The ALRC is proposing two further reforms in the context of agency
information-handling policies. First, the establishment of
baseline requirements
for information that Australian Government agencies must include in their
information-handling policies—in
particular, the classes of information
that can be disclosed to others and any associated penalties for unauthorised
disclosure.
Secondly, Australian
Government agencies should make their information-handling policies publicly
These proposals are
discussed further below.
Level of secrecy in information-handling
15.29 Commonwealth officers and others who handle Commonwealth information
can be placed in a difficult situation when they are subject
to an agency
information-handling policy that imposes a different level of secrecy from
requirements under legislation and the general
law. For example, an agency
policy could restrict all but a select few officers from releasing information
to ministerial staffers,
including publicly available information. This is more
stringent than the proposed general secrecy
and the administrative
secrecy obligations presently set out in reg 2.1 of the
Public Service
Regulations 1999
These both include exceptions for information in the public domain. Moreover, an
officer may be of the view that compliance with
this information-handling policy
conflicts with other requirements of his or her employment—for example,
his or her duty to
provide the government with ‘frank, honest,
comprehensive, accurate and timely advice’.
15.30 If agency information-handling policies are drafted correctly, this
normally will mean that the level of secrecy imposed under
the policy will be
equivalent to that set out in related Commonwealth secrecy laws or employee
directions. However, in certain circumstances,
other legal requirements may
justify an agency imposing a different level of secrecy. In the scenario set out
in the preceding paragraph,
for example, the agency may have decided that
restricting the employees who can provide information to ministerial staff was
to ensure that the advice it provided to the government was
‘apolitical’ and
‘accurate’.
for the policy to be properly characterised as ‘clarifying’ the
information-handling obligations of officers—rather
than imposing new and
different secrecy requirements—the agency should clearly set out the
objectives upon which it relies
to justify the discrepancy.
Baseline requirements for
information-handling policies
15.31 The ALRC proposes that agency information-handling policies should
include a baseline amount of information about the secrecy
obligations that
apply to officers, in addition to the potential consequences of
Information-handling
policies should clearly set out:
the types of information that an employee can routinely disclose in
the performance of his or her duties;
the types of information for which an employee should obtain
authority for disclosure, including the potential for unauthorised disclosure
result in administrative disciplinary action; and
situations where the unauthorised handling of information could
result in criminal proceedings.
15.32 In Chapter 13, the ALRC
proposes that agency information-handling policies should also clarify the
manner in which an agency
will apply administrative penalties for breaches of
secrecy provisions.
15.33 Including these types of information in agency policies may foster
effective information-handling practices by Commonwealth
officers and others in
a number of ways. First, it gives an unambiguous statement of situations when
disclosing Commonwealth information
will be unlawful, thereby minimising
unintended breaches. Secondly, information about the potential consequences of
unauthorised
disclosure of Commonwealth information can reinforce the deterrent
effect of criminal and administrative secrecy penalties, thereby
intentional breaches. Finally, instilling a greater confidence in Commonwealth
officers about situations where disclosing
information is lawful can promote the
timely sharing of Commonwealth information in appropriate circumstances.
15.34 The ALRC also proposes that agency information-handling policies should
include information on the avenues available to Commonwealth
officers to raise
queries or concerns. This is discussed later in this chapter.
Making policies publicly
15.35 The ALRC proposes that Australian Government agencies should publish
their information-handling
The public release of
government policies provides members of the public with a better understanding
of the standard of openness
that they should expect from Australian Government
agencies. A greater degree of transparency in the day-to-day operation of
laws also keeps the Australian Government accountable to the public on
its information-sharing processes.
15.36 Making Australian Government information-handling policies publicly
available is consistent with the object of the FOI Act of
making available to the public information about the operations of departments
and public authorities and, in particular, ensuring
that rules and practices
affecting members of the public in their dealings with departments and public
authorities are readily available
to persons affected by those rules and
15.37 The need for public availability of government information is stressed
even more strongly in the revised objects clause included
in the Exposure Draft
Freedom of Information Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(1) The objects of this Act are to give the Australian community access to
information held by the Government of the Commonwealth,
(a) requiring agencies to publish the information; and
(b) providing for a right of access to documents.
(2) The Parliament intends, by these objects, to promote Australia’s
representative democracy by contributing towards the following:
(a) increasing public participation in Government processes, with a view to
promoting better-informed decision-making;
(b) increasing scrutiny, discussion, comment and review of the
Government’s activities.
15.38 In the ALRC’s view, the vast majority of Australian Government
information-handling policies should be publicly available.
This includes, for
example, many parts of the PSM, as recommended by the ALRC in
Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security Sensitive Information
there may be exceptional cases where it would not be reasonable to publish
information on the disclosure protocols of Australian
Government agencies. For
example, it may be that public knowledge of the information holdings of an
intelligence agency, or its patterns
of information sharing, could impede the
agency’s functions. The ALRC proposes that there should be an exception
from the general
requirement of public release of information-handling protocols
where such release would be ‘unreasonable or impractical’.
Australian Government agencies should develop and implement
policies clarifying the application of relevant secrecy laws to their
information holdings. These policies should include:
(a) the types of information that an employee can lawfully disclose in the
performance of his or her duties;
(b) the types of information for which an employee must obtain authority for
disclosure, including the potential for unauthorised
disclosure to result in
disciplinary action;
(c) the circumstances in which the unauthorised handling of information could
lead to criminal proceedings; and
(d) avenues for an employee to raise queries or concerns, including the
process by which he or she can make a public interest disclosure.
Proposal 15–2
Australian Government agencies should make their
information-handling policies publicly available, save in certain exceptional
where this would be unreasonable or impractical.
Memorandums of
understanding
15.39 Australian Government agencies that regularly share information with
other agencies or bodies can formalise the terms of exchange
through an MOU.
This may provide an additional tool to facilitate compliance with
information-handling
obligations.
15.40 An MOU does not of itself provide a legal basis for the handling of
Commonwealth information. Its operation must be underpinned
by common law or
statute. However, entry into an MOU may promote appropriate information sharing
among agencies and others. While
acknowledging that MOUs generally do not have
the force of law, the Administrative Review Council has advised that they may
the exchange of information among government agencies by
‘formalis[ing] the terms of a relationship or framework for cooperation
between the parties’.
15.41 Several Australian Government agencies have MOUs in place relevant to
information handling. For example, ASIC has entered into
an MOU with the
Australian Government Financial Reporting Council, under which the entities
agree—subject to any restrictions
imposed by law—to ‘share
information that they believe would be of assistance to the other in
understanding their respective
responsibilities under the
Each agency agrees,
on request, to provide certain information to the other in a timely
They further agree to
use ‘reasonable endeavours’ to notify the other of the existence of
relevant information, notwithstanding
that the information has not been
Commonwealth and
state and territory police departments also have entered into a detailed MOU for
the sharing of law enforcement
information.
Submissions and
consultations
15.42 In IP 34, the ALRC asked about the effectiveness of the strategies
used by Australian Government agencies—such as MOUs—in
Commonwealth information.
15.43 The AGD noted that ‘MOUs and similar instruments may be used to
set out a shared understanding and guidelines for the
communication, handling
and protection of particular
information’.
agreed that MOUs were ‘an effective tool for setting up protocols for the
exchange of information with other
Commonwealth Ombudsman also advised that it has entered into MOUs with some
other agencies about the exchange of information,
and that these appeared to be
working well.
15.44 Although the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) agreed that MOUs can
commented that, because
MOUs between Commonwealth agencies are not legally enforceable, they are not
guarantees of protection.
However, the AGD noted that, although MOUs are voluntary arrangements, they
operate within the legal framework that governs the relevant
parties to the
agreement. In some cases, this framework may give legal force to certain
agreements and obligations set out in the
15.45 Although not specifically directed to the context of MOUs, the
Commonwealth Ombudsman raised the potential for difficulties
to arise when an
employee of the Ombudsman needs to access another agency’s documents that
have a security classification.
Although there is nothing in the
(Cth), or other legislation, to prevent access in these
circumstances, Australian Government agencies are sometimes reluctant to
the information other than in accordance with their own internal security
classification procedures. While a course of action
can usually be agreed upon,
the issue can hamper speedy
investigation.
15.46 Almost all
stakeholders that commented on this issue agreed that MOUs can be an effective
tool for establishing the terms of
exchange of information between an Australian
Government agency and other agencies or bodies. In particular, MOUs formalise
the standard
information-sharing protocols between agencies. This minimises the
need for ad hoc decision making on the part of individual Commonwealth
and, consequently, the potential for inadvertent unauthorised disclosures. As
with agency information-handling policies,
an MOU may instil confidence in
Commonwealth officers seeking to exchange information by creating certainty in
the information-sharing
framework. Where a disclosure is authorised under an
MOU, it may also satisfy exceptions in criminal and administrative secrecy
for disclosures in the course of an employee’s functions or
duties. The ALRC proposes that Australian Government agencies that
share information with other agencies or bodies should enter into MOUs setting
out the terms and conditions for the exchange
of information.
15.47 A situation where an MOU may be useful, for example, is for the
exchange of security classified information with a body such
as the Commonwealth
Ombudsman. Hypothetically, an MOU could be entered into between one or more
Australian Government agencies and
the Commonwealth Ombudsman, with the agency
agreeing to share security classified information in defined circumstances. This
require, for example, the Ombudsman to abide by minimum protective
security standards. Once an agreed framework was in place, investigations
involving the use of classified information may be better able to proceed in a
timely fashion.
Proposal 15–3
Government agencies that
regularly share information with other agencies or bodies should enter into
memorandums of understanding
setting out the terms and conditions for the
exchange of information.
Training and
development programs
15.48 Training and development programs provide an opportunity for agencies
to educate employees about their obligations in handling
Commonwealth
information, and to impart broader information-handling
State of the
Service Report 2001–02
, the APSC reported that agencies alerted
employees to their obligations in relation to the non-disclosure of Commonwealth
information
the induction process (85% of agencies);
promulgated policies (58% of agencies);
Chief Executive instructions (46% of agencies); and
training programs (44% of
APSC noted that although the majority of employees are informed of their
obligations about Commonwealth information when
they commence employment, 42% of
agencies did not provide employees with regular reminders of these
obligations.
15.50 Some agencies have developed extensive training and development
programs to advise employees and others about their information-handling
responsibilities. Centrelink, for example, provides all graduates and cadets, on
induction, with training on confidentiality, privacy
and FOI laws. The training
module, among other things, specifies the types of documents that officers can
release outside the formal
operation of the FOI Act; provides information on the
application of privacy and secrecy laws; and advises on the availability of
information.
Submissions and
consultations
15.51 In IP 34, the ALRC asked about the effectiveness of training and
development programs in protecting Commonwealth
information.
15.52 Several Australian Government agencies advised that they placed a high
degree of importance on training and development programs
as a tool for
protecting Commonwealth
information.
The ABS, for
example, advised that training was ‘a very effective strategy to maintain
an organisational focus on secrecy and
confidentiality’.
noted that all new staff members were required to undertake an extensive
education and awareness program, including security,
fraud and privacy
In addition to
training programs on recruitment, the Australian Federal Police (AFP) advised
that training on secrecy provisions
forms a part of all management, leadership
and supervisory developmental
15.53 One Australian Government agency noted that, in the past year, it had
developed ‘a compulsory on-line training module’
and ‘policy
instruction (with flow-charts and examples)’ to assist its officers to
comply with secrecy laws. The agency
provides in-person training to all
entry-level officers, as well as training programs delivered on an ad hoc
15.54 The Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre (AUSTRAC) noted
that it also provides training and information to designated
agencies and
reporting entities on their record-keeping obligations under the
Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
15.55 In February 2009, the ALRC conducted an open forum about secrecy
laws with members of the CPSU. Participants commented on the
need for training
and development programs to reflect the type of risks that are commonly
encountered by employees of particular
agencies. One participant noted that,
unless the purpose of the provision is made relevant, employees go
‘straight to a fear
Callers to the
ALRC’s secrecy phone-in also raised issues about the content of training
and development programs. Callers made
remarks about the need for Commonwealth
employees to be trained about broader ethics and values in relation to
government information
handling, in order to instil a greater culture of
transparency.
15.56 Training and development programs are an essential tool for Australian
Government agencies to foster compliance by employees
and others with their
information-handling regime. In order for employees to operate in accordance
with secrecy and other information-handling
obligations, they must first
understand the scope of these obligations and the purpose that they serve. The
ALRC proposes that Australian
Government agencies develop and administer
training and development programs for their employees about their
information-handling
obligations.
15.57 A number of features should be incorporated in such programs. First,
agencies should ensure that they deliver programs that
are relevant to the roles
of participants. In particular, the ALRC anticipates that this would involve
information-handling practices
that employees are likely to encounter on a
day-to-day basis and avenues for assistance in the case of unusual events.
15.58 Training and development programs should be conducted on induction and
at regular intervals thereafter. Ensuring that training
takes place throughout
an employee’s career has the benefit both of refreshing the information
imparted in previous training
programs, and enabling new obligations to be
considered. For example, an employee may incur additional information-handling
responsibilities
because he or she has attained a higher security classification
level or a position of managing staff.
15.59 Finally, training and development programs should also incorporate
information on the circumstances in which it is appropriate
for an employee to
share information and avenues to make public interest disclosures. The need to
share information in certain situations
is a requirement, for example, under FOI
and privacy laws. Ensuring that clear avenues for making public interest
disclosures are
available to employees and others is a central component of the
scheme put forward in the House of Representatives Standing Committee
and Constitutional Affairs inquiry into whistleblowing protections in the
Australian Government.
and development programs should ensure awareness of such
15.60 The ALRC’s proposal is limited to employees of Australian
Government agencies. Strategies to foster compliance in the
private sector are
considered below.
Proposal 15–4
Australian Government agencies should develop and
administer training and development programs for their employees, on induction
at regular intervals thereafter, about the information-handling obligations
relevant to their position, including
the circumstances in which it is
appropriate to share information and the avenues for making public interest
disclosures.
Oaths, affirmations
and acknowledgements of secrecy
15.61 Approximately 8% of the secrecy provisions identified by the
ALRC—predominantly in laws governing taxation and revenue-protection
information—empower a specified person, or persons, to require officers to
take an oath or make an affirmation of
Secrecy obligations may
also be included in the oaths of office required for assuming certain public
positions, such as the oath
taken by Executive
Councillors.
In addition to
conduct covered by these legislative provisions, some agencies have taken
administrative action to require officers
to sign an acknowledgement of their
secrecy obligations.
15.62 Many oaths or affirmations require officers to maintain secrecy
‘in accordance with’ the associated secrecy provision
(or words to
this effect). Identical conduct is therefore proscribed in both the oath of
secrecy and the head secrecy provision,
including the same defences and
exceptions. For example, the oath and declaration of secrecy set out in the
Income Tax Regulations 1936
(Cth) requires an officer to swear or declare
that he or she
will not, either directly or indirectly,
except as permitted under the said
, and either while I am, or after I cease to be, an officer, make a
record or divulge or communicate to any person any information
respecting the
affairs of another person, disclosed or obtained under the provisions of the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
, or of any amendment thereof, or of any
Act substituted therefore, or of any previous law of the Commonwealth relating
15.63 The ALRC has heard anecdotally, however, that some Commonwealth
employees have been asked to sign oaths that set out substantially
stringent secrecy requirements than those that apply under relevant Commonwealth
15.64 It can be argued that the fact that an officer has taken an oath or
affirmation of secrecy is of little or no legal consequence.
Professor Enid
Campbell commented that:
Nowadays, little or any legal consequence is attached to the fact that a member
of an Executive Council, or a Minister, has taken
an oath or affirmation of
secrecy and has done so by virtue of some legal requirement. The legal
significance of the taking of such
an oath or affirmation has been considered by
courts primarily in the context of the laws of evidence which govern the conduct
judicial proceedings. Rules of common law make it possible for courts to
exclude relevant evidence on the ground that its admission
would be contrary to
the public interest. In recent time the availability of this so-called public
interest immunity has been narrowed
by the courts and in one of the leading
cases before the High Court of Australia—
Sankey v Whitlam
1978—Gibbs ACJ firmly rejected the argument that this immunity is
automatically attracted when evidence about proceedings
before the Federal
Executive Council is sought to be adduced, and is so attracted because of the
oaths or affirmations taken by members
15.65 However, oaths and affirmations of secrecy may have legal consequences
where they reinforce the application of other duties
of non-disclosure. For
example, in setting out the particulars in the case of
Kessing v The
, the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal noted that:
On 10 May 2005 the appellant signed documents including an
‘Official Secrets’ form in which he acknowledged his understanding
that all official information that he had acquired in the course of his duties
for the Commonwealth was not to be published or communicated
to any unauthorised
person after his service with the Commonwealth. He certified that all
information acquired by him in the course
of his employment with the
Commonwealth had been returned to an appropriate Commonwealth
representative.
15.66 Beyond any legal implication, however, oaths and affirmations may carry
with them an imprint of moral significance. As one commentator
There is a particular import, a gravitas, to … an oath: a message inherent
therein that mandates a sense of trust, be it in
oneself to fulfill the promise
made or, if we are observing the oath or benefiting from its guarantee, in the
oath-taker to do the
Submissions and
consultations
15.67 In IP 34, the ALRC asked what role oaths and affirmations of
secrecy play in protecting Commonwealth information, and whether
such oaths or
affirmations should be
15.68 Stakeholders that commented on this issue unanimously agreed that
although oaths and declarations of secrecy may have little
legal consequence,
they play an important role in reminding staff of their obligations of secrecy.
As stated by the Department of
Human Services, having employees and contracted
service providers sign deeds of confidentiality
reinforces the importance the agency places on the proper management of
information it handles and personalises the employee or individual
provider’s obligations.
15.69 The concept of personalising information-handling obligations was also
evident in other submissions. For example, the Commonwealth
Ombudsman submitted
that, although it has not been its practice to require staff to swear an oath of
office, the approach may have
merit as a way of communicating to staff their
duties and responsibilities.
Liberty Victoria advised that ‘whilst the breach of oaths, affirmations or
acknowledgements of secrecy may have little legal
consequence, they remain an
important psychological
15.70 The AGD commented that, although failure to comply with an oath or
affirmation of secrecy is not of itself a criminal offence,
the actions that
amount to the breach may attract criminal liability. The making of an oath
‘enables the legal consequences
and duties imposed by secrecy provisions
to be presented to Commonwealth officers for their personal acknowledgement and
acceptance’.
The AGD also noted that courts have taken the signing of an
oath of secrecy into account as evidence of the existence of a duty of
non-disclosure in accordance with s 70 of the
Crimes Act 1914
as seen in the
15.71 Elsewhere in this Discussion Paper, the ALRC considers the need for
individuals subject to secrecy obligations to accept the
personal nature of
these responsibilities.
strong moral significance accorded to oaths and affirmations of secrecy means
that they could play a valuable role in reinforcing
this personal
responsibility. However, their very gravitas means that, if oaths or
affirmations are framed more broadly than the
underlying legal obligations,
those who enter into them may be inhibited from engaging in lawful information
15.72 In the ALRC’s view, the decision whether or not to administer an
oath or affirmation of secrecy should remain at the discretion
of the relevant
Australian Government agency, in accordance with any legislative provision.
However, where an agency decides to administer
such an oath or declaration, the
agency should ensure that it accurately reflects the requirements under relevant
Commonwealth secrecy
laws. In particular, the ALRC is concerned about the
potential for oaths and affirmations to be broader or more onerous than the
secrecy laws on which they are based.
Proposal 15–5
Any Australian Government agency that administers
oaths, affirmations or declarations of secrecy should ensure that these properly
reflect what is required under relevant Commonwealth secrecy laws.
Information and
communication technology systems
15.73 The capacity for Commonwealth officers to handle information
effectively may depend upon the availability of suitable infrastructure—in
particular, ICT systems. Commonwealth officers have identified the improvement
of the capacity of ICT infrastructure to support information
sharing—particularly secure or confidential information—as a key
factor in improving their agency’s ability to
collaborate with other
15.74 ICT systems, such as access controls, can lessen the opportunity for
inadvertent or deliberate non-compliance on the part of
Commonwealth officers.
Centrelink, for example, has implemented a ‘Deny Access Facility’
(DAF), which protects information
clients. Only designated Centrelink officers are able to access DAF records.
This limits
the potential for the computer records of DAF clients to be accessed
inappropriately by Centrelink staff, either inadvertently or
by reason of a
deliberate breach.
systems, such as audit control mechanisms, may deter deliberate breaches by
Commonwealth officers by facilitating the enforcement
of secrecy obligations by
Australian Government agencies.
15.75 Effective ICT systems may also promote information-sharing by
standardising information-handling practices that may otherwise
be contentious
or dependent on the favourable exercise of individual discretion. By way of
illustration, CrimTrac’s National
Criminal Investigation DNA Database
(NCIDD) provides police with access to what is effectively a national DNA
capacity to conduct automated intra- and inter-jurisdictional
DNA profile-matching. NCIDD has been designed to ensure that only links
comply with Commonwealth, state and territory legislative requirements are
available for review. Access is user-based, with
data security processes in
place to manage and audit such
15.76 Where adequate ICT systems are not available, the protection of
Commonwealth information can be
compromised.
For example, as
noted in Chapter 3, concerns have been raised about the capacity for ATO
officers seconded to law enforcement agencies
to have access to the computer
systems of both agencies, and, consequently, the potential for unauthorised data
matching activities.
Submissions and
consultations
15.77 In IP 34, the ALRC asked about the effectiveness of Australian
Government ICT systems in protecting Commonwealth
information.
15.78 Law enforcement agencies, in particular, highlighted the important role
that ICT systems play in protecting official information.
For example, AUSTRAC
advised that it uses a ‘sophisticated and secure electronic system’
to collect, analyse and disseminate
financial intelligence, including access
controls that prevent a designated agency from accessing certain types of
information without
the appropriate authority; the capacity to audit an
agency’s access to AUSTRAC information; and a secure international
system for the exchange of information
The AFP noted that it
has located reminders about secrecy requirements throughout its intranet where
sensitive information is stored.
The Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity (ACLEI) submitted that
law enforcement agencies usually have in place well-developed
ICT systems, and
attach a high degree of importance to implementing and maintaining these
15.79 Australian Government agencies in other functional areas also made
submissions about how they use ICT systems to protect their
information. The ABS
noted that it tightly controls access to its ICT systems. ABS employees can only
access those sensitive databases
that they need in order to perform their
duties, and the ABS conducts regular audits of
The AGD also advised
that it had the capacity to ‘lock down’ information to certain
persons on a need-to-know
15.80 A diverse array of ICT strategies is used by Australian Government
agencies to protect official information. Most commonly,
these involve: (a)
access controls to prevent employees and others from deliberately or
inadvertently gaining access to unnecessary
or sensitive information; and (b)
audit mechanisms, to log who has gained access to particular files. Some
agencies also employ ICT
strategies to standardise information-sharing practices
by their employees and, in this way, promote the sharing of information in
appropriate circumstances.
15.81 The ALRC agrees that ICT strategies can assist Commonwealth employees
and others to comply with their obligations of secrecy,
information-handling, responsibilities. The ALRC proposes that Australian
Government agencies should implement protective
ICT systems—in particular,
access controls and audit mechanisms.
Proposal 15–6
Australian Government agencies should put in place
and maintain information and communication technology systems to facilitate the
secure and convenient handling of Commonwealth information, including access
controls and audit mechanisms.
for employee queries and concerns
15.82 As noted above, the
APS Values and Code of Conduct in Practice
issued by the APSC, suggests that agencies may give a direction to their
employees requiring them to seek advice if they are unsure
disclose information.
advice will usually come from an employee’s
supervisor.
Agencies may
establish additional frameworks for an employee to raise queries or concerns
15.83 The ATO, for example, has instituted a national ATO Privacy Network,
comprising members of each of the agency’s business
sections. The Network
is intended to be the first point of contact to assist employees to resolve
members are also responsible for receiving
and reporting complaints about breaches of privacy and secrecy provisions. The
ATO directs
employees to the ATO Legal Services Branch where they may seek
further advice or
assistance.
15.84 Another option to deal with secrecy queries or concerns is through a
program to provide employees with ethics advice more generally.
strategy is the APSC Ethics Advisory Service that was launched on
6 May 2009.
service will provide advice and resources for applying and interpreting the APS
Values and Code of Conduct. Among other initiatives,
the service includes an
anonymous call and email centre for APS employees to seek advice on ethical
issues, including their secrecy
obligations under the Code of
In other situations, an
agency may have in place arrangements to provide its employees with ethics
advice in a manner that is tailored
to the agency’s specific
circumstances.
15.85 Finally, an employee who has a concern about secrecy obligations may be
able to raise it with one or more integrity agencies,
such as the Public Service
and Merit Protection Commissioners and the Commonwealth Ombudsman.
15.86 Providing Commonwealth employees with avenues to raise queries and
explore concerns about secrecy laws may help promote effective
information
handling in Australian Government agencies in two ways. First, where a
Commonwealth employee has a ready source of advice
agency’s information-handling policy, there will be a decreased risk of
misunderstanding and consequent
inadvertent breach of secrecy obligations.
Further, to the extent that a deliberate breach is motivated by an
employee’s desire
to feel as though his or her views have been
‘heard’ by an agency, providing the employee with an avenue to raise
may lessen his or her dissatisfaction or disgruntlement.
15.87 The ALRC proposes that Australian Government agencies should develop
information-handling policies, which must include, among
other information,
avenues for an employee to raise queries or
In the ALRC’s
view, this proposal adequately deals with the need for Australian Government
agencies to provide their employees
with avenues to seek advice or raise
concerns about secrecy obligations. There is no need to specify a particular
system that agencies
must institute. As long as a clear pathway is provided, it
is reasonable for an agency to have a broad discretion as to the manner
it satisfies this obligation, depending, for example, on the agency’s
structure and functions, and any related initiatives
that it has in place. APS
employees—who make up a significant proportion of Commonwealth
employees—will also be able
to have many of their secrecy queries or
concerns addressed through the APSC Ethics Advisory Service.
15.88 The avenues for queries and concerns that are developed by Australian
Government agencies will be supplemented by the broader
oversight role provided
by independent integrity agencies. The operation of integrity agencies for the
Australian Government is discussed
Fostering effective
information handling at the agency level
15.89 A common theme of this Discussion Paper is the personal nature of
secrecy obligations and how Commonwealth officers and others
who gain access to
official information can be held responsible for unauthorised
disclosure—for example, through administrative
and criminal secrecy
obligations and associated penalties. This chapter also focuses on strategies
that Australian Government agencies
may implement to promote effective
information handling by individuals.
15.90 Individual compliance, however, depends upon the practices and
processes of Australian Government agencies. For example, one
of the risk
factors identified by the QCMC for the unauthorised disclosure of information by
individuals is a failure by the employing
agency to consistently condemn such
disclosures. Agency culture may also play a role in determining which breaches
are discovered,
investigated, and enforced at the administrative level, or
referred for prosecution. A further issue, therefore, is how a culture
effective information handling can be fostered at the agency level.
15.91 The following section of this chapter describes the independent
oversight mechanisms that apply to the practices and processes
of Australian
Government agencies. It goes on to consider whether any reforms are necessary in
the specific context of the application
of secrecy laws.
Commonwealth
15.92 The Commonwealth Ombudsman is an independent statutory officer, with
the function of investigating the administrative actions
of Australian
Government officers and agencies, either on receipt of a complaint or on the
Ombudsman’s own motion.
This potentially includes a range of agency practices for protecting
Commonwealth information—for instance, a decision by an
agency or officer
to disclose, or not disclose, information to a third
15.93 After completing an investigation, the Ombudsman must make a report to
the relevant agency or authority, including recommendations
for change, where he
or she is of the opinion:
(a) that the action:
(i) appears to have been contrary to law;
(ii) was unreasonable, unjust, oppressive or improperly discriminatory;
(iii) was in accordance with a rule of law, a provision of an enactment or a
practice but the rule, provision or practice is or
may be unreasonable, unjust,
oppressive or improperly discriminatory;
(iv) was based either wholly or partly on a mistake of law or of fact; or
(v) was otherwise, in all the circumstances, wrong;
(b) that, in the course of the taking of the action, a discretionary power had
been exercised for an improper purpose or on irrelevant
grounds; or
(c) in a case where the action comprised or included a decision to exercise a
discretionary power in a particular manner or to refuse
to exercise such a
(i) that irrelevant considerations were taken into account, or that there was
a failure to take relevant considerations into account,
in the course of
reaching the decision to exercise the power in that manner or to refuse to
exercise the power, as the case may be;
(ii) that the complainant in respect of the investigation or some other person
should have been furnished, but was not furnished,
with particulars of the
reasons for deciding to exercise the power in that manner or to refuse to
exercise the power, as the case
15.94 The Ombudsman has no power to implement the conclusions of his or her
investigation. However, if appropriate action is not taken,
the Ombudsman can
make a further report to the Prime
The Ombudsman also
must file annual reports that are tabled in both Houses of
Parliament.
Public Service and Merit Protection Commissioners
Public Service Act
establishes the role of the APS
Commissioner, whose functions include evaluating the extent to which agencies
incorporate and uphold
the APS Values; and the adequacy of systems and
procedures in agencies for ensuring compliance with the APS Code of
15.96 Under s 44 of the Act, the Commissioner is required to prepare a
report to the Prime Minister, for presentation to Parliament,
on the state of
the APS during the preceding financial
Every year the APS
Commissioner sends a questionnaire to each agency seeking information on which
to base the report.
15.97 In addition, the APS Commissioner will report annually to Parliament on
information collected by the Ethics Advisory Service
call centre, including on
emerging ethical issues and any action that might be needed to strengthen
understanding of the APS Values
and Code of
Public Service Act
also establishes the role of the Merit
Protection Commissioner
The functions of the
MPC include reviewing APS actions that relate to the employment of an APS
employee and reporting on the results
Recommendations
made by the MPC are not legally binding; however, if the MPC is not satisfied
with an agency’s response to
recommendations, he or she may, after
consulting with the responsible minister, give a report on the matter to the
minister of the
responsible agency and to either or both of the Prime Minister
and the Presiding Officers, for presentation to
Parliament.
The responsible
minister also may request that the MPC conduct an inquiry into an action by an
agency head or another APS employee
in relation to an APS employee’s
employment.
National Audit Office
15.99 Under the
Auditor-General Act 1997
Auditor-General—supported by the Australian National Audit Office
(ANAO)—is responsible for providing auditing
services to the Parliament
and public sector entities. The ANAO provides the Parliament with an independent
assessment of selected
areas of public administration, and assurance about
public sector financial reporting, administration, risk management and
accountability.
This function is primarily fulfilled by conducting performance
and financial statement
The ANAO has
conducted a series of audits of the policies and practices used by Commonwealth
agencies to protect their resources,
including Commonwealth
information.
Information
Commissioner
15.100 As a part of its anticipated reforms to FOI laws and practices, the
Australian Government is proposing to establish an Office
of the Information
Commissioner. The proposed functions of the Information Commissioner
(a) to report to the Minister on any matter that relates to the Commonwealth
Government’s policy and practice with respect
(i) the collection, use, disclosure, management, administration or storage of,
or accessibility to, information held by the Government;
(ii) the systems used, or proposed to be used, for the activities covered by
subparagraph (i).
15.101 The Companion Guide to the FOI reform package notes that one of the
roles for the Information Commissioner is that he or she
will act as an independent monitor for FOI and will be entrusted with a broad
range of functions designed to make the Office of the
Information Commissioner
both a clearing house for FOI matters and a hub for the promotion of the objects
of the Act.
Overseeing specific
15.102 Some Australian Government agencies, including many that handle highly
sensitive Commonwealth information, are subject to more
specific oversight
mechanisms. These include the AFP, the Australian Intelligence Community (AIC)
the Australian
Defence Force (ADF), and the ATO.
Australian Federal Police
15.103 The Commonwealth Ombudsman, in his or her role as Law Enforcement
Ombudsman, has an enhanced investigatory and inspection role
in relation to the
AFP. The AFP must notify the Ombudsman of all serious misconduct matters dealt
with under the
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
The Ombudsman must
undertake an annual review of the administration of AFP conduct and practices
a copy of which must
be provided to both the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of
Representatives for tabling.
Further, the Ombudsman may, at any time, inspect records relating to AFP conduct
and practices issues for the purposes of conducting
an ad hoc review of the
administration of AFP conduct and practices
15.104 The Law Enforcement Integrity Commissioner is responsible for
preventing, detecting and investigating serious and systemic
corruption issues
in the AFP and the Australian Crime
Commission.
The jurisdiction
of the Integrity Commissioner potentially could be invoked, for example, where
unauthorised handling of Commonwealth
information is associated with financial
gain on the part of an officer.
Australian Intelligence
15.105 The Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security (IGIS) is an
independent statutory office holder who reviews the activities
of the agencies
which collectively comprise the AIC. The IGIS provides independent assurance
that the AIC agencies:
conduct their activities within the law;
behave with propriety;
comply with ministerial guidelines and directives; and
have regard to human
IGIS considers complaints or requests from ministers in relation to the actions
of AIC agencies. Investigations also can
be initiated by his or her own motion.
In undertaking inquiries, the IGIS has investigative powers akin to those of a
Royal Commission.
Where the IGIS completes an inquiry, he or she must provide a
report, including any conclusions and recommendations, to the head
relevant agency and to the responsible
The agency head
must advise the IGIS of any action taken in response to the inquiry. Where the
IGIS is of the view that such action
is inadequate or inappropriate, he or she
may discuss the matter with the responsible minister and prepare a report, a
copy of which
is provided to the Prime
15.107 Additional oversight of the AIC is provided by the Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Intelligence and Security (PJCIS). The
PJCIS is required, under
s 29(1)(a) of the
Intelligence Services Act 1982
(Cth), to conduct
an annual review of the administration, expenditure and financial statements of
the AIC. The PJCIS does not conduct
inquiries into individual complaints about
the AIC agencies’ activities.
Australian Defence Force
15.108 The Inspector-General of the ADF (IGADF) is a statutory position
introduced in 2005 to oversee the ADF military justice
The principal
functions of the IGADF are:
inquiring into complaints about the military justice system that cannot be dealt
with through the usual channels, conducting an ongoing
scrutiny of the
effectiveness of the system through a program of rolling audits of military
justice arrangements at unit level, and
analysing a broad spectrum of military
justice statistical data.
15.109 The IGADF does not have the power to implement measures arising out of
his or her investigations. Rather, the IGADF may report
the outcome of inquiries
to the Chief of the ADF, an official in the Department of Defence, a member of
the ADF or another person
affected by the
The Department of
Defence’s annual report also includes a section on the operation of the
Office of the IGADF.
15.110 Additional oversight of the ADF is provided by the Defence Force
Ombudsman (DFO), another office of the Commonwealth Ombudsman.
The DFO can
investigate administrative actions related to or arising out of a person’s
service in the ADF, either following
receipt of a complaint or on the
DFO’s own motion.
general, before the DFO will investigate a complaint from an ADF member, the
member must first have exhausted internal grievance
mechanisms. The DFO is not
authorised to investigate disciplinary action taken against an ADF
Australian Taxation Office
15.111 The Inspector-General of Taxation is an independent statutory office
holder who reviews systemic tax administration issues.
Inspector-General of Taxation Act 2003
(Cth) sets out the functions of
the Inspector-General as being:
(a) to review:
(i) systems established by the Australian Taxation Office to administer the tax
laws, including systems for dealing or communicating
with the public generally,
or with particular people or organisations, in relation to the administration of
the tax laws; and
(ii) systems established by tax laws, but only to the extent that the systems
deal with administrative matters; and
(b) to report on those reviews, setting out:
(i) the subject and outcome of the review; and
(ii) any recommendations that the Inspector-General thinks appropriate
concerning how the system reviewed could be improved.
15.112 Where the Inspector-General, in the course of his or her review, forms
the opinion that a tax official has engaged in misconduct,
the Inspector-General
must report the evidence to the Commissioner of
Submissions and
consultations
15.113 In IP 34, the ALRC asked about the effectiveness of the
mechanisms for monitoring and overseeing the application by Australian
Government agencies of Commonwealth secrecy
15.114 The AFP advised that its standards are overseen by the Commonwealth
Law Enforcement Ombudsman and
The AIC submitted that
there are extensive oversight mechanisms in place relating to the intelligence
agencies—in particular,
the role of the IGIS. These arrangements ensure
that there is transparency in the protections afforded to the
The Australian
Prudential Regulatory Authority advised that its mechanisms were ‘as
effective as is
practicable’.
agreed that, in its ‘limited experience’, these mechanisms appear
15.115 A contrasting view was put forward by PIAC, which submitted that
current arrangements relating to the Ombudsman and the IGIS
are inadequate, so
far as they are limited to the making of a report to the Prime
Whistleblowers
Australia expressed the view that the APSC has been ineffective in overseeing
the application of Commonwealth secrecy
laws and submitted that its powers
should be transferred to the
15.116 Liberty Victoria commented on the importance of independent and
effective oversight bodies empowered to investigate and report
misconduct by Commonwealth officers. It submitted that every agency or
department should fall within the purview of at
least one such
15.117 The AGD noted that monitoring and overseeing the application of
secrecy laws is not the primary role of bodies such as the
Ombudsman and the APS
Commissioner, although they may be able to consider particular matters following
specific complaints.
15.118 Some stakeholders made submissions on the importance of having
available avenues for
whistleblowing.
Renwick, for example, stated that there should be a clear mechanism for the
public servant who genuinely believes that a government
is going to behave
unlawfully to report that
information.
The CPSU advised
that its members strongly supported an independent body where employees could
raise complaints and allegations without
breaching secrecy provisions or
employment duties.
considered that the capacity for whistleblowers to bring information to it
directly for independent assessment and investigation
is an important part of
Participants in the
national secrecy phone-in advised of the lack of support for officers wanting to
report misconduct. One caller
stated that officers feel they have no place to go
to report misconduct with confidence that something will be done about
15.119 Australian Government agencies are subject to a number of independent
oversight mechanisms, including the Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Commissioner, MPC and the ANAO. For many of the agencies that handle highly
sensitive Commonwealth information, such as the
AIC, specific oversight
mechanisms have been established. For the reasons set out below, the ALRC
considers this provides an adequate
framework to promote effective information
handling in Australian Government agencies.
15.120 The independent oversight mechanisms that currently apply to the
Australian Government have not been established for the primary
ensuring compliance with information-handling obligations. Many of their
functions, however, are potentially applicable
in this context. Hypothetically,
for example, the Commonwealth Ombudsman could investigate the systemic leaking
of information by
Commonwealth officers. The APS Commissioner could report on an
APS agency’s administrative disciplinary system, where its operation,
example, was inadequate to promote compliance by employees with their secrecy
obligations under the APS Code of Conduct.
15.121 The proposed Information Commissioner will supplement the functions of
the general integrity agencies. The Commissioner’s
functions are expected
to include reporting to the responsible minister on Australian Government policy
and practice with respect
to ‘the collection, use, disclosure, management,
administration or storage of, or accessibility to, information held by the
Government’ and the systems used for these activities. These functions
encompass issues concerning the application of secrecy
laws in Australian
Government agencies—including, for example, agency information-handling
policies and ICT systems for information
sharing. The Commissioner has also been
given an important role in education and training.
15.122 A determination of breach of an administrative secrecy obligation, and
any penalty imposed, by an Australian Government agency
may also be subject to
judicial review. As noted in Chapter 13, an APS employee may seek merits
review of most agency-level secrecy
determinations by applying to the MPC or,
where appropriate, the Australian Industrial Relations Commission. In accordance
with Proposal
13–1, Australian Government agencies that employ
persons other than under the
Public Service Act
should institute a merits
review process, to the extent that this is consistent with the agency’s
functions and structure.
15.123 At this stage, the ALRC is not proposing reforms concerning the
whistleblowing avenues available to those who have access to
Commonwealth
information. This issue was comprehensively canvassed by the House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs in its
2009 report on whistleblowing protections in the Australian
Government.
The interaction
between this Inquiry and recommendations in the Standing Committee’s
report is discussed in detail in Chapter
Fostering effective
information handling in the private sector
15.124 Previous sections of this chapter have considered a variety of
strategies that have been put in place by Australian Government
agencies to
promote effective information-handling by employees, including, for example,
information-handling policies, training
and development programs and protective
ICT systems. However, where the person accessing information is not in an
employment relationship
with the Commonwealth, these strategies may not be
available. In particular, the ALRC questions whether employees of contracted
providers are always aware of their potential criminal liability under
secrecy laws.
15.125 As discussed in Chapter 14, extensive Commonwealth information
may be accessed by private sector contracted service providers.
situations, the unauthorised disclosure of this information will satisfy the
harm requirements for criminal liability under
the general secrecy offence or a
more specific secrecy offence. In Chapter 8, the ALRC considers which
parties should be covered
by the general secrecy offence. The ALRC proposes that
the offence should extend to ‘individuals and entities who are contracted
service providers for a Commonwealth
secrecy offences might also apply to employees of contracted service
15.126 Attaching criminal liability to the unauthorised disclosure of
information is a unique incidence of government information.
No such liability
results from the disclosure of other confidential information, such as
information obtained under a contract with
another private sector organisation.
This can be distinguished from obligations of non-disclosure that arise under
the general law,
including contractual obligations and the equitable duty of
confidence. These obligations arise regardless of whether the information
originated from government or the private sector.
15.127 If employees of contracted service providers are unaware of the
liability associated with the unauthorised disclosure of Commonwealth
information, the criminal offences will have no deterrent effect. Further, it is
not desirable to impose criminal sanctions on a
person who was unaware of his or
her potential liability. Therefore, the ALRC is proposing that private sector
organisations that
perform services for or on behalf of the Australian
Government should take steps to make their staff aware of their obligations of
secrecy—and, in particular, any relevant criminal offences.
Proposal 15–7
Private sector organisations that
perform services for or on
behalf of the Australian Government under contract should take steps to ensure
that all employees who access
Commonwealth information are aware of their
obligations of secrecy, including the circumstances in which criminal, civil or
administrative
liability could result.
Australian Law Reform Commission and
Administrative Review Council,
Open Government: A Review of the Federal
Freedom of Information Act
Freedom of Information Review
Enhancing Open and Accountable Government
, Discussion Paper
(2008), 90–91.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34
Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009.
Misconduct Commission Queensland,
Information Security—Keeping
Sensitive Information Confidential
, Building Capacity Series Number 7
(2005), 4. Suggestions about an agency culture of inappropriately releasing
information were raised,
for example, in P Durbin, ‘ATO lashed over
Australian Financial Review
, 23 April 2009,
Crime and Misconduct Commission
Queensland,
Information Security—Keeping Sensitive Information
Confidential
, Building Capacity Series Number 7
Australian Public Service
Commission,
APS Values and Code of Conduct in Practice
<www.apsc.gov.au> at 23 September 2008,
See, eg, comments about the
need to clarify information sharing between the Australian Federal Police and
the Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation in Australian Federal Police
National Security Operations Review Committee,
The Street Review: A Review of
Interoperability Between the AFP and its National Security Partners
(2008), [4.2].
Australian Government
Child Support Agency and Centrelink,
Protocol Governing the Disclosure of
Information Between the Child Support Agency and Centrelink 1 October
2006–30 September
. Information that Centrelink can disclose to
the CSA under child support legislation includes, among other details, customer
the last known customer address, family tax benefit entitlements for
customers with outstanding debts, last known employment details
and last known
bank account details: attachment A. In return, the CSA can disclose to
Centrelink, upon request, details of applications
for child support, any current
or previous entitlements of Centrelink customers to child support, and details
of disbursed payments:
attachment B.
Australian Taxation
ATO Practice Statement Law Administration: Disclosure to Ministers
, PS LA 2004/9
See, eg, Australian Taxation
ATO Practice Statement: Secrecy and Privacy Obligations
2004/07 (2004), which directs employees who are in doubt about whether an action
is lawful under the
or secrecy laws to seek advice from
their manager, the relevant Privacy Network member, and, if necessary, the Legal
Services Branch:
Parliament of
Australia—Senate Select Committee on a Certain Maritime Incident,
Majority Report
(2002), [2.53].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper
34 (2008), Question 6–1.
Australian Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009; Australian Bureau of Statistics,
24 March 2009; Australian Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
18 February 2009.
and Public Sector Union,
2 March 2009.
The NSW Young Lawyers Human Rights noted the need to identify in guidelines the
relevant legislation relating to the
duty not to disclose government
information: NSW Young Lawyers Human Rights Committee,
4 March 2009.
Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009; Australian Press Council,
18 February 2009.
Australian Press Council,
18 February 2009.
Public Interest Advocacy Centre
9 March 2009. Lawful and
reasonable directions are discussed in
Proposal 15–1.
Proposal 15–2.
exceptions to the proposed general secrecy offence are discussed in
Administrative secrecy
obligations are discussed in Chs 13 and 14.
Public Service Regulations
(Cth) reg 2.1 applies to APS employees. The ALRC is proposing that
this obligation should be the default administrative secrecy obligation
Commonwealth employees:
Proposal 13–1.
Service Act 1999
s 10(1)(f).
Proposal 15–1.
Proposal 13–5.
Proposal 15–2.
of Information Act 1982
Freedom of Information
Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth)—Exposure Draft, sch 1
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of Classified and Security
Sensitive Information
, ALRC 98 (2004), Rec 4–1. At the time of
ALRC 98, the PSM did not have a security classification but was not
publicly available.
Since this time, the document has been given a security
classification. The PSM and security classifications are discussed in
Chapter 3 discusses
MOUs in the context of sharing Commonwealth
information.
Administrative Review
The Coercive Information-Gathering Powers of Government
, Report No 48 (2008), 65.
Australian Government Financial
Reporting Council,
Memorandum of Understanding Between the Australian
Securities and Investments Commission and the Financial Reporting Council
(2004) <www.frc.gov.au/auditor/mou/MOU_ASIC.asp> at 28 May 2009
New South Wales Police
and others,
Memorandum of Understanding between New South Wales Police,
Victoria Police, Queensland Police, Western Australia Police, South Australia
Police, Northern Territory Police, Tasmania Police, ACT Policing, Australian
Federal Police and the CrimTrac
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 6–3(a).
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009. See also Australian Securities & Investments
Commission,
17 March 2009.
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009.
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
19 February 2009. AUSTRAC also submitted that it has entered into MOUs
with agencies that set out the measures that parties will
put in place to
protect the confidentiality of information: Australian Transaction Reports and
Analysis Centre,
2 March 2009.
Bureau of Statistics,
24 March 2009.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Commonwealth
19 February 2009. This
issue is also noted in Ch 3.
Sometimes training and development can also be used as an administrative action
to address breaches of secrecy
Australian Public Service
Commission,
State of the Service Report 2001–02
28–29. More recent
State of the Service Reports
also include
information about training and development activities; however, these do not
specifically relate to the unauthorised
disclosure of
information.
Centrelink,
Centrelink Graduate and Cadet Induction: Confidentiality,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 6–3(b).
Victoria also submitted that it supported the ‘thorough and ongoing
training’ of all Commonwealth officers in
the responsible handling of
government information: Liberty Victoria,
18 February 2009.
Bureau of Statistics,
24 March 2009.
Taxation Office,
16 February 2009. See
also Australian Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009; Australian Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009; Attorney-General’s
Department,
6 March 2009; Australian
Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre,
2 March 2009; Department of Human Services,
20 February 2009; Australian Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Federal Police,
3 March 2009.
Confidential,
19 February 2009.
Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre,
2 March 2009.
Community and
Public Sector Union Members Secrecy Forum,
Consultation
, Canberra, 3
February 2009.
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
Whistleblower Protection: A Comprehensive Scheme for
the Commonwealth Public Sector
The Standing Committee
recommended that the Commonwealth Ombudsman provide assistance to agencies in
implementing the public interest
disclosure system, including educational
activities to promote awareness of the systems and an anonymous and confidential
line: Ibid, Rec 20.
Superannuation (Government Co-contribution for Low Income Earners)
(Cth) s 53(9);
Termination Payments (Assessment and
Collection) Act 1997
(Cth) s 23;
Child Support (Assessment) Act
Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986
(Cth) s 5(7);
Student Assistance Act 1973
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
(Cth) s 16(6). See also:
Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981
Reserve Bank Act 1959
For a discussion of official
secrecy provisions that govern Executive Councillors, see P Finn,
Information
, Integrity in Government Project: Interim Report 1
(1991), 98–100.
example, in 2007, as a part of the distribution of Centrelink’s Ethics
Resource Kit, Centrelink required all employees
to sign a Declaration of
Confidentiality: Centrelink,
Annual Report 2006–07
(2007), 40.
The Department of Defence also requires employees to sign an official secrecy
form acknowledging their obligations: Australian
Public Service Commission,
State of the Service Report 2001–02
Income Tax Regulations 1936
(Cth) sch 1 (emphasis added).
This was a topic of conversation at the open forum that the ALRC held with
members of the CPSU: Community and Public Sector Union
Members Secrecy Forum,
Consultation
, Canberra, 3 February
E Campbell, ‘Oaths and
Affirmations of Public Office’
[1999] MonashULawRw 6
(1999) 25(1)
Monash University Law
Sankey v Whitlam
, Gibbs ACJ commented that
‘the fact that members of the Executive Council are required to take a
binding oath of secrecy does
not assist the argument that the production of
state papers cannot be compelled’. Any obligation must be ‘binding
law and not merely morals’:
Sankey v Whitlam
[1978] HCA 43
(1978) 142 CLR
Kessing v The Queen
[2008] NSWCCA 310
‘Oath and Affirmation in the Court: Thoughts on the Power of a Sworn
New England Law Review
, 556. See also J
McGinness, ‘Secrecy Provisions in Commonwealth Legislation’
[1990] FedLawRw 3
Federal Law Review
, 74, which argues that oaths of secrecy
reinforce an ‘atmosphere of unnecessary
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 6–2.
Department of
Human Services,
20 February 2009. See
also Australian Bureau of Statistics,
24 March 2009; Department of Education, Employment and Workplace
19 February 2009; The Treasury,
19 February 2009; Australian Taxation
16 February 2009.
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
19 February 2009.
18 February 2009.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009, referring to
Kessing v The Queen
[2008] NSWCCA
See, eg, the discussion of former
Commonwealth employees and contracted service providers in
Australian Public Service
Commission,
State of the Service Report 2006–07
Australian Government Child
Support Agency and Centrelink,
Protocol Governing the Disclosure of
Information Between the Child Support Agency and Centrelink 1 October
2006–30 September
Report 2006–07
(2007), 18–21.
comments in PricewaterhouseCoopers,
Australian Taxation
Office—Information Security Practices Review Version 2.0
P Durbin, ‘ATO lashed
over privacy breaches’,
Australian Financial Review
, 23 April 2009,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 6–3(c).
Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre,
2 March 2009.
Federal Police,
3 March 2009.
Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity,
18 February 2009.
Bureau of Statistics,
24 March 2009.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
Public Service Commission,
APS Values and Code of Conduct in Practice
(2005) <www.apsc.gov.au> at 23 September 2008,
The influence of
supervisors in establishing an agency’s information-handling culture was
recognised in Australian Law Reform
Commission and Administrative Review
Open Government: A Review of the Federal
Freedom of Information Act
, ALRC 77 (1995). The ALRC recommended that the performance agreements
of all senior officers should include a requirement to ensure efficient
effective practices and performance in respect of access to government-held
information, including FOI requests:
Australian Taxation
ATO Practice Statement: Secrecy and Privacy Obligations
2004/07 (2004), 4.
(Cabinet Secretary and Special Minister of State),
Launch of the Public
Service Ethics Advisory Service: 6 May 2009
http://www.smos.gov.au/speeches
Ibid. See also Australian Public
Service Commission,
Introducing the Ethics Advisory Service
<www.apsc.gov.au> at 8 May 2009.
For example, the QCMC advised the ALRC that the Queensland Police Service
operates an internal peer support scheme, which provides
members with the
opportunity to raise issues of concern. The QCMC noted that one of the benefits
of this system is the capacity of
the peer support officer to reassure the
member that steps will be taken to address his or her concern: Crime and
Misconduct Commission
Queensland,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 20 February
Proposal 15–1.
Ombudsman Act 1976
The Ombudsman has additional
responsibilities in his or her associated role as the Defence Force Ombudsman;
Law Enforcement Ombudsman;
Immigration Ombudsman; Postal Industry Ombudsman; and
Taxation Ombudsman.
, however, expressly prevents the Ombudsman from investigating
employment actions (for example, a penalty for a determined breach
Code of Conduct) taken in respect of APS
Public Service Act
(Cabinet Secretary and Special Minister of State),
Launch of the Public
Service Ethics Advisory Service: 6 May 2009
http://www.smos.gov.au/speeches
at 6 May 2009. In exceptional cases, the
APS Commissioner may also refer issues to the agency head or—where claims
serious nature or involving imminent risk are identified—to the AFP:
Australian Public Service Commission,
Ethics Advisory Service Client Service
(2009) <www.apsc.gov.au> at 7 May
Public Service Act
Australian National
Audit Office,
<www.anao.gov.au/director/aboutus.cfm> at 5 September
See, eg, Australian National
Audit Office,
Managing Security Issues in Procurement and Contracting
Audit Report 43 (2007); Australian National Audit Office,
Administration of
Security Incidents, Including the Conduct of Security Investigations
Report 41 (2005); Australian National Audit Office,
Management of Protective
, Audit Report 55 (2004); Australian National Audit Office,
Personnel Security—Management of Security Clearances
, Audit Report
22 (2001); Australian National Audit Office,
Operation of the Classification
System for Protecting Sensitive Information
, Audit Report 7 (1999);
Australian National Audit Office,
Protective Security
, Audit Report 21
Information Commissioner
—Exposure Draft 2009 (Cth)
J Faulkner (Cabinet
Secretary and Special Minister of State),
Freedom of Information (FOI)
Reform: Companion Guide
The six AIC
agencies are the: Australian Security Intelligence Organisation; Australian
Secret Intelligence Service; Defence Signals
Directorate; Defence Imagery and
Geospatial Organisation; Defence Intelligence Organisation; and Office of
National Assessments.
Federal Police Act 1979
Law Enforcement
Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security,
<www.igis.gov.au/about.cfm> at 7 October
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security Act 1986
Defence Act 1903
The position of the IGADF was introduced in the
Legislation Amendment Act (No 2) 2005
Australian Government
Department of Defence,
Annual Report 2006–07
Defence (Inquiry)
Regulations 1985
Ombudsman Act 1976
s 19C(5)(d).
Inspector-General of Taxation Act 2003
Inspector-General suspects misconduct on the part of the Commissioner of
Taxation, the matter is reported to the Minister:
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of Secrecy Laws
, Issues Paper 34 (2008),
Question 6–10.
Australian Federal Police,
3 March 2009.
Intelligence Community,
6 March 2009.
Prudential Regulation Authority,
13 February 2009.
Australian Securities & Investments Commission,
17 March 2009.
Public Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd,
9 March 2009.
Whistleblowers Australia,
10 March 2009.
18 February 2009. Liberty
Victoria also noted the ongoing need for judicial oversight, including, where
necessary, access by the
judiciary to classified
information.
Attorney-General’s Department,
6 March 2009.
interest disclosure, or ‘whistleblowing’, is discussed in
11 December 2008.
Community and Public Sector Union,
2 March 2009.
Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity,
18 February 2009.
Secrecy Phone-In
, 11–12 February
Parliament—House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
Whistleblower Protection: A Comprehensive Scheme for
the Commonwealth Public Sector
Proposal 8–1.
Appendix 1. List of
Submissions
Submission Number
Attorney-General’s Department
6 March 2009
Australia’s Right to Know
6 March 2009
Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre
2 March 2009
Australian Bureau of Statistics
24 March 2009
Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity
18 February 2009
Australian Competition & Consumer Commission
12 February 2009
Australian Federal Police
3 March 2009
Australian Intelligence Community
6 March 2009
Australian Press Council
18 February 2009
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
13 February 2009
Australian Securities & Investments Commission
17 March 2009
Australian Taxation Office
16 February 2009
18 May 2009
J Butterworth
9 February 2009
11 February 2009
Clerk of the Senate
23 January 2009
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
18 February 2009
Commonwealth Ombudsman
19 February 2009
Confidential
11 February 2009
Confidential
19 February 2009
A Chynoweth
2 February 2009
Community and Public Sector Union
2 March 2009
Department of Climate Change
23 February 2009
Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations
19 February 2009
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs
18 May 2009
Department of Human Services
20 February 2009
10 February 2009
Fairness in Child Support
19 February 2009
23 March 2009
IP Australia
4 February 2009
6 March 2009
Law Council of Australia
27 February 2009
Liberty Victoria
18 February 2009
Media, Entertainment & Arts Alliance
10 March 2009
20 February 2009
National Archives of Australia
23 February 2009
Non-Custodial Parents Party
3 February 2009
NSW Young Lawyers Human Rights Committee
4 March 2009
Public Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd
9 March 2009
11 December 2008
9 December 2008
Social Security Appeals Tribunal
17 February 2009
The Treasury
19 February 2009
17 February 2009
Whistleblowers Australia
10 March 2009
Appendix 2. List of Agencies,
Organisations and Individuals Consulted
Australian Bureau of Statistics
Australian Electoral Commission
Australian Federal Police
Australian Government Solicitor
Australian Intelligence Community
Australian Public Service Commissioner
Australian Taxation Office
Attorney-General’s Department
Professor A J Brown
Centrelink and other Australian Government Agencies
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
Community and Public Sector Union
Sydney; Canberra
C Erskine SC
Monash University academics
Members of the New South Wales Bar Association
Justice H Penfold, Supreme Court of the ACT
Queensland Crime and Misconduct Commission
Justice R Refshauge, Supreme Court of the ACT
Dr D Solomon
Appendix 3. List of
Abbreviations
Administrative Appeals Tribunal
Australian Bureau of Statistics
Australian Crime Commission
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity
Australian Defence Force
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
Australian Electoral Commission
Australian Federal Police
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department
Australian Government Solicitor
Australian Intelligence Community
Australian Industrial Relations Commission
Australian Law Reform Commission
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Open Government: A Review of the
Freedom of Information Act
ALRC 77 (1995)
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Australia’s Federal Record: A
Archives Act
ALRC 85 (1998)
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Principled Regulation: Federal Civil
and Administrative Penalties in Australia,
ALRC 95 (2002)
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Keeping Secrets: The Protection of
Classified and Security Sensitive Information,
ALRC 98 (2004)
Australian Law Reform Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
Australian Law Reform Commission
, Privilege in Perspective—Client
Legal Privilege in Federal Investigations
Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian
, ALRC 108 (2008)
Australian Military Court
AML/CTF Act
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
Australian National Audit Office
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998
Australian Public Service Commission
Australian Public Service
Administrative Review Council
Australia’s Right to Know Coalition
Australian Securities and Investments Commission
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Australian Secret Intelligence Service
Australian Taxation Office
Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre
Commonwealth Authorities and Companies Act 1997
Case Categorisation and Prioritisation Model
Chief Executive Officer
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
Commanding Officer
Council of Australian Governments
Community and Public Sector Union
Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service
Deny Access Facility
Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Defence Force Ombudsman
Department of Human Services
Defence Imagery and Geospatial Organisation
Defence Intelligence Organisation
Director of Public Prosecutions
Defence Signals Directorate
Financial Management
and Accountability Act 1997
Freedom of Information
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
Information and communication technology
Inspector-General of the Australian Defence Force
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
Indigenous Land Corporation
Australian Law Reform Commission, Issues Paper,
Review of Secrecy Laws
Information Privacy Principles
Members of Parliament (Staff) Act 1984
Memorandum of understanding
Merit Protection Commissioner
National Archives of Australia
National Criminal Investigation DNA Database
National Privacy Principles
National Security Information
Office of National Assessments
Office of Parliamentary Counsel
Public Interest Advocacy Centre
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security
Australian Government Protective Security Manual
Queensland Crime and Misconduct Commission
Social Security Appeals Tribunal
Trusted Information Sharing Network
United Kingdom
Freedom of Information Act 2000
United States
Appendix 4. Table of Secrecy
The first section of this table lists the provisions in Commonwealth
legislation that impose secrecy or confidentiality obligations
and criminal
penalties for breach as identified to date. The second section lists all other
provisions that impose such obligations
and do not contain express criminal
penalties for breach. Some of the latter provisions create obligations, breach
of which may lead
to criminal penalties under s 70 of the
(Cth). Provisions that relate only to exceptions to secrecy or
confidentiality obligations and other associated matters are not included.
Criminal secrecy offences
Legislation
A New Tax System (Australian Business Number) Act 1999
A New Tax System (Bonuses for Older Australians) Act 1999
A New Tax System (Family Assistance)(Administration) Act 1999
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax Administration) Act
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Act 2005
Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976
Age Discrimination Act 2004
Aged Care Act 1997
ss 86-2; 86-5; 86-6; 86-7
Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Code Act 1994
s 162(1), (8), (9)
Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Code Regulations 1995
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
Auditor-General Act 1997
AusCheck Act 2007
Australian Citizenship Act 2007
Australian Crime Commission Act 2002
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
Australian Hearing Services Act 1991
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare Act 1987
Australian Postal Corporation Act 1989
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority Act 1998
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority Act 2006
Australian Trade Commission Act 1985
Aviation Transport Security Act 2004
Aviation Transport Security Regulations 2005
regs 2.06; 4.46(2), (3), (4)
Banking Act 1959
ss 11CF; 52E
Broadcasting Services (Transitional Provisions and Consequential
Amendments) Act 1992
Building and Construction Industry Improvement Act 2005
Census and Statistics Act 1905
Chemical Weapons (Prohibition) Act 1994
, (3A), (3C)
Child Care Act 1972
Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989
Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988
Civil Aviation Act 1988
Civil Aviation Regulations 1988
Coal Mining Industry (Long Service Leave) Payroll Levy Collection Act
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
(1), (2), (3);
Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981
Competition Policy Reform (Transitional Provisions) Regulations
Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty Act 1998
Corporations (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander) Act 2006
ss 175-10; 183-1; 472-1; 604-
Crimes Act 1914
ss 15XS(1), (2);
; 70(1), (2); 79(2), (3), (4),
(5), (6); 83
Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act 1980
, (1A), (1AA), (4); sch 1 s 355-
Criminal Code
ss 91.1(1), (2), (3), (4); 105.41(1), (2), (3), (4A), (5), (6),
Customs Act 1901
Customs Administration Act 1985
Dairy Produce Act 1986
s 119(2)(a)
, (b); sch 2 cl 43
Data-matching Program (Assistance and Tax) Act 1990
Defence Act 1903
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Defence (Inquiry) Regulations 1985
regs 62; 63
Defence (Special Undertakings) Act 1952
Dental Benefits Act 2008
Designs Act 2003
Development Allowance Authority Act 1992
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
Disability Services Act 1986
Environment Protection (Alligator Rivers Region) Act 1978
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
sch 1 cls 51; 53
Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981
Equal Opportunity for Women in the Workplace Act 1999
Excise Act 1901
Export Finance and Insurance Corporation Act 1991
Financial Transaction Reports Act 1988
First Home Saver Accounts Act 2008
Fisheries Management Act 1991
sch 1A cl 53
Fisheries Management Regulations 1992
Food Standards Australia New Zealand Act 1991
Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986
Gene Technology Act 2000
Health Insurance Act 1973
(1), (3B), (3C), (4), (9), (14), (15), (17), (19), (21),
Higher Education Funding Act 1988
Higher Education Support Act 2003
ss 179-10; 179-
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act 1986
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997
Inspector of Transport Security Act 2006
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act 1986
Inspector-General of Taxation Act 2003
Insurance Act 1973
Intelligence Services Act 2001
; sch 1 cl 9
International Criminal Court Act 2002
Law Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act 2006
(1), (3), (5);
Life Insurance Act 1995
ss 156E; 230E
Maritime Transport and Offshore Facilities Security Act 2003
Medical Indemnity Act 2002
Migration Act 1958
Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters Act 1987
National Blood Authority Act 2003
National Environment Protection Measures (Implementation) Act
National Greenhouse and Energy Reporting Act 2007
National Health Act 1953
, (4), (9), (13), (14), (16), (18), (20), (21);
(3), (6), (8)
National Health and Medical Research Council Act 1992
, (7), (11)
National Health Security Act 2007
National Residue Survey Administration Act 1992
National Water Commission Act 2004
Nuclear Non-Proliferation (Safeguards) Act 1987
Offshore Minerals Act 1994
Ombudsman Act 1976
Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry (Repeal) Act 1986
Parliamentary Privileges Act 1987
Patents Act 1990
Petroleum Resource Rent Tax Assessment Act 1987
Pooled Development Funds Act 1992
Port Statistics Act 1977
Postal and Telecommunications Commissions (Transitional Provisions) Act
Private Health Insurance Act 2007
ss 323-1; 323-40; 323-45; 323-50; 323-
Proceeds of Crime Act 1987
Proceeds of Crime Act 2002
(1), (2), (3)
Product Grants and Benefits Administration Act 2000
Productivity Commission Act 1998
Public Service Regulations 1999
regs 6.3; 7.6
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
Referendum (Machinery Provisions) Act 1984
Renewable Energy (Electricity) Act 2000
Research Involving Human Embryos Act 2002
Reserve Bank Act 1959
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
Social Welfare Commission (Repeal) Act 1976
Space Activities Act 1998
Student Assistance Act 1973
Superannuation Contributions Tax (Assessment and Collection) Act
Superannuation Contributions Tax (Members of Constitutionally Protected
Superannuation Funds) Assessment and Collection Act 1997
Superannuation (Government Co-contribution for Low Income Earners) Act
Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act 1993
Superannuation (Unclaimed Money and Lost Members) Act 1999
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
Taxation Administration Act 1953
(2), (2B), (5), (6C); 3EA; 3EB; 3EC;
(6), (9); 3H(5),
; 8XB; 13H; 13J; sch 1 s 355-
Taxation (Interest on Overpayments and Early Payments) Act
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Termination Payments Tax (Assessment and Collection) Act 1997
Torres Strait Fisheries Act 1984
sch 2 cls 51; 53
Torres Strait Fisheries Regulations 1985
Trade Practices Act 1974
ss 10.89; 95ZP; 95ZQ
Transport Safety Investigation Act 2003
ss 26(2)(a)
Wheat Export Marketing Act 2008
Wheat Export Marketing (Repeal and Consequential Amendments)
sch 3 item 6
Witness Protection Act 1994
Workplace Relations Act 1996
Other secrecy provisions
Legislation
A New Tax System (Australian Business Number) Act 1999
Aged Care Act 1997
ss 62-1; 63-1AA
Air Navigation (Confidential Reporting) Regulations 2006
Air Navigation Regulations 1947
Airports (Building Control) Regulations 1996
Airports (Environment Protection) Regulations 1997
Archives Act 1983
Auditor-General Act 1997
Australian Crime Commission Act 2002
Australian Federal Police Regulations 1979
regs 12; 13B; 13C
Australian Hearing Services Act 1991
Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation (Annual General Meeting of the
Industry) Regulations 1999
Bankruptcy Regulations 1996
regs 8.05O; 8.32
Building and Construction Industry Improvement Act 2005
Cadet Forces Regulations 1977
Census and Statistics Act 1905
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
Crimes Act 1914
Designs Act 2003
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
ss 131AA(4)
Export Finance and Insurance Corporation Act 1991
Family Law Act 1975
Film Licensed Investment Company (Application) Rules 2005
Fisheries Administration Act 1991
Food Standards Australia New Zealand Act 1991
Health Insurance Regulations 1975
reg 23C(2)(a)
Industry Research and Development Act 1986
Inspector of Transport Security Act 2006
(1), (2), (3);
(2), (3), (4), (5);
International Criminal Court Act 2002
Migration Act 1958
Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2004
National Health and Medical Research Council Act 1992
National Health Regulations 1954
National Residue Survey Administration Act 1992
National Workplace Relations Consultative Council Act 2002
Native Title Act 1993
Occupational Health and Safety (Safety Standards) Regulations
regs 8.61; 9.68
Offshore Petroleum Act 2006
; sch 5 cl 4
Ombudsman Act 1976
Parliamentary Service Act 1999
Patents Act 1990
sch 1 cl 4.6
Public Service Act 1999
Public Service Regulations 1999
Research Involving Human Embryos Act 2002
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
sch 3 cl 19
Telecommunications (Consumer Protection and Service Standards) Act
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Therapeutic Goods Act 1989
Trade Marks Act 1995
Trade Practices Act 1974
ss 10.37; 10.88; 15AA; 44AAF;
; 95AI; 95AZA; 95ZN;
Trade Practices Regulations 1974
Veterans’ Entitlements Act 1986
Water Act 2007
Witness Protection Act 1994
Workplace Relations Act 1996
; sch 1 cl 276
Appendix 5. Extracts of Key Secrecy
Crimes Act 1914
Section 70–Disclosure of information by Commonwealth officers
Section 79–Official secrets
Section 83–Unlawful soundings
Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth)
Section 91.1–Espionage and similar activities
Section 91.2–Defence—information lawfully available
Dictionary–Definition of ‘Commonwealth public official’
Intelligence Services Act 2001
–Communication of certain information—ASIS
Section 39A
–Communication of certain information—DIGO
–Communication of certain information—DSD
Public Service Regulations 1999
Regulation 2.1
–Duty not to disclose information (Act
Appendix 5. Extracts of Key Secrecy
The following extracts include some of the principal provisions referred to
in the text of this Issues Paper. Provisions referred
to in passing only, or
otherwise adequately set out in the text, are not included in this Appendix.
Section 70–Disclosure
of information by Commonwealth officers
(1) A person who, being a Commonwealth officer, publishes or communicates,
except to some person to whom he or she is authorized to
publish or communicate
it, any fact or document which comes to his or her knowledge, or into his or her
possession, by virtue of
being a Commonwealth officer, and which it is his or
her duty not to disclose, shall be guilty of an offence.
(2) A person who, having been a Commonwealth officer, publishes or
communicates, without lawful authority or excuse (proof whereof
shall lie upon
him or her), any fact or document which came to his or her knowledge, or into
his or her possession, by virtue of
having been a Commonwealth officer, and
which, at the time when he or she ceased to be a Commonwealth officer, it was
duty not to disclose, shall be guilty of an offence.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 2 years.
79–Official secrets
(1) For the purposes of this section, a sketch, plan, photograph, model,
cipher, note, document, or article is a prescribed sketch,
plan, photograph,
model, cipher, note, document or article in relation to a person, and
information is prescribed information in
relation to a person, if the person has
it in his or her possession or control and:
(a) it has been made or obtained in contravention of this Part or in
contravention of section
91.1 of the
Criminal Code
(b) it has been entrusted to the person by a Commonwealth officer or a
person holding office under the Queen or he or she has made
or obtained it owing
to his or her position as a person:
(i) who is or has been a Commonwealth officer;
(ii) who holds or has held office under the Queen;
(iii) who holds or has held a contract made on behalf of the Queen or the
Commonwealth;
(iv) who is or has been employed by or under a person to whom a preceding
subparagraph applies; or
(v) acting with the permission of a Minister;
and, by reason of its nature or the circumstances under which it was
entrusted to him or her or it was made or obtained by him or
her or for any
other reason, it is his or her duty to treat it as secret; or
(c) it relates to a prohibited place or anything in a prohibited place and:
(i) he or she knows; or
(ii) by reason of its nature or the circumstances under which it came into
his or her possession or control or for any other reason,
he or she ought to
that it should not be communicated to a person not authorized to receive it.
(2) If a person with the intention of prejudicing the security or defence of
the Commonwealth or a part of the Queen’s dominions:
(a) communicates a prescribed sketch, plan, photograph, model, cipher, note,
document or article, or prescribed information, to a
person, other than:
(i) a person to whom he or she is authorized to communicate it; or
(ii) a person to whom it is, in the interest of the Commonwealth or a part
of the Queen’s dominions, his or her duty to communicate
or permits a person, other than a person referred to in subparagraph (i) or
(ii), to have access to it;
(b) retains a prescribed sketch, plan, photograph, model, cipher, note,
document or article in his or her possession or control when
he or she has no
right to retain it or when it is contrary to his or her duty to retain it; or
(c) fails to comply with a direction given by lawful authority with respect
to the retention or disposal of a prescribed sketch,
plan, photograph, model,
cipher, note, document or article;
he or she shall be guilty of an indictable offence.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 7 years.
(3) If a person communicates a prescribed sketch, plan, photograph, model,
cipher, note, document or article, or prescribed information,
to a person, other
(a) a person to whom he or she is authorized to communicate it; or
(b) a person to whom it is, in the interest of the Commonwealth or a part of
the Queen’s dominions, his or her duty to communicate
or permits a person, other than a person referred to in paragraph (a) or
(b), to have access to it, he or she shall be guilty of
an offence.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 2 years.
(4) If a person:
(a) retains a prescribed sketch, plan, photograph, model, cipher, note,
document or article in his or her possession or control when
he or she has no
right to retain it or when it is contrary to his or her duty to retain it;
(b) fails to comply with a direction given by lawful authority with respect
to the retention or disposal of a prescribed sketch,
plan, photograph, model,
cipher, note, document or article; or
(c) fails to take reasonable care of a prescribed sketch, plan, photograph,
model, cipher, note, document or article, or prescribed
information, or to
ensure that it is not communicated to a person not authorized to receive it or
so conducts himself or herself
as to endanger its safety;
he or she shall be guilty of an offence.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 6 months.
(5) If a person receives any sketch, plan, photograph, model, cipher, note,
document, article or information, knowing or having reasonable
believe, at the time when he or she receives it, that it is communicated to him
or her in contravention of section
Criminal Code
or subsection (2) of this section, he or
she shall be guilty of an indictable offence unless he or she proves that the
communication
was contrary to his or her desire.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 7 years.
(6) If a person receives any sketch, plan, photograph, model, cipher, note,
document, article or information, knowing, or having reasonable
believe, at the time when he or she receives it, that it is communicated to him
or her in contravention of subsection (3),
he or she shall be guilty of an
offence unless he or she proves that the communication was contrary to his or
her desire.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 2 years.
(7) On a prosecution under subsection (2) it is not necessary to show that
the accused person was guilty of a particular act tending
to show an intention
to prejudice the security or defence of the Commonwealth or a part of the
Queen’s dominions and, notwithstanding
that such an act is not proved
against him or her, he or she may be convicted if, from the circumstances of the
case, from his or
her conduct or from his or her known character as proved, it
appears that his or her intention was to prejudice the security or defence
the Commonwealth or a part of the Queen’s dominions.
(8) On a prosecution under this section, evidence is not admissible by virtue
of subsection (7) if the magistrate exercising jurisdiction
with respect to the
examination and commitment for trial of the defendant, or the judge presiding at
the trial, as the case may be,
is of the opinion that that evidence, if
(a) would not tend to show that the defendant intended to prejudice the
security or defence of the Commonwealth or a part of the
dominions; or
(b) would, having regard to all the circumstances of the case and
notwithstanding subsection (9), prejudice the fair trial of the
(9) If evidence referred to in subsection (8) is admitted at the trial, the
judge shall direct the jury that the evidence may be taken
into account by the
jury only on the question whether the defendant intended to prejudice the
security or defence of the Commonwealth
or a part of the Queen’s dominions
and must be disregarded by the jury in relation to any other question.
(10) A person charged with an offence against subsection (2) may be found
guilty of an offence against subsection (3) or (4) and a
person charged with an
offence against subsection (5) may be found guilty of an offence against
subsection (6).
Section 83–Unlawful
(1) Any person who in the Commonwealth or in any Territory:
(a) takes any unlawful soundings;
(b) makes any record of any unlawful soundings;
(c) intentionally has in possession any record of unlawful soundings;
(d) communicates to any person outside the Commonwealth or any Territory
any record of or information concerning unlawful soundings;
(e) communicates to any other person any record of or information
concerning unlawful soundings with intent that the record or information
communicated to any person outside the Commonwealth or any Territory;
shall be guilty of an indictable offence.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 2 years.
(2) For the purposes of this section all soundings taken in the territorial
waters of the Commonwealth or any Territory shall be
deemed to be unlawful
unless they were made under the authority of the Queen, the Commonwealth
Government, or a State Government,
or the Government of a Territory, or were
reasonably necessary for the navigation of the vessel from which they were taken
any purpose in which the vessel from which they were taken was lawfully
(3) In any prosecution under this section, proof that any soundings were not
unlawfully taken shall lie upon the defendant.
(4) Any figure or word or sign representing a figure (other than the printed
figures appearing on any official or recognized map
or chart) appearing on any
map or sketch of any portion of the coast or territorial waters of Australia or
of a Territory shall,
in the absence of satisfactory proof to the contrary, be
deemed to be a record of an unlawful sounding, but nothing in this subsection
shall affect proof of unlawful soundings in any other manner.
(5) All records of unlawful soundings including all maps or charts having
thereon any record of unlawful soundings shall be forfeited
Commonwealth.
(6) A reference in this section to soundings shall be read as including a
reference to a hydrographic survey and a reference to the
taking of soundings
shall be read as including a reference to the making of a hydrographic
Code Act 1995
–Espionage and similar activities
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person communicates, or makes available:
(i) information concerning the Commonwealth’s security or defence;
(ii) information concerning the security or defence of another country,
being information that the person acquired (whether directly
or indirectly) from
the Commonwealth; and
(b) the person does so intending to prejudice the Commonwealth’s
security or defence; and
(c) the person’s act results in, or is likely to result in, the
information being communicated or made available to another
country or a foreign
organisation, or to a person acting on behalf of such a country or
organisation.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 25 years.
(2) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person communicates, or makes available:
(i) information concerning the Commonwealth’s security or defence;
(ii) information concerning the security or defence of another country,
being information that the person acquired (whether directly
or indirectly) from
the Commonwealth; and
(b) the person does so:
(i) without lawful authority; and
(ii) intending to give an advantage to another country’s security or
defence; and
(c) the person’s act results in, or is likely to result in, the
information being communicated or made available to another
country or a foreign
organisation, or to a person acting on behalf of such a country or
organisation.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 25 years.
(3) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes, obtains or copies a record (in any form) of:
(i) information concerning the Commonwealth’s security or defence;
(ii) information concerning the security or defence of another country,
being information that the person acquired (whether directly
or indirectly) from
the Commonwealth; and
(b) the person does so:
(i) intending that the record will, or may, be delivered to another country
or a foreign organisation, or to a person acting on behalf
of such a country or
organisation; and
(ii) intending to prejudice the Commonwealth’s security or
Penalty: Imprisonment for 25 years.
(4) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person makes, obtains or copies a record (in any form) of:
(i) information concerning the Commonwealth’s security or defence;
(ii) information concerning the security or defence of another country,
being information that the person acquired (whether directly
or indirectly) from
the Commonwealth; and
(b) the person does so:
(i) without lawful authority; and
(ii) intending that the record will, or may, be delivered to another country
or a foreign organisation, or to a person acting on
behalf of such a country or
organisation; and
(iii) intending to give an advantage to another country’s security or
Penalty: Imprisonment for 25 years.
(5) For the purposes of subparagraphs (3)(b)(i) and (4)(b)(ii), the
person concerned does not need to have a particular country, foreign
organisation or person in mind at the time when the person makes, obtains or
copies the record.
(6) A person charged with an offence under this section may only be remanded
on bail by a judge of the Supreme Court of a State or
Territory. This subsection
has effect despite anything in section 93.1.
Note: Section 93.1 deals with how a prosecution is instituted.
(7) Section 15.4 of the
Criminal Code
(extended geographical
–Defence—information lawfully available
(1) It is a defence to a prosecution of an offence against subsection 91.1(1)
or (2) that the information the person communicates
or makes available is
information that has already been communicated or made available to the public
with the authority of the Commonwealth.
(2) It is a defence to a prosecution of an offence against subsection 91.1(3)
or (4) that the record of information the person makes,
obtains or copies is a
record of information that has already been communicated or made available to
the public with the authority
of the Commonwealth.
Note: A defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to the matters in
subsections (1) and (2). See subsection 13.3(3).
–Definition
of ‘Commonwealth public official’
Commonwealth public official
(a) the Governor-General; or
(b) a person appointed to administer the Government of the Commonwealth
Constitution
(c) a Minister; or
(d) a Parliamentary Secretary; or
(e) a member of either House of the Parliament; or
(f) an individual who holds an appointment under
Constitution
(g) the Administrator, an Acting Administrator, or a Deputy Administrator,
of the Northern Territory; or
(h) the Administrator, an Acting Administrator, or a Deputy Administrator,
of Norfolk Island; or
(i) a Commonwealth judicial officer; or
(j) an APS employee; or
(k) an individual employed by the Commonwealth otherwise than under the
Public Service Act 1999
(l) a member of the Australian Defence Force; or
(m) a member or special member of the Australian Federal Police; or
(n) an individual who holds or performs the duties of an office established
by or under a law of the Commonwealth, other than:
Corporations (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander) Act
Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988
Corporations Act 2001
Norfolk Island Act 1979
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978
of Chapter 2 of Schedule 1 to the
Workplace Relations Act
(vii) Schedule 10 to the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(o) an officer or employee of a Commonwealth authority; or
(p) an individual who is a contracted service provider for a Commonwealth
contract; or
(q) an individual who is an officer or employee of a contracted service
provider for a Commonwealth contract and who provides services
for the purposes
(whether direct or indirect) of the Commonwealth contract; or
(r) an individual who exercises powers, or performs functions, conferred on
the person by or under a law of the Commonwealth, other
Corporations
(Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander) Act 2006
Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988
Corporations Act 2001
Norfolk Island Act 1979
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978
of Chapter 2 of Schedule 1B to the
Relations Act
(vii) a provision specified in the regulations; or
(s) an individual who exercises powers, or performs functions, conferred on
the person under a law in force in the Territory of Christmas
Island or the
Territory of Cocos (Keeling) Islands (whether the law is a law of the
Commonwealth or a law of the Territory concerned);
(t) the Registrar, or a Deputy Registrar, of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Corporations.
Intelligence
Services Act 2001
39–Communication of certain information—ASIS
(1) A person is guilty of an offence if:
(a) the person communicates any information or matter that was prepared by
or on behalf of ASIS in connection with its functions
or relates to the
performance by ASIS of its functions; and
(b) the information or matter has come to the knowledge or into the
possession of the person by reason of:
(i) his or her being, or having been, a staff member or agent of ASIS;
(ii) his or her having entered into any contract, agreement or arrangement
with ASIS; or
(iii) his or her having been an employee or agent of a person who has
entered into a contract, agreement or arrangement with ASIS;
(c) the communication was not made:
(i) to the Director‑General or a staff member by the person in the
course of the person’s duties as a staff member; or
(ii) to the Director‑General or a staff member by the person in
accordance with a contract, agreement or arrangement; or
(iii) by the person in the course of the person’s duties as a staff
member or agent, within the limits of authority conferred
on the person by the
Director‑General; or
(iv) with the approval of the Director‑General or of a staff member
having the authority of the Director‑General to give
such an approval.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 2 years or 120 penalty units, or both.
(2) A prosecution for an offence against subsection (1) may be
instituted only by the Attorney‑General or with the
Attorney‑General’s
–Communication of certain information—DIGO
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person communicates any information or matter that was prepared by
or on behalf of DIGO in connection with its functions
or relates to the
performance by DIGO of its functions; and
(b) the information or matter has come to the knowledge or into the
possession of the person by reason of:
(i) his or her being, or having been, a staff member of DIGO; or
(ii) his or her having entered into any contract, agreement or arrangement
with DIGO; or
(iii) his or her having been an employee or agent of a person who has
entered into a contract, agreement or arrangement with DIGO;
(c) the communication was not made:
(i) to the Director of DIGO or a staff member by the person in the course of
the person’s duties as a staff member; or
(ii) to the Director of DIGO or a staff member by the person in accordance
with a contract, agreement or arrangement; or
(iii) by the person in the course of the person’s duties as a staff
member, within the limits of authority conferred on the
person by the Director
of DIGO; or
(iv) with the approval of the Director of DIGO or of a staff member having
the authority of the Director of DIGO to give such an
Penalty: Imprisonment for 2 years or 120 penalty units, or both.
(2) A prosecution for an offence against subsection (1) may be
instituted only by the Attorney‑General or with the
Attorney‑General’s
–Communication of certain information—DSD
(1) A person is guilty of an offence if:
(a) the person communicates any information or matter that was prepared by
or on behalf of DSD in connection with its functions or
relates to the
performance by DSD of its functions; and
(b) the information or matter has come to the knowledge or into the
possession of the person by reason of:
(i) his or her being, or having been, a staff member of DSD; or
(ii) his or her having entered into any contract, agreement or arrangement
with DSD; or
(iii) his or her having been an employee or agent of a person who has
entered into a contract, agreement or arrangement with DSD;
(c) the communication was not made:
(i) to the Director of DSD or a staff member by the person in the course of
the person’s duties as a staff member; or
(ii) to the Director of DSD or a staff member by the person in accordance
with a contract, agreement or arrangement; or
(iii) by the person in the course of the person’s duties as a staff
member, within the limits of authority conferred on the
person by the Director
(iv) with the approval of the Director of DSD or of a staff member having
the authority of the Director of DSD to give such an approval.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 2 years or 120 penalty units, or both.
(2) A prosecution for an offence against subsection (1) may be
instituted only by the Attorney‑General or with the
Attorney‑General’s
Public Service
Regulations 1999
2.1–Duty not to disclose information (Act s 13)
(1) This regulation is made for subsection 13(13) of the Act.
(2) This regulation does not affect other restrictions on the disclosure of
information.
(3) An APS employee must not disclose information which the APS employee
obtains or generates in connection with the APS employee’s
employment if
it is reasonably foreseeable that the disclosure could be prejudicial to the
effective working of government, including
the formulation or implementation of
policies or programs.
(4) An APS employee must not disclose information which the APS employee
obtains or generates in connection with the APS employee’s
employment if
the information:
(a) was, or is to be, communicated in confidence within the government;
(b) was received in confidence by the government from a person or persons
outside the government;
whether or not the disclosure would found an action for breach of
confidence.
(5) Subregulations (3) and (4) do not prevent a disclosure of information by
an APS employee if:
(a) the information is disclosed in the course of the APS employee’s
(b) the information is disclosed in accordance with an authorisation given
by an Agency Head; or
(c) the disclosure is otherwise authorised by law; or
(d) the information that is disclosed:
(i) is already in the public domain as the result of a disclosure of
information that is lawful under these Regulations or another
(ii) can be disclosed without disclosing, expressly or by implication, other
information to which subregulation (3) or (4) applies.
(6) Subregulations (3) and (4) do not limit the authority of an Agency Head
to give lawful and reasonable directions in relation to
the disclosure of
information.
Note Under section 70 of the
Crimes Act 1914
, it is an offence
for an APS employee to publish or communicate any fact or document which comes
to the employee’s knowledge,
or into the employee’s possession, by
virtue of being a Commonwealth officer, and which it is the employee’s
to disclose.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (21.5 MB)
PDF format (2.84 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter