URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ACTCLRC/1991/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:29:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Contributory Negligence in Fatal Accident Cases and Breach of Statutory Duty Cases and Funeral Costs in Fatal Accident Cases [1991] ACTCLRC 3
Contributory Negligence in Fatal Accident Cases and Breach of Statutory Duty Cases and Funeral Costs in Fatal Accident Cases
Introduction
Breach of Statutory Duty Cases
Fatal Accident Cases
Funeral Expenses
Financial Considerations for the ACT Government
Bibliography
Terms of Reference
Participants
Contributory Negligence in Fatal Accident Cases and Breach of Statutory Duty Cases and Funeral Costs in Fatal Accident Cases
Report No 3 of the Community Law Reform Committee of the
Australian Capital Territory. This Report reflects the law as at March 1991.
Committee Reference: CLRC No 3.
The Community Law Reform Committee of the
Australian Capital Territory was established in June 1990. The purpose of the
is to assist the Government to identify areas in need of reform,
anticipate emerging social and legal issues and assess the practical
various proposals and laws on the people of the ACT. The Committee's Office and
Secretariat are at 3rd floor GIO Building,
City Walk, Canberra City ACT 2601
(Tel (06)2070546, fax (06)2070538).
This report examines whether:
(i) the defence of contributory negligence should be abolished in fatal
accident cases and breach of statutory duty cases; and
(ii) the Government should enact legislation to provide for increased
compensation for funeral expenses in fatal accident cases.
The Report is a review of recommendations made by the Australian Law Reform
Commission in its report number 28 (1985).
The Committee agrees with the recommendations of the Commission that the
defence of contributory negligence should be abolished
in both breach of
statutory duty cases and fatal accident cases.
The Committee also agrees with the Commission that the Government should enact
legislation to provide for increased compensation
for funeral expenses.
Draft legislation which would give effect to the recommendations appears at the
Introduction
1. Before the ACT gained self-government in 1989, ACT law reform lacked a
consistent and overall focus. The Commonwealth had attempted
to establish an
ACT law reform process. In the early 1970s a short lived Law Reform Commission
of the ACT, under the guidance
of Chairperson Mr Justice Blackburn, prepared
several reports for the Commonwealth on issues including conveyancing, mental
and guardianship.
2. More recently the Commonwealth Government referred issues of law reform in
the ACT to the Australian Law Reform Commission,
under an initiative called the
Community Law Reform Program. The Australian Law Reform Commission prepared
several reports under
this program between 1984 and 1989.
3. Despite a number of reforms having been implemented as a result of these
processes, most of the recommendations of both the
Law Reform Commission of the
ACT and the Australian Law Reform Commission received little attention prior to
self-government.
The ACT Government has recognised the need to determine
whether these recommendations should be implemented.
4. Therefore, in September 1990, the ACT Attorney-General, Mr Bernard Collaery,
having established the Community Law Reform Committee,
requested the Committee
to review recommendations made by the Australian Law Reform Commission as a
matter of urgency.
5. Three references to the Committee, signed by the Attorney-General in
September 1990, required the Committee to consider law
reform proposals which
were the subject of recommendations made by the Australian Law Reform
Commission pursuant to the Community
Law Reform Program. Consequently, the
Committee has prepared the following reports.
Report No 2 Occupiers Liability This is a review of ALRC Report No 42 (1988).
Report No 3 Contributory Negligence in Fatal Accident Cases and Breach of
Statutory Duty Cases; Funeral Costs in Fatal Accident
Cases. This is a review
of ALRC Report No 28 (1985).
Report No 4 Action for Loss of Consortium and Compensation for Loss of Capacity
to do housework. This is a review of ALRC Report
No 32 (1986).
6. This report, the second of the three reports on recommendations of the
Commission, was requested by the Attorney-General in
a reference to the
Committee signed on the 21 September 1990. The reference required the
Committee to review the recommendations
of the Commission, presented in its
report number 28 (1985). The Commission recommended that:
(i) the defence of contributory negligence in fatal accident cases and in
breach of statutory duty cases be abolished; and
(ii) the Government enact legislation to provide for more generous and clearer
entitlements to families of fatal accident victims
for funeral and related costs.
Submissions
7. In preparing this report the Committee made use of the collective experience
of its members, including those with expertise
in business, legal practice and
community welfare, to assess the impact of proposals on the ACT community. An
Issues Paper
on this area, prepared by the
Committee's Secretariat, was widely circulated and the Committee called for submissions.
of the Committee have examined the following submissions:
(i) National Roads and Motorists Association, January 1991;
(ii) Insurance Council of Australia Limited, January 1991;
(iii) Mr J Marks, October 1990; and
(iv) Ms Uyen Loewald, February 1991.
8. The Committee also received written information from Mrs Christine Walters
J.P., Manager of the firm 'M. H. O'Rourke Funerals'
and received written
information and oral evidence from Mr David Treloar, Managing Director of the
firm 'Tobin Brothers Funeral
Directors'.
9. The Committee also carefully considered the Commission's report number 28 on
this area and discussed these issues extensively
with Mr Nick Seddon who as
Commissioner in Charge of the Community Law Reform Program, was a primary
contributor to the Commission's
report. Mr Seddon is a Commissioner of the
Australian Law Reform Commission as well as a member of this Committee.
of Statutory Duty Cases
10. The law allows people who suffer injury due to the negligence of another to
claim compensation from the 'injurer'. However
if the victim contributed to
his or her injury then the law may reduce the amount of compensation the victim
might otherwise have
received because of the 'contributory negligence' of the
victim. For example: if Anne negligently injures Bill and Bill contributed
his injury, then the law may reduce the amount of money he may receive from
Anne or her insurer because of what the law calls
Bill's 'contributory
negligence'. Lawyers refer to this rule as the 'defence of contributory
negligence'.
11. Governments have responded to the increasing complexity and hazards of
modern society by legislating to oblige people to take
safety measures. In
particular, many laws govern safety at the workplace. In most cases
legislation provides for a fine or other
penalty when someone fails to perform
a statutory duty.
12. The Courts allow a person injured by a breach of a statutory duty to seek
compensation for their injury. Breach of statutory
duty cases are generally
cases involving lapses in industrial safety standards in which an employee
claims compensation from his
or her employer for the breach. The defence of
contributory negligence applies to breach of statutory duty cases in the ACT
all other Territories and States. If successful the defence can reduce but
not defeat a claim for compensation.
13. In New South Wales, the Government disallowed the defence in 1945 but
restored it in 1989 for work accident cases.
Section 151N
Compensation Act 1987
(NSW) allows the defence in all work accident cases
including fatal accident cases and breach of statutory duty cases
Subsection 151N(2)
of the Act, prevents the
defence from reducing compensation for loss of earning capacity below the level
the worker could have
claimed, if eligible, as a lump sum under the statutory
compensation scheme
. This limitation applies
to breach of statutory duty cases as well as to other work accident cases so
the law in New South
Wales differs from other States.
Recommendation
14. The Committee agrees with the recommendation of the Commission that the
defence of contributory negligence should be abolished
in breach of statutory
duty cases. The Committee had regard to the following points in making its
(i) A statutory duty is a standard of safety imposed by parliament to ensure,
as far as possible, that accidents do not happen
even if people are careless.
It is therefore illogical and contrary to the purpose of statutory duties for
compensation for breach
of such a duty to be reduced for contributory
negligence when the very purpose of the imposition of a statutory duty is to
workers against their own inadvertence.
(ii) An action for breach of statutory duty is not a negligence action. The
legislation which creates the duty will determine
the nature of the obligation
and negligence may have nothing to do with the duty or its breach. It is
therefore illogical for
the courts to apply standards of negligence to the
injured person when those same standards may not apply in determining whether
an employer has breached a statutory duty.
(iii) In many cases a statutory duty is imposed on the employer as the person
in the best position, in terms of resources and knowledge
of the enterprise, to
make sure that the enterprise is safe. Further, employers must take out
insurance against compensation claims
and so are usually in a better position
to pay than an uninsured worker.
(iv) The Insurance Council of Australia Limited, in its submission to the
Committee, stated that abolition of the defence of contributory
negligence in
breach of statutory duty cases will cause an increase in the number and cost of
compensation claims and so cause
a rise in insurance premiums.
The Committee considers that abolition of the defence will have a minimal
impact, if any, on the costs of accident compensation
in the workplace. The
defence itself is rarely successful and a breach of a statutory duty will often
entitle an employee to
full compensation regardless of his or her carelessness.
Also breach of statutory duty actions represent only a small minority
of compensation
claims in the workplace. A recent review of workers compensation in the ACT
concludes that abolition of common
law claims outside the scheme will have a
marginal effect on insurance costs
. This conclusion suggests that reform of this
limited area will not have a significant effect on overall insurance costs.
will however, facilitate the settlement of claims by removing a bargaining
(v) The High Court considered this issue for the first time in
Butterfield and Lewis
when it decided
that, as a matter of principle, the defence did not apply to breach of statutory
duty cases. Several years
later the House of Lords in England in
v Powell Duffryn Associated Collieries Ltd
came to the contrary conclusion that the defence
did apply. In
Piro v W Foster & Co Ltd
, the High Court considered that it should follow
the House of Lords decision. It overruled
Bourke v Butterfield and Lewis
to decide that the defence should apply to breach of statutory duty cases.
As decisions of the House of Lords are no longer binding on the High Court,
the High Court may return to its original position.
It may be noted that the
defence is seldom upheld in the State and Territory Courts.
Accident Cases
15. Legislation in the ACT and other States allows family members to claim
compensation for the economic effects of the loss of
a breadwinner or
houseworker. To claim compensation, family members must establish that the
deceased victim died because of the
negligence of another.
16. In general, dependents may claim for the loss of benefits or services the
deceased would have provided if the deceased had
survived. The family of a
negligently killed full time houseworker may make a claim for the loss of the
housekeeping and child
caring services of the deceased. The law does not allow
compensation for the emotional effect of the loss or bereavement.
17. The defence of contributory negligence applies to fatal accident cases.
18. In the ACT people may claim compensation for the loss of a family member
pursuant to the
Compensation (Fatal Injuries) Act 1968
which sets out
in detail who may claim compensation
Act and similar Acts in other States are commonly referred to as 'Lord Campbell's
19. The law in most other States is similar to that in the ACT. Victoria is
now the only State where the Courts may not apply
the defence of contributory
negligence in fatal accident cases
Recommendation
20. The Committee agrees with the recommendation of the Commission that the
defence of contributory negligence should be abolished
in fatal accident cases.
The Committee had regard to the following points in making its decision.
(i) It is inequitable for dependents to receive less compensation because of
the negligence, not of themselves, but of the deceased.
The loss and need of
the family is just as great whether the deceased contributed to his or her
death or not.
(ii) In a motor accident the surviving person who caused the accident does not
pay for his or her part in the death of the deceased,
an insurance company
does. In contrast, the deceased's family may suffer a loss in the form of
reduced compensation because of
the deceased's part in his or her death. Third
party motor vehicle insurance will not cover this particular loss. In short,
contributory
negligence has a very real financial impact on the family whereas
negligence by the defendant has no financial effect on him or
Similarly, in work accident cases an insurance company will pay for the cost
to the employer of the accident whereas the family
of the deceased could suffer
a direct loss in the form of reduced compensation because of the deceased's
part in his or her death.
(iii) Abolition of the defence in fatal accident cases could have a particular
consequence for people or organisations who negligently
injure another and do
not have insurance to cover liability for the injury. For example, an accident
at home could lead to an
injured person making a negligence claim against an
uninsured person, the injurer, who becomes the defendant in the claim. The
defendant may have to pay more out of his or her pocket if the defence of
contributory negligence is abolished.
The vast majority of fatal accidents occur on the road or at work where the
defendant is insured. It is not appropriate to make
an exception for the small
minority of situations where the defendant is not insured and allow the defence
of contributory negligence
to continue to apply in those cases. To do so would
result in an injured person receiving less compensation simply because the
defendant on a particular occasion did not have insurance. People are able to
obtain insurance at modest rates against the possibility
of a negligence claim
but victims can not choose their injurer.
(iv) In addition, abolition could have an exceptional consequence for owner
drivers and employers without compulsory insurance.
A person injured by an uninsured
vehicle must sue the nominal defendant for compensation instead of the owner
of the uninsured
. The nominal
defendant can then recover the compensation it pays to that person from the
owner of the uninsured vehicle
situation, the uninsured owner and not an insurance company, becomes liable
to pay the full costs of compensation.
If the defence of contributory negligence
is abolished in fatal motor accident cases, the nominal defendant and therefore
drivers could on occasion have to pay more compensation than if the
defence had applied. Employers without compulsory insurance
against common law
liability to the level required under the
Workmens Compensation Act 1951
may find themselves in a similar situation
The Committee decided against retention of the defence in these
instances because to do so would advantage those who commit a serious
in not having compulsory insurance.
(v) Some consider that these issues apply equally to dependents of accident
victims who survive but suffer serious injuries and
that, if the defence is
abolished to the benefit of families in fatal accident cases, it should also
disappear in cases where the
victim survives.
Dependents of a negligently injured person are in a different situation from
dependents of a negligently killed person. The dependents
of an injured person
can not claim compensation for the injury, only the actual victim can do so.
In contrast, dependents of a
person who is killed have an independent right to
claim compensation for the loss of support and other benefits they might have
expected to receive from the deceased. It is therefore appropriate to pursue
reform in the discrete area of fatal accidents.
To do otherwise and postpone
reform, pending abolition of the defence in all accident cases, will most
likely result in no reform
(vi) The High Court has significantly narrowed the scope of the defence of
contributory negligence in work accidents
. Mistakes due to conditions of work including
preoccupation with the job at hand, inattention caused by repetitive tasks or
fatigue will, in general, not amount to contributory negligence.
The approach of the High Court recognises that a worker should not suffer
because of mistakes made due to the pressure of work.
Abolition of the defence
in fatal accidents at work is an appropriate extension of this same philosophy.
(vii) Abolition of the defence will not change other features of the law of
negligence which limit and define people's liability
for injury to others. The
injured person must still prove that the alleged injurer was negligent and that
the negligence caused
the injury. Also, the defence of 'voluntary assumption
of risk' still applies in appropriate situations
. This defence allows an injurer to establish
that he or she is not liable because the injured person voluntarily consented
to involvement in the dangerous situation causing the injury when fully aware
of the risks involved.
(viii) The National Roads and Motorists Association and the Insurance Council
of Australia Limited in their submissions to the
Committee stated that
abolition of the defence in fatal accident cases will cause insurance premiums
to rise. They were, however,
unable to provide the Committee with statistical
evidence to support this view.
(ix) There is no evidence before the Committee to enable it to say with
certainty whether abolition will cause an increase in the
amount insurance
companies must pay for compensation or that it will cause a rise in insurance
21. Legislation in the ACT allows the family of negligently killed victims to
claim compensation for the 'reasonable expenses of
burial and cremation'
. The ACT Courts have interpreted this phrase
very narrowly to find that it includes only the bare cost of burial or cremation
not other costs such as for a memorial or headstone to a grave
. This legislation prevents relatives of people
killed in the ACT from claiming reasonable compensation for items such as headstones,
wreaths, funeral notices and church services which they would generally be able
to do if the death occurred in other States
Recommendation
22. The legislation in the ACT does not allow for proper and adequate
compensation for funeral expenses. The Committee therefore
agrees with the
Commission that changes to the legislation are necessary. The Committee
recommends that the Government enact legislation
as annexed, to allow claims
for compensation for reasonable funeral expenses beyond the bare cost of burial
or cremation. In coming
to this decision, the Committee considered the
following matters.
(i) The legislation should allow compensation for the reasonable cost of
funeral services, press notices, headstones or memorials,
flowers and other
(ii) The Committee agrees with the recommendation of the Commission that the
legislation should clearly state the type of funeral
expenses for which people
(iii) The Committee considers, on balance, that the legislation should enable
the Courts to determine what level of compensation
is reasonable rather than
set a fixed monetary sum or ceiling to apply in all or most cases. The
diversity of funeral requirements
of different ethnic and religious groups
makes it difficult to determine in advance a level of compensation which would
majority of reasonable and just claims.
(iv) Regard should be had to the need to discount the full amount paid or
payable for funeral expenses in circumstances where the
age or health of the
deceased immediately prior to the relevant accident renders such discounting
appropriate.
Considerations for the ACT Government
Implications
23. The implementation of these recommendations will not involve the ACT
Government in any immediate financial cost.
24. In the long term the Government could incur additional costs in the form of
increased compensation payments. These extra costs
would be payable directly
by the Government as it and its instrumentalities are, in the main, self
insured. The Committee considers
such extra costs would be of marginal
significance because the recommendations will affect only a minority of future
compensation
claims against the Government.
Bibliography
Bourke v Butterfield and Lewis
[1926] HCA 38
(1926) 38 CLR 354
Caswell v Powell Duffryn Associated Collieries Ltd
(1940) A.C. 152
Cunningham v The Nominal Defendant
(1970) 17 FLR 61
Commissioner for Railways v Halley
(1978) 20 ALR 409
Commissioner of Railways v Ruprecht
[1979] HCA 37
(1978) 142 CLR 563
Insurance Commissioner v Joyce
[1948] HCA 17
(1948) 77 CLR 39
Mclean v Tedman
[1984] HCA 60
(1984) 155 CLR 306
Piro v W Foster & Co Ltd
[1943] HCA 32
(1943) 68 CLR 313
Podreberserk v Australian Iron and Steel Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 34
(1985) 59 ALR 529
Roggenkamp v Bennett
[1950] HCA 23
(1950) 80 CLR 292
Zotovic v Dobel Boat Hire Pty Limited
(1985) 62 ACTR 29
of Legislation
Australian Capital Territory
Compensation (Fatal Injuries) Act 1968
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1955
Motor Traffic Act 1936
Workmens Compensation Act 1951
New South Wales
Compensation to Relatives Act 1897
Motor Accidents Act 1988
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Northern Territory
Compensation (Fatal Injuries) Act 1974
Succession Act 1981
South Australia
Wrongs Act 1936
Fatal Accidents Act 1934
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Wrongs Act 1958
Western Australia
Fatal Accidents Act 1959
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY,
Review of the ACT Workers Compensation Scheme,
Sydney, August, 1990
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE AND COMMUNITY SERVICES,
Issues Paper,
Defence of Contributory Negligence,
Canberra 1990
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION, Report No 28,
Community Law Reform for the
Australian Capital Territory, First Report
AGPS, Canberra 1985
AUSTRALIAN TORTS REPORTER, CCH Australia Ltd., Sydney, 1989
COMMUNITY LAW REFORM COMMITTEE, Report No 2, Australian Capital Territory,
Canberra, 1991
COMMUNITY LAW REFORM COMMITTEE, Report No 4, Australian Capital Territory,
Canberra, 1991
The Law of Torts
7th Ed, The Law Book Company, Sydney, 1987
Assessment of Damages for Personal Injury and Death
Butterworths Pty Ltd., Sydney, 1990
LUNTZ HAMBLY AND HAYES
Torts Cases and Commentary
2nd Ed, Butterworths
Pty Ltd., Sydney, 1985
of Reference
I, BERNARD COLLAERY, Attorney-General of the Australian Capital Territory,
HAVING REGARD TO -
the recommendations of the Australian Law Reform Commission, made in its first
report to the Commonwealth Attorney-General pursuant
to the Australian Capital
Territory Community Law Reform Program that:
(i) the defence of contributory negligence in fatal accident and breach of
statutory duty cases be abolished; and
(ii) legislation be enacted to provide more generous and clearer entitlements
to families of fatal accident victims for funeral
and related costs;
REFER the following matter to the Community Law Reform Committee as provided
Constitution
of the Committee:
TO REVIEW the laws in force in the Territory with respect to the defence of
contributory negligence in fatal accident and breach
of statutory duty cases
and compensation for funeral costs in fatal accident cases;
(a) which, if any, of the recommendations of the abovementioned report of the
Law Reform Commission should be adopted in whole
or in part; and
(b) on any other relevant matter the Committee wishes to take into
consideration.
IN MAKING ITS REVIEW AND REPORT the Committee will have regard to any views of
business, community or government agencies on the
subject matter of this
reference and the possible effect any recommendations may have on insurance or
related financial costs.
SIGNED THIS 21ST DAY OF SEPTEMBER 1990
BERNARD COLLAERY
ATTORNEY-GENERAL
Participants
Chairperson
The Honourable JJA Kelly, QC
Deputy Chairpersons
Ms Jennifer Kitchin
Chief Magistrate Mr RJ Cahill
Committee Members
Mr Nick Seddon
Mr Graeme Lunney
Mr Peter Sutherland
Mrs Bettie McNee
Mr Rod Campbell
Ms Judy Harrison
Professor Roman Tomasic
Professor Duncan Chappell
Ms Robin Burnett
Mr Rainer Frisch
Mr Ross Gengos
Mr Peter Hohnen
Reform Unit - Secretariat to Committee
Director: Mr Peter Quinton
Senior Legal Officer: Ms Tracy Reid
Project Officer: Mr David Snowden
Word processing/Secretarial: Margaret Ryan
Australian Capital Territory,
Department of Justice and Community Services,
Defence of Contributory
, Issues Paper, Canberra 1990.
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Workers Compensation Act
s. 151(N)(2).
Australian Capital Territory,
Review of the ACT Workers
Compensation Scheme,
Sydney, August, 1990, at 109 to 111.
Bourke v Butterfield and Lewis
(1926) 38 CLR
Caswell v Powell Duffryn Associated Collieries Ltd
(1940) A.C. 152.
Piro v W Foster & Co Ltd
[1943] HCA 32
(1943) 68 CLR 313.
Compensation (Fatal Injuries) Act 1968
The Victorian government abolished the defence in this
area in 1983 (
Wrongs Act 1958
The defence was
abolished in New South Wales but restored after 1987 in relation to fatal motor
and work accident cases (
Motor Accidents Act 1988
(NSW) s. 75 and
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Motor Traffic Act 1936
(ACT) s. 85(1).
Motor Traffic Act s. 87(1).
Workmens Compensation Act 1951
(ACT) s. 18.
Mclean v Tedman
[1984] HCA 60
(1984) 155 CLR 306
, refer also to
Commissioner of Railways v Ruprecht
[1979] HCA 37
(1979) 142 CLR 563
Commissioner for Railways v Halley
(1978) 20 ALR 409
, but the High Court
did uphold a finding of contributory negligence in
Podreberserk v Australian
Iron and Steel Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 34
(1985) 59 ALR 529.
Insurance Commissioner v Joyce
[1948] HCA 17
(1948) 77 CLR 39
Roggenkamp v Bennett
[1950] HCA 23
(1950) 80 CLR 292.
For a discussion of this
defence and other cases refer to Luntz Hambly and Hayes
Torts Cases and
2nd Ed Butterworths Pty Ltd, Sydney, 1985.
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1955
(ACT) ss. 4 and 5(c)(i) and
Compensation (Fatal Injuries) Act 1968
(ACT) s. 10(3)(a).
Cunningham v. The Nominal Defendant
Zotovic v. Dobel Boat Hire Pty Limited
(1985) 62 ACTR 29.
New South Wales and Tasmanian legislation allows compensation for 'the
reasonable cost of erecting a headstone or tombstone' (
Compensation to
Relatives Act 1897
(NSW) s. 3(2) and
Fatal Accidents Act 1934
Legislation in Queensland, Victoria, South Australia, and
Western Australia provides for compensation for 'funeral expenses'
Administration and Probate Act 1958
s. 29(2)(c)(i)
(Qld) subsection 66(2)(d)(i),
Wrongs Act 1936
Fatal Accidents Act 1959
Courts have
interpreted this legislation as allowing compensation for more than the bare
cost of burial or cremation. The Northern
Territory has legislation similar
to the ACT,
Compensation (Fatal Injuries) Act 1974
s. 10(3)(a)
For a more detailed discussion of this area refer to ALRC Report No 28 at 22-24
and Australian Torts Reporter at paragraph 19-400,
CCH Australia Ltd., Sydney,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter