URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/VLRC/2020/41.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:51:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Committals [2020] VLRC 41
The present committal and pre-trial system
Committal system and indictable case data
The test for committal
Should the lower courts conduct indictable case management?
Reforming pre-trial indictable case management: outline of a new system
Role of the DPP and defence practitioners
Charging practices
Forensic reports and delay
Pre-trial cross-examination
Children’s Court
Chapter 5 Should the lower courts conduct indictable case management?
Chapter 7 Role of the DPP and defence practitioners
Chapter 8 Charging practices
Chapter 9 Disclosure
Chapter 10 Forensic reports and delay
Chapter 11 Pre-trial cross-examination
Chapter 12 Children’s Court
Scope of the reference
Purposes of committal proceedings
Objectives of pre-trial indictable procedure
The value of committal proceedings
Reforms in other Australian jurisdictions
Recent reforms and reform proposals in Victoria
Terminology
The definition of ‘committals’
The term ‘victims’
The approach of the Commission
Commission Chair
Committals Division
Commission process
Reform objectives
Reducing trauma experienced by victims and witnesses
Improving efficiency
Maintaining the right to a fair trial
An overview of the Commission’s conclusions
Statutory sentencing discount schemes
16 Introduction
Figure 1: The present committal and pre-trial system5
Direct indictment by the DPP
Committal proceedings in the Magistrates’ Court
The purposes of committal proceedings
The component parts of committal proceedings
Filing hearing
Hand-up brief
Time frame for service of the hand-up brief
Election to stand trial
Application for summary jurisdiction
Case direction notice (Form 32)
Committal case conference
Committal mention
Committal hearing
Cross-examination of witnesses
Test for committal
Costs orders
List management in the Magistrates’ Court
Pre-trial procedure in the higher courts
Procedure immediately following committal
Filing an indictment
Time limits for filing an indictment
Choice of Supreme or County Court
Case conferences supervised by the higher courts
Pre-trial cross-examination in the higher courts
List management in the County Court
County Court regional matters
List management in the Supreme Court
Statistical data relating to indictable cases
Disposition of cases in the Magistrates’ Court
Rates of discharge at committal hearing
Cross-examination during committal hearing
Duration of cases
Magistrates’ Court
County and Supreme Courts
Guilty pleas and other outcomes of cases in the higher courts
Limitations of the available data
Identifying delay
Analysing rates of pre-trial cross-examination
Drawing comparisons between Victoria and other jurisdictions
Improving data collection
The current test for committal
Is the committal test an effective filter?
Abolishing the test for committal in other jurisdictions
Stakeholder support for retaining the committal test
Stakeholder support for abolishing the committal test
Commission’s conclusions: Abolish the test for committal
Create a test for discharge
5. Should the lower courts conduct indictable case management?
Introduction
Case management in the Magistrates’ Court: positive features
Magistrates’ case management expertise
Services available in the Magistrates’ Court
Regional Magistrates’ courts
Affordability of the Magistrates’ Court
Efficiency of the Magistrates’ Court
Case management in the Magistrates’ Court: negative features
Duplication and delay
Inconsistent case management practices
Approach to case management in other jurisdictions
Case management in the lower courts: stakeholder views
Commission’s conclusions
Retain pre-trial case management in the lower courts for most cases
Commence Supreme Court cases in the Supreme Court
6. Reforming pre-trial indictable case management: outline of a new system
Introduction
New pre-trial procedures
Commencing indictable proceedings
Figure 2: Proposed pre-trial case management system
Service of hand-up brief
Contents of the hand-up brief
Case direction notice
Court-supervised case conferences
Issues hearing
Specialist lists in the County Court
Case management in the Supreme Court
Resourcing more active case management
Resourcing a system rather than its parts
Current personnel and infrastructure shortfalls
Resource implications of case management recommendations
Resource implications of abolishing committal proceedings
74 Introduction
7. Role of the DPP and defence practitioners
Introduction
Structural problems with committal proceedings
New South Wales reforms
Role of the DPP and defence practitioners: stakeholder views
Prosecution not in a position to negotiate
Inadequate preparation by both parties
Commission’s conclusions
Early involvement of the DPP
Early engagement of experienced practitioners
8. Charging practices
Introduction
Current approach to charging
Responsibility for investigating criminal conduct and filing charges
Responsibility for conduct of committal proceedings and charge review
Historical backdrop to current charging practices
Overcharging
What is overcharging?
Alternative charges
Discrete event charges
Inflated charges
Is overcharging a problem in Victoria?
Consequences of overcharging
Overcharging undermines fair trial rights
Overcharging undermines efficiency
Overcharging can lead to trauma for victims
Commission’s conclusions: addressing overcharging
Do not introduce charge certification
Provide charging training for Victoria Police
Require earlier involvement of DPP in charging
Charge immediately following apprehension—cases where remand is sought
Charge following investigation
Improve disclosure and early engagement
Codify the DPP’s power to withdraw charges
Consulting victims about charging decisions
94 Introduction
9. Disclosure
Introduction
Current disclosure regime
Disclosure at common law
Statutory disclosure requirements
The informant’s statutory disclosure obligations
The prosecution’s statutory disclosure obligations
Approaches to disclosure in other jurisdictions
New South Wales
United Kingdom
Problems with disclosure
Lack of clarity about objecting to disclosure
Commission’s conclusions: improving disclosure
Strengthen the prosecution’s statutory disclosure obligations
No change to the prosecution’s common law disclosure obligations
Strengthen the informant’s statutory disclosure obligations
Require the informant to give disclosure evidence at the issues hearing
The process for objecting to disclosure
Relevant material includes exculpatory material
Expand the indicative list in section 110 of materials that must be included in the hand-up brief
A disclosure certificate regime should not be introduced
10. Forensic reports and delay
Introduction
Forensic services in Victoria
Victoria Police Forensic Services Department
The Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine
Other providers
Timelines for forensic reports
Delay in the provision of forensic reports: stakeholder views
Causes of delay
Effects of delay
Commission’s conclusions: better resourcing for forensic service providers
Publicise timeframes for the provision of forensic reports
Conferencing with forensic experts
Preliminary forensic reports?
11. Pre-trial cross-examination
Introduction
Pre-trial cross-examination in the present system
Cross-examination during committal proceedings
Leave to cross-examine witnesses
Pre-trial cross-examination in the higher courts
Sexual offence cases where the complainant was a child or person with a cognitive impairment when proceedings commenced
Section 198B (formerly Basha hearings)
Cross-examination in the lower courts
Does Victoria have a culture of pre-trial cross-examination?
Trauma associated with cross-examination
Cross-examination during a committal hearing
Cross-examination and disclosure
Cross-examination and early resolution
Other jurisdictions
Commission’s conclusion: retain cross-examination in the lower courts
Protecting additional classes of witness from cross-examination
Commission’s conclusion: expand section 123 to some family violence cases
Commission’s conclusions: expand application of section 124(5) and better apply the test for leave to cross-examine
Reducing trauma during cross-examination
The OPP’s Victims and Witness Assistance Service
Expanding the use of intermediaries
Alternative arrangements
12. The Children’s Court
Introduction
Committals in the Children’s Court: the present system
The role of the Children’s Court
Current committal process in the Children’s Court
Removing committals from the Children’s Court
Children accused of Supreme Court offences
Areas of reform specific to the Children’s Court
Timing of applications for summary jurisdiction
Management of cases involving adult and child co-accused
Transfer of related indictable offences to trial court
Appendix A: Submissions
Appendix B: Consultations
Commonwealth
International
Commonwealth
Other Australian Jurisdictions
International
Published by the Victorian
Law Reform Commission
The Victorian Law Reform Commission was established under the
Law Reform Commission Act 2000
as a central agency for developing law reform
in Victoria.
© Victorian Law Reform Commission 2020.
This publication of the Victorian Law Reform Commission follows the Melbourne
University Law Review Association Inc,
Australian Guide to Legal Citation
(4th ed., 2018).
This report reflects the law at 12 March 2020.
Title: Committals: Report / Victorian Law Reform Commission ISBN
978-0-9943725-6-7
Series: Report (Victorian Law Reform Commission) 41
Ordered to be published Victorian Government Printer PP 122, Session
The Hon. Anthony M. North QC
commissioners
Liana Buchanan Bruce Gardner PSM
Dr Ian Hardingham QC Professor Bernadette McSherry Dan Nicholson
Alison O’Brien PSM Gemma Varley PSM
The Hon. Frank Vincent AO QC
(until October 2019)
chief executive officer
Merrin Mason
Lindy Smith (11 Feb –12 Jul 2019)
reference team
Michael McKiterick Team Leader
Dr Emma Larking
Senior Research and Policy Officer
Briana Proud
Senior Research and Policy Officer
Jonathan O’Donohue
Senior Research and Policy Officer
cover design
text layout
Victorian Law Reform Commission GPO Box 4637
Melbourne Victoria 3001 Australia
DX 144, Melbourne
333 Queen Street Melbourne Victoria 3000 Australia
+61 3 8608 7800
1300 666 555
(within Victoria)
+61 3 8608 7888
law.reform@lawreform.vic.gov.au
www.lawreform.vic.gov.au
Preface vii
Terms of reference ix
Executive summary xiv
Recommendations xvii
Introduction 2
Terms of reference 2
Scope of the reference 2
Purposes of committal proceedings 3
Objectives of pre-trial indictable procedure 3
The value of committal proceedings 4
Reforms in other Australian jurisdictions 4
Recent reforms and reform proposals in Victoria 6
Terminology 6
The approach of the Commission 7
Commission Chair 7
Committals Division 8
Commission process 8
Reform objectives 8
Reducing trauma experienced by victims and witnesses 8
Improving efficiency 10
Maintaining the right to a fair trial 10
An overview of the Commission’s conclusions 12
Statutory sentencing discount schemes 13
The present committal and pre-trial system 16
Introduction 16
Prosecuting indictable offences 16
Figure 1: The present committal and pre-trial system 17
Direct indictment by the DPP 18
Committal proceedings in the Magistrates’ Court 19
The purposes of committal proceedings 19
The component parts of committal proceedings 19
Filing hearing 20
Hand-up brief 20
Election to stand trial 21
Application for summary jurisdiction 21
Case direction notice (Form 32) 22
Committal case conference 22
Committal mention 23
Committal hearing 23
Costs orders 24
List management in the Magistrates’ Court 24
Pre-trial procedure in the higher courts 25
Procedure immediately following committal 25
Filing an indictment 25
Case conferences supervised by the higher courts 26
Pre-trial cross-examination in the higher courts 26
List management in the County Court 27
List management in the Supreme Court 29
Committal system and indictable case data 32
Introduction 32
Statistical data relating to indictable cases 32
Disposition of cases in the Magistrates’ Court 33
Cross-examination during committal hearing 33
Duration of cases 33
Guilty pleas and other outcomes of cases in the higher courts 35
Limitations of the available data 35
Identifying delay 35
Analysing rates of pre-trial cross-examination 35
Drawing comparisons between Victoria and other jurisdictions 36
Improving data collection 37
The test for committal 40
Introduction 40
The current test for committal 40
Is the committal test an effective filter? 42
Abolishing the test for committal in other jurisdictions 43
Stakeholder support for retaining the committal test 44
Stakeholder support for abolishing the committal test 45
Commission’s conclusions: Abolish the test for committal 47
Create a test for discharge 48
The preparation for trial of indictable offences through the committal
process is a most significant matter for the system of criminal
justice. The
efficient and fair management of that process impacts not only on the direct
participants in the criminal proceeding,
the accused and the prosecution, but
also on victims, witnesses, and the wider circle of citizens who are linked to
them. About 3000
indictable cases are initiated each year so the committals
process affects many people, and it is critical to get the process right.
Minimising the trauma to victims of crime, enhancing the efficiency of the
criminal justice system, and maintaining the rights of
the accused to a fair
trial were critical elements in the terms of reference; the Commission has
sought to achieve these goals.
As the Commission explored the issues raised by the reference, several
conundrums emerged. The first was the lack of data about the
way the committal
process was working, whether positive or negative. For instance, it is accepted
that in most cases witnesses find
it stressful and distressing to be
cross-examined more than once during criminal proceedings. Yet there is no data
available to show
how often this happens. The Commission adopts an
evidence-based approach to law reform, so this lack of data presents a barrier
proper consideration for the need for reform, or the direction of it.
The second conundrum arose over the role of the Magistrates’ Court in
the present committal system. Even though there was
a lack of comprehensive
data, the Commission has come to the view that the Magistrates’
Court has demonstrated that it
is able to administer the committal system
effectively, particularly if certain suggested improvements are made. However,
the Magistrates’ Court to continue to manage indictable offences
is contrary to the prevailing notions of optimum case
management, according to
which view it is generally accepted that cases are best managed by the judge who
will hear the trial.
So the question for the Commission was how to make a choice between a system
which might be ideal and a system which already functions
effectively in the
real world. The Commission favoured the existing system, essentially for two
reasons. One: the present system
is known and working; and two: the cost of
change is likely to be significant. The course taken by the Commission shows
reform is a complex exercise in balancing the ideal with the pragmatic;
and there are times when law reform is best achieved through
evolution rather
than revolution.
Having said this, the Commission has recommended a number of creative reforms
which have the potential to make fundamental improvements
to the system. To
mention a couple: the Commission suggests the abolition of the test for
committal and its replacement with the
power of the Magistrates’ Court to
discharge an accused, on an application made by the accused, on the ground that
no reasonable prospect of conviction. Another innovation is the
requirement that an informant give sworn evidence to a magistrate
disclosure obligations of the prosecution have been met. Both these innovations
would act as safeguards of fair trial rights.
The report of the Commission is the product of very hard work by Emma Larking
and Briana Proud. The research and policy team was led
by Michael McKiterick.
Jonathan O’Donohue and Michael Hepworth also contributed. I thank the
Commissioners for their diligent
work, in particular Bruce Gardner PSM and Dan
Nicholson, who constituted the Division on this inquiry. Bruce led
the reference until my appointment as Chair in August 2019. The Hon. Frank
Vincent AO QC and Liana Buchanan were also members of the
Division until October
and December 2019 respectively. I acknowledge too the important contribution of
the Hon. Philip Cummins AM
who was Chair of the Commission from the commencement
of this reference until his death in February 2019.
The team benefited from input from a large number of written submissions and
from consultations with the wide range of bodies and
people involved in and
affected by the committal system.
Those who made submissions and participated in consultations provided the
Commission with the foundations on which the report is based.
I express my
appreciation for the assistance provided by all of those people and by the
bodies for whom they spoke.
The draft report was scrutinised in detail for editorial flaws by Nick Gadd
and Gemma Walsh in their usual meticulous way. These acknowledgements
be complete without a generous thank you to Merrin Mason, the CEO of the
Commission, who along with keeping the Commission
running smoothly, ensured the
wellbeing of staff and kept the team going as a happy committed and functioning
The Hon. Anthony M. North QC
Chair, Victorian Law Reform
Commission March 2020
Terms of reference
[Referral to the Victorian Law Reform Commission pursuant to
section 5(1)(a)
Victorian Law Reform Commission Act 2000
(Vic) on 24 October
Recognising legislative reforms, public consultation on an early case
management model, and other efforts in recent years to address
challenges in
the committal system, which forms part of pre-trial criminal procedure, the VLRC
is asked to review and report on Victoria’s
committal system.
The Commission is asked to recommend any legislative, procedural or
administrative changes to Victoria’s committal procedure,
which could
reduce trauma experienced by victims and witnesses, improve efficiency in the
criminal justice system and ensure fair
trial rights.
In particular, the Commission should consider:
• whether Victoria should maintain, abolish, replace or reform the
present committal system
• opportunities for reform that enable early identification of cases
that can be determined summarily, encourage appropriate
early guilty pleas,
facilitate efficient use of court time and encourage parties’ proper
preparation for trial
• ways of improving early disclosure processes in criminal prosecutions
brought in the indictable stream
• if, when and in what circumstances witnesses or classes of witnesses
should be examined prior to trial, including consideration
of ways to minimise
the need for victims and other vulnerable witnesses to give evidence multiple
• whether a magistrate should determine if there is sufficient evidence
to commit an accused to stand trial and, if so, what
test to apply, having
regard to the Director of Public Prosecutions’ power to directly indict,
• the impacts of any recommended changes on all parts of the criminal
justice system, and what will be needed to ensure the
successful implementation
and operation of those changes, including resource implications.
The Commission should also consider, in relation to Victoria’s
committal system or any recommendations made by the Commission:
• best practice for supporting victims, and
• any other matter that the Commission considers necessary to reduce
trauma experienced by victims and witnesses and improve
efficiency in the
criminal justice system, while also ensuring fair trial rights.
The Commission is asked to deliver its report to the Attorney-General by 31
March 2020.
A person charged with a criminal offence or offences who has
not yet been found guilty or pleaded guilty.
Brief of evidence
The material relied on by the prosecution in a
criminal case.
In this report, a person who is under 18 years of age.
Children’s Court
A specialist court that hears and determines
cases involving
children and young people. In this report, the term ‘
’ may be used to refer to both the
Children’s Court
Magistrates’ Court
An order of a magistrate that requires an accused to appear
in a higher court for sentence or trial.
Committal mention
A case management hearing in a
Committal proceedings
The indictable pre-trial procedures conducted in
the lower courts
that are outlined in Chapter 4 of the
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Complainant
A term used in criminal cases to refer to a victim of an
County Court
County Court
sits above the
Magistrates’ Court
Supreme Court
in the Victorian court hierarchy. In its
criminal jurisdiction it hears
criminal cases, except for the
most serious. Criminal trials in this court are heard by a judge and jury.
Cross-examination
When a witness for one party (for example the
prosecution
is asked questions in court by the lawyer for the other party (for example
) to test the evidence the witness has already given. See also
evidence-in-chief
Committal test
The standard applied by a magistrate to determine if
evidence in a case is sufficient to order that the accused be tried or
sentenced in a higher court. In the
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
the committal test is referred to as the ‘committal determination’.
In this report, the ‘committal test’
be used to refer to a magistrate’s application of the test for
person’s case and the lawyers who
represent them.
A person who is charged with a criminal offence—the
Depositions
The transcript of evidence given in a committal proceeding
any statements admitted in evidence in a committal proceeding in accordance
with chapter 4 of the
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Direct indictment
filed by the
Director of
Public Prosecutions
against an accused where no committal has been held; or the accused has been
discharged at committal; or a discontinuance has been
filed. Known in some
ex officio indictment.
Directions hearing
A case management hearing in a
Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP)
The official who makes decisions about whether to prosecute serious criminal
matters and is independent of government.
The Victorian Director of Public Prosecutions is responsible for prosecuting
indictable criminal offences under Victorian law. The
Office of Public
Prosecutions
conducts these prosecutions on behalf of the Director of Public
Prosecutions.
In this report DPP may be used inclusively to reference other prosecuting
agencies such as the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions.
Director’s Committee
Established under the
Prosecutions Act 1994
the Director’s Committee consists of the Director of Public
Prosecutions, the Chief Crown Prosecutor and the Solicitor for Public
Prosecutions.
In relation to committal proceedings, where a magistrate
determines there is insufficient evidence to support a conviction for an
indictable offence and orders that the
be discharged.
Providing information or material to a
required by law.
Discontinue
Director of Public Prosecutions
determines not to
proceed with charges that have been brought before a court.
Ex officio indictment
Direct indictment
Evidence-in-chief
The evidence given by a
for the party
who called the
Hand-up brief
brief of evidence
used in committal proceedings
in Victoria.
Higher court
In Victoria, the
County Court
Indictable offence
A serious criminal offence that is usually heard in
higher court
before a judge and jury.
Indictable offence triable summarily
A less serious
indictable offence
that can be heard before a
A formal written accusation charging a person with an
indictable offence
that is to be tried in a higher court.
The person who commences a criminal proceeding in the
Magistrates’ Court
. Often a member of Victoria Police, but
sometimes a representative from another investigating agency such as WorkSafe
Investigating agency
The agency investigating a criminal offence.
This is often Victoria
Police but can also be other agencies such as WorkSafe Victoria.
Permission given by a judge or
during a legal proceeding to take a particular course of action.
Legal aid is legal assistance provided by the government
Legal Aid Act 1978
(Vic) to people who cannot afford it
themselves. Victoria Legal Aid is an organisation that provides legal
information, advice and
representation to people in accordance with the
Aid Act 1978
Local Court
The equivalent of the
Magistrates’ Court
some Australian jurisdictions.
Lower Court
In Victoria, the
Children’s Court
Magistrates’ Court
The person who presides over a case in the
Magistrates’ Court
Children’s Court
Magistrates’ Court
A lower court that hears less serious matters
without a jury. It
is responsible for hearing and determining
summary offences
indictable offences triable summarily
, and for conducting
proceedings
In this report, the term ‘
lower courts
’ may be used to
refer to both the
Children’s Court
Magistrates’
A brief court hearing to deal with procedural matters.
A person who has been found guilty or has pleaded guilty to
a criminal offence. Until this happens, a person is known as an
Office of Public Prosecutions (OPP)
An independent statutory authority that institutes, prepares and conducts
criminal prosecutions on behalf of the
Director of Public
Prosecutions
A binding direction by a court or tribunal in a legal
proceeding.
prosecution
in a criminal
proceeding.
person tells the court whether he or she
is guilty or not guilty of the charge.
brief of evidence
used when the
indicates an intention to plead guilty before the
hand-up brief
been served.
Plea hearing
The hearing in which the
prosecution
information that they want the court to take into account when deciding the
in the case.
Prosecution
In indictable cases, the lawyers, individual (for example,
Director of Public Prosecutions
) or statutory authority (for example,
Office of Public Prosecutions
) conducting a criminal case before the
court on behalf of the investigating agency. A ‘prosecution’ may
also refer to
the case against a person accused of a criminal offence.
The penalty given to an offender by a court.
Sentencing hearing
plea hearing
Summary offence
A less serious criminal offence that may be dealt with
magistrate.
Supreme Court
The highest court in Victoria that deals with the most
criminal offences. Criminal trials in this court are heard by a judge and
In criminal proceedings, a person who has suffered harm as a
result of the action of an
. In this report the term
applies to a person alleged by the
prosecution
to be a victim prior
to determination of the offender’s guilt as well as a person who has
suffered due to an offence for which
has been found
Where a charge against an
is no longer
prosecuted.
A person who gives evidence in a case.
Executive summary
1 This report is about improving committal and other pre-trial indictable
procedures to reduce trauma for victims and witnesses,
improve efficiency in
the criminal justice system, and ensure fair trial rights.
The present committal and pre-trial system
2 Most indictable criminal cases start in the lower courts. They progress
through the ‘committal stream’ until either:
i) the accused is committed by order of the Magistrates’ or
Children’s Court for trial or sentence in a higher court
ii) the matter resolves summarily, or
iii) the prosecution is discontinued.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) sets out the role of the lower
courts in managing indictable cases. This includes ensuring a fair trial through
disclosure of
evidence and cross-examination of witnesses; narrowing the issues
in contention; determining how the accused proposes to plead and
matters where possible.
4 This culminates with a magistrate determining if the evidence is of
sufficient weight to support a conviction (the test for committal
or committal
determination).
5 The case management conducted by the lower courts and the committal
determination together constitute ‘committal proceedings’.
6 Pre-trial case management also occurs in the higher courts after the
accused has been committed for trial.
7 The flow chart on page 17 illustrates the main components of the present
Committal system and indictable case data
8 Each year, approximately 3000 criminal cases go through some form of
committal proceeding. Around 30 per cent of these resolve
Magistrates’ Court. Around 60 per cent are committed to the County Court,
around half of these for trial, the other
half for sentence following a plea of
guilty in the Magistrates’ Court. A further four per cent are tried or
in the Supreme Court.1
9 Gaps in the data make it difficult to tell how common it is for victims and
other civilian witnesses to be cross-examined more than
once before trial, or
both before trial and again at trial.
10 Inadequate data collection also makes it difficult to identify when and
why avoidable delay occurs.
1 Percentages do not add up to exactly 100 because they are
approximate only.
11 Data collection systems should be improved so that the performance of the
criminal justice system can be better understood and
12 Notwithstanding the limitations in the data, it appears that:
i) delay in indictable matters is no worse in Victoria than in other
Australian states and territories, and Victoria compares favourably
other jurisdictions
ii) late guilty pleas are not more of a problem in Victoria than
The test for committal
13 Currently, magistrates must consider the evidence to determine if it is
of sufficient weight to support a conviction for an
indictable offence (the
test for committal or committal determination).
14 While the rationale for applying a committal test is sound—to
provide independent scrutiny of an indictable prosecution—requiring
all indictable stream matters is unnecessary; therefore the test should be
abolished. The lower courts should, however, be
empowered to discharge the
accused on application by the defence, on the grounds that there is no
reasonable prospect of conviction.
Should the lower courts conduct indictable case
management?
15 It is now generally accepted that best practice case management
requires the trial judge to deal with pre-trial case management.
not, however, been the practice historically in Victoria for indictable
matters. Further, the evidence suggests that the
lower courts manage committal
proceedings effectively and it would not be prudent to change the system at
present. The same considerations
do not apply to the Supreme Court. It is
appropriate for the Supreme Court to deal with indictable offences within its
principles.
16 Apart from Children’s Court cases, cases within the exclusive
by that Court,
but only if this change is accompanied by adequate resourcing.
17 There is scope to improve pre-trial procedure in the lower courts. As
well as abolishing the test for committal, changes
should be made to other
procedures to improve efficiency while also ensuring fair trial rights and
reducing trauma for victims and
witnesses. These changes are set out in Chapters
Reforming pre-trial indictable case management: outline
of a new system
18 A single issues hearing should replace committal mention hearings and
committal hearings. When cases are transferred to the County
Court by order of a
magistrate (assuming the test for committal is abolished and Supreme Court
matters are filed in the Supreme Court),
they should be accompanied by an issues
hearing report so that judges in the County Court know about issues that arose
in the lower
19 The Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) should assume formal
prosecutorial responsibility in indictable matters at the filing
20 The flow chart on page 65 illustrates the main components of the proposed
Role of the DPP and defence practitioners
21 To address issues related to charging and disclosure, the DPP should be
actively engaged in the conduct of indictable proceedings
in the lower
22 Measures should also be taken to ensure the early and continuous
involvement of prosecution and defence practitioners.
Charging practices
23 Overcharging involves unnecessarily filing more charges than are
ultimately indicted or pleaded. To address this, the DPP should
provide binding
charging instructions to
informants in cases where there has been an investigation prior to
apprehension of the alleged offender. In other cases, the DPP should
charges within seven days of being provided with the brief of evidence.
24 Other measures to reduce overcharging include providing training to
Victoria Police officers.
25 The prosecution should ensure that victims are informed about and
consulted in relation to decisions to withdraw charges or discontinue
prosecution.
26 Inadequate early disclosure is a problem. A range of measure should be
taken to address it, including making the DPP responsible
for disclosure to
the accused, and the informant responsible for disclosure to the DPP.
27 Other measures include clarifying that the prosecution must disclose the
general existence of material that the informant objects
to producing in the
hand-up brief; further
expanding the list of material that the
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) specifies must be included in the hand-up brief; and requiring the
informant to give disclosure evidence at an issues hearing.
Forensic reports and delay
28 Achieving timely disclosure of forensic evidence is difficult and the
provision of forensic reports is a major source of delay.
Some of this delay may
be unavoidable given the time required to conduct some forms of forensic
analysis, but better funding of forensic
service providers and case conferencing
between the parties and forensic analysts should reduce delay.
Pre-trial cross-examination
29 Pre-trial cross-examination often contributes to early resolution and
better disclosure but it can also be stressful or traumatising
for victims and
other witnesses. The current test for leave to cross-examine at a committal
hearing should be applied more strictly
in accordance with its terms, and
additional criteria for leave should apply in some cases.
30 Existing prohibitions on cross-examination should be extended to include
all cases involving family violence where the complainant
was a child or person
with a cognitive impairment when the proceedings commenced.
31 The intermediaries pilot program should be expanded to assist all
witnesses with communication difficulties, and alternative arrangements
giving evidence should be used wherever necessary to reduce trauma for victims
and witnesses.
Children’s Court
32 As a specialist jurisdiction the Children’s Court should continue to
manage committal proceedings, including cases within
the exclusive jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court.
Children Youth and Families Act 2005
(Vic) should be amended to
clarify certain processes in the Children’s Court.
Recommendations
Chapter 3 Committal system and indictable case data
1 The Magistrates’ and Children’s Courts should collect detailed
data about pre-trial cross-examination.
2 The case management systems used by the Magistrates’ and
Children’s Courts should be linked with the higher courts’
management systems to enable the creation of a single electronic case file for
indictable cases.
Chapter 4 The test for committal
3 The test for committal, which involves a magistrate assessing if the
evidence is of sufficient weight to support a conviction
for an indictable
offence (referred to in chapter 4,
Criminal Procedure Act
(Vic) as the committal determination) should be abolished.
4 In place of an order for committal, the mechanism for transfer of
indictable charges from the lower courts should be an order of
Magistrates’ or Children’s Court that the accused either:
(a) appear for plea and sentence in a higher court on a date to be
determined, or
(b) stand trial in a higher court on a date to be determined.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should be amended to provide
that the accused may apply to the Magistrates’ or Children’s Court
for an order that
the accused be discharged and to empower the
Magistrates’ and Children’s Courts to discharge
the accused on the relevant indictable charge or charges if satisfied that
there is no reasonable prospect of conviction.
Chapter 5 Should the lower courts conduct indictable
case management?
6 The lower courts should retain a case management function for indictable
stream matters that will be heard in the County Court.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should be amended to require
that matters within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Supreme Court are filed
in the Supreme
Court, aside from Children’s Court matters.
Chapter 6 Reforming pre-trial case management: outline of a new
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should be amended to require
the Director of Public Prosecutions to assume formal prosecutorial
responsibility in cases involving
indictable offences from the filing hearing
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should be amended to require
that a case direction notice is filed before an issues hearing rather than a
committal mention
10 If an application for summary jurisdiction includes an application for a
Koori Court hearing, this should be stated in the case
direction notice and the
Magistrates’ Court registrar should list the issues hearing before a Koori
Court magistrate.
Section 127
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should be
amended to require that a case conference be conducted during an issues hearing
in all indictable cases, regardless
of offence type.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should be amended to replace
committal mention hearings and committal hearings with an issues hearing.
13 Magistrates should be required to prepare an issues hearing report for
transmission to the County Court.
14 The courts should be adequately funded to support any changes to their
case management role.
Chapter 7 Role of the DPP and defence
practitioners
15 Experienced practitioners should be engaged at an early stage in
proceedings and have continuing responsibility for the case until
resolution.
16 The Director of Public Prosecutions and Victoria Legal Aid should be
provided with additional funding to ensure experienced practitioners
oversight of committal proceedings from the outset and are responsible for the
conduct of matters until final resolution, including
in the higher courts.
17 Fee structures at Victoria Legal Aid and the Office of Public Prosecutions
should provide for the early involvement of counsel
and to ensure continuity of
representation.
18 Victoria Legal Aid and the Office of Public Prosecutions should regularly
and publicly report, preferably in their annual reports,
(a) measures used to ensure legal practitioners acting in indictable matters
retain responsibility for those matters for the lifetime
of the prosecution
(b) the success of these measures.
Chapter 8 Charging practices
19 Victoria Police officers should receive regular and up-to-date charging
20 In cases where indictable charges are filed immediately following
apprehension, the Director of Public Prosecutions should review
the charges
within seven days of receipt of the hand-up brief from the informant.
21 In cases involving a suspected indictable offence that has been the
subject of an ongoing investigation prior to arrest, the investigating
should prepare an ‘initial charge brief’. This should be provided to
the Director of Public Prosecutions before
any charge sheet is filed.
22 The Director of Public Prosecutions should review any ‘initial
charge brief’ received and provide charge instructions
to the informant.
Charge instructions should be binding on the informant.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should be amended to give the
Director of Public Prosecutions the power to withdraw, amend or file charges in
the Magistrates’
and Children’s Courts.
Chapter 9 Disclosure
24 While the informant should be required to prepare the brief of evidence,
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should be amended to require the
Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) to file and serve the brief and assume all
obligations
of disclosure to the accused currently imposed by the Act on the
informant. The DPP should ensure the existence of material that
the informant
objects to producing is communicated to the accused.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should be amended to specify
that the Director of Public Prosecutions’ disclosure obligations continue
from the filing
hearing until the death of the accused, regardless of the
outcome of the prosecution.
Public Prosecutions Act 1994
(Vic) should be amended to empower
the Director of Public Prosecutions to make enquiries of the informant in
relation to disclosure,
and to require the informant to respond to those
27 Additional resources should be provided to the Office of Public
Prosecutions to allow it to manage its increased disclosure obligations.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should be amended
to make it clear that the informant has a continuing obligation of disclosure to
the Director of Public Prosecutions
(DPP). This obligation commences at the
filing hearing and includes preparation of the hand-up brief, which must be
provided to the
DPP before the date specified by the Magistrates’ Court at
the filing hearing for service of the hand-up brief on the accused.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should be amended to specify
that the informant’s disclosure obligations continue from the filing
hearing until the death
of the accused, regardless of the outcome of the
prosecution.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should be amended to specify
that informants have an obligation to retain potentially disclosable material
for as long as their
disclosure obligations continue.
31 Systems should be established at investigating agencies to ensure
(a) informants are made aware of, or able to obtain information concerning,
potentially disclosable material that exists or is known
parts of the agency
(b) potentially disclosable material is retained and not destroyed.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should be amended to require
the informant, unless excused by the court, to appear at the issues hearing and
provide evidence
(a) all available relevant material has been disclosed to the Director of
Public Prosecutions
(b) all reasonable enquiries have been made by the informant to determine if
there is any additional relevant material in existence.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should be amended to provide
that the informant’s disclosure obligations to the Director of Public
Prosecutions (DPP)
apply regardless of claims of privilege, public interest
immunity, or statutory immunity, but where such claims are made,
material that is the subject of these claims need not be produced to the
DPP. The informant must indicate to the DPP the
grounds on which the objection
to production is made.
Section 110
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should be
amended to require reference in the hand-up brief to the general existence of
material that the informant objects
to producing and the grounds for the
35 The Magistrates’ Court Rules 2019 should be amended to clarify that
the list of contents that must accompany the hand-up
brief and be signed by the
informant (currently Magistrates’ Court Form 30) includes a field noting
the existence of material,
if any, that the informant objects to producing.
Section 110
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should be
amended to include a section explaining that a hand-up brief must disclose
all relevant material, including
all information, documents or other things
obtained during the investigation that are exculpatory or might reasonably be
(a) undermine the case for the prosecution or
(b) assist the case for the accused.
Section 110
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should be
amended to include, in addition to the other materials that a hand-up brief must
contain, a list of the materials
contained in the list of ‘Standard
Disclosure Material’ currently set out in Magistrates’ Court
Practice Direction
No 3 of 2019.
Chapter 10 Forensic reports and delay
38 Funding for forensic service providers should be increased to support
faster preparation of forensic reports.
39 Forensic service providers should publicise current turnaround times for
the provision of reports and the courts should have regard
to these when setting
dates for the service of reports.
40 Forensic case conferencing between forensic experts and the prosecution,
based on the existing model used in clandestine laboratory
drug cases, should be
adopted in all cases where forensic evidence is in issue.
41 Forensic case conferencing between forensic experts and defence
practitioners should be encouraged in cases where forensic evidence
Chapter 11 Pre-trial cross-examination
Section 123
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should be
amended to prohibit cross-examination in the lower courts of any witnesses in
cases where the complainant was a child
or person with a cognitive impairment
when the proceedings commenced and where the conduct constituting the offence
involves family
violence within the meaning of the
Family Violence Protection
43 Any amendments to expand
section 123
to include family violence offences
should be accompanied by appropriate resourcing of the Courts, the Office of
Public Prosecutions,
Victoria Police and Victoria Legal Aid.
44 There should be a formal evaluation of the operation of the scheme created
sections 123
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
determine if it is operating in the best interests of victims and witnesses,
and its broader resource implications.
Section 124(5)
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should
be amended to require that the considerations in the section also apply to
applications for leave to cross-examine
witnesses with a cognitive impairment,
and victims in cases involving sexual or family violence.
Section 124
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should be
amended to require a magistrate to provide written reasons why, with reference
sections 124(3)
– (5), leave was granted to cross-examine
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should be amended to allow
for an intermediary to be appointed to assess any witness with communication
difficulties following
an application by a party or on the court’s own
48 Division 4 of
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
should be amended to provide that the court may make directions for alternative
arrangements for taking the evidence of any
witness where the interests of
justice so require, and taking into account the need to minimise trauma for
victims and witnesses.
Chapter 12 Children’s Court
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
(Vic) should be amended
to require applications for summary jurisdiction be made prior to, or at, the
issues hearing. Applications
for summary jurisdiction should only be made after
an issues hearing in exceptional circumstances.
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
(Vic) and the
Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) should be amended to permit issues hearings to be
held jointly in cases involving child and adult co-accused.
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
(Vic) should be amended
to allow the Children’s Court to transfer related indictable offences
for hearing and determination
in the County or Supreme Courts, in cases that
are uplifted from its jurisdiction.
Introduction
2 Terms of reference
2 Scope of the reference
The approach of the Commission
Reform objectives
12 An overview of the Commission’s conclusions
Introduction
Terms of reference
1.1 On 24 October 2018, the Attorney-General, the Hon. Martin Pakula MP,
asked the Victorian Law Reform Commission, under
section 5(1)(a)
Victorian Law Reform Commission Act 2000
(Vic), to review and report on
Victoria’s committal system.
1.2 The terms of reference are set out on page ix.
Scope of the reference
1.3 The Commission is asked to recommend any legislative, procedural or
administrative changes to the committal system that could:
• reduce trauma experienced by victims and witnesses
• improve efficiency in the criminal justice system
• ensure fair trial rights.
1.4 The committal system incorporates all pre-trial criminal procedures
conducted in the Magistrates’ or Children’s Courts
courts1) in respect of indictable offences.2 The elements of committal
proceedings are set out in chapter four of the
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) (CPA) and described in Chapter 2 of this report. They include various
court events such as filing and committal hearings, and
other procedural
requirements such as disclosure by the prosecution of relevant materials.
1.5 Each year around 3000 cases commence in the committal stream of the
Magistrates’ Court and pass through some or all parts
of a committal
proceeding.3 Of these cases:
• roughly 30 per cent are heard and determined summarily4
• another 30 per cent are committed to the County Court for
• another 30 per cent are committed to the County Court for trial6
• roughly four per cent are committed to the Supreme Court for sentence
1 Throughout this report, the Magistrates’ and Children’s Courts
are collectively referred to as the lower courts, and
the County and Supreme
Courts are referred to as the higher courts.
2 See Chapter 2 and glossary for an explanation of what constitutes an
indictable offence.
3 Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Committal Data Requested by VLRC
(24 April 2019). Statistics for the past five years are available at
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
(Issues Paper, June 2019) 15
[3.24]. For data on the number of cases dealt with in the committal stream of
the Children’s
Court, see Chapter 12.
4 Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Committal Data Requested by VLRC
(24 April 2019). In order for indictable stream matters to be determined
summarily in the Magistrates’ Court, the prosecution
must withdraw all
indictable charges with the approval of the Magistrates’ Court:
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
5 County Court of Victoria,
Case Data Requested by VLRC
6 County Court of Victoria,
Case Data Requested by VLRC
7 Supreme Court of Victoria,
Case Data Requested by VLRC
2019). The percentages cited in this paragraph do not total 100%
because they are a rough approximation only.
Purposes of committal proceedings
1.6 The purposes of committal proceedings are listed in the CPA:
• To determine whether a charge for an offence is appropriate to be
heard and determined summarily.
• To determine whether there is evidence of sufficient weight to
support a conviction for the offence charged.
• To determine how the accused proposes to plead to the charge.
• To ensure a fair trial, if the matter proceeds to trial,
- ensuring the prosecution case against the accused is adequately disclosed
in the form of depositions
- enabling the accused to hear or read the evidence against them and to
cross- examine prosecution witnesses
- enabling the accused to put forward a case at an early stage if the accused
wishes to do so
- enabling the accused to adequately prepare and present a case
- enabling the issues in contention to be adequately defined.8
1.7 To those unfamiliar with indictable criminal procedure in common law
a lower court before
conducting a trial or sentencing an offender in a higher court may appear
complicated and inefficient.
1.8 The practice has roots in a different historical context—a time
when citizens could accuse fellow citizens of serious crimes
independent police forces and prosecution agencies did not exist.9 Having an
independent arbiter review the evidence in
the case was designed to act as a
filter,10 ensuring that people accused of serious crimes were
not faced with the cost and stress of defending themselves in the higher
courts against prosecutions that were ‘wanton or
misconceived’.11
1.9 The purposes of committal proceedings have evolved over time and are now
more various.12 Each of the purposes currently listed
in the CPA represents an
important objective of pre-trial indictable procedure, although their relative
value and how they should
be realised is debated.
1.10 A review of these purposes is implicit in the terms of reference, which
request the Commission to consider, among other things,
‘whether Victoria
should maintain, abolish, replace or reform the present committal
Objectives of pre-trial indictable
1.11 Numerous submissions to this reference identify the most important
objectives of pre-trial criminal procedure as being to:
• achieve early resolution where possible, including by securing
appropriate early guilty pleas
• provide disclosure and thereby to ensure the accused understands the
prosecution’s case and can present a defence, which
is essential for fair
trial rights
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
9 See Victorian Law Reform Commission,
(Issues Paper, June
2019) 6–7 [2.4]–[2.8].
10 Originally the evidence was reviewed by ‘grand juries’ of
citizens whose role was to decide if the alleged conduct
constituted a criminal
offence, and if there was enough evidence to justify requiring the accused to
stand trial for that offence:
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
(Issues Paper, June 2019) 6 [2.5].
11 Patrick Devlin,
The Criminal Prosecution in England
University Press, 1960) 92.
12 For a discussion of some of the changes, see David Brereton and John
Willis, ‘Evaluating the Committal’ in Julia Vernon
Future of Committals
(Australian Institute of Criminology, January
• narrow the issues in dispute and ensure the case is ready for trial,
if it goes to trial
• minimise trauma for victims and witnesses.13
1.12 These objectives are central to Victoria’s criminal justice
system, whether they are achieved under the rubric of committal
proceedings or
in the jurisdiction of the lower or higher courts. The objectives are reflected
in the terms of reference.
1.13 The Commission has interpreted the terms of reference broadly to include
review of all pre-trial indictable criminal procedure
including committal
proceedings and procedures conducted prior to trial in the higher courts. Higher
court pre-trial procedures are
relevant because they are designed to achieve the
same underlying objectives as committal proceedings. Moreover, many of the
submissions
to this reference advocated for reforms that would affect pre-trial
procedures in the higher courts.
The value of committal proceedings
1.14 There has been long-standing debate in all common law jurisdictions
justice systems.
Some consider committal proceedings to be a ‘vital cog in the machinery of
the criminal law’,14 essential
fair trial,15 and central to achieving early resolution of cases.16 Others
view committal proceedings as a source of delay and unnecessary
duplication
between the lower and higher courts.17
Reforms in other Australian jurisdictions
1.15 In recent decades, all Australian jurisdictions have made changes to
their committal systems. No two systems are perfectly
comparable, but there are
common elements.18 In all states and territories, an indictable criminal case
commences in the lower courts.
In some instances, these cases are moved quickly
into the higher courts19 while in others they go through a more involved process
in the lower courts before being transferred to the higher courts.20
1.16 Some jurisdictions require a magistrate to consider the evidence in a
case before committing the accused to a higher court21
while in other
1.17 The availability of cross-examination during committal proceedings also
varies between jurisdictions. Some have abolished or
severely restricted it23
while in others it is available but is not often requested or permitted.24 In
Victoria, leave to cross-examine
witnesses at committal hearings is granted
relatively frequently.25 In all jurisdictions, there is a prohibition on
cross-examining
witnesses during committal proceedings who may be particularly
vulnerable and there are additional protections for some other witnesses
Chapter 11).
13 Submissions 9 (Australian Lawyers for Human Rights), 11 (Criminal Bar
Association (Victoria)), 12 (Neville Rudston), 13 (Victoria
Legal Aid), 14
(Magistrates’ Court of Victoria), 19 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service),
20 (County Court of Victoria),
22 (Supreme Court of Victoria), 24 (Law Institute
of Victoria); Consultation 18 (Academic roundtable).
14 John Coldrey,
Report of Advisory Committee on Committal Proceedings
(Victorian Government Printer, February 1986) 2; Submission 11 (Criminal Bar
Association (Victoria)).
15 Submissions 9 (Australian Lawyers for Human Rights), 11 (Criminal Bar
Association (Victoria)), 14 (Magistrates’ Court of
Victoria), 15 (Liberty
Victoria), 19 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
16 Submissions 9 (Australian Lawyers for Human Rights),11 (Criminal Bar
Association (Victoria)), 13 (Victoria Legal Aid), 14 (Magistrates’
of Victoria), 15 (Liberty Victoria), 19 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service), 24
(Law Institute of Victoria).
17 Submissions 4 (Director of Public Prosecutions (Victoria)), 7 (knowmore),
10 (Rape and Domestic Violence Services Australia), 18
(Name withheld), 20
(County Court of Victoria) (but note that the County Court is divided in its
evaluation of committal proceedings),
22 (Supreme Court of Victoria), 23
(Victims of Crime Commissioner), 25 (Victoria Police); Consultations 3 (CASA
Forum) , 31 (Supreme
Court of Victoria).
18 See the comparative table in Victorian Law Reform Commission,
(Issues Paper, June 2019) 74.
19 Western Australia and Tasmania.
20 Victoria, South Australia, Queensland and New South Wales.
21 Victoria, South Australia, Queensland, Northern Territory and Australian
Capital Territory.
22 New South Wales, Tasmania and Western Australia.
23 Western Australia and Tasmania.
24 South Australia and New South Wales.
25 See paragraph 11.34 of this report.
1.18 Recent changes to committal proceedings in New South Wales and South
Australia are of particular interest.
1.19 In 2018, New South Wales introduced reforms designed to encourage
appropriate early guilty pleas.26 The reforms abolished the
test for committal
and established a new case management process and sentencing discount scheme.
Funding was provided to the Director
of Public Prosecutions (New South Wales)
and Legal Aid New South Wales to ensure continuity of legal representation in
criminal matters,
allowing senior lawyers to act from the start of proceedings
until finalisation.27
1.20 The New South Wales reforms also introduced disclosure and charge
certification requirements.28 The disclosure requirements involve
initially preparing a simplified brief of evidence. This should include all
relevant material in the possession of the
informant but the evidence does not
need to be in admissible form.29 The informant and their senior officer must
both sign a disclosure
certificate confirming the investigation is complete and
that the informant’s disclosure obligations have been complied with.30
senior prosecutor must then review the evidence and file a charge certificate in
the Local Court (the equivalent of Victoria’s
Magistrates’ Court)
confirming the charges that will proceed to trial and identifying any charges
that should be withdrawn.31
Until a charge certificate is filed, the accused is
not able to enter a plea.
1.21 Also in 2018, South Australia introduced reforms to facilitate early
resolution of major indictable matters32 and reduce delay.33
The reforms provide
for a tiered disclosure process, with South Australia Police providing a
preliminary brief of evidence to the
South Australian Director of Public
Prosecutions.34 The Director must make a charge determination before the
commencement of committal
proceedings.35 The charge determination requirement
was designed to reduce the number of charges withdrawn at a late stage in
proceedings.36
Until a charge determination is made by the Director of
Public Prosecutions, South Australia Police have conduct of a case and advise
magistrates of the time required to compile the brief
of evidence.37 Statutory
time frames for providing the brief of evidence have been abolished to create a
more flexible system with
fewer hearing dates.38 As well as these procedural
reforms, South Australia established a sentencing discount scheme.39
Justice Legislation Amendment (Committals and Guilty Pleas) Bill 2017
(NSW), containing amendments to the
Criminal Procedure Act
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act
(NSW). The reforms implemented
many of the recommendations from New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Encouraging Appropriate Early Guilty Pleas
(Report No 141, December
27 Consultations 33 (Director of Public Prosecutions (New South Wales), 34
(Legal Aid New South Wales).
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW) ch 3 divs 3, 4.
29 New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 11
October 2017, 7 (Mark Speakman, Attorney-General);
Criminal Procedure Act
. The legislation does not refer to a ‘simplified
brief’ but specifies that the material need not be in admissible form
Director of Public Prosecutions Act
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW) ch 3 div 4.
32 With some exceptions, major indictable offences are those offences that
attract a maximum term of imprisonment exceeding five years:
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
(South Australia)
33 South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 2
March 2017, 6235–6247 (Kyam Maher). See also Brian Ross Martin,
of the Major Indictable Reforms—
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
(As Amended
by the Summary Procedure (Indictable Offences) Amendment Act 2017
13 September 2019) 2–4.
34 South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 2
March 2017, 6235–6247 (Kyam Maher).
35 South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 2
March 2017, 6235–6247 (Kyam Maher);
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
(South Australia),
The preliminary brief must be also provided by the
police to the accused as soon as practicable:
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
(South Australia)
s 106(1)(c).
36 South Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 2
March 2017, 6235–6247 (Kyam Maher).
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
. This is also
the case in New South Wales.
38 Brian Ross Martin,
Review of the Major Indictable
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
(As Amended by the Summary Procedure
(Indictable Offences) Amendment Act 2017
(Report, 13 September 2019) 3
Sentencing Act
Recent reforms and reform proposals in
1.22 The terms of reference ask the Commission to report on Victoria’s
committal system in light of ‘legislative reforms,
public consultations on
an early case management model, and other efforts in recent years to address
challenges in the committal
1.23 Since the introduction of the
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
(Vic) and the CPA in 2009, amendments to pre-trial criminal procedure in
Victoria have focused on reducing delay and on providing
better protections for
victims and witnesses. Throughout this period, although the value of committal
proceedings generally has been
debated, two central elements have been retained:
the ability to cross-examine some witnesses, and the test for committal.
1.24 Recently, the desirability of allowing cross-examination during
committal proceedings was considered by:
• the Commission’s inquiry, The Role of Victims of Crime in the
Criminal Trial Process, which recommended restricting
cross-examination during
committal proceedings40
• the Department of Justice and Community Safety (DJCS) 2017 review
that sought input from criminal justice stakeholders on
reforming criminal
procedure to minimise trauma for victims and witnesses and to reduce
1.25 The Role of Victims of Crime in the Criminal Trial Process inquiry
prompted the most significant reform of committal proceedings
years—the expansion of section 123 and the introduction of section 198A of
the CPA42 (see Chapter 11). Section
123 now prohibits cross-examination
during committal proceedings of
witness in cases involving a sexual
offence where the complainant was a child or person with a cognitive impairment
when proceedings
commenced. Section 198A allows for pre-trial cross- examination
in the higher courts of witnesses
other than the complainant
1.26 In 2017, the Supreme Court proposed reforms to allow it to manage cases
within its jurisdiction from the point of charge, or
shortly thereafter, through
to trial. The Supreme Court claimed that ‘a rigid separation between the
committal process and
pre-trial management [in a higher court], no longer
accords with modern case management practice’.43
Terminology
The definition of ‘committals’
1.27 ‘Committal proceedings’ are a species of pre-trial
procedure. They are distinguished from other pre-trial procedures
because they
occur only in the lower courts, and before the accused has been ordered
(‘committed’) to stand trial in
a higher court. A
‘committal’ is the decision by a magistrate to commit an accused
for trial or sentence in a higher
1.28 During this inquiry, stakeholders commonly used the expression
‘committals’ as shorthand for the entire committal
proceedings. The
term ‘committals’ was also used to refer to an event within a
committal proceeding such as the committal
40 Recommendations 37 and 38: Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of
Victims of Crime in the Criminal Trial Process
(Report No 34, August 2016)
41 Department of Justice and Regulation (Vic),
Proposed Reforms to
Criminal Procedure: Reducing Trauma and Delay for Witnesses and
Victims—Criminal Law Review
(Discussion Paper, 2017).
Justice Legislation Miscellaneous Amendment Act 2018
43 The Court’s ‘flexible early case management proposal’
was not published independently but is summarised in the
DJCS Discussion Paper:
Department of Justice and Regulation (Vic),
Proposed Reforms to Criminal
Procedure: Reducing Trauma and Delay for Witnesses and Victims—Criminal
(Discussion Paper, 2017) 10. The mention of ‘public
consultation on an early case management model’ in the current terms
reference relates to the Supreme Court’s proposal as it is canvassed in
the DJCS Discussion Paper.
44 The expression is used in this way by David Brereton and John Willis in
their article, ‘Evaluating the Committal’,
which begins,
‘...the future of the committal hearing is now under something of a
cloud’. Throughout the article the
authors tend to conflate references to
committal hearings and committal proceedings more generally: David Brereton and
John Willis,
‘Evaluating the Committal’ in Julia Vernon (ed),
Future of Committals—Proceedings of a Conference Held 1–2 May 1990
(Australian Institute of Criminology, January 1991) 5.
1.29 In order to avoid ambiguity, the Commission uses the term
‘committal’ on its own solely with reference to the
magistrate’s
decision to commit the accused for trial or sentence.
Specific court events such as the committal hearing are referred to in full,
where the Commission is referring to committal proceedings in their entirety, it
uses the expression ‘committal proceedings’.45
1.30 A consequence of the Commission’s recommendation that the test for
committal be abolished (see Chapter 4), is that the
language associated with
pre-trial indictable procedure in the lower courts will need to change.
References to ‘committal’
and ‘committal proceedings’
will be redundant. Many component parts of current committal proceedings will,
however, remain
in somewhat different form.
1.31 A benefit of changing the terminology associated with pre-trial
indictable procedure in the lower courts will be to remove language
opaque to people who do not have experience in the criminal justice system.
The term ‘victims’
1.32 For some survivors of criminal attacks or criminal offending, the word
‘victim’ is a pejorative.46 As the Commission
of Victims of Crime in the Criminal Trial Process: Report
, the word:
can connote strength, fortitude, resilience and dignity, yet its use is
commonly avoided on the basis that it can reduce a person
to their experience
of victimisation and connote weakness rather than the attributes of a
survivor.47
1.33 The law attaches its own meaning to the word, generally using it to
refer to the subject of alleged offending only after a finding
of guilt in
respect of that offending has been made. Before this, the term
‘complainant’ is used to refer to the person
whom the prosecution
claims is the victim of an alleged offence. The word ‘complainant’
also has derogatory associations
for many survivors of crime.48
1.34 Despite its negative associations for some, the Commission has decided
to follow the Judicial College of Victoria and use the
word ‘victim’
in this report:
as a single term to cover any person who has, or is alleged to have, suffered
harm as the result of unlawful action...49
1.35 The word ‘complainant’ is used occasionally where necessary
for consistency with the CPA and other legislation.
The approach of the Commission
Commission Chair
1.36 This reference was commenced under the leadership of the Hon. Philip
Cummins AM, who was Chair of the Commission from 1 September
2012 until his
death on 24 February 2019.
1.37 On 4 March 2019, Bruce Gardner PSM was appointed Acting Chair of the
Commission. Mr Gardner led the reference until the appointment
of the Hon.
Anthony North QC as Chair of the Commission on 30 August 2019.
45 In instances in which the term ‘committal’ is employed
differently by a stakeholder, it is retained regardless of this
for the purposes
of direct quotes.
46 Consultation 3 (CASA Forum).
47 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the
Criminal Trial Process
(Report No 34, August 2016) 3 [1.9].
48 Consultation 3 (CASA Forum).
49 Judicial College of Victoria,
Victims of Crime in the Courtroom: A
Guide for Judicial Officers
Committals Division
1.38 In accordance with
section 13(1)(b)
Victorian Law Reform
Commission Act 2000
(Vic), a Division was constituted to guide and oversee
the conduct of the reference. Bruce Gardner PSM and Dan Nicholson have been
members of the Division throughout the reference. The Hon. Frank Vincent AO QC
was a member until his resignation from the Commission
in October 2019. Liana
Buchanan was a member until she stepped down from the Division in December
Commission process
1.39 The Commission requested and received data from the Magistrates’
Court of Victoria, the County Court of Victoria, the Supreme
Court of Victoria,
Court Services Victoria and the Office of Public Prosecutions. An overview of
the available data and a discussion
of its limitations is provided in Chapter
1.40 An issues paper was published on 24 June 2019.50 The Commission sought
submissions on 21 questions included in the paper. It
received 27 submissions,
listed in Appendix A.
1.41 The Commission engaged in consultations in Melbourne, Geelong, Bendigo,
Shepparton and Morwell with, among others, representatives
prosecuting agencies, Victoria Legal Aid, legal practitioners, forensic
agencies, victims, and witnesses and victims’
advocacy groups. The
consultations are listed in Appendix B.
1.42 The Commission had the opportunity to observe several committal
mentions, committal case conferences, and committal hearings
in the Melbourne
Magistrates’ Court and Bendigo Magistrates’ Court.
1.43 The Commission examined reforms conducted in other jurisdictions and
consulted with members of the justice sectors in New South
Wales and South
Reform objectives
1.44 The terms of reference ask the Commission to recommend changes that
• reduce trauma experienced by victims and witnesses
• improve efficiency in the criminal justice system
• ensure fair trial rights.
1.45 These objectives are interconnected and may be mutually reinforcing,
although there is potential for tension between them.
The recommendations in
this report provide strategies for reducing trauma for victims and other
witnesses while also promoting efficiency
and fair trial rights.
Reducing trauma experienced by victims and
1.46 Although victims and witnesses are not parties to criminal proceedings,
they are important participants.51 They have an inherent
interest in the
criminal justice system’s response to crime and should be treated with
courtesy, respect, and dignity.52
Victims’ Charter Act 2006
(Vic) (Victims’
Charter) recognises the impact of crime on victims and seeks to reduce the
likelihood of secondary victimisation
by the criminal justice system.53 It
applies to all agencies that investigate and prosecute crimes and that
50 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
(Issues Paper, June
Victims’ Charter Act 2006
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the Criminal
Trial Process
(Report No 34, August 2016) 12 [2.4], 15
[2.21]–[2.34].
Victims’ Charter Act 2006
ss 4(1)(ba)
also Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the
Criminal Trial Process
(Report No 34, August 2016) 24
[3.20]–[3.21].
Victims’ Charter Act 2006
The objects of the
Victims’ Charter are based on
United Nations Declaration of Basic
Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power
40/34, UN Doc A/Res/40/34 (29 November 1985);
Victims’ Charter Act 2006
provide victims’ services.54 These agencies should take into account
the particular needs of victims, including with respect
• racial or religious background
• sex or gender identity
• disability
• location in regional or rural areas.55
1.48 The Victims’ Charter states that all victims should be provided
with information about and referrals to relevant support
services.56 They
should be kept informed about the course of an investigation and prosecution
and about the court process.57 In
some instances their views about a
prosecution must be sought and taken into account.58
1.49 Despite efforts to improve their experience,59 many victims and
witnesses continue to find their involvement in criminal proceedings
and stressful. For victims and witnesses who have experienced trauma,
involvement in the adversarial criminal justice
system can be a particularly difficult and damaging experience.60 The
criminal process may require them to relive traumatic events
that they wish to
leave behind and that trigger distress and anxiety.61 Some describe it as more
distressing that the crime itself.62
CASA Forum told the Commission that for
victims of sexual assault:
[their] general experience of engagement with the criminal justice system is
that it is confusing, disempowering, and re-traumatising.63
1.50 The submissions received by the Commission converge in acknowledging
that the criminal process can be traumatic for victims and
witnesses.64
Cross-examination is a particular concern, but delay and failures by the
prosecution to communicate what is happening
in a case are also described as
frequent problems.65
1.51 A trauma-informed approach was recommended as a way of mitigating the
harm that victims and witnesses may suffer as a result
of their involvement in
the criminal justice process.66 Domestic Violence Victoria describes a
trauma-informed approach as:
processes that don’t place victims in a position of being
re-traumatised and don’t treat them as objects of blame or instruments
evidence. Currently, the process often doesn’t deliver a sense of justice
... this doesn’t necessarily require a
conviction.67
Victims’ Charter Act 2006
59 See Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse,
Criminal Justice
(Consultation Paper, September 2016) 11, 76;
and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2018
(Vic), containing amendments to:
Victims Charter Act 2006
Victims of Crime Commissioner Act 2015
Sentencing Act 1991
Jury Directions Act 2015
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
60 Consultations 2 (Victims of Crime Consultative Committee), 3 (CASA Forum),
5 (Victims of Crime Commissioner), 14 (Domestic Violence
Victoria); Submissions
7 (knowmore), 9 (Australian Lawyers for Human Rights), 10 (Rape and Domestic
Violence Services), 13 (Victoria
Legal Aid), 19 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal
Service), 23 (Victims of Crime Commissioner); Judicial College of Victoria,
Victims of Crime in the Courtroom: A Guide for Judicial Officers
(2019) 4; Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime
in the Criminal Trial Process
(Report No 34, August 2016) 25 [3.24], 33
[3.75], 34 [3.78], 196 [8.1].
61 Judicial College of Victoria,
Victims of Crime in the Courtroom: A
Guide for Judicial Officers
(2019) 3–4; Consultations 3 (CASA Forum),
5 (Victims of Crime Commissioner), 14 (Domestic Violence Victoria).
62 Consultation 3 (CASA Forum), with reference to committal proceedings in
particular; Judicial College of Victoria,
Victims of Crime in the Courtroom:
A Guide for Judicial Officers
63 Consultation 3 (CASA Forum).
64 Submissions 4 (Director of Public Prosecutions (Victoria)), 6 (Office of
the Public Advocate), 7 (knowmore), 9 (Australian Lawyers
for Human Rights), 10
(Rape and Domestic Violence Services), 13 (Victoria Legal Aid), 19 (Victorian
Aboriginal Legal Service), 23
(Victims of Crime Commissioner), 24 (Law Institute
of Victoria), 25 (Victoria Police).
65 Submissions 7 (knowmore), 10 (Rape and Domestic Violence Services), 23
(Victims of Crime Commissioner); Consultations 3 (CASA Forum),
5 (Victims of
Crime Commissioner), 14 (Domestic Violence Victoria).
66 Submissions 4 (Director of Public Prosecutions (Victoria)), 6 (Office of
the Public Advocate), 7 (knowmore), 9 (Australian Lawyers
for Human Rights),
10 (Rape and Domestic Violence Services), 13 (Victoria Legal Aid), 19 (Victorian
Aboriginal Legal Service),
23 (Victims of Crime Commissioner), 24 (Law Institute
of Victoria), 25 (Victoria Police). Consultations 3 (CASA Forum), 5 (Victims
Crime Commissioner), 14 (Domestic Violence Victoria).
67 Consultation 14 (Domestic Violence Victoria).
1.52 The concept of trauma is expansive and the word is variously defined.68
As well as physical harm, it can encompass a psychological
wound or injury
caused by very frightening or distressing events.69 This may result from
directly experiencing or witnessing distressing
events; learning that someone
close is affected; or repeated or extreme exposure to details of the
1.53 A trauma-informed approach recognises the barriers that witnesses and
victims who have been through traumatic events may confront
during their
participation in criminal proceedings, such as difficulties discussing the
traumatic events, impaired recollection,
fear of being blamed or not believed,
and distrust of authority figures.71 If judicial officers and court staff are
aware of these
barriers and trained to assist victims and witnesses to navigate
them, this may limit the potential for further trauma.72 The Judicial
Victoria’s guide for judicial officers provides strategies to reduce
trauma for victims and witnesses (see Chapter
11 of this report). The Commission
has sought to adopt a trauma- informed approach in its discussion and
recommendations.
Improving efficiency
1.54 Criminal processes should be streamlined, avoid duplication and delay,
and be cost- efficient. This is consistent with the rights
of the accused to
trial without undue delay73 and assures victims and witnesses that they will not
be caught up in overly long proceedings.
1.55 Efforts to increase efficiency in the criminal process must not be at
the cost of the rights of those involved. Not all delay
is ‘unreasonable
delay’ and any reforms must ensure that measures to speed up the process
do not undermine the rights
of the accused. In
particular, the rights of the accused to be informed in detail of the nature
and evidentiary basis for the charge and to have adequate
time to prepare their
defence must be respected during pre-trial proceedings.74
1.56 This report focuses on avoidable delay and makes recommendations to
reduce the time that cases spend ‘queuing’ for
various court events,
including trial hearings.75
1.57 As requested in the terms of reference, the Commission has considered
the resource implications of its recommendations. It has
identified areas where
existing capacity and resource constraints need to be addressed and when
recommendations to change the system
require additional funding.
Maintaining the right to a fair trial
1.58 Everyone accused of criminal offending is entitled to a fair
hearing.76 In Victoria, the right to a fair trial in the
Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
(Vic) recognises that the accused has,
among other things, rights to:
• be informed promptly and in detail of the nature of the charge
• be tried without unreasonable delay
• be provided with legal aid in some instances
• examine witnesses unless otherwise provided for by law.77
68 Judicial College of Victoria,
Victims of Crime in the Courtroom: A
Guide for Judicial Officers
69 Australian Psychological Society, ‘
Psychology Topics
(Web Page, 2020) <https://
www.psychology.org.au/for-the-public/
Psychology-topics/Trauma>.
70 Marie-Eve Leclerc et al,
Assessing and Treating Traumatic Stress in
Crime Victims
(Research Brief, February 2017).
71 Judicial College of Victoria,
Victims of Crime in the Courtroom: A
Guide for Judicial Officers
72 Ibid. See also Jo-Anne Wemmers, ‘Victims’ Experiences in the
Criminal Justice System and Their Recovery from Crime’
(2013) 19(3)
International Review of Victimology
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
ss 25(2)(a)
75 See Submissions 20 (County Court of Victoria), 22 (Supreme Court of
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
signature 16 December
1966, 999 UNTS 171
(entered into force 23 March 1976) art
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
1.59 Criminal cases necessarily involve the power of the State being deployed
against an individual.78 Procedural rules have been
developed that:
reflect two obvious propositions: that the power and resources of the State
as prosecutor are much greater than those of the individual
accused and that the
consequences of conviction are very serious.79
1.60 The inherent potential for imbalance between the State and the accused
in the criminal justice system is exacerbated by the profile
of many alleged
offenders. Victoria Legal Aid funds over 80 per cent of all criminal trials in
the state. To be eligible for legal
aid, strict means tests apply and only the
most disadvantaged in the community qualify.80 Victoria Legal Aid describes
those it assists
as ‘the most disadvantaged people in Victoria’.81
In addition to many of its criminal law clients having ‘themselves
the victims of crime, trauma or abuse’, Victoria Legal Aid states that in
• five per cent of its clients were of Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Islander background
• 22 per cent were from culturally and linguistically diverse
backgrounds
• 26 per cent disclosed having a disability or mental illness
• five per cent were experiencing homelessness
• 29 per cent had no income.82
1.61 Some stakeholders urged the Commission to keep the potential
vulnerability of accused people in mind. Professor Felicity Gerry
there was a need within the criminal justice system to recognise that
‘everyone is vulnerable to some degree’
and ‘the starting
point [has to be] protecting everyone in the system—how can we ensure
everyone trusts the integrity
of the system?’83 Professor Gideon Boas
I act for both the accused and for victims and
feel very similar
[about their participation in the crimiminal trial]—they feel as if they
are not involved in the process,
that they are not well informed, that it is not
meaningful to them.84
1.62 At common law, committal proceedings have been characterised as playing
an important role in ensuring the rights of the accused.
Forty years ago, in
, Chief Justice Gibbs and Justice Mason (with Justice Aickin
agreeing) described the effects of depriving an accused person of committal
proceedings:
In such a case the accused is denied (1) knowledge of what the Crown
witnesses say on oath; (2) the opportunity of cross-examining
them; (3) the
opportunity of calling evidence in rebuttal; and (4) the possibility that the
magistrate will hold that there is no
prima facie case or that the evidence is
insufficient to put him on trial or that there is no strong or probable
presumption of guilt.85
, the judges concluded that committal proceedings:
constitute such an important element in the protection of the accused that a
trial held without antecedent committal proceedings,
unless justified on strong
and powerful grounds, must necessarily be considered unfair.86
R v Carroll
[2002] HCA 55
, 6 (2002) 213 CLR 635, 643 (Gleeson CJ,
R v Carroll
[2002] HCA 55
, 6 (Gleeson CJ, Hayne J).
80 Victoria Legal Aid notes that some people who may not be able to afford
private legal representation still do not qualify for legal
aid. Victoria Legal
Aid, ‘12—Means Test’,
VLA Handbook for Lawyers
Handbook, 2 January 2020) <https://handbook.vla.vic.gov.au/
handbook/12-means-test>. The means test requires an applicant
to earn less
than $360 per week and to have less than $1,095 worth of assessable assets in
order for their case to be fully aided.
Applicants who earn more than this or
who have more assets will be required to contribute to the costs of their
defence (ibid).
To put this in perspective, the national minimum wage is
currently $740 per week: Fair Work Ombudsman, Australian Government
(Web Page, 2020) <https://
www.fairwork.gov.au/how-we-will-help/
templates-and-guides/fact-sheets/minimum-workplace-entitlements/minimum-wages#what-is-the-national-minimum-wage-order>.
81 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
83 Consultation 18 (Academic Roundtable).
Barton v The Queen
[1980] HCA 48
(1980) 147 CLR 75
, 99 (Gibbs ACJ and Mason
86 Ibid 100 (Gibbs ACJ and Mason J).
1.64 In the same case, Justice Stephen described committal proceedings as
‘an important part of the protection ordinarily afforded
accused.’87
1.65 More recent decisions explain that any unfairness resulting from the
absence of committal proceedings may be rectified by the
trial court. Whether
this is possible will depend on the particular circumstances of the case.88
The measures available to trial
courts to prevent unfairness where an accused is
being tried without antecedent committal proceedings include voir dire hearings
and the ability to grant leave to cross-examine witnesses under section 198B of
the CPA (see Chapter 11).89
An overview of the Commission’s
conclusions
1.66 In the following chapters, the Commission outlines the reasons for
arriving at the conclusions which are now briefly summarised.
1.67 The Commission considered proposals from some stakeholders to abolish
committal proceedings and replace them with pre-trial case
management in the
higher courts. It recognises the advantages of a ‘docket system,’ in
which a single judge has oversight
of a case from start to finish and is likely
to have a keener interest in progressing the case than another judge who will
1.68 However, aside from the test for committal, which should be abolished,
many of the current elements of committal proceedings
are essential to ensuring
fair trials, promoting early resolution of cases, narrowing the issues before
trial, and reducing trauma
for victims and witnesses. Subject to some procedural
changes, and putting to one side matters within the exclusive jurisdiction
the Supreme Court, the main elements of committal proceedings should be retained
in the lower courts in Victoria.
1.69 Introducing a docket system in indictable criminal cases would require a
substantial departure from current practice. With the
exception of Supreme Court
matters, such a radical change is not the most effective approach to advancing
the objectives of this
reference. Victoria’s lower courts currently filter indictable cases
effectively, with around a third of all indictable stream
cases resolving in
the lower courts and another third committed to the higher courts following a
plea of guilty.
1.70 The County Court hears most indictable cases in which an accused is
committed for trial, with only around 100 cases committed
to the Supreme Court
each year. Transferring the bulk of pre-trial indictable case management to the
County Court would be costly
and there is a danger it would increase
1.71 While still costly, there is less danger of exacerbating delay by moving
all pre-trial management of cases within the Supreme
Court’s exclusive
Court matters, charges for indictable
offences that fall within the Supreme
Court’s exclusive jurisdiction should be filed in the Supreme Court.
1.72 Comprehensive information is not currently available about the impact of
abolishing elements of committal proceedings in other
example, New South Wales has invested heavily in the reforms discussed
earlier, but it is too soon to say whether
they have streamlined processes and
reduced delay, had positive outcomes for fair trials or reduced trauma for
victims and witnesses.91
Barton v The Queen
[1980] HCA 48
(1980) 147 CLR 75
, 105 (Stephen J).
[2006] VSC 481
(2006) 14 VR 228
Cook v The Queen
[2019] VSCA 87.
[2006] VSC 481
Cook v The Queen
[2019] VSCA
90 See paragraphs 5.26–5.27 and 5.34–5.36 of this report.
91 The Commission was told that the New South Wales Bureau of Crime
Statistics and Research (BOCSAR) is undertaking an evaluation
reforms: Consultation 32 (Local Court of New South Wales). The BOCSAR study has
not been publicised. Professor Jeremy
Gans urged the Commission to consider the
impact of the New South Wales reforms before recommending ‘sweeping
to Victoria’s committal system: Consultation 18 (Academic
roundtable).
1.73 While the outcomes of abolishing committal proceedings in their entirety
are currently uncertain, the Commission’s recommendations
address existing
concerns about inefficiency and unnecessary trauma for victims and witnesses.
The Commission’s recommendations
• Replacing the test for committal with a new procedure called a
discharge application. The Court will be have the power to
discharge charges
where it finds there is no reasonable prospect of conviction. Such an
application would be initiated by the accused.
• Earlier active involvement of the DPP in prosecuting indictable
stream matters. This should include providing charging instructions
or reviewing
charges at an early stage and taking ultimate responsibility for disclosure to
the accused.
• Earlier and continuing involvement of experienced practitioners.
• Replacing committal mention hearings and committal hearings with
‘issues hearings.’ While the opportunity to cross-examine
in the Magistrates’ Court should— with some exceptions—be
retained, the Court should more strictly apply
for leave to cross-examine in accordance with its terms; apply additional
criteria for leave to cross-examine in some cases; and carefully
monitor the
conduct of cross- examination. The issues hearing will allow for greater
flexibility in the scheduling of cross-examination
and reduce delay.
1.74 The Commission’s recommendations do not preclude future
consideration of whether committal proceedings should be further
Victoria should continue to study pre-trial systems in other jurisdictions and
particularly the outcomes, when available,
evaluations such as that currently being undertaken by the Bureau of Crime
Statistics and Research in New South Wales.92
1.75 The effectiveness of Victoria’s pre-trial criminal justice system
should continue to be evaluated and data collection strengthened
future reform decisions.
Statutory sentencing discount schemes
Sentencing Act 1991
(Vic) encourages early guilty pleas by
requiring the sentencing court to have regard to whether the offender entered a
guilty plea
and at what stage in the proceedings this occurred.93 The Act does
not prescribe specific discounts linked to the timing of guilty
1.77 New South Wales and South Australia have introduced statutory sentencing
discount schemes as part of their recent reforms. The
schemes specify the amount
by which a sentence should be reduced, depending on the timing of the
1.78 In its report on statutory sentence reductions for early guilty pleas,
Tasmania’s Sentencing Advisory Council cited arguments
that legislated
sentence reductions are contrary to the presumption of innocence because they
penalise offenders who proceed to
trial. The Council continued:
Concerns have also been expressed that [prescribed sentence reductions] may
place undue pressure on an innocent [person] to enter
a plea of guilty,
particularly when a custodial sentence would follow a guilty finding at trial,
but a guilty plea would result in
a non-custodial sentence.95
92 See note 91, above.
Sentencing Act 1991
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
95 Sentencing Advisory Council Tasmania,
Statutory Sentencing Reductions
for Pleas of Guilty
(Final Report No 10, October 2018) 82.
1.79 Legal Aid New South Wales shares these concerns, telling the Commission
in the course of the current reference that strict statutory
sentencing discount
schemes are:
unfair in ways that you can’t always predict. The [NSW] scheme is
incredibly complicated because it tries to incorporate every
single matter ...
none of the debates have been had yet about how it will play out.96
1.80 In the report cited above, Tasmania’s Sentencing Advisory Council
endorsed Victoria’s sentencing regime.97 There
were no stakeholders who
advocated during the current reference for introduction of legislatively
prescribed sentence discounts in
Victoria. The Commission is not recommending
any changes to the existing sentencing discount scheme.
96 Consultation 34 (Legal Aid New South Wales).
97 Sentencing Advisory Council Tasmania,
Statutory Sentencing Reductions
for Pleas of Guilty
(Final Report No 10, October 2018) 82.
pre-trial system
16 Introduction
Prosecuting indictable offences
Figure 1: The present committal and pre-trial system
19 Committal proceedings in the Magistrates’ Court
25 Pre-trial procedure in the higher courts
The present committal and pre-trial system
Introduction
2.1 This chapter provides an overview of pre-trial indictable procedure in
Victoria, including committal proceedings in the Magistrates’
describes current procedures from the filing of charges to trial or sentence.
The procedures described here are generally
followed for indictable offences
filed in the Children’s Court but issues specific to the Children’s
Court are discussed
in Chapter 12.
2.2 The flow chart on page 17 shows how indictable matters proceed through
the jurisdiction of the Magistrates’ Court.
Prosecuting indictable offences
2.3 Criminal offences are categorised as either ‘indictable’ or
2.4 Indictable offences are serious crimes that are heard and determined
before a judge and jury in the County or Supreme Courts1—although
circumstances, less serious indictable offences may be dealt with in the
Magistrates’ Court (‘indictable offences
summarily’).2
2.5 Summary offences are less serious offences that are heard and determined
in the Magistrates’ Court by a magistrate alone.3
2.6 Although indictable offences are prosecuted and sentenced in the County
or Supreme Courts, charges for these offences are usually
filed in the
Magistrates’ Court by the investigating officer (often a police officer),
who is known as ‘the informant’.4
The Magistrates’ Court
registrar lists these matters in the committal stream of the Magistrates’
Court. They only enter
the jurisdiction of a higher court after some preliminary
procedural matters are dealt with in the Magistrates’ Court. These
procedures are set out in chapter four of the
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) (CPA) and together constitute a ‘committal
proceeding’.
1 The majority of indictable offences are listed in:
Crimes Act 1958
Wrongs Act 1958
Offences in other legislation
that are described as being level 1–6 or punishable by level 1–6
imprisonment, fine or
both are presumed to be indictable offences unless the
contrary intention appears: Judicial College of Victoria, ‘2.5 Summary
Indictable Offences’,
Victorian Criminal Proceedings Manual
Manual, 1 November 2019) [3] <https://
www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/eManuals/VCPM/indexpage.htm#27318.htm
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
specifies that the following
indictable offences may be heard and determined summarily, unless the contrary
intention appears in
Criminal Procedure Act
or other legislation or
subordinate instruments: level 5 or level 6 offences; offences punishable by
level 5 or level 6 imprisonment,
fine or both; offences punishable by a term of
imprisonment of not more than 10 years, a fine of not more than 1200
units or both; or offences listed in schedule 2 of the Act. Such
offences can only be heard summarily if the Magistrates’
considers that it is appropriate to hear and determine the charge summarily and
the accused consents to a summary hearing,
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
The informant or the accused may apply for a summary hearing, or
the Magistrates’ Court may offer a summary hearing without
any application
being made,
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
3 The procedure for prosecuting summary offences is set out in in chapter
three of the
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
4 Note that a charge sheet need not be filed with a registrar of the
Magistrates’ Court—if an accused was arrested without
warrant and
released on bail, the charge sheet may be filed with a bail justice. Criminal
proceedings may also be commenced by
a police officer or public official signing
a charge sheet if a summons to answer a charge is at the same time issued by
that person.
The charge sheet and summons must be filed with a registrar of the
Magistrates’ Court within 7 days of signing the charge sheet:
Procedure Act 2009
Figure 1: The present committal and pre-trial
Source: Department of Justice, Victoria. This is an updated version of a
flowchart that appeared in
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
— Legislative Guide,
February 2010, 118.
5 References are to chapters, parts and divisions of the
Procedure Act 2009
2.7 Committal proceedings in the Magistrates’ Court must be held in all
cases involving charges for an indictable offence, unless:
• the accused elects to stand trial after service of the brief of
• the indictable offence can be heard summarily
• the DPP files a direct indictment.7
2.8 After committal, another charging document called an
‘indictment’ must be filed by the Director of Public Prosecutions
(DPP) in the higher court as the basis for proceedings in that court.8 The
indictment does not, however, commence a new criminal
proceeding against the
accused: the proceedings in the higher court are a continuation of the
proceedings that commenced in the Magistrates’
Court with the filing of a
charge sheet.9
Direct indictment by the DPP
2.9 A direct indictment may be filed even though an accused has been
discharged at committal,10 no committal has been held,11 or a
discontinuance has
been filed.12
2.10 Except where the accused person consents to the filing of a direct
indictment, the decision to do so is a special decision that
must be made by the
Director’s Committee in accordance with specified guidelines.13 These
provide that a direct indictment
should only be filed where there are strong
grounds for justifying a trial without a committal proceeding, and the resulting
would not be unfair to the accused.14
2.11 While the exercise of the power to file a direct indictment is not
subject to judicial review,15 a court may order a stay of
proceedings or make
other orders—such as for a voir dire hearing—where necessary to
prevent a miscarriage of justice
flowing from the use of the direct indictment
and to ensure a fair trial.16
2.12 As well as filing a direct indictment without a prior committal
proceeding, the DPP may file a direct indictment after a magistrate
has declined
to commit an accused for trial if, in the opinion of the Director’s
Committee, the magistrate made an error in
discharging the accused.17
2.13 Direct indictments are rare—just 19 were filed in 2017–18.18
Of these, seven were filed following discharge of one
or more charges at a
committal hearing.19 In 2018–19, the DPP filed 15 direct indictments, five
following discharge of one
or more charges at a committal hearing.20
6 The accused may elect to stand trial at any time after service of a hand-up
brief (which contains the evidence in the case):
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
See sub-heading below, ‘Election to stand
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(‘a criminal
proceeding is commenced by— ... (b) filing a direct indictment in
accordance with
section 159
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(‘a committal proceeding must be held in all cases in which the accused
is charged with an indictable offence, except
where—(a) a direct
indictment is filed; or (b) the charged is heard and determined
summarily’);
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Crown Prosecutor may file an indictment’),
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(‘Direct indictment commences criminal proceeding’)
and the definition of ‘direct indictment’ in
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
A Crown Prosecutor may file
an indictment in the name of the DPP.
Section 163
imposes time limits
for the filing of indictments following committal for trial in various classes
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
. See also Director of Public Prosecutions, Office of
Public Prosecutions Victoria,
Policy of the Director of Public Prosecutions
for Victoria
(17 December 2019) 4 [7]
http://www.opp.vic.gov.au/Resources/Policies
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
. See also Director of
Public Prosecutions, Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria,
Policy of the
Director of Public Prosecutions for Victoria
(17 December 2019) 5
http://www.opp.vic.gov.au/Resources/Policies
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
. See also Director of
Public Prosecutions, Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria,
Policy of the
Director of Public Prosecutions for Victoria
(17 December 2019) 5 [10]
http://www.opp.vic.gov.au/Resources/Policies
(‘definitions’) and
Public Prosecutions Act
14 Director of Public Prosecutions, Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria,
Policy of the Director of Public Prosecutions for Victoria
(17 December
2019) 5 [8]
http://www.opp.vic.gov.au/Resources/Policies
Cook v The Queen
[2019] VSCA 87
Barton v The Queen
[1980] HCA 48
(1980) 147 CLR 75
(2006) 14 VR 228
Cook v The Queen
[2019] VSCA 87.
17 The Director’s Committee must also be satisfied that the DPP’s
criteria governing the decision to prosecute are satisfied
and there has not
been unreasonable delay between the accused being discharged and the decision to
directly indict: Director of Public
Prosecutions, Office of Public
Prosecutions Victoria,
Policy of the Director of Public Prosecutions for
(17 December 2019) 4 [7]
http://www.opp.vic.gov. au/Resources/Policies
18 Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria,
Response to VLRC Request for
Statistics—Review of Committals
(24 April 2019). See also: Victorian
Law Reform Commission,
(Issues Paper, June 2019) 24
19 Email from Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria to Victorian Law Reform
Commission, 9 January 2020.
Committal proceedings in the Magistrates’
The purposes of committal proceedings
2.14 The statutory purposes of committal proceedings, set out in section 97
of the CPA, are:
• to determine whether a charge for an offence is appropriate to be
heard and determined summarily21
• to determine whether there is evidence of sufficient weight to
support a conviction for the offence charged22
• to determine how the accused proposes to plead to the charge23
• to ensure a fair trial, if the matter proceeds to trial,
- ensuring that the prosecution case against the accused is adequately
disclosed in the form of depositions
- enabling the accused to hear or read the evidence against the accused and
to cross-examine prosecution witnesses
- enabling the accused to put forward a case at an early stage if the accused
wishes to do so
- enabling the accused to adequately prepare and present a case
- enabling the issues in contention to be adequately defined.24
2.15 These statutory purposes are consistent with how the courts have
characterised the functions of committal proceedings at common
The component parts of committal
proceedings
2.16 Court appearances in a committal proceeding may include:
• a filing hearing
• a special mention hearing26
• a compulsory examination hearing27
• a committal mention hearing
• a committal case conference
• a committal hearing—although not in cases involving a charge
for a sexual offence where the complainant was a child
or a person with a
cognitive impairment when the proceeding commenced.28
2.17 Aside from special mention and compulsory examination hearings, each
of these hearings is described below, along with the
associated procedural
requirements.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Grassby v The Queen
[1989] HCA 45
(1989) 168 CLR 1
, 15 (Dawson J);
[1980] HCA 48
(1980) 147 CLR 75
, 99 (Gibbs ACJ and Mason J).
26 A special mention hearing may be held at any time during committal
proceedings to allow the court to: amend the date for a hearing
proceedings; make orders or directions that the court considers
appropriate for the management of the proceedings;
immediately conduct
a committal mention hearing and determine whether to discharge or commit the
accused, or automatically commit
for trial an accused who has
elected to stand trial:
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
27 At any stage after filing a charge but before a committal hearing, the
informant may seek an order requiring a person to attend
examination, or to produce a document or some other thing:
Criminal Procedure
-4.Compulsory examination
hearings are most commonly used when a prosecution witness has refused to
provide a written statement. The transcript of the compulsory
examination
hearing then constitutes the evidence of that witness and forms part of the
hand-up brief.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Filing hearing
2.18 A filing hearing must be held soon after charges are filed.29 At the
filing hearing, a solicitor from the Office of Public Prosecutions
(OPP) or, in
regional areas, a police prosecutor appears on behalf of the prosecution.
2.19 A magistrate establishes a timetable for the committal proceedings,
including setting dates for service of the hand-up brief
(containing the
evidence in support of the charges) and the committal mention hearing. The
magistrate also considers any application
for bail, unless the case involves
charges for treason or murder.30
Hand-up brief
2.20 If the accused indicates an intention to plead guilty and provides
written consent to the service of a plea brief, the informant
may serve a plea
brief, which is less substantial than a hand-up brief.31
2.21 Unless a plea brief has been served and the accused pleads guilty to the
charge, the informant must serve on the accused a hand-up
2.22 A hand-up brief must include33:
• a notice in Magistrates’ Court Form 29 containing information
- the purpose of the various stages
- the date of the committal mention hearing
- the importance of the accused obtaining legal representation and advising
them of their right, if eligible, to legal aid34
- the requirement that the parties have discussions before the committal
mention hearing. The purposes of these discussions include
finding out how the
accused proposes to plead; and if the accused wants to inspect materials listed
in the hand-up brief but the
informant objects to that inspection.35
• a copy of the charge sheet
• a statement of the material facts relevant to the charge
• any information, document or thing on which the prosecution intends
to rely in the committal proceedings, including copies
- any record of the accused’s interview with police or statement signed
by the accused, or other evidentiary material in the
possession of the informant
relating to a confession or admission made by the accused
- witness statements
- transcripts of compulsory examination hearings or examinations under
Major Crime (Investigative Powers) Act 2004
- documents that the prosecution intends to produce as evidence
- a list of things the prosecution intends to tender as exhibits.
• a description of any forensic procedure that has not yet been
completed and on which the prosecution intends to rely
29 Within seven days if the accused has been arrested and either remanded in
custody or granted bail, and within 28 days if a summons
to answer charge has
been issued:
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Only the Supreme Court
can grant bail to a person accused of treason, and only the Supreme Court
or a lower court at the time
of committing the person for trial, may grant bail
to a person accused of murder:
Bail Act 1977
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
. A plea brief must
contain a copy of the charge sheet, a statement of the material facts relevant
to the charge, statements signed
by the accused or records of interview of the
accused in the informant’s possession:
Criminal Procedure Act
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Magistrates’
Court Criminal Procedure Rules 2019
(Vic) r 57(1).
Magistrates’ Court Criminal Procedure Rules 2019
57(1), Form 29.
• any other information, document or thing in the possession of the
prosecution that is relevant to the alleged offence, including
a list of persons
who have made statements which the prosecution does not intend to tender at the
committal hearing and copies of
those statements, and copies of reports or tests
carried out on behalf of the prosecution but on which it does not intend to
• if the committal proceeding relates to a charge for a sexual offence,
a copy of every statement made by the complainant to
any police officer that
relates to the alleged offence and contains an acknowledgement of its
truthfulness
• a copy or list of any other information, documents or things required
by the rules of court to be included in the hand-up
brief. The rules of court
specify that these include witnesses’ prior convictions, surveillance
logs, crime scene notes, exhibit
logs and diaries.36
2.23 The hand-up brief must be accompanied by a list of its contents, signed
by the informant, in Magistrates’ Court Form 30.37
Time frame for service of the hand-up brief
2.24 The time frame for service on the accused of the hand-up brief is not
directly specified in the CPA, but parameters are imposed
by the requirements
• a committal mention hearing must be held within six months of the
commencement of proceedings or within three months if a
sexual offence is
involved,38 unless it is in the interests of justice to extend this time39
• the hand-up brief must be served on the accused at least 42 days
before the committal mention hearing, unless the Magistrates’
Court fixes
another period for service or the accused gives written consent to a lesser
2.25 A magistrate will consider the circumstances of the case when fixing
the date for service of the hand-up brief. The standard
time for service is
usually six weeks after the filing hearing.41
Election to stand trial
2.26 At any time after service of the hand-up brief, the accused may elect to
stand trial without a committal proceeding by filing
a notice to this effect
with the court and serving a copy on the informant.42 As soon as practicable,
the Magistrates’ Court
must have the accused attend before it and if it
considers that the accused understands the nature and consequences of the
it must commit the accused for trial.43
Application for summary jurisdiction
2.27 If all strictly indictable charges in a case are withdrawn by the
prosecution, leaving only indictable charges that are triable
summarily or
summary charges, the Magistrates’ Court may offer or the accused may make
an application for summary jurisdiction.44
If granted, the remaining charges
will be determined by a magistrate.45
Magistrates’ Court Criminal Procedure Rules 2019
57(2), Form 30. Magistrates’ Court Practice Direction 3 of 2019 sets out
additional ‘Standard Disclosure Material’
(Form 32A) that must be
served with the hand-up brief in all section 123 matters, involving a sexual
offence where the complainant
was a child or person with a cognitive impairment
at the time the proceeding commenced.
Magistrates’ Court Criminal Procedure Rules 2019
57(2), Form 30.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Within seven days after service of the brief on the
accused, a copy must be filed with the Magistrates’ Court registrar and,
if the DPP is conducting the committal proceeding, forwarded to the DPP:
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
41 Submission 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria).
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
The notice must be in
Magistrates’ Court Form 38:
Magistrates’ Court Criminal Procedure
(Vic) r 66.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Ibid 125(1)(b).
45 In accordance with the procedure set out in
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Case direction notice (Form 32)
2.28 A ‘case direction notice’, known as a ‘Form
32’,46 must be filed jointly by the parties and signed by
or on behalf of
the accused and the DPP or, if the DPP is not conducting the committal
proceeding, the informant.47
2.29 The purpose of the case direction notice is to require the parties to
engage in discussions to explore early resolution of the
case, identify the
issues in the case and identify the witnesses, if any, whom the accused will
seek leave to cross-examine.48
2.30 If the accused is unrepresented, the DPP (or if the DPP is not
conducting the committal proceeding, the informant) files the
case direction
notice and informs the court that ‘the accused has not participated in any
discussion or other activity in connection
with the preparation’ of the
2.31 The case direction notice must be filed seven days before the committal
mention hearing50 and must include:
• the procedure proposed for dealing with the matter, or if an
adjournment of the committal mention hearing would assist the
determining how the matter should be dealt with51
• any application for summary jurisdiction52
• if the parties have not reached agreement, details of the issues in
contention53
• details of any applications to cross-examine witnesses.54
2.32 The case direction notice may also include a statement that the
• requires the production of specified items in the hand-up brief55
• requires copies of things that the accused believes should have been
included in the hand-up brief56
• is prepared, or is not prepared, to proceed with the committal
hearing while a forensic procedure, examination or test described
in the hand-up
brief remains incomplete.57
2.33 If the accused seeks the production of material listed in the hand-up
brief and the informant objects, the items must be described
in the case
direction notice and the informant’s grounds for objecting must be
Committal case conference
Section 127
of the CPA provides that the Magistrates’ Court may
direct the parties to appear at a committal case conference conducted by
magistrate.59 Where practicable, the committal case conference should be
conducted on the same day as the committal mention hearing.60
See paragraph 2.52
below for further information about how the court conducts these case
conferences.
2.35 What is said or done at the committal case conference, and documents
prepared solely for its purposes, are not subsequently
admissible as
evidence except with the agreement of all the parties to the conference.61
Magistrates’ Court Criminal Procedure Rules 2019
(Vic) r 59;
Form 32–Case Direction Notice.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
48 Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Practice Direction No 6 of 2013:
Directions Concerning the Case Direction Notice
, 10 October 2013.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
and see Form 32. 50 Ibid
52 Magistrates’ Court Form 32, paragraph 3,
Magistrates’
Court Criminal Procedure Rules 2019
(Vic), r 59.
53 Magistrates’ Court Form 32, paragraph 2,
Magistrates’
Court Criminal Procedure Rules 2019
(Vic), r 59.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
s 119(e)(ii).
58 Magistrates’ Court Form 32, paragraph 7
(Magistrates’ Court
Criminal Procedure Rules 2019
(Vic), r 59.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
2.36 In practice, committal case conferences are confined to matters
involving an offence against the person, robbery, armed robbery
or aggravated
burglary.62
Committal mention
2.37 The committal mention is the central case management hearing in
committal proceedings.63 As well as conducting committal case
conferences, the
Magistrates’ Court may make any orders it considers appropriate,64 and
• immediately determine the committal proceeding65
• offer a summary hearing or determine an application for a summary
• hear and determine applications for leave to cross-examine67
• hear and determine any objection to disclosure of material68
• fix another date for a committal mention69
• fix a date for a committal hearing—although not in matters
involving a sexual offence where the complainant was a child
or person with a
cognitive impairment at the time the proceedings commenced.70
Committal hearing
2.38 At a committal hearing, if one is held, the Magistrates’ Court
considers whether to commit the accused to stand trial based
on the material in
the hand-up brief and any other evidence given during the hearing.71
2.39 After the cross-examination of witnesses, if any, the Magistrates’
Court must ask the accused whether they plead guilty
or not guilty,72 and must
inform the accused that the sentencing court may take into account a plea of
guilty and its timing.73
Cross-examination of witnesses
2.40 Witnesses, including complainants, may be cross-examined at the
committal hearing where leave to cross-examine has previously
Test for committal
2.41 Before committing the accused to a higher court for trial or sentence,
the Magistrates’ Court must determine if the evidence
is of sufficient
weight to support a conviction for an indictable offence.75 This involves
assessing whether a reasonable jury could
convict the accused on the evidence
available.76
62 Pursuant to Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Practice Direction No
7 of 2013: Committal Case Conference
, 10 October 2013. Offences against the
person are listed:
Crimes Act 1958
originally introduced as a nine month pilot, court supervised case conferencing
in these matters has continued.
63 Explanatory Memorandum, Criminal Procedure Bill 2009 (Vic) 48.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
s 125(1)(b).
s 125(1)(c).
s 125(1)(e).
s 125(1)(f).
s 125(1)(d).
s 144(1)(a).
The conditions for the grant of leave to cross-examine are set
and in Chapter 11 of this report. As noted earlier, leave cannot be
granted in cases involving a charge for a sexual offence where
the complainant
was a child or a person with a cognitive impairment when the proceeding
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
76 Judicial College of Victoria, ‘4.4.5 Determination of Committal
Proceeding’,
Victorian Criminal Proceedings Manual
(Online Manual,
1 November 2019) [7].
2.42 The prosecution case should be taken at its highest,77 and:
the magistrate need not consider whether a jury
be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt, but merely whether a jury
be so satisfied.78
2.43 The committal test has been described as a task requiring:
a committing magistrate ... essentially to sift the wheat from the chaff:
cases so weak that a jury properly instructed could not
possibly convict the
defendant and cases where it could.79
2.44 If the Magistrates’ Court determines the evidence is not of
sufficient weight to support a conviction for
indictable offence, it
must discharge the accused.80
2.45 If the Court determines the evidence is of sufficient weight to support
a conviction for the offence with which the accused is
charged, it must commit
the accused for trial.81
2.46 If the Court determines the evidence is of sufficient weight to support
a conviction for an indictable offence
the offence with which
the accused is charged, it may
adjourn the committal proceeding to allow the informant to file a charge
sheet in respect of that other offence and:
• if the charge sheet is filed, must commit the accused for trial,82
• if the informant does not file a charge sheet for the other offence
within the period of adjournment, must discharge the accused.83
2.47 Where an accused is charged with summary offences that are related to
the indictable offence in respect of which the accused
has been committed for
trial, the Magistrates’ Court must order that the related summary offences
are transferred to the trial
Costs orders
2.48 The Magistrates’ Court has an unfettered discretion to make costs
orders in criminal proceedings within its jurisdiction.85
Magistrates’ Court awards costs against an informant who is a police
officer, the order must be made against the Chief
Commissioner of Police.86
2.49 In exercising its discretion to make costs orders, the
Magistrates’ Court may take into account any unreasonable act or
by, or on behalf of, a party to the proceeding that the court is satisfied
resulted in prolonging the proceeding.87
List management in the Magistrates’
2.50 The Melbourne Magistrates’ Court has a group of dedicated
committal list magistrates led by the criminal supervising magistrate.
regional areas all sitting magistrates may be called on to manage committal
stream matters.
2.51 The Magistrates’ Court emphasises that it manages committal
proceedings proactively from the outset, with the aim of achieving
resolution or
ensuring proper preparation for trial as quickly and efficiently as
possible.88
Forsyth v Rodda
(1988) 37 A Crim R 50
Forsyth v Rodda
[1989] FCA 312
(1989) 87 ALR 699.
Thorp v Abbotto
[1992] FCA 112
(1992) 34 FCR 366
, [24] per Gummow J (with whom
O’Loughlin J agreed), emphasis added.
Thorp v Abbotto
[1992] FCA 112
(1992) 34 FCR 366
; [28] per Lockhart J, with whom
O’Loughlin J also agreed.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
s 141(4)(a).
s 141(4)(c).
Section 242
Criminal Procedure Act
provides that the County Court and Supreme Court have jurisdiction to hear
summary matters founded on the same set of facts
as the indictable offence in
respect of which the accused has been committed.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
While the High Court has made it clear that an award of
costs is an indemnity for a successful party and is not intended to punish
unsuccessful party, or to censure its conduct in the proceeding, this does not
limit the power of the court to order costs where
it is just and reasonable
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534.
88 Submission 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria).
2.52 At the committal mention, magistrates may give the parties a frank
assessment of the strength of the evidence. During case conferences,
the Melbourne Magistrates’ Court are usually conducted by the criminal
supervising magistrate, parties are required
to explain their attitudes to the
issues in the case and any barriers to resolution. Around half of the indictable
stream matters
that resolve within the jurisdiction of the Magistrates’
Court resolve at the committal mention and/or case conference.89
2.53 About 40 per cent of all matters that resolve within the jurisdiction
of the Magistrates’ Court resolve at a committal
hearing.90 In some
instances, matters resolve part way through a committal hearing, removing
the need to call all witnesses in
relation to whom leave to cross-examine has
been granted.91 Magistrates also engage actively with the parties at the
encourage resolution. The Commission was told, however, that some
regional magistrates are less proactive in this regard.
Pre-trial procedure in the higher courts
Procedure immediately following committal
2.54 Following committal, a Magistrates’ Court registrar forwards to
the DPP the materials from the committal proceedings including
the transcript of
evidence given and any statements admitted in evidence (‘the
depositions’).92 The DPP must file the
depositions in the County or
Supreme Court as soon as practicable after committal,93 and serve them on the
Filing an indictment
Time limits for filing an indictment
2.55 Assuming that the DPP decides to pursue the prosecution, which they are
not required to do,95 they must file an indictment against
a person committed
• for non-sexual offence matters: within six months after the date of
committal96
• for sexual offence matters in which the complainant was
child or person with a cognitive impairment when the criminal proceedings
commenced: at least 28 days before the day on which the
trial is listed to
• for sexual offence matters in which the complainant was a child or
person with a cognitive impairment when the criminal proceedings
within 14 days after the date of committal.98
2.56 The periods for filing an indictment may be extended or abridged by
order of the Court if it believes that this is in the
interests of
89 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
(Issues Paper, June
2019) 18 [3.47], Table 3.
91 Submissions 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria), 24 (Law Institute
of Victoria).
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
93 County Court of Victoria,
Criminal Division Practice Note PNCR 1-2015,
12 July 2019, para 5.1.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
As well as being free to choose whether to indict
post-committal, the DPP may also discontinue a prosecution at any time except
trial, whether or not an indictment against the accused has been filed:
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
ss 163(1)(b)
Choice of Supreme or County Court
2.57 The DPP may choose to file an indictment in the Supreme Court, or in the
County Court if all the indictable offences alleged
in the indictment are within
the County Court’s jurisdiction.100 The County Court has jurisdiction over
all offences except
treason and misprision of treason; murder and child
destruction; attempted murder; and unlawful combinations or conspiracies to
any offence that, when committed by an individual acting alone, could
only be tried in the Supreme Court.101
2.58 Matters outside the County Court’s jurisdiction are described as
being within the ‘exclusive jurisdiction’
of the Supreme Court. The
Supreme Court has jurisdiction in all Victorian cases but is not required to
exercise its jurisdiction
if jurisdiction has also been given to another
2.59 When deciding which court to file an indictment in, the DPP must have
• the complexity of the case103
• the seriousness of the alleged offence104
• any particular importance attaching to the case105
• any other consideration that the DPP considers relevant.106
Case conferences supervised by the higher
2.60 As in the Magistrates’ Court, court-supervised case conferencing
in the higher courts currently occurs in some but not
all matters.
2.61 In the County Court, court-supervised case conferencing is being
trialled in the Long Trial List and as part of the Active
Case Management
System (ACMS). In the ACMS, a distinction is drawn between matters that can be
managed administratively and matters
that require intensive case management. The
former will generally be cases that arrive in the County Court’s
ready to go to trial, without outstanding disclosure, and
with the issues for trial clearly identified by the parties and not
susceptible to resolution.107 The latter might be cases where
there are issues
in dispute that can be refined, substantial pre-trial legal issues, or multiple
accused.108 In these matters, a
case conference will generally be listed within
8-10 weeks of the committal hearing.109 The case conference will be conducted
a judge.110
2.62 In the Supreme Court, the Principal Judge directs appropriate cases to
participate in case conferencing, which is overseen by
reserve judges.111
Pre-trial cross-examination in the higher
2.63 In some circumstances, leave may be given to cross-examine witnesses
within the jurisdiction of the trial court but prior to
the trial itself (see
Chapter 11).
County Court Act 1958
Constitution
(Vic) ss 85, 87(1).
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
s 160(2)(a).
s 160(2)(c).
s 160(2)(d).
107 County Court of Victoria,
Practice Note PNCR 2-2019: Criminal
Division—Active Case Management
, 2 December 2019, para 35.
108 Ibid para 37.
109 Ibid para 45.
110 Ibid para 44.
111 Consultation 31 (Supreme Court of Victoria). The
Supreme Court
(Criminal Procedure) Rules 2017
r 4.07(1) provide that the Judicial
Registrar—Criminal Division may conduct a case conference at any time
before trial.
List management in the County Court
2.64 Cases are allocated to particular lists within the County Court’s
Criminal Division, including a general list, a list for
matters involving sexual
offences, the Long Trial List, the special hearing list for sexual offence
matters where the complainant
was a child or person with a cognitive impairment
when the proceedings commenced, and the ACMS which is currently being
piloted.112
2.65 Until the inauguration of the ACMS in December 2019, most matters were
listed for an initial directions hearing (IDH) in the
County Court on the next
sitting day following committal.113
2.66 ACMS matters are not listed for a directions hearing until 14 days after
committal,114 and this directions hearing may be vacated
where the judicial
registrar managing the list
makes an assessment that the matter can be listed for trial immediately.115
In such cases, a trial date will be provided and a directions
hearing listed
four weeks before this date.116
2.67 Trial material will generally have to be filed within eight to ten weeks
of the committal.117 This material includes:
• depositions
• the indictment
• summary of prosecution opening and notice of pre-trial admissions
• Evidence Act and/or
Jury Directions Act
• defence response to the prosecution opening
• notice of pre-trial admissions sought.118
2.68 The County Court’s Practice Note for the ACMS requires parties to
be ‘in a position to meaningfully progress the
matter’ whenever they
appear before the court.119 It states ‘Practitioner compliance with Court
directions ... is critical’
and notes that the Court will list a matter
for Mention before the Judicial Registrar in order to address non-
compliance.120
2.69 For matters in the County Court’s general and sexual offences
lists (excluding matters involving a sexual offence where
the complainant was a
child or person with a cognitive impairment when the proceedings commenced), an
IDH is held on the next sitting
day following the committal hearing.121
112 See County Court of Victoria,
Practice Note PNCR 2-2019: Criminal
Division—Active Case Management
, 2 December 2019; County Court of
Criminal Division Practice Note PNCR 1-2015,
12 July 2019.
113 County Court of Victoria,
Criminal Division Practice Note PNCR 1-2015
(12 July 2019), para 2.1.
114 County Court of Victoria,
Practice Note No 2 of 2019: Active Case
Management System (Criminal Division Reform)
3 December 2019, para 22.
115 This will be where the matter appears incapable of resolution; there are
only straightforward pre-trial legal issues, if any;
there is no outstanding
disclosure; and the estimate trial length is reasonable and is agreed between
the parties: County Court of
Practice Note No 2 of 2019: Active
Case Management System (Criminal Division Reform)
3 December 2019,
116 County Court of Victoria,
Practice Note No 2 of 2019: Active Case
Management System (Criminal Division Reform),
3 December 2019, para 36.
117 Ibid para 36.3.
118 County Court of Victoria,
Practice Note No 2 of 2019: Active Case
Management System (Criminal Division Reform),
3 December 2019, paras
119 Ibid para 8.
120 Ibid para 57.
121 The defence must file and serve a ‘Notice that Legal
Practitioner Acts’ on the day of the IDH. The practitioner
appeared at the committal must appear at the IDH, and ‘both parties must
be fully familiar with the matter.’
The accused must also appear at the
IDH, by video link if he or she is in custody: County Court of
Criminal Division Practice Note PNCR 1-2015
, 12 July 2019,
paras 2.6–2.7, 2.10.
2.70 Parties must come to an IDH prepared to answer a list of questions set
out by the County Court in its Criminal Division Practice
Note, such as:
• What are the factual issues in dispute?
• What is not in dispute?
• How can the parties narrow the issues in dispute?
• Are there any outstanding disclosure issues?
• Do any applications need to be made?122
2.71 All sexual offence cases involving a complainant who was a child or
person with a cognitive impairment when proceedings commenced
are listed in the
County Court’s Special Hearing Rolling List, which sits
fortnightly.123
2.72 These cases are not listed for an IDH until at least 28 days after the
date of committal.124 The prosecution must file and serve
trial materials no
later than 14 days after committal.125
2.73 If an application is made for pre-trial cross-examination of witnesses
under section 198A (see Chapter 11), the parties must
jointly file a Form 198A,
‘Application for Pre-Trial Cross- Examination’, no later than seven
days before the IDH.126
2.74 If confidential communications are sought by the defence, the relevant
applications and draft subpoenas must be filed and served
no less than seven
days before the IDH.127
2.75 At the IDH, both parties must be fully familiar with the matter and be
able to make decisions as to its future conduct.128
2.76 Parties must come to an IDH prepared to answer similar questions to
those set out in paragraph 2.70. In addition, they should
be prepared to say if
pre-trial cross-examination will assist in resolution of the matter, and if
so, how long this cross-examination
will take.129
2.77 At the conclusion of the IDH, the proceeding will either be adjourned
• section 198A pre-trial cross-examination hearing
• final directions hearing
• special hearing
• trial.130
2.78 If the matter is listed for a final directions hearing, the court will
generally make orders for the filing of documents before
the final directions
hearing.131
122 County Court of Victoria,
Criminal Division Practice Note PNCR 1-2015,
12 July 2019, para 2.11.
123 Ibid para 3.1.
124 Ibid paras 2.4, 3.2.
125 Ibid para 3.4.
126 County Court of Victoria,
Criminal Division Practice Note PNCR 1-2015,
12 July 2019, para 3.6.
127 Ibid para 3.7. Confidential communications are defined by
section 32C
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1958
128 County Court of Victoria,
Criminal Division Practice Note PNCR
,12 July 2019, para 3.8.
129 Ibid para 3.12. The accused must appear at the IDH, by video link if he
or she is in custody: County Court of Victoria,
Criminal Division Practice
Note PNCR 1-2015,
12 July 2019, para 3.11.
130 County Court of Victoria,
Criminal Division Practice Note PNCR 1-2015
12 July 2019, para 3.13
131 Ibid para 3.14.
County Court regional matters
2.79 When an accused is committed for trial to a regional (circuit)
location, the matter will be listed for a circuit directions
hearing (CDH) in
the next CDH list for that particular location.132
2.80 At the CDH, both parties are required to be fully familiar with the
2.81 Parties may appear from Melbourne or from a regional court location for
all such hearings.134 Video links are automatically
arranged between courts
for all CDHs. All accused on bail must attend the CDH but can appear via
video link from any
County Court location. Accused in custody who are
legally represented are not required to attend either in person or via video
unless the Court orders otherwise or at the written request of the
parties.135
2.82 Additional pre-trial listings may be made as the case requires.136
List management in the Supreme Court
2.83 Supreme Court matters are listed for post-committal directions hearing
(PCDH) within 24 hours of committal if the committal proceedings
were conducted
in Melbourne, or within five days if the committal proceedings were conducted in
a regional area.137
2.84 A trial date is usually set at the PCDH.
2.85 Following the PCDH, the Supreme Court conducts case management of
matters through the Principal Judge. Court-supervised case
conferences currently
occur on an ad hoc basis.
132 Ibid para 4.1.
133 Ibid para 4.8.
134 County Court of Victoria,
Criminal Division Practice Note PNCR 1-2015,
12 July 2019, para 4.10. If seeking to appear from any other Victorian court
location, parties must contact the relevant circuit registry
to confirm that a
video link can be accommodated para 4.11. Leave is required to appear at a
Circuit directions hearing from a non-Victorian
court or interstate location
135 County Court of Victoria,
Criminal Division Practice Note PNCR 1-2015,
12 July 2019, paras 4.13-4.14. 136 Ibid para 4.18.
137 Supreme Court of Victoria,
Practice Note SC CR 1 (First Revision):
Case Management Procedure for Criminal Trials,
1 January 2019, paras 4.1,
Committal system
32 Introduction
32 Statistical data relating to indictable cases
35 Limitations of the available data
37 Improving data collection
Committal system and indictable case data
Introduction
3.1 During this reference the Commission requested and received data from the
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, the County Court
of Victoria, the Supreme
Court of Victoria, Court Services Victoria and the Office of Public
Prosecutions. Other stakeholders referenced
or provided additional data in their submissions. As well as these sources of
data, the Commission’s recommendations are based
on publicly available
statistical data
3.2 In this chapter the original sources of data are referenced. On
occasion, references are to the issues paper, in which the
available data is
set out more fully.1 The year that is referred to may vary depending on the
most recent data available or provided
to the Commission.
3.3 This chapter provides an overview of what the statistical data reveals
data and its
limitations, and makes recommendations about how data can be better captured in
indictable criminal cases. While there
are shortcomings with the available data
that make it difficult to draw accurate comparisons between Victoria and other
conclusions:
• Delay in indictable matters is no worse in Victoria than in other
Australian states and territories, and Victoria compares
favourably to most
other jurisdictions.
• Late guilty pleas are not more of a problem in Victoria than
elsewhere and again, Victoria compares relatively favourably
Statistical data relating to indictable
3.4 Each year around 3000 criminal cases commence in the committal stream of
the Magistrates’ Court and pass through some or
all parts of a committal
proceeding.2
3.5 Of these cases, roughly:
• 30 per cent are heard and determined summarily3 in the
Magistrates’ Court4
• 30 per cent are committed to the County Court for sentence, following
a plea of guilty5
1 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
(Issues Paper, June
2 In the five years from 2013–14 to 2017–18, an average of 3,091
cases per year commenced in the committal stream of the
Magistrates’
Court: see Victorian Law Reform Commission,
(Issues Paper,
June 2019) 15 [3.24].
3 A case can only be determined summarily if all indictable charges are
withdrawn or discharged, and a magistrate grants an application
for summary
the procedure outlined in
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
4 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
(Issues Paper, June
2019) 15 [3.24].
5 In 2017–18, 1069 cases were committed to the County Court following a
guilty plea at committal. In 2018–19 this number
was 1017: County Court of
Case Data Requested by VLRC
(October 2019).
• 30 per cent are committed to the County Court for trial, following a
plea of not guilty6
• four per cent are committed to the Supreme Court. Of the cases
committed to the Supreme Court, approximately 14 per cent are
committed for
sentence following a plea of guilty.7
Disposition of cases in the Magistrates’
3.6 Of those committal stream matters that were finalised summarily in the
Magistrates’ Court in 2017–18, approximately:
• seven per cent resolved at the filing hearing
• 40 per cent resolved at the committal mention hearing
• seven per cent resolved at the committal case conference
• 40 per cent resolved at the committal hearing8
Rates of discharge at committal hearing
3.7 Between one and two per cent of all committal stream cases per year have
at least one charge discharged by a magistrate. In 2017–18,
57 cases had
at least one charge discharged, and ten cases had at least one charge discharged
and none committed.9
Cross-examination during committal hearing
3.8 The Commission is unable to determine from the available data how
frequently witnesses are cross-examined during committal hearings.
2017–18, leave to cross-examine at least one witness was granted in 46 per
cent of all committal stream cases—a total
of 1,569 cases.10
3.9 The shortcomings of this data are discussed below.
Duration of cases
Magistrates’ Court
3.10 In 2017–18, the average time between first hearing and committal
in the Magistrates’ Court was 36 weeks for death-related
and general
offences, and 29 weeks for sexual offences.11
3.11 Data is not available to show the average time between filing hearing
and finalisation in the Magistrates’ Court for those
committal stream
matters that resolve summarily.
3.12 Figures provided by the Australian Bureau of Statistics provide a point
of comparison for the time taken to finalise matters
in the Magistrates’
Court of Victoria by comparison with Magistrates’ or Local Courts in other
Australian states and
territories, but these figures capture both summary and
indictable cases.
6 In 2017–18, 1019 cases were committed to the County Court for trial
following a plea of not guilty. In 2018–19, this
number was 1175: County
Court of Victoria,
Case Data Requested by VLRC
(October 2019).
7 In 2016–17, 106 cases were committed to the Supreme Court. In
2017–18, this number was 115: Supreme Court of Victoria,
Requested by VLRC
(September 2019). The data provided by the Supreme Court
covers cases initiated in financial years 2016–17, 2017–18
2018–19. Of the case data provided for 2018–19, roughly 60 per cent
of cases were not yet finalised. Accordingly,
the Commission has not relied on
the 2018–19 data in this report.
8 Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Committal Data Requested by VLRC
(24 April 2019). See also Victorian Law Reform Commission,
(Issues Paper, June 2019) 18 [3.47] for figures spanning 2013–14 to
9 Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Committal Data Requested by VLRC
(24 April 2019). See also Victorian Law Reform Commission,
(Issues Paper, June 2019) 19 [3.55] for figures spanning 2013–14 to
10 Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Committal Data Requested by VLRC
(24 April 2019). See also Victorian Law Reform Commission,
(Issues Paper, June 2019) 17 [3.44]. Note that data obtained by the
Commission in 2016 shows that in 2015, one or more witness was
cross-examined in
46 per cent of matters that proceeded through a committal hearing: Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the Criminal Trial
(Report No 34, August 2016), 210 [8.86].
11 Court Services Victoria,
Committal Data requested by VLRC
Table 1: Time taken (weeks) for finalisation of criminal cases in the
Magistrates’ or Local Courts in Australian jurisdictions,
Mean (weeks)
3.13 Given these figures relate to summary as well as indictable
proceedings, it is difficult to rely on them as a performance
indicator for
courts’ management of indictable stream cases. What is clear, however,
is that criminal cases in the Victorian
Magistrates’ Court are being
finalised in a comparable way to most other jurisdictions, with South Australia
and Tasmania taking
much longer to finalise matters than other
County and Supreme Courts
3.14 In the higher courts in 2018–19:
• 71 per cent of cases in the County Court and 61 per cent of cases in
the Supreme Court were finalised within 12 months
• 96 per cent of cases in the County Court and 97 per cent of cases in
the Supreme Court were finalised within 24 months.20
3.15 These figures capture pleas and sentencing matters as well as
3.16 Table 2 outlines the time taken to finalise criminal cases in the higher
courts across Australia. The figures capture average
disposition times across
both higher courts (County/District and Supreme) in the states. The Australian
Capital Territory and the
Northern Territory only have one higher court.
Table 2: Time taken (weeks) for finalisation of criminal cases in higher
courts in Australian jurisdictions, 2017–18
Mean (weeks)
3.17 This data indicates that the higher courts in Victoria are finalising
criminal cases more quickly than most other Australian
12 Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Criminal Courts, Australia
(Catalogue No 4513.0, 27 February 2019) table 20.
13 Ibid table 16.
14 Ibid table 24.
15 Ibid table 28.
16 Ibid table 32.
17 Ibid table 36.
18 Ibid 40.
19 Ibid table 44.
20 Productivity Commission, Australian Government,
Report on Government
Services 2020
(Report, 2020), Table 7A.22 <https://
www.pc.gov.
au/research/ongoing/report-on-government-services/2020/justice/courts>. These
figures relate to non-appeal criminal cases in each
22 Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Criminal Courts, Australia
(Catalogue No 4513.0, 27 February 2019) table 20.
23 Ibid table 16.
24 Ibid table 24.
25 Ibid table 28.
26 Ibid table 32.
27 Ibid table 36.
28 Ibid table 40.
29 Ibid table 20.
Guilty pleas and other outcomes of cases in the
higher courts
3.18 In 2017–18, roughly 2100 cases were committed to the County
Court.30 Of these, just over half were committed following
a plea of guilty,
and in another approximately 25 per cent a plea was entered prior to trial.31
Of the remaining 25 per cent
of cases where a plea of guilty was not entered,
roughly 16 per cent proceeded to trial with the remaining cases either
discontinued
or transferred to another court.32
3.19 Of the cases that proceeded to trial, the accused was found or pleaded
guilty in roughly 63 per cent of cases, was found not
guilty in 33 per cent of
cases and was found not guilty by reason of mental impairment in four per cent
of cases.33
3.20 In 2017–18, 115 cases were committed to the Supreme Court. Only 14
per cent of cases were committed following a guilty
plea.34 In another 31 per
cent of cases, a plea of guilty was entered between committal and trial,
including during trial.35 Roughly
30 per cent
of cases proceeded to trial, with the remaining 25 per cent either being not
yet finalised, discontinued or transferred to the County
3.21 Of the cases that proceeded to trial in the Supreme Court, the
accused was either found or pleaded guilty in approximately
80 per cent of
cases and was found not guilty (or unfit to stand trial) in 20 per cent of
Limitations of the available data
3.22 The available data relating to pre-trial indictable procedure in
Victoria and other Australian jurisdictions is limited in several
respects. This
makes it difficult to:
• identify at which points in the criminal justice system delay is
occurring and why
• know the profile of witnesses who are cross-examined prior to trial,
and how common it is for witnesses to be cross-examined
both before trial and at
• draw comparisons between the pre-trial criminal justice systems in
Victoria and other Australian states and territories, and
internationally.
3.23 These issues are discussed further below.
Identifying delay
3.24 It is difficult to pinpoint causes of delay in indictable criminal
matters. The lower and higher courts use different case
management systems and
do not share information. As a result, it is difficult to obtain
system-wide, representative data that
captures the full lifecycle of all
indictable matters.38
30 County Court of Victoria,
Case Data Requested by VLRC
31 In 2017–18, the County Court finalised 2088 cases, 1069 of which
were committed following a plea of guilty. In another 509
cases, a plea was
entered following committal but prior to trial. In 32 cases a plea was entered
during trial: County Court of
Case Data Requested by VLRC
(October 2019).
32 In 2017–18, 337 cases proceeded to trial, 98 cases were
discontinued, four were stayed and 57 were transferred to the Magistrates’
Court: County Court of Victoria,
Case Data Requested by VLRC
34 In 2017–18, 16 cases were committed to the Supreme Court following a
plea of guilty at committal: Supreme Court of Victoria,
Case Data Requested
(September 2019).
35 In 2017–18, a plea of guilty was entered between committal and trial
in 28 cases and a plea of guilty was entered during
trial in 8 cases: Supreme
Court of Victoria,
Case Data Requested by VLRC
(September 2019).
36 In 2017–18, 34 cases proceeded to trial, seven were discontinued,
seven were transferred to the County Court and 23 were
not yet finalised:
Supreme Court of Victoria,
Case Data Requested by VLRC
37 In 2017–18, the accused was convicted of at least one offence in 19
cases, pleaded guilty in eight cases, was acquitted
of all offences in two
cases, was found not guilty by reason of mental impairment in four cases and was
found to be unfit in
one case: Supreme Court of Victoria,
Case Data Requested
(September 2019). Unlike the defence of mental impairment, which
concerns the accused person’s mental condition at the time
of the offence,
unfitness to stand trial relates to the accused person’s mental condition
at the time they are involved in
court proceedings: see Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Review of the Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be
Tried) Act 1997
(Consultation Paper, May 2013) 52 [4.1].
38 In order to track the lifecycle of indictable matters between
disparate records.
3.25 According to the Director of Public Prosecutions’
Annual Report
, the average time to complete an indictable prosecution that
year was 15.5 months, down from a five- year average of 19.9 months.39
Analysing rates of pre-trial
cross-examination
3.26 The availability of cross-examination at a committal hearing is
frequently criticised, in part because it means some witnesses
cross-examined multiple times—not only in the lower courts but also prior
to trial in the higher courts and subsequently
at a trial.
3.27 The Commission cannot satisfactorily measure how often this happens due
to the way the Magistrates’ Court captures data
relating to
cross-examination. In particular, the Magistrates’ Court does not
• the number of witnesses per case for whom leave to cross-examine was
• how many witnesses per case were cross-examined at a committal
• the class of witness for whom leave to cross-examine was granted,
such as informants or other professional witnesses, and
witnesses.40
3.28 The higher courts do not uniformly capture this information either.
Since August 2019, however, the County Court has been manually
capturing data
relating to pre-trial cross- examination pursuant to section 198A of the
3.29 The Magistrates’ Court has provided data about the number of cases
in which leave to cross-examine at least one witness
was granted.41 The
Commission is cautious about relying on this data as indicative of overall
cross-examination rates at committal
hearings because:
• Leave may have been granted in cases that resolve or in which a
witness is ultimately not required.
• Leave may have been granted in cases involving co-accused, which will
result in leave being recorded in three separate cases,
even though a witness is
cross-examined only once.
• Classes of witness are not identified, so it is impossible to know if
potentially vulnerable witnesses were cross-examined.
Drawing comparisons between Victoria and other
3.30 It is difficult to draw meaningful comparisons between Victoria and
other jurisdictions because of differences such as population
size and criminal
case load, and variations in indictable criminal procedure. The Australian
Bureau of Statistics cautions that direct
comparisons may be misleading
• data systems used by the courts are designed for the administration
of court business, not to provide data for the purposes
of nation-wide
statistical analysis
• variability in data systems and the methodologies used to
extract/compile data
• refinements over time to data quality procedures
• legislative or operational differences across states and territories
(e.g. differences in the types of sentencing options
available to the
39 Victorian Office of Public Prosecutions,
Annual Report 2017–18
(Report, 2018) 1.
40 See the discussion under the heading, ‘Does Victoria have a culture
of pre-trial cross-examination?’ in Chapter 11.
41 See Victorian Law Reform Commission,
(Issues Paper, June
2019) 17 [3.44].
42 Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Crime and Justice Statistics
‘Criminal Courts – Explanatory Notes’, (Catalogue 4513.0,
February 2019) [65].
Improving data collection
3.31 The Magistrates’ and Children’s Courts are currently
developing a new case management system. It is expected that
this system will be
operational by 2022.43
3.32 It is important that the Courts’ new case management system
captures information to address the deficiencies discussed
above, including
detailed information about how many and what classes of witnesses are
cross-examined in the lower courts.
3.33 The new system should also directly link with case management systems
used in the higher courts, so that indictable stream cases
commenced in the
Magistrates’ Court can be tracked in the higher courts, and the higher
courts can easily gain an understanding
of how the case was managed in the lower
courts and any issues that arose there. This will allow for collection of
reliable data
specific points during proceedings at which undue delay occurs.
3.34 Ideally, a single electronic case file should be created in respect of
an indictable case to ensure that information is not either
lost or duplicated
between the lower courts and the higher courts.
3.35 If the Commission’s recommendation for case management in the
Supreme Court from the commencement of proceedings is adopted,
this linkage
between electronic case management systems in the Magistrates’ Court and
the Supreme Court will be unnecessary.
It will remain necessary in respect of
the Children’s Court, however, which should continue to case manage
indictable stream
cases where the accused is a child.
43 Court Services Victoria, ‘Case Management System Project’,
(Web Page, 23 July 2019) <https://
www.courts.vic.gov.au/projects/
case-management-system-project>.
The test for
40 Introduction
40 The current test for committal
42 Is the committal test an effective filter?
47 Commission’s conclusions: Abolish the test for committal
The test for committal
Introduction
4.1 This chapter analyses the role of magistrates in reviewing the evidence
to decide if the accused should be committed for trial
in a higher court.
Although this decision is referred to in the
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) (CPA) as the ‘committal determination’,1 in
this discussion the widely recognised phrase ‘committal test’ or
‘test for committal’ is used instead.2
4.2 The chapter begins by describing the current test for committal and how
it has been interpreted by the courts, and the process
involved in its
application. It provides an overview of the ongoing debate about whether the
test operates as an effective filter,
before surveying stakeholders’
arguments in support of retaining the test and those in support of abolishing
4.3 The Commission concludes that the test for committal should be abolished
and cases transferred from the jurisdiction of the lower
courts by a magistrate
making an order that the accused appear in a higher court for trial or sentence.
Magistrates will no longer
be required to apply a test for committal based on
the evidence in a case. Instead of this, the accused should be able to apply for
a discharge and the lower courts empowered
to discharge the accused if the Court is satisfied that there is no
reasonable prospect of conviction.
4.4 An outcome of the proposed change is that the language of committal will
no longer play a role or be necessary. In place of the
present test for
committal, a case would move from a lower court to a higher court by an order of
the lower court that the accused:
• appear for plea and sentence in a higher court on a date to be
determined, or
• stand trial in a higher court on a date to be determined.
The current test for committal
4.5 Before committing the accused to a higher court for trial or sentence, a
magistrate must determine if the available evidence is
of sufficient weight to
support a conviction for an indictable offence.3 This involves assessing whether
a reasonable jury could
convict the accused on the evidence available.4
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
2 To be clear, the phrase ‘committal test’ is often used
expansively in this chapter to refer to the lower courts’
reviewing the evidence, rather than to the specific content of the test, which
has changed over the years. When the content
of the test is being discussed,
this is obvious from the surrounding context.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
4 Judicial College of Victoria, ‘4.4.5 Determination of Committal
Proceeding’,
Victorian Criminal Proceedings Manual
(1 November
4.6 The current test for committal was adopted in 1987, replacing an earlier
test that required an assessment of whether the evidence
was of sufficient
weight ‘to put the accused
on trial’.5 The earlier test had been interpreted as requiring the
prosecution to establish a prima facie case.6 It was
characterised by a
committee led by Victoria’s then Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP),
John Coldrey QC, as an insufficient
filter for ‘unwarranted
prosecutions.’7 Its replacement was recommended by the same committee
and described by Coldrey as a stronger test that has ‘the
simplicity’, while also ensuring
a magistrate’s decision to commit is not perceived as
‘pre-empting the ultimate jury verdict.’8
4.7 The current test requires a magistrate to take the prosecution case at
its highest.9 A magistrate ‘need not consider whether
be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt, but merely whether a
be so satisfied’.10 A magistrate is expected ‘to
sift the wheat from the chaff’, distinguishing between ‘cases
weak that a jury properly instructed could not possibly convict the defendant
and cases where it could’.11
4.8 If the Magistrates’ Court determines the evidence is not of
sufficient weight to support a conviction for
indictable offence, it
must discharge the accused.12
4.9 If the Court determines the evidence is of sufficient weight to support a
conviction for the offence with which the accused is
charged, it must commit the
accused for trial.13
4.10 If the Court determines the evidence is of sufficient weight to support
a conviction for an indictable offence
the offence with which
the accused is charged, it may
adjourn the committal proceeding to allow the informant to file a charge
sheet in respect of that other offence and
• if the charge sheet is filed, must commit the accused for trial,14
• if the informant does not file a charge sheet for the other offence
within the period of adjournment, must discharge the accused.15
4.11 The power to commit an accused person for trial or sentence in a higher
court is administrative rather than judicial. Committal
to stand trial does not
prejudge the question of the accused’s guilt or innocence, which is for a
jury to decide.16
5 The test involved the application of two different standards of proof, but
‘the key test’ was ‘whether the evidence
was “sufficient
to put the accused upon trial for any indictable offence”’: David
Brereton and John Willis, ‘Evaluating
the Committal’ in Julia Vernon
The Future of Committals
(Australian Institute of
Criminology, January 1991) 5, 11, with reference to the
Magistrates (Summary
Proceedings) Act 1975
(Vic) (s 59(7)).
6 John Coldrey, ‘Committal Proceedings: The Victorian
Perspective’ in Julia Vernon (ed),
The Future of
Committals—Proceedings of a Conference Held 1-2 May 1990
(Australian
Institute of Criminology, January 1991) 3.
7 Ibid 3. See also
Forsyth v Rodda
(1988) 37 A Crim R 50
8 John Coldrey, ‘Committal Proceedings: the Victorian
Perspective’ in Julia Vernon (ed),
The Future of
Committals—Proceedings of a Conference Held 1-2 May 1990
(Australian
Institute of Criminology, January 1991) 3. See also David Brereton and John
Willis, ‘Evaluating the Committal’
in Julia Vernon (ed),
Future of Committals—Proceedings of a Conference Held 1-2 May 1990
(Australian Institute of Criminology, January 1991) 8.
Forsyth v Rodda
(1988) 37 A Crim R 50
Forsyth v Rodda
[1989] FCA 312
(1989) 87 ALR 699.
Thorp v Abbotto
[1992] FCA 112
(1992) 34 FCR 366
; [24] per Gummow J (with whom
O’Loughlin J agreed), emphasis added.
Thorp v Abbotto
[1992] FCA 112
(1992) 34 FCR 366
; [28] per Lockhart J, (with whom
O’Loughlin J also agreed).
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
s 141(4)(a).
s 141(4)(c).
Grassby v The Queen
[1989] HCA 45
(1989) 168 CLR 1
Is the committal test an effective filter?
4.12 Requiring that a magistrate assess the evidence in a case before
committing an accused for trial was originally justified
as a way to protect
citizens ‘from being prosecuted on inadequate evidence, by filtering out
... unmeritorious cases’.17
4.13 The threshold for committal is relatively low, even after the test was
strengthened in Victoria in 1987. Although discharge rates
initially increased
following the introduction of the new test, from around four per cent of
indictable matters in 1984 to around
10 per cent in 1989–1990,18 they have
since dropped to between one and two per cent in Victoria per year.19
4.14 The decline in discharge rates may reflect a more careful attitude to
charging on the part of the prosecution, fostered by the
desire to avoid having
a matter discharged at committal. Another factor that may have influenced the
decline of discharge rates after
1990 is the adoption by DPPs across Australia
in 1989–90 of uniform guidelines for
the exercise of the prosecutorial discretion.20 This is unlikely to have had
a significant influence, however, given the DPP in Victoria
does not generally
take an active role in charge review until after committal.21 Another
explanation for the decline might be that
magistrates do not apply the test with
consistent rigour but tend to commit the accused as a matter of course.
4.15 In any event, doubts persist about the contribution the committal test
makes to ensuring manifestly weak cases are not pursued
to trial.22 For example,
in 2007 the Australian Institute of Criminology questioned:
the efficacy of the committal procedure to ensure that sufficient evidence
exist[s] to proceed with the prosecution as many deficiencies
in evidence are
not identified until well after the committal process.23
4.16 The accused is acquitted in roughly 30 per cent of cases that go to
trial in the County Court.24 This suggests that the role
played by the test as a
filter for cases with insufficient evidence to convict the accused could be
4.17 Another source of doubt about the value of the committal test as a
filter for unmeritorious charges is the DPP’s power
to directly indict
even if a magistrate has discharged the charges.25 In 2017–18, the DPP
filed a direct indictment in 19 cases.26
Of these, seven were filed following discharge of one or more charges by a
magistrate.27 In 2018–19, the DPP filed a direct
indictment in 15 cases,
five following discharge of one or more charges by a magistrate.28
17 Bronwyn Naylor, ‘Justiciability of Decisions in the Criminal
Process: Review of Committal Proceedings in the Federal Court’
Federal Law Review
, 353. See also John Coldrey, ‘Committal
Proceedings: the Victorian Perspective’ in Julia Vernon (ed),
Future of Committals—Proceedings of a Conference Held 1-2 May 1990
(Australian Institute of Criminology, January 1991) 2; Asher Flynn, ‘A
Committal Waste of Time? Reforming Victoria’s Pre-trial
Process: Lessons
From Other Jurisdictions’
Criminal Law Journal
18 David Brereton and John Willis, ‘Evaluating the Committal’ in
Julia Vernon (ed),
The Future of Committals—Proceedings
Conference Held 1-2 May 1990 (Australian Institute of Criminology, January 1991)
11. See also John Coldrey, ‘Committal
Proceedings: the Victorian
Perspective’ in Julia Vernon (ed),
The Future of
Committals—Proceedings of a Conference Held 1-2 May 1990
(Australian
Institute of Criminology, January 1991) 3.
19 According to data provided by the Magistrates’ Court, there are on
average approximately 10 cases per year where a magistrate
all offences and another 65 cases where some charges are discharged and
others are committed: Magistrates’
Court of Victoria,
Data Requested by VLRC
(24 April 2019).
20 Damian Bugg, ‘The Role of the DPP in the 20th Century’
(Speech, Judicial College of Australia Colloquium, 1999) 9.
21 See the discussion in Chapter 8.
22 There is a long tradition of questioning the efficacy of the
committal determination: see David Brereton and John
‘Evaluating the Committal’ in Julia Vernon (ed),
The Future of
(Australian Institute of Criminology, January 1991) 5, 8; Bronwyn
‘Justiciability of Decisions in the Criminal Process: Review of
Committal Proceedings in the Federal Court’ (1990) 19
Federal Law
352. In these articles the authors themselves argue the committal
determination
represent an effective filter.
23 Jason Payne,
Criminal Trial Delays in Australia: Trial Listing Outcomes
(Research and Public Policy Series No 74, Australian Institute of
Criminology, 2007) ix.
24 County Court of Victoria,
Case Data Requested by VLRC
2019). A much lower percentage (six per cent in 2017–18), are acquitted
in the Supreme Court: Supreme Court of Victoria,
Case Data Requested by VLRC
(September 2019).
25 The Director’s power applies even where charges have been discharged
at committal.
26 Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria,
Response to VLRC Request for
Statistics—Review of Committals
(24 April 2019).
27 Email from Office of Public Prosecutions to Victorian Law Reform
Commission, 9 January 2020.
4.18 Reform bodies and commentators argue that the professionalisation of
modern policing and the creation of independent public
prosecutors removes the
need for the committal test.29 The underlying assumption of this argument is
that criminal prosecutions
will not be pursued where there is insufficient
evidence; to advance biased or political agendas; or for malicious or vindictive
4.19 While this assumption should be treated with caution, the test for
committal does not appear to be operating effectively as a
prosecutions founded on insufficient evidence.
Abolishing the test for committal in other
4.20 The committal test has been abolished in England and Wales, and in
Australia in Tasmania, Western Australia, and most recently,
in New South
4.21 In 1999, the Law Reform Commission of Western Australia recommended
abolishing preliminary hearings, Western Australia’s
equivalent of
committal proceedings. The Commission considered that the DPP’s power to
directly indict, regardless of the outcome
of the test for committal, meant the
role of the determination as a mechanism for screening charges was virtually
redundant. The
Commission did, however, recommend that a power should be
conferred on the courts to examine and, where appropriate, penalise late
decisions to withdraw or alter indictments.30 This recommendation was adopted
and became law in 2002.31
4.22 In 2014, the New South Wales Law Reform Commission noted that
magistrates in New South Wales discharged only around one per cent
of cases.32
It posited that abolishing the test for committal would not lead to an increase
in unsubstantiated matters proceeding,
provided that court supervised case
management operated to ‘ensure the prosecution gives timely consideration
to the charges.’33
The test for committal was abolished as part of the
wider package of reforms introduced in New South Wales in 2018.
4.23 The effects of abolishing the test in Western Australia, New South
Wales, and elsewhere are unclear. While delay continues to
be a problem in the
New South Wales Local Court, this has been attributed to the new charge
certificate requirement and failure
by New South Wales Police to provide
adequate disclosure to the New South Wales DPP.34 It
is impossible to quantify the time saved by dispensing with the test. Nor is
evidence available to show whether unmeritorious prosecutions
are proceeding to
trial because the test is no longer applied. The experience of other
and the United Kingdom suggests that
disclosure failures may be a greater contributor
to trials being adjourned or aborted than the absence of the test in the
lower courts.35 Again, the Commission does not have reliable
data on wrongful
convictions and their causes in these jurisdictions.
29 Department of Justice and Attorney-General (Qld),
Reform of the
Committal Proceedings Process
(Discussion Paper, 2008) 5; John Coldrey,
‘Committal Proceedings: the Victorian Perspective’ in Julia Vernon
The Future of Committals—Proceedings of a Conference Held
1-2 May 1990
(Australian Institute of Criminology, January 1991)
194-5; Director of Public Prosecutions, Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria,
Proposed Reforms to Reduce Further Trauma to Victims and Witnesses
(Policy Paper, 1 October 2018)
http://www.opp.vic.gov. au/getattachment/0da88912-0a57-48f0-9048-31a0ad1b15df/DPP-Policy-Paper-Proposed-reforms-to-reduce-furthe.aspx
New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Encouraging Appropriate Early Guilty
(Report No 141, December 2014); John Johnson, ‘A Case
for Abolition’ in Julia Vernon (ed),
The Future of
Committals—Proceedings of a Conference Held 1-2 May 1990
(Australian
Institute of Criminology, January 1991) 89, 94.
30 Western Australia Law Reform Commission,
Review of the Criminal and
Civil Justice System
(Report No 92, 1999) 245-6, see also recommendations
307, 308. Note that preliminary hearings were not routine procedure in Western
Australia, even at the time of the WA Law Reform Commission’s report.
They were available upon election by an accused person
and held in only around
ten per cent of
indictable matters: Western Australia Law Reform Commission,
Review of the
Criminal and Civil Justice System
(Report No 92, 1999) 245.
Criminal Law (Procedure) Amendment Act 2002
(WA) ss 11, 17,
inserting new ss 102-106 in the
Justices Act 1902
(WA) and ss
611B–611C of the Criminal Code (WA) respectively. These provisions
were largely replicated when the
Criminal Procedure Act 2004
32 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Encouraging Appropriate Early
Guilty Pleas
(Report No 141, December 2014) 177, 182.
33 Ibid 195.
34 Consultations 32 (Local Court of New South Wales), 33 (Director of Public
Prosecutions (New South Wales)).
35 In relation to the United Kingdom, see the discussion in Chapter 9, on
disclosure, and in relation to Western Australia, see paragraphs
11.63–11.64.
Stakeholder support for retaining the committal
4.24 Stakeholders who support retaining the test for committal include the
Magistrates’ Court, some County Court judges, Victoria
Legal Aid, the
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service, the Criminal Bar Association (Victoria), and
Australian Lawyers for Human Rights.36
4.25 These stakeholders emphasise the contribution that application of the
test for committal makes to fair trial rights. They argue
it is an effective
inducement for the prosecution to review its case at an early stage in
proceedings. They also highlight the benefits
for the small number of accused
people whose cases are discharged and who would otherwise have had to endure the
stress and anxiety
of a trial, often while remanded in custody.
4.26 Other benefits attributed to the committal test include encouraging an
accused person to enter an early guilty plea where there
is strong evidence in
support of the charges.
4.27 The Criminal Bar Association (Victoria) told the Commission there is
little apparent reason for abolishing the test ‘Other
than the fact that
it has been removed in other jurisdictions (without any clear assessment of the
impact)’.37 In favour of
retaining the committal determination, the
Criminal Bar Association submitted:
the possibility of discharge in open court, and the risk of costs being
awarded against the police, is ... a real incentive for
the DPP to be in a
position to properly consider the charge in advance of a committal hearing. It
is common for the prosecution on
the day of the hearing to substantially
revise charges and add or withdraw charges against an accused.38
4.28 The Criminal Bar Association also pointed to the application of the
committal test as a ‘powerful indicator to the accused’
the strength of the case either for the prosecution or the defence.39
4.29 The Law Institute of Victoria suggested:
The prospect of a discharge and the risk of an award of costs provides the
prosecution with a substantial incentive to review the
case and to decide
whether to amend the charges or consider resolution in the summary
4.30 The Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service argued:
3.7% of cases that went to a committal hearing in 2017–2018 resulted in
either charges being withdrawn or discharged by the
Magistrate. Whilst this is a
small percentage
of the overall number of matters, it represents 89 matters where the accused
rightly avoided trial, and where the cost implications
of proceeding with the
trial in a higher court were avoided.41
4.31 Victoria Legal Aid claimed that:
independent scrutiny of the prosecution case by a judicial officer is an
essential component of a fair system. Scrutiny of the case
and the ability to
hold parties to account is as relevant at the pre-trial stage as during trial
proceedings.
Furthermore, now that Prasad directions have been held to be contrary to law,
committal proceedings are one of the last independent
protections against
prosecuting misconceived or weak cases.42
36 Submissions 9 (Australian Lawyers for Human Rights), 11 (Criminal Bar
Association (Victoria)), 13 (Victoria Legal Aid), 14 (Magistrates’
of Victoria), 19 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service), 20 (County Court of
37 Submission 11 (Criminal Bar Association (Victoria)).
40 Submission 24 (Law Institute of Victoria).
41 Submission 19 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service) 4–5.
42 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid). A Prasad direction is when the trial
Judge at the end of the prosecution case informs—in
response to an
invitation by the prosecution or an application by the defence—the jury
that they have the right to acquit
the accused at any time from then on,
including without hearing the case put by the accused (if any), or the closing
submissions
or the Judge‘s summary and directions relating to law. The
High Court ruled that the practice of giving a Prasad direction
is unlawful in
Director of Public Prosecutions Reference No 1 of 2017
[2019] HCA 9
(2019) 364 ALR 407.
4.32 Australian Lawyers for Human Rights endorsed the view, put by the Law
Society of NSW in 2014, that:
the committal decision provides transparency and impartiality that could not
be achieved if the OPP were given sole responsibility
for filtering out weak
prosecutions.43
4.33 County Court judges who support retaining the committal test view it as
bolstering fair trial rights and holding both parties
to criminal prosecutions
to account. These judges suggested that:
Removing a magistrate’s assessment of the strength of the prosecution
case takes away a critical opportunity for the parties
to be exposed to an
impartial and independent view of the case.44
4.34 The Magistrates’ Court told the Commission: ‘There is no
downside to allowing the evidence to be the subject of independent
scrutiny by a
judicial officer when [a] safety net, if needed exists in the form of a direct
presentment’.45 The Court suggested
that the committal test operates as a
mechanism for ensuring charges are appropriate. It cited anecdotal evidence from
practitioners
and barristers that ‘the DPP is reluctant to
exercise its power to discontinue prosecutions on an assessment of the likely
prospects of conviction but rather tends to let matters
go to trial’.46 It
pointed out that:
[It] does not further the interests of witnesses or accused if the
prosecution persevere with charges that are later abandoned or
which result in a
verdict of acquittal at trial. Nor does it enhance the expeditious and timely
administration of the criminal justice
4.35 According to the Magistrates’ Court:
What does influence the DPP is the prospect that a matter may be discharged
at committal with consequent cost orders. Thus, at contested
committal the DPP
may often propose the withdrawal of charges but invariably with an attached
condition that defence do not apply
for costs.48
Stakeholder support for abolishing the committal
4.36 Stakeholders who argue the test for committal should be abolished
include the Supreme Court, some County Court judges, the DPP,
Victoria Police,
and the Victims of Crime Commissioner.49 These stakeholders suggest the test for
committal is now redundant and
that fair trial rights are adequately protected
by alternative mechanisms. They say application of the test contributes to
unnecessary
duplication and delay.
4.37 The Victims of Crime Commissioner submitted:
such a small proportion of matters are discharged by magistrates at the
committal stage that this original [filtering] purpose alone
cannot be a valid
rationale for the continuation of this procedure.50
4.38 Those judges of the County Court who argued the committal test should be
abolished claimed its role in filtering weak cases had
been surpassed:
The current bifurcated approach [to indictable prosecutions] is no longer
necessary in the context of an independent DPP and where
charges can be
appropriately filtered by increased interaction between prosecutors and Victoria
43 Submission 9 (Australian Lawyers for Human Rights).
44 Submission 20 (County Court of Victoria).
45 Submission 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria).
49 Submissions 4 (Director of Public Prosecutions (Victoria)), 20 (County
Court of Victoria), 22 (Supreme Court of Victoria), 23 (Victims
Commissioner), 25 (Victoria Police).
50 Submission 23 (Victims of Crime Commissioner).
51 Submission 20 (County Court of Victoria).
4.39 These judges also pointed out that the Magistrates’ Court when
applying the test and the trial court subsequently must
both familiarise
themselves with the case, ‘resulting in a duplication of
4.40 The Supreme Court similarly argued that removing the test for committal
would avoid duplication and allow for more integrated
case management, which
would be capable of ‘adapt[ing] readily to the needs of individual
4.41 Victoria Police viewed the test for committal as unnecessarily
duplicating the functions of the DPP, which ‘already makes
a decision as
to the sufficiency of the evidence in deciding whether to pursue
charges.’54
4.42 According to the DPP, abolishing the test for committal will make
indictable proceedings less complex and ‘will also
remove confusion about
the significance of a magistrate’s committal decision’.55 As noted
earlier, a magistrate’s
decision to commit is an administrative rather
than judicial finding.
4.43 The DPP suggested that the power of the court to stay a proceeding
‘including a direct indictment, even at a very early
removed the need for the committal test to ensure fair trial rights. The DPP
added that the power to stay proceedings
‘is in addition to the many
safeguards that exist during a trial proceeding.’57 The implication is
power of the trial court to issue a stay can appropriately substitute for the
committal test’s role filtering cases with insufficient
evidence to
support a conviction.
4.44 The Victorian Court of Appeal said recently that:
the power to grant a permanent stay is one to be exercised only in the most
exceptional circumstances, and only in circumstances where
fundamental defect confronting the trial such that nothing the trial judge
can do in the conduct of the trial can
relieve against its unfair
consequences.58
4.45 While it is true that an application for a permanent stay may be made at
an early stage in proceedings—and generally before
the prosecution leads
any evidence in a trial—this is because the merits of the application will
usually be based on facts
that are independent of the evidence supporting the
Crown case.59
4.46 By comparison, the test for committal specifically involves assessing
the sufficiency of the evidence to support the charges.
53 Submission 22 (Supreme Court of Victoria). The Supreme Court’s
comments are confined to matters within its exclusive jurisdiction
either the prosecution or defence seek to forgo the test for committal.
54 Submission 25 (Victoria Police).
55 Submission 4 (Director of Public Prosecutions (Victoria)).
Cook v The Queen
[2019] VSCA 87
, [27] (Priest and Beach JJA). For
the proposition that the power may only be exercised in exceptional
circumstances, the Court cited
Williams v Spautz
[1992] HCA 34
(1992) 174 CLR 509
(Mason CJ, Dawson, Toohey and McHugh JJ); and for the proposition that the power
should only be exercised where there is nothing
the trial judge can do in the
conduct of the trial to remedy its unfairness, the Court cited
Barton v the
[1980] HCA 48
(1980) 147 CLR 75
, 111 (Wilson J);
Jago v District Court of New
South Wales
[1989] HCA 46
(1989) 168 CLR 23 (Mason
R v Glennon
[1992] HCA 16
173 CLR 592 (Mason
CJ and Toohey J);
Dupas v The Queen
[2010] HCA 20
[2010] HCA 20
(2010) 241 CLR 237.
Edebone v Allen
[1991] VicRp 100
[1991] 2 VR 659
Commission’s conclusions: Abolish the test
for committal
4.47 For a magistrate to consider the evidence in a case requires time and
effort, even if some magistrates tend to commit the accused
as a matter of
course. In complex cases the time required may be considerable. In
, the Full Court of the Federal Court quoted the committing
magistrate’s reasons in which he referred to having spent ‘many
hours’ analysing the evidence.60 After detailed consideration of the
magistrate’s reasons, the Federal Court concluded
Not only did [the committing magistrate] weigh the evidence; he was at pains
to weight it most carefully and anxiously before reaching
his conclusion.61
Forsyth v Rodda
demonstrates that applying the test for committal
can be a serious impost on a magistrate’s time. This impost translates to
costs for the parties and the criminal justice system.
4.49 Even so, the original rationale for requiring the lower courts to assess
at an early stage the strength of the evidence in indictable
proceedings remains
sound. When the charges are weak or misconceived, an accused should not be
subjected to the stress and anxiety
of a trial. It is equally important for
victims and witnesses that such charges are not pursued to trial, as a decision
to discontinue
at a late stage, or a verdict of not guilty, will likely cause
distress.62 The costs for the justice system of unwarranted prosecutions
4.50 Moreover, the capacity of investigating and prosecuting agencies to
ensure the integrity of all prosecutions may be limited in
ways that are
difficult to foresee. While there has been reform over many years to enhance the
independence of these agencies, the
establishment of the Royal Commission into
the Management of Police Informants suggests there is a need for continual
vigilance.63
4.51 The role of the test for committal as a filter for unwarranted
prosecutions should, however, be served by alternative mechanisms
that preserve
the fair trial rights of the accused and are less costly in terms of time and
4.52 The benefits of the committal test—providing independent scrutiny
of indictable charges at an early stage and in a relatively
inexpensive
• providing magistrates with a new power to discharge charges, upon
application by the defence, on the grounds that there is
no reasonable prospect
of conviction64
• strengthening other case management procedures in the lower courts to
ensure ongoing judicial oversight of prosecutions.
4.53 The combination of more effective case management and the availability
of a discharge application will ‘create a risk that
forces the OPP to
consider the case’.65 It will ensure
an accused charged on spurious grounds has an early opportunity for redress,
without requiring magistrates to expend unnecessary time
considering the
evidence in
4.54 Active case management and the availability of a discharge application
should produce other benefits commonly attributed to the
committal test,
including providing an indication from the bench to the accused of the strength
of the evidence,66 promoting early
guilty pleas where appropriate, and
encouraging both parties to review their cases.
Forsyth v Rodda
[1989] FCA 312
(1989) 87 ALR 699
61 Ibid 220.
62 See the discussion in Chapter 8.
63 The Royal Commission into the Management of Police Informants was
established on 13 December 2018 to inquire into and report on
Police’s relationship with former criminal barrister, Nicola Gobbo, and
matters relating to Victoria Police’s
use and management of human sources
with legal obligations of confidentiality or privilege.
64 See discussion below under ‘Create a test for discharge’.
65 Thibaut Clamart, a practitioner working for Victoria Legal Aid in
Shepparton, advocated for retaining the current test for committal
basis that it serves this purpose: Consultation 13 (Goulburn Valley
practitioners).
66 See the Criminal Bar Association’s contention that ‘Comments
from a magistrate on the strengths of the evidence are
often made. At times this
assist[s] with resolution, where an accused hears that the evidence is strong or
the prosecutors hear from
a judicial officer of their concerns.’
Submission 11 (Criminal Bar Association (Victoria)).
Create a test for discharge
4.55 When there appears to be no reasonable prospect of conviction,
magistrates should be able to discharge indictable charges on
application by the
accused. This will provide a safeguard against unwarranted prosecutions.
4.56 The Commission recommends adopting a test for discharge that has a
higher threshold than the current test for committal. This
is meant to ensure
that discharge applications are made and granted only when charges are highly
unlikely to result in a finding
of guilt at trial.
4.57 The proposed discharge test will require a magistrate, on application by
the accused, to assess if there is a reasonable prospect
of conviction, taking
into account:
• all the evidence in the hand-up brief and depositions, if any
• the apparent reliability and credibility of the evidence
• any defence available on the basis of the evidence
• whether the prosecution witnesses are available, competent and
compellable
• how the witnesses are likely to present in court.67
4.58 If the magistrate concludes that there is no reasonable prospect of
conviction, the magistrate should discharge the accused on
the relevant charge
or charges.
4.59 The proposed test for discharge does not pre-empt the role of the jury
as the ultimate arbiter of facts if a discharge application
is unsuccessful and
a trial goes ahead. In many cases, juries will be unaware of whether an
application for discharge was made.
To the degree to which a jury may arrive at
a perception of guilt based on the outcome of a discharge application or failure
make such an application, this concern applies equally to the current
test for committal. The Commission is satisfied that
the danger of a jury
allowing the discharge test to influence its deliberations can be appropriately
mitigated, in instances where
it arises, by the trial judge directing the jury
that the test should have no bearing on its deliberations.
4.60 The Commission proposes that applications for discharge be made by the
accused following service of the hand-up brief or after
cross-examination of any
67 These are also measures used by the DPP to decide whether to prosecute an
offence: Director of Public Prosecutions, Office of Public
Prosecutions
Policy of the Director of Public Prosecutions for Victoria
December 2019) 1 [1]–[2]
http://www.opp.vic.gov.au/ Resources/Policies
4.61 In order to apply for a discharge, the defence should be required to
file a document explaining why there is no reasonable prospect
of conviction.
In response, the prosecution should be required to file an outline of its case,
including information about witness
availability and compellability; any
possible reasons for doubt about the reliability and credibility of the
evidence; and any insights
it has about how witnesses are likely to
present in court.
4.62 The magistrate should have the power to either refuse the application on
the papers or hear oral submissions from the parties.
4.63 There is some risk that discharge applications will be made routinely
and absorb as much court time as is currently spent applying
the test for
committal. This reform will require a cultural change in the legal profession.
The court’s ability to refuse an
application on the papers will operate as
a control on groundless applications. In time, defence practitioners will come
to appreciate
that the test sets a high bar. Combined with early involvement of
the OPP in the prosecutorial process, this means it will only
be in exceptional
cases that discharge applications are successful.
4.64 Consistent with its existing discretion in relation to costs orders,
the Magistrates’ Court may order costs against
the OPP where discharge
applications are granted or against the defence if an application for discharge
is refused.
4.65 A decision by the Magistrates’ Court to discharge charges would,
like the current test, be characterised as administrative.
It should not
interfere with the DPP’s existing powers to directly indict.
Should the lower
Introduction
Case management in the Magistrates’ Court: positive
Case management in the Magistrates’ Court: negative
Approach to case management in other jurisdictions
Case management in the lower courts: stakeholder views
Commission’s conclusions
Should the lower
courts conduct indictable case management?
Introduction
5.1 This chapter considers the most appropriate venue for pre-trial
indictable procedure by surveying some of the advantages and disadvantages
the present committal system.
5.2 Management of committal proceedings is undertaken by the lower courts in
cases ultimately heard by the higher courts. On its face,
this is at odds with
modern case management principles. It is widely accepted that cases are best and
most efficiently managed by
the judge who is to hear the trial. That judge has
ownership of determining the case and will likely have a keener interest in
progressing
it than judges who will not hear the trial.
5.3 Although presenting a challenge to modern case management principles, the
committal system has a considerable history and has
been reformed over the
years. The question is whether dismantling this system in obedience to modern
case principles is justified.
The answer lies in an assessment of how the
committal system operates.
5.4 The following discussion identifies benefits of the committal system,
including early resolution, regional coverage, affordability,
and efficiency.
The role of committal proceedings in advancing early disclosure is touched on
here but dealt with in more detail
in Chapters 9 and 11.
5.5 After outlining positive features of case management in the
Magistrates’ Court, the discussion traverses negative features
committal system, including the potential for duplication and delay, and some
isolated instances of inadequate case management.
Next, indictable case
management in other jurisdictions and the model that has been adopted in Western
Australia for dealing with
Supreme Court cases are discussed.
The following section canvasses stakeholders’ views of lower court
indictable case management.
5.6 The Commission concludes that the present system of case management is
operating satisfactorily, although the Commission makes
recommendations for
reform in later chapters. Except for matters within the Supreme Court’s
exclusive jurisdiction, the lower
courts should retain a case management
function in indictable criminal cases.
5.7 Charges for offences within the Supreme Court’s exclusive
application
there of modern case management principles. This recommendation is made subject
to the provision of adequate funding.
5.8 The recommendation is also made with the qualification that all
Children’s Court indictable stream matters should continue
to be initiated
and managed in the Children’s Court, even those within the exclusive
Chapter 12). Throughout this chapter,
the focus is on case management in the Magistrates’ Court. Much of this
discussion is
relied on to support the recommendations in Chapter 12
concerning the Children’s Court.
Case management in the
Magistrates’ Court: positive features
Magistrates’ case
management expertise
5.9 The Magistrates’ Court is experienced in managing committal
proceedings to achieve disclosure, early resolution where possible,
appropriate preparation for trial.
5.10 The Court has engaged in considerable reform over many years to case
manage committal proceedings more efficiently, and to strengthen
oversight of
cross- examination.1
5.11 The Magistrates’ Court told the Commission that:
Over a number of years, the Court, with a proactive bench, has developed a
rigorous culture in the committal stream. Foreseeable delay
is addressed at
[the] filing hearing, where the parties are urged to engage in resolution
discussions prior to committal mention
and defence must properly justify any
cross-examination of a witness.2
5.12 The Court also told the Commission that magistrates use the filing
hearing to give directions to the prosecution about obtaining
relevant forensic
reports and progressing other matters that might otherwise contribute to
5.13 The expertise and engagement of committal magistrates at the Melbourne
Magistrates’ Court and in some regional centres
is demonstrated by the
outcomes in committal stream cases: around a third are resolved within the
and of those cases committed to the higher
courts, almost half are committed for sentencing following a guilty plea in
lower courts.4 Moreover, rates of summary resolution have increased
steadily, from 20 per cent in 2008-09.5
5.14 There appears, however, to be some variability in case management in
regional areas, which is discussed further below.6
Services available in the
Magistrates’ Court
5.15 The Magistrates’ Court is well equipped to deal with preliminary
aspects of indictable procedure that are outside the scope
of the higher
courts’ current work and that the higher courts are not presently equipped
to manage. Bail applications, in particular,
occupy considerable court time. In
most cases, bail applications must be determined by the Magistrates’
5.16 The Court Integrated Services Program (CISP8), located within
Magistrates’ Courts, and the Court Remand Outreach Pilot
(CROP9) provide
intensive support to many people seeking bail—this includes case
management, referral to support services,
and progress reporting to the judicial
officer who granted bail. Housing services and other support agencies are often
with Magistrates’ Courts and also provide support and advice to
accused people seeking bail and to judicial officers determining
applications.
5.17 Significant resources would be required to make these services available
on a comparable scale in the higher courts.
1 Submissions 11 (Criminal Bar Association (Victoria)), 14
(Magistrates’ Court of Victoria), 24 (Law Institute of Victoria).
2 Submission 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria).
4 See paragraph 3.5 of this report.
5 Court Services Victoria,
Committal Data requested by VLRC
6 See paragraphs 5.44–5.45 of this report.
7 Only the Supreme Court has the jurisdiction to hear bail applications in
treason cases, and in murder cases only the Supreme Court
or a magistrate at the
time of committal may hear bail applications:
Bail Act 1977
8 See Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, `Bail Support (CISP)’,
Find Support
(Web Page, 4 July 2019) <https://
www.mcv.vic.gov.au/find-support/
bail-support-cisp>.
9 CROP works alongside CISP, but while CISP workers are based in
Magistrates’ Courts, CROP workers are based in remand prisons.
workers assess people on remand for their suitability for the CISP program if
they are granted bail. If granted bail, a CISP
worker will be allocated. In some
limited circumstances, CROP workers provide ongoing case management to a person
Magistrates’ courts
5.18 The Magistrates’ Court has good coverage in regional areas, and it
sits throughout the year in major regional centres.10
By comparison, the County
and Supreme Courts send judges from Melbourne to sit in regional areas for
limited periods each year.11
5.19 In 2018–19, nearly 28 per cent of criminal cases heard by the
County Court were heard in regional courts.12
5.20 The complexities associated with transferring regional pre-trial case
management to the higher courts were raised by numerous
stakeholders. Victoria
Legal Aid points out that any such transfer ‘would create particular
challenges in regional areas’
given the ‘limited presence of higher
5.21 A regional practitioner suggested that if pre-trial case management is
transferred to the higher courts, it will be ‘difficult
to maintain
consistency’ in relation to particular cases, given judges only sit in
regional areas for four weeks at a time,
‘especially if you’re
asking [the circuit] judge to keep on top of disclosure. The temptation will be
to transfer
the matter back to Melbourne with that judge’.14
5.22 From the perspective of this practitioner, transferring regional matters
to Melbourne ‘goes against the concept of open
justice, transparency,
proper venue and proper forum’.15
5.23 People living in regional areas can face greater barriers accessing the
courts and justice system than those living in metropolitan
Melbourne. According
to the Law Council’s
Access to Justice Report
, ‘As well as
cost, distance and lack of public transport, poor technological access and/or
capability are also common access
to justice barriers’ in the regions.16
The Law Council observes that:
a decline in local court circuit services in [regional] communities ...
significantly exacerbates distance, transport and cost barriers
for residents.
In some cases, this means they give up on attending court despite the personal
costs. In certain contexts, the delay
in having their matter heard effectively
means that their case is already lost.17
5.24 During consultation, some County Court judges said that moving pre-trial
case management away from the Magistrates’ Court
would be a real problem
in regional areas and would require ‘significant resourcing’.18
Other members of the Court pointed
to its increased use of video link facilities as a way of reaching those in
regional areas, but acknowledged this is not a solution
in all cases and for all
on circuit, access to physical
courtrooms can be a barrier to providing more
regular court services to regional areas.19
Affordability of the
Magistrates’ Court
5.25 The Magistrates’ Court estimates that each day across Victoria six
magistrates and around 20 other Magistrates’ Court
staff deal with
committal proceedings, at a cost of approximately $6 million per annum: $3
million for the magistrates and $3 million
for the other staff.20
10 In addition to the ten metropolitan Magistrates’ Courts, the Court
sits in 41 locations across regional Victoria. Smaller
locations are serviced
by the Magistrates’ Court on a weekly, fortnightly or monthly basis.
11 The County Court sits at eleven regional courts (‘circuit
locations’) and the Supreme Court at twelve. Each year there
number of four or five-week sitting periods ... at each circuit
location’: County Court of Victoria,
‘Circuit Courts’,
Court Divisions
(Web Page, 27 November 2019) <https://
www.countycourt.vic.gov.au/learn-about-court/court-divisions/circuit-courts
12 1,501 of a total of 5,393 criminal cases (cases committed and appeals)
commenced in the County Court’s regional locations
in 2018–19.
County Court of Victoria,
Annual Report 2018–19
(Report, 2019) 7,
13 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
14 Consultation 38 (Victoria Legal Aid regional practitioners).
16 Law Council of Australia,
The Justice Project Final Report
August 2018) 3.
18 Consultation 30 (County Court of Victoria).
20 Consultation 15 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria). These figures were
provided by Chief Magistrate Lauritsen. His Honour said
that while they were an
approximation, he felt they captured the reality quite closely and demonstrated
the cost effectiveness of
pre-trial management in the Magistrates’
5.26 According to Victoria Legal Aid’s submission, moving pre-trial
proceedings from the Magistrates’ to the higher courts
tremendously expensive’.21 It highlighted the risk that:
without adequate investment, the early resolution rate will reduce and there
will be greater delays in the finalisation of indictable
matters and an increase
in the number of trials in which victims are required to give evidence.22
5.27 The Law Institute of Victoria emphasised the financial benefits
associated with finalising indictable stream cases within the
the Magistrates’ Court. According to its submission:
As of 2017–18, the average cost of a criminal trial finalising in the
County Court exceeds
$16,000 per trial, for the Supreme Court it is $50,000. Whereas, a matter
finalising in the Magistrates’ or Children’s
Court is less than
$800. This is a considerable saving.23
5.28 The County and Supreme Courts suggested that the costs associated with
managing pre- trial matters in their jurisdictions could
be minimised by
employing non-judicial staff, such as judicial registrars, to assist in case
management.24
5.29 Victoria Legal Aid, however, suggested that rather than investing
additional resources in the higher courts, funding should instead
‘invested in ... improving current systems’, which ‘would have
a much greater positive impact on efficiency,
speed of finalisation, and the
experience of victims in the pre-trial process’.25
Efficiency of the
Magistrates’ Court
5.30 In 2017–18, the average time between first hearing and committal
in the Magistrates’ Court was 36 weeks for death-related
and general
offences, and 29 weeks for sexual offences.26 Data is not available to show the
average time between filing hearing and
finalisation in the Magistrates’
Court for those committal stream matters that resolve summarily.
5.31 Also in 2017–18, it took on average 38 weeks to finalise
matters in the higher courts.27 The average time frame
for finalisation
in the higher courts includes pleas and sentencing as well as trials.
5.32 It is not possible to draw any strong conclusions from these statistics
regarding the comparative efficiency of the courts, given
the mix of sentencing
and trial matters in the higher courts.
5.33 The Law Institute of Victoria stated:
The periods of time that matters take in the Magistrates’ Court can be
compared to the overall time that indictable matters
take from initiation in the
Magistrates’ Court until finalisation in the higher courts. This was,
according to the OPP, 19.9
months averaged over [a] five-year period [to
2017–18]. On this basis, it would appear that the bulk of the time spent
initiation to finalisation, occurs in the higher courts, at 12.9 or 16.6
months, depending on the stage at which the matter was committed
to the higher
21 Submission 24 (Law Institute of Victoria).
22 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
23 Submission 24 (Law Institute of Victoria).
24 Submissions 20 (County Court of Victoria), 22 (Supreme Court of
25 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
26 Court Services Victoria,
Committal Data requested by VLRC
27 Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Criminal Courts, Australia
(Catalogue No 4513.0, 27 February 2019) table 20.
28 Submission 24 (Law Institute of Victoria). The Law Institute notes that
the DPP’s data amalgamates all indictable matters
regardless of how they
were finalised in the higher courts.
5.34 Victoria’s higher courts finalise criminal cases more quickly than
most other Australian jurisdictions.29 Even so, both
the Supreme Court and
County Court are experiencing issues with delay. These are most serious in the
County Court, where the current
indicative waiting time from initial directions
hearing to trial is between 12 and 13 months depending on the circumstances of
case.30 The waiting time for a plea hearing is five months.31
5.35 The County Court is working to address delay through case management
innovations such as the Long Trial List and Active Case
Management System, which
appear to be achieving positive outcomes. Even so, increasing the County
Court’s case management workload
by requiring it to supervise cases from
an earlier stage will likely make the current problems worse.
5.36 Like the County Court, the Supreme Court currently has a backlog of
trial cases.32 It has, however, significantly improved its
clearance rate,33
from approximately 70 per cent in 2017–18 to 120 per cent in
5.37 While the Supreme Court argued that it can efficiently manage a
selection of cases from the point of filing, it did not seek
carriage of all
cases within its exclusive jurisdiction from this point.35 It also
emphasised that managing more cases from
an earlier point will not improve
efficiency unless funding is provided to support this shift and to address its
existing case backlog.
If not, the Court told the Commission:
new matters [that will be] ready for trial sooner will bottleneck behind a
backlog of cases awaiting trial.36
Case management in the
Magistrates’ Court: negative features
Duplication and
5.38 Some stakeholders claimed that committal proceedings contribute to
unnecessary duplication of pre-trial procedures and delay
in indictable
prosecutions. This was mentioned in the preceding chapter in relation to the
test for committal, but the claim was
also made in respect of other elements of
committal proceedings.
5.39 The Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) pointed out that:
Counsel appearing at [committal] hearings are often different to those who
will appear at trial, so [holding a committal hearing]
does not mean that
preparation of trial is commencing any earlier than it otherwise would; in fact,
it can mean trial preparation
is actually delayed...37
5.40 Those County Court judges who favour moving the bulk of pre-trial
procedures into the jurisdiction of the trial court claimed
a benefit of this
would be that:
The parties need not duplicate efforts to prepare for committal and trial,
and argument in relation to the strength of the prosecution
case need not be
made in two separate jurisdictions.38
29 See Table 2 in Chapter 3 of this report.
30 County Court of Victoria, ‘Criminal Division’,
(Web Page, 27 November 2019) <https://
www.countycourt.vic.gov.au/learn-
32 Submission 22 (Supreme Court of Victoria).
33 Clearance rate refers to the number of finalisations compared with the
number of lodgements: Productivity Commission, Australian
Government,
on Government Services 2020
(Report, 2020), Table 7A.25 <https://
www.pc.gov.au/research/ongoing/report-on-
government-services/2020/justice/courts>.
34 Productivity Commission, Australian Government,
Report on Government
Services 2020
(Report, 2020), Table 7A.25 <https://
www.pc.gov.
au/research/ongoing/report-on-government-services/2020/justice/courts>. These
figures relate to non-appeal criminal cases.
35 Consultation 31 (Supreme Court of Victoria).
36 Submission 22 (Supreme Court of Victoria).
37 Submission 4 (Director of Public Prosecutions (Victoria)).
38 Submission 20 (County Court of Victoria).
5.41 According to this view:
Double queuing results from matters awaiting both a committal date, and then
subsequently a trial date. This can also cause delays
to existing trials. For
example, if a matter is awaiting trial in the trial court and new related
matters arise and are filed in
the lower court, the new matters must first
go through the committal process to join up with the matters at trial.39
5.42 In the experience of these County Court judges:
despite the existence of committal procedures, when cases arrive at the trial
court, significant disclosure issues persist and must
be litigated. This is
despite the process also occurring in the Magistrates’ Court. As such,
there is a duplication of efforts.
This is further exacerbated by the fact that
each court must familiarise itself with the case ...40
5.43 The Supreme Court told the Commission that committal proceedings
unnecessarily duplicated aspects of pre-trial procedure that
would be better
managed within its jurisdiction, including the cross-examination of witnesses.
It argued, ‘Management from
an early stage would allow these processes to
be managed as one’.41 The Court pointed out that in some cases:
there are critical issues, especially evidentiary issues, which will
determine the direction or even the outcome of a case, but which
can only be
determined in the trial court. By allowing the matter to be brought through to
the trial court at an early stage there
is the opportunity to address those
critical issues in a way that may avoid the need for processes which would
otherwise be undertaken
in the committal process.42
Inconsistent case
management practices
5.44 While many committal magistrates are proactive and skilful case managers
who actively engage with the parties to ensure full
disclosure, encourage early
resolution, and narrow the issues in contention, the Commission heard that some
magistrates are inadequate
case managers who do not exert their authority
effectively. This appears to be a particular problem in some—although by
means all—regional areas.
5.45 The Commission was told that some courts treat the case direction notice
as an administrative step rather than an important case
management tool, and
that some magistrates fail to ensure cross-examination at committal hearings is
kept within the limits of
the issues for which leave to cross-examine was
originally granted.
5.46 While not commenting on its experience with particular magistrates, the
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service recommended committal
proceedings ‘be
treated as a specialist stream within the Magistrates’ Court and be run by
magistrates with specific
expertise in committal proceedings.’ It
suggested this would help ensure committal proceedings achieve their purposes of
weak cases and achieving early disclosure, which supports the right to
a fair trial.43
Approach to case
management in other jurisdictions
5.47 Other jurisdictions that have abolished aspects of committal
proceedings, including the test for committal and the opportunity
cross-examine witnesses, have retained the practice of filing charges in a lower
court. As a result, there remains a requirement
that the accused be
‘committed’ to the jurisdiction of a higher court, although without
prior determination by the
lower court that the evidence in the case is
sufficient.
41 Submission 22 (Supreme Court of Victoria).
43 Submission 19 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
5.48 Whether committal occurs by order of a judicial officer or registrar
varies among jurisdictions. In all cases, the committal
order is dependent on
completion by the parties of certain procedural steps, usually including
disclosure by the prosecution of
relevant materials.
5.49 In Western Australia, a special Magistrates’ Court has been
established in the same building as the Supreme Court. All
Perth-based
proceedings for Supreme Court indictable offences commence there, at the
Magistrates’ Court Stirling Gardens. Registrars
of the Supreme Court are
appointed as magistrates to preside in the Magistrates’ Court Stirling
Gardens. They provide ‘individual
case management of each matter from
start to finish’ and ‘expedite ... the committal and management of
criminal cases.’44`
Case management in the
lower courts: stakeholder views
5.50 The Commission heard a wide variety of views about where pre-trial case
management of indictable cases should occur.
5.51 The strongest opponents of committal proceedings are groups representing
victims and witnesses. Their opposition is primarily
to the opportunity to
cross-examine witnesses at a committal hearing (see Chapter 11), although they
are also concerned that committal
proceedings contribute to undue delay.
5.52 The County Court is divided in its opinion about the benefits and
drawbacks of moving some elements of committal proceedings,
opportunities for pre-trial cross- examination, into its jurisdiction. The Court
is unanimous, however, in recommending
that early case management, including
filing charges, bail, and standard disclosure, should continue in the
Magistrates’ Court:
The Court recognises that a criminal matter proceeding through the
Magistrates’ Court at first instance has merit. The filing
of charges, the
setting of bail, and the disclosure of evidence are all invaluable to good case
management. Further, the prosecution
and defence must be provided with adequate time to assess the evidence,
obtain instructions, and enter negotiations. It is for this
reason that the
Court is of the view that matters can still properly proceed through the
Magistrates’ Court at first instance...45
5.53 Like some judges in the County Court, the DPP argued the test for
committal should be abolished and there should be a presumption
cross-examination of witnesses during committal proceedings, but recognised the
substantial benefits of many elements of
committal proceedings. The DPP
supported committal proceedings for
the purposes of providing ‘a limited opportunity to test evidence where
it is central to resolution discussions or will inform
the charges proceeded
with.’46 The DPP also told the Commission it was ‘appropriate that
the availability of summary
Magistrates’ Court.’47 Finally, the DPP noted that:
Any reform should continue to have judicial case management in the
Magistrates’ Court so that the costs of early resolutions
disclosure do not increase.48
5.54 The Magistrates’ Court emphasised that achieving early disclosure
is one of the most significant purposes of committal
proceedings. Often, this
facilitates early resolution:
44 ‘Stirling Gardens Magistrates Court’,
Supreme Court of
Western Australia
(Web Page, 1 March 2019) <https://
www.supremecourt.wa.gov.
au/M/magistrates_court_stirling_gardens.aspx?uid=4946-0149-8167-1518>.
45 Submission 20 (County Court of Victoria).
46 Submission 4 (Director of Public Prosecutions (Victoria)).
Committal proceedings play a fundamental role in ensuring proper and timely
disclosure. Serious indictable matters should not be proceeding
directly from a
charge to a lengthy, costly jury trial without concerted attempts having been
made to facilitate disclosure and resolution.
Committal proceedings have the potential to ensure timely disclosure by
making parties accountable for the conduct of their matters
in open court.49
5.55 As well as disclosure and early resolution, the Magistrates’ Court
stressed the benefits of committal proceedings for narrowing
the issues in a
5.56 The Law Institute of Victoria advocated strongly for the retention of
committal proceedings in the Magistrates’ Court.
It stated that committal
proceedings represent a cost effective and efficient means of promoting early
resolution or of narrowing
the issues in indictable matters:
LIV members report that committals have improved noticeably over the last few
decades in terms of judicial oversight ... many ...
aspects of case management
occur during committal procedures. These include applications for bail ...
custody management issues and
confiscation orders ... The LIV submits that this
work is best handled in the Magistrates’ Court as part of the committal
5.57 In addition to highlighting the benefits of early resolution and
narrowing of issues, Victoria Legal Aid suggested:
The experience of ... committal reform in other jurisdictions tends to
suggest that [moving pre-trial procedures to the higher courts]
does not result
in significant improvements in efficiency or reductions in delay ...52
Commission’s
conclusions
Retain pre-trial case
management in the lower courts for most cases
5.58 Although there is a need for more consistent case management in the
Magistrates’ Court, many elements of committal proceedings
resolution of criminal cases or help narrow the issues for trial. This reduces
costs and overall delay.
5.59 The Commission recommends building on practices in the
Magistrates’ Court that are working effectively while addressing
issues in a targeted way.
5.60 Around one-third of cases that commence in the committal stream of the
Magistrates’ Court are determined summarily, and
another third are
committed to the higher courts following a plea of guilty entered in the
Magistrates’ Court. Of the remaining
third of cases that are
committed to the higher courts for trial following a plea of not guilty, a
plea of guilty is entered
prior to trial in approximately 60 per cent of cases
in the County Court.53
5.61 If more effective case management can be achieved in the
Magistrates’ Court, a higher proportion of matters should enter
reduce the County Court’s case management
51 Submission 24 (Law Institute of Victoria).
52 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
53 In the County Court in 2017–18, 508 guilty pleas were entered
between the first hearing in the County Court and the trial
commencing, and
32 guilty pleas were entered during trial. In the Supreme Court in
2017–18, 27 guilty pleas were entered
between the first hearing in the
Supreme Court and the trial commencing, and 8 guilty pleas were entered during
trial: County Court
of Victoria,
Case Data Requested by VLRC
2019), Supreme Court of Victoria,
Case Data Requested by VLRC
54 This is so even accepting that in some instances resolution is impossible
in the lower courts because, for example, a ruling from
the trial court
is sought about the admissibility of evidence.
5.62 It may be useful for the Magistrates’ Court to establish an
‘indictable case management practice group’ of
magistrates who have
particular expertise managing indictable cases. Magistrates could be provided
with specialist training around:
• encouraging the parties to narrow the issues in dispute
• applying the test for leave to cross-examine strictly and
consistently
• implementing reformed disclosure requirements55
• making costs orders where appropriate.
5.63 The Magistrates’ Court should give consideration to how this
training can be provided to magistrates in regional areas.
5.64 Duplication between the lower and higher courts does sometimes
contribute to delay. This delay is offset by the efficiencies
achieved through
early and summary resolution of cases in the Magistrates’ Court. Delay in
the disposition of indictable cases
will not be remedied by limiting the case
management function of the Magistrates’ Court and moving cases to the
County Court
sooner. In fact, it is likely that would cause additional
5.65 Many causes of delay will not be remedied simply by a change of court
venue. These causes include inadequate preparation by the
parties, insufficient
disclosure, and the time taken to provide forensic reports. Recommendations to
address these issues are made
in subsequent chapters.
Commence Supreme Court
cases in the Supreme Court
5.66 The Supreme Court favours moving case management of some matters
within its exclusive jurisdiction into its jurisdiction
at an early stage.56 It
submitted that this should occur on application by either party.57 The Supreme
Court told the Commission
that such a change would reflect modern case
management principles.
5.67 For several reasons, it is desirable for Supreme Court matters to be
managed by that Court. Except in Children’s Court
cases, this should apply
from the commencement of proceedings, not—as the Supreme Court
submitted—from some point after
charges have been filed.
5.68 Given the relatively small number of indictable matters within the
Supreme Court’s exclusive jurisdiction—just
over 100 cases
annually58—and given the Supreme Court already manages bail
applications in treason and murder cases,59 establishing
the services necessary
to support early case management in the Supreme Court is more achievable
in the short term than adopting this change in the County Court, although
still resource intensive.
55 See Chapter 9.
56 Submission 22 (Supreme Court of Victoria). The Supreme Court has
Constitution
(Vic) ss 85, 87(1). The County Court has
treason and misprision of treason;
murder and child destruction; attempted murder; unlawful combinations
or conspiracies to commit any offence that, when committed by an individual
acting alone, could only be tried in the Supreme Court
County Court Act
As a consequence, these offences fall within the exclusive
explicitly refer only to matters within its exclusive jurisdiction, but this is
implied by its description of these matters (homicide
and terrorism charges,
57 Submission 22 (Supreme Court of Victoria).
58 Supreme Court of Victoria,
Case Data Requested by VLRC
59 See paragraph 2.19 of this report.
5.69 Moreover, a much lower proportion of Supreme Court matters resolve in
the jurisdiction of the Magistrates’ Court, or have
guilty pleas entered
there, than County Court matters. The role played by the Magistrates’
Court in the early case management
of Supreme Court matters is thus less
effective than in other cases.
5.70 The difficulties associated with pre-trial management of regional County
Court cases also do not apply in Supreme Court matters.
Most pre-trial
administration and preparation for these matters is currently conducted from the
Melbourne Supreme Court, and the
proposed change will not affect the conduct of
Supreme Court trials by circuit judges.
5.71 The Supreme Court argued that matters within its exclusive
are readily identifiable when they are commenced in the Magistrates’
Court. They are not in the cohort that may ultimately be
resolved summarily as
even the lesser alternative charges are purely indictable ...
It is also rare for a matter in the category of cases dealt with by the
Supreme Court not to be committed for trial ...There remain
where there is a real contest in respect of the charge or a defence, but the
committal determination is not the mechanism
by which those issues are
resolved.60
5.72 The Supreme Court told the Commission the only exception to the rule
that matters within its jurisdiction do not resolve
such that they can be heard
in a lower court are ‘the very small number of cases involving children
... where resolution to
a lesser charge can result in the matter being dealt
with summarily in [the Children’s] Court.’61
5.73 The Supreme Court acknowledged that cases involving a child accused
charged with offences within its exclusive jurisdiction should
commence and be
managed in the Children’s Court as currently occurs.62
5.74 The Supreme Court’s proposal to allow transfer of matters within
its jurisdiction from the Magistrates’ Court on
application by one of the
parties should not be adopted. The DPP expressed concern that the Supreme Court
would thereby be able to
‘cherry pick’ matters.63 This would make it
difficult to explain to complainants and the accused why
some but not all matters are filed in the Supreme Court, with a likely
inference being that matters filed in the Supreme Court are
considered more
important or worthy than others. The DPP told the Commission this would place
the prosecution:
in a very difficult position having to explain to victims and/or their
families as to why one case has been chosen to be case managed
[in the Supreme
Court] and not another.64
5.75 The recommendation that Supreme Court cases should be filed in the
Supreme Court should not be implemented without provision
of appropriate funding
to the Court to support earlier case management and to ensure that the
Court’s existing backlog of cases
is not exacerbated.65
60 Submission 22 (Supreme Court of Victoria).
62 Ibid. See Chapter 12: The Children’s Court.
63 Submission 4 (Director of Public Prosecutions (Victoria)).
65 Submission 22 (Supreme Court of Victoria).
Reforming pre-trial indictable case
management: outline
of a new system
64 Introduction
New pre-trial procedures
Figure 2: Proposed pre-trial case management system
70 Resourcing more active case management
Reforming pre-trial
indictable case management: outline of a new system
Introduction
6.1 This chapter sets out the main elements of the Commission’s
proposed system for pre- trial indictable case management, designed
negative features of the present system. A key initiative is the creation of a
single issues hearing to replace committal
mention hearings and committal
6.2 Some reform proposals—such as that the Director of Public
Prosecutions (DPP) should have formal conduct of indictable stream
matters from
the filing hearing—are referred to briefly in this chapter because of
their centrality to how indictable stream
cases will travel through the courts,
but the rationale for their adoption is discussed separately in subsequent
chapters. These
chapters add detail about specific areas in which additional
reform is required, in relation to charging practices, disclosure,
cross-examination. The current chapter concludes by discussing the need to
resource more active case management in all courts,
and the resourcing
implications of the proposed system.
6.3 With some modifications where appropriate, the case management proposals
in this chapter could be adopted by the Supreme Court
if the Commission’s
recommendation to file Supreme Court charges in that Court is implemented.
New pre-trial
6.4 The reform proposals below are set out in order of the chronology of the
pre-trial process.
Commencing indictable
proceedings
6.5 While it should remain the informant’s responsibility to file
charges, the DPP should assume formal prosecutorial responsibility
indictable stream matters from the time of the filing hearing onwards. The
rationale for this is discussed in Chapter
7 on the role of the DPP and
Chapter 8 on charging practices.
Figure 2: Proposed
pre-trial case management system
Case conference
Application for summary jurisdiction
Application for cross-examination
Application for discharge
Service of hand-up
6.6 Currently, the hand-up brief must be served within five months of the
commencement of proceedings, or within two months if a sexual
involved, except where the Magistrates’ Court decides it is in the
interests of justice to extend this time frame.1
In practice, the magistrate at
the filing hearing will usually order earlier service of the hand- up brief. In
straight-forward cases,
service is typically required within six weeks of the
filing hearing.2
6.7 The time frames for service of the hand-up brief in the
Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) (CPA) allow for a degree of flexibility and a
case-by-case approach. The Magistrates’ Court of Victoria suggests this
appropriate, given that:
An extended period for service of the [hand-up brief] is often required for
certain charges, eg. murder. However, this should be considered
case-by-case basis, be properly justified, and not become a standard for any
category of offending. It is often quite realistic
for an incomplete brief to be
served within [a] 6-week period with the remainder served prior to committal
6.8 While the current approach allows the court to be appropriately
responsive to the varying circumstances of each case, magistrates
encouraged to closely scrutinise the case at hand, and to allow only the
minimum time necessary for service of the
hand-up brief.
6.9 A consequence of the Commission’s recommendation that the DPP has
formal prosecutorial responsibility for indictable stream
matters from filing
hearing onwards is that the DPP will be responsible for filing the hand-up brief
and serving it on the accused.
Preparation of the hand-up brief should remain
the informant’s responsibility, but the DPP should assist and advise the
in this regard. This is discussed further in Chapter 9 on disclosure.
Here it is only necessary to note that the informant should
progressive disclosure to the DPP, so that the DPP is aware of the contents
of the brief and able to file and serve it within the
time frame set by the
Contents of the hand-up brief
6.10 Recommendations for expanding the materials that must be included in the
hand-up brief are made in Chapter 9 on disclosure. Chapter
9 also discusses the
need to clarify how to identify in the hand-up brief items that the informant
objects to disclosing on grounds
such as public interest immunity.
Case direction
6.11 Currently, the parties must engage in discussions at least 14 days
before the committal mention hearing.4 The purpose of these
discussions is to
explore early resolution of the case and, where resolution cannot be achieved,
to identify the issues in dispute
and any witnesses whom the accused will seek
leave to cross-examine.5 A case direction notice recording the outcome of these
discussions
must be filed jointly by the parties seven days before the committal
1 This time frame is established by
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Section 126
requires a committal mention hearing to be held
within three months after the commencement of proceedings in cases involving
sexual offence and within six months in all other cases, unless the
Magistrates’ Court fixes a longer period because it is
satisfied it is in
the interests of justice to do so.
Section 108
requires a hand–up
brief to be served at least 42 days before the committal mention hearing, unless
the Magistrates’
Court fixes another period for service or the accused
gives written consent to a lesser period.
2 Submission 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria).
4 Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Practice Direction 6 of 2013:
Directions Concerning the Case Direction Notice
, 10 October 2013.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
6.12 The case direction notice may also be used to indicate that the accused
will apply for a summary hearing. The Victorian Aboriginal
Legal Service told
the Commission that when an Aboriginal accused makes an application for
summary jurisdiction, he or she will
often at the same time make an
application for Koori Court determination. This means the magistrate must
determine at the committal
mention hearing both whether the case is suitable for
summary determination and if it meets the criteria for a Koori Court
A concern raised by the Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service is that
if this decision is not made by a Koori Court magistrate,
its suitability may
be challenged by the Koori Court magistrate when the case appears in the Koori
6.13 Current provisions for early discussions between the parties and the
joint filing of a case direction notice should be retained,
although the
prescribed timeframe for discussions should be set with reference to the
proposed issues hearing, discussed below,
rather than the committal mention
hearing. A revised case direction notice should support the same purposes as
current case direction
notices, to promote early resolution discussions, and
contain the same fields for identification of the issues in dispute, such
applications for leave to cross-examine witnesses. If an application for
summary jurisdiction includes an application for
a Koori Court hearing, this
should also be stated in the revised case direction notice, allowing the
Magistrates’ Court
registrar to list the issues hearing before a Koori
Court magistrate.
Court-supervised case
conferences
6.14 Although the Magistrates’ Court may direct the parties to appear
at a committal case conference conducted by a magistrate,8
conferences are
currently confined to matters involving offences against the person, robbery,
armed robbery or aggravated burglary.
6.15 The conferences provide an opportunity for magistrates to question
parties about failures to engage actively in early resolution
discussions and
to identify and narrow the issues
in dispute. The parties can raise disclosure issues and the court can provide
its views regarding the strength of the prosecution
case, the suitability of the
charges, and how the issues could be narrowed.
6.16 A significant minority of indictable stream cases resolve summarily at
committal case conferences: ten per cent in 2016–17
and seven per cent
in 2017–18. These results could be improved through more consistent and
engaged case management in the
Magistrates’ Court. The Commission
recommends extension of court-supervised conferences to all indictable stream
7 Submission 19 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
6.17 The conferences should be conducted on the same day as the issues
hearing (discussed below). If the Commission’s recommendation
the test for committal is implemented, magistrates will have more scope to
actively engage parties about resolving or
narrowing the issues in the
Issues hearing
6.18 Generally speaking, committal proceedings do not themselves contribute
to undue delay—other factors such as failure to
obtain forensic evidence
promptly and inadequate preparation by the parties are the main causes of
delay.9 How committal hearings
are currently conducted can, however, cause
delay. If a committal hearing is adjourned, the challenge of finding a new court
when the magistrate and parties are available can be exacerbated by the
need to accommodate witnesses and to combine witness cross-
examination with
submissions from counsel and the magistrate’s determination of the test
for committal.10
6.19 Abolishing the test for committal, as recommended in Chapter 4, will
allow the committal mention and the committal hearing to
be combined into a
single ‘issues hearing’.
6.20 The notion of an issues hearing to replace committal mention hearings
was advanced by the DPP in 2018, along with other reforms
such as fast-track
procedures for certain categories of cases.11 The Commission is not recommending
the adoption of those other reforms
and its proposed issues hearing will
function differently to that envisaged by the DPP.
6.21 The Court should determine applications for leave to cross-examine
witnesses at the issues hearing.12 If leave to cross-examine
is granted, the
issues hearing could be
adjourned, with cross-examination scheduled in a flexible manner—rather
than being tied, as is currently the case, to a single
committal hearing that
culminates with the Magistrates’ Court determining the test for committal.
This will remove the potential
for delay caused by having to schedule witness
cross-examination for a dedicated hearing where the magistrate also takes
submissions
from the parties.
6.22 As discussed earlier, the court should conduct a case conference at the
issues hearing in order to encourage resolution where
possible, or to identify
and narrow the issues for trial.
6.23 At the issues hearing, the Magistrates’ Court could also:
• hear an application for summary jurisdiction, conduct a summary
hearing, or list a matter for summary hearing
• hear an application for Koori Court
• hear a discharge application
9 Submissions 11 (Criminal Bar Association (Victoria)), 14
(Magistrates’ Court of Victoria), 15 (Liberty Victoria).
10 Submissions 20 (County Court of Victoria), 22 (Supreme Court of Victoria),
24 (Law Institute of Victoria).
11 Director of Public Prosecutions, Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria,
Proposed Reforms to Reduce Further Trauma to Victims and Witnesses
(Policy Paper, 1 October 2018), appended to Submission 4 (Director of Public
Prosecutions (Victoria)).
12 As is currently the case, the accused should provide details of any
applications to cross-examine witnesses in the case direction
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
• hear and determine any objection to the production of material, or
order the matter be transferred to the County Court for
consideration of an
objection to the production of material13
• order the accused appear for plea and sentence in the County Court on
a date to be determined
• order the accused stand trial in the County Court on a date to be
determined.
6.24 The attendance of the informant at the issues hearing should be
obligatory. Informants will be required to confirm on oath
that they have
disclosed all relevant material in their possession or knowledge, and that they
have made all reasonable enquiries
Chapter 9).
6.25 Currently, the higher courts have inadequate information about what
happened in cases before them while those cases were in the
lower courts.
6.26 This issue would be partly remedied by more effective and integrated
court data management systems.14 The Commission also recommends
introducing a
requirement that magistrates complete an ‘issues hearing report’ for
transmission to the higher court.
6.27 The proposed issues hearing report will include details of:
• any issues raised before the magistrate
• if the informant objected to production of material, the grounds for
the objection and the court’s determination in
relation to it
• any outstanding disclosure items sought by the accused, or disclosure
issues that are likely to arise
• any other matter that the Magistrates’ Court regards as
relevant to the higher court.
6.28 The issues hearing report should also include brief reference to key
depositional material, including:
• whether or not the informant confirmed on oath that all relevant
material had been fully disclosed
• if leave was sought to cross-examine witnesses; if leave was granted;
and if witnesses were cross-examined (including details
of the witnesses in
6.29 The issues hearing report may also include details of any failure by the
parties to adequately complete the case direction notice
or make concerted
efforts to resolve the matter or narrow the issues in dispute.
6.30 Preparation of the issues hearing report need not be overly time
consuming. A template could be used allowing some fields to
populated. Copies of the report should be provided to the parties.
13 See further discussion in Chapter 9.
14 See the discussion in Chapter 3.
Specialist lists in the
County Court
6.31 At the initial directions hearing, a judge will categorise matters as
suitable for management in one of the County Court’s
specialist lists. The
County Court’s current specialist lists are:
• sexual offences
• general crime (including the pilot Active Case Management System)
• long trial list
• Koori Court.
6.32 In addition to the existing lists, it may be appropriate to add a
separate family violence list, or to create a joint family
violence and sexual
offences list, as the Commission’s recommendations in relation to
pre-trial cross-examination require special
protections for complainants in
family violence matters to supplement the existing protections in sexual offence
matters.15 It may
also be appropriate to add a specialist Children’s Court
Case management in the
Supreme Court
6.33 The main elements of the case management procedures proposed for the
lower courts should be adopted, with appropriate modifications,
in the Supreme
Court. In particular, early discussions between the parties, joint completion of
a case direction notice, and court
supervised case conferences should be
6.34 While an issues hearing may take a somewhat different form, it should
allow for disclosure issues to be raised and for informants
to confirm on oath
that they have discharged their disclosure obligations. The accused should be
entitled to seek leave to cross-examine
witnesses, and to have leave granted if
the same conditions are met as apply in other cases.16
Resourcing more active
case management
6.35 Civil litigation reforms in the United Kingdom in 1999 represented
‘radical, arguably revolutionary, procedural change
putting greater
emphasis on settlement and giving greater control of litigation to the
judiciary.’17
6.36 While the benefits of the reforms continue to be debated, what became
clear after their introduction was the importance of ensuring
the courts were
adequately resourced to meet the increased burden of case management. As the
chairman of the Law Society’s
Civil Litigation Committee noted:
Case management under Woolf has greatly increased the burden on the courts in
driving the pace of litigation ... If the civil justice
reforms are to succeed
they must have the support of an adequately resourced court
infrastructure.18
6.37 This comment applies equally to reforms promoting more active case
management of criminal matters. Regardless of the jurisdiction
in which case
management occurs, active judicial oversight of proceedings imposes a burden on
the court in terms of time and other
resources. Examples of active case
management by the courts include:
• careful scrutiny of applications for adjournment and a strict
attitude towards granting them
• calling parties before the court to explain why they have not met
procedural obligations
15 See Chapter 11.
17 Susan Moloney, ‘A New Approach to Civil Litigation? The
Implementation of the “Woolf Reforms” and Judicial Case
Management’ (2001) 2(1)
Judicial Studies Institute Journal
18 Fraser Whitehead cited in Susan Moloney, ‘A New Approach to Civil
Litigation? The Implementation of the “Woolf
Reforms” and
Judicial Case Management’ (2001) 2(1)
Judicial Studies Institute
• more proactive use of costs orders to penalise delay
• mandated court-supervised case conferences, which require an
understanding of the charges and issues.
Resourcing a system
rather than its parts
6.38 The Supreme Court of Victoria pointed out that ‘Inefficiencies are
created when one or more aspects of the system are not
resourced to keep up with
the processes of other parts of the system.’19 As an example, it cites an
increase in police resources
leading to more investigations and arrests, and
more charges being filed.20 A higher volume of prosecutions will necessarily
an additional burden on the courts that must hear and determine the
6.39 The County Court attributes increased delays within its jurisdiction
to—among other things—the ‘steady increase
initiations’ from 2014–15 to 2017–18.21
6.40 If it is the case that prosecutions for indictable offences have
been increasing and continue to do so, the entire criminal
justice system
should be adequately resourced to cater for this. More generally, reforms to
specific elements of the criminal
justice system will fail to deliver
substantial and lasting benefits unless the flow-on effects of these reforms
are catered
for and resourced. For example, if indictable cases move more
quickly through the jurisdiction of the lower courts, the overall time
disposition will not improve if they simply swell existing backlogs in the
higher courts—those backlogs must also
be addressed.
Current personnel and
infrastructure shortfalls
6.41 The Commission was told there are not currently enough magistrates to
handle the committal stream caseload.22 This is said to
be a particular problem
in the regions, where other matters such as summary cases involving family
violence offences are often given
priority.23 The Commission also heard that the
Magistrates’ Court does not have enough courtrooms with custody or video
facilities to hear indictable cases.24
6.42 The Magistrates’ Court told the Commission a cause of delay in its
conduct of committal proceedings is the need to adjourn
committal hearings
because of:
Lack of ... resources both in magistrates and custody court rooms. More
magistrates are required to be available to hear committal
hearings. More court
rooms are also required. Even with the Court’s lease of [two] court rooms
in the County Court building,
there is still a shortage of custody courts in the
Melbourne Magistrates’ Court building.25
6.43 The DPP told the Commission that magistrates ‘are under strain
from ever-increasing work pressures.’26
6.44 The Law Institute of Victoria pointed to under-resourcing of all courts,
not just the Magistrates’ Court. It described
this as a major contributor
The capacity of the three courts is limited by the number of suitable
courtrooms, the competing uses for these courts (i.e. civil
and criminal
matters) and the number of judicial officers with relevant experience in
criminal law to hear a matter.27
6.45 The Law Institute calls for investment in court infrastructure, citing a
The Court Services Victoria Strategic Asset Plan
19 Submission 22 (Supreme Court of Victoria).
21 Submission 20 (County Court of Victoria).
22 Submission 24 (Law Institute of Victoria).
23 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid), Consultation 29 (Bendigo
Magistrates’ Court).
24 Submission 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria); Consultations 8
(Victoria Legal Aid), 16 (LaTrobe Valley practitioners).
25 Submission 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria).
26 Submission 4 (Director of Public Prosecutions (Victoria)).
27 Submission 24 (Law Institute of Victoria).
Current and historical funding for court asset management has been
constrained and below levels that are required to maintain and
appropriate court environments.28
Resource implications of
case management recommendations
6.46 If the Commission’s recommendation to abolish the test for
committal is implemented, this should reduce the Magistrates’
Court’s workload in respect of indictable stream matters. The
Commission’s recommendation for more court-supervised
case conferences
will, however, add to that workload. Meanwhile, the opportunity to
cross-examine witnesses at an issues hearing
will continue to impose a burden
on Magistrates’ Court resources.
6.47 Additional funding will therefore be required to redress existing
shortages of magistrates and a scarcity of courtrooms in the
Magistrates’ Court.29
6.48 Additional funding will be required to resource the Commission’s
recommendation that charges within the exclusive jurisdiction
of the Supreme
Court are filed there.
Resource implications of
abolishing committal proceedings
6.49 If—contrary to the Commission’s recommendations—the
bulk of pre-trial case management is moved into the County
Court, this will
require large-scale funding.
6.50 Both the County and the Supreme Courts submitted that moving elements of
committal proceedings into the higher courts would require
additional funding
for these courts.30 They argued that these additional resources would be offset
by savings in the Magistrates’
6.51 Neither higher court provided an estimate of the figures involved,
although the Supreme Court outlined the range of resources
it would require. The
Supreme Court told the Commission the resources necessary would include:
• ‘judge resources to reduce [existing] trial backlogs and
facilitate early management
• judicial registrar...resources for case management tasks including
aspects of pre-trial cross examination
• staff support to maximise the capacity of judicial resources and
undertake out of court management to reduce adjournments
and the need for
appearances
• consequential costs associated with the above reflective of having a
greater number of matters running at a given time including
jury and transcript
costs and accommodation.’31
6.52 The County Court submitted that ‘any transfer of pre-trial
cross-examination to the County Court must be supported by appropriate
allocation, prior to implementation.’32
6.53 It added more generally:
a significant change in procedure must be accompanied by pre-emptive funding
that meets the increased demand on the County Court ...The
Court is unanimously
opposed to any reforms to committals without upfront and appropriate resource
allocation.33
28 Court Services Victoria,
Strategic Asset Plan 2016-2031
2016) 10; Submission 24 (Law Institute of Victoria).
29 Submission 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria).
30 Submissions 20 (County Court of Victoria), 22 (Supreme Court of
31 Submission 22 (Supreme Court of Victoria).
32 Submission 20 (County Court).
Role of the DPP and
defence practitioners
Introduction
Structural problems with committal proceedings
New South Wales reforms
Role of the DPP and defence practitioners: stakeholder views
Commission’s conclusions
Role of the DPP and
defence practitioners
Introduction
7.1 The Commission was told that inefficiency, delay, and failures to resolve
matters at an early stage can be attributed partly to
failure by defence and
prosecution practitioners to engage actively in proceedings from the outset.
7.2 In 2014 the New South Wales Law Reform Commission identified several
barriers to securing appropriate early guilty pleas. These
• a failure by the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) to brief Crown
Prosecutors with authority to negotiate until late in
proceedings
• discontinuity of legal representation leading to inconsistency in
advice and negotiations.1
7.3 These barriers are also present in Victoria. The prosecution is not
actively engaged in committal proceedings from the beginning.
It is common for
both the prosecution and defence to brief less experienced solicitor-advocates
or counsel during pre-trial proceedings
and to transfer briefs to more senior
counsel at the trial stage.
7.4 The problem of insufficient early engagement by both parties is also
structural. Because the informant is responsible for drafting
charges and preparing the brief of evidence, as well as for other aspects of
committal proceedings, it is natural
that the DPP’s involvement is
minimal until a late stage in the committal proceedings. Without meaningful
early involvement
from Office of Public Prosecutions (OPP) practitioners, even
those defence practitioners who try to resolve the matter quickly are
be thwarted.
7.5 This chapter canvasses the situation in Victoria in relation to the
informant’s and prosecution’s different roles
in committal
proceedings. It explains how reforms in New South Wales have attempted to
ensure more active engagement from an
early stage by experienced prosecutors
and defence practitioners. The chapter considers what
stakeholders have reported about the issue in Victoria and concludes by
urging the need to ‘front-load’ the criminal
justice system. This
requires two things:
• the DPP assuming earlier prosecutorial responsibility for conducting
committal proceedings
• the provision of funding at an early stage in proceedings to secure
the involvement of experienced practitioners and to ensure
continuity of
representation.2
1 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Encouraging Appropriate Early
Guilty Pleas
(Report No 141, December 2014) 9-10.
2 As the New South Wales Law Reform Commission said, ‘resources should
be switched away from the end process—where they
wasted—and deployed in a “front-ended” system.’ New
South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Encouraging Appropriate Early Guilty Pleas
(Report No 141, December 2014) 11.
Structural problems with
committal proceedings
7.6 The informant commences criminal proceedings by filing charges.3 If the
defence wants to communicate with the prosecution between
the filing hearing and
the committal
mention, their point of contact is usually the informant.4 The informant is
also the point of contact for complainants and other witnesses
responsible for informing them about court dates and the criminal process.5
7.7 The DPP conducts almost all committal proceedings for Victorian
offences,6 but the prosecution’s level of engagement is
minimal in the
early stages of proceedings.7 For example, while it is customary for a solicitor
from the OPP to appear for the prosecution
at filing hearings in the Melbourne
Magistrates’ Court,8 matters are not usually allocated to a dedicated
conduct solicitor
who will have ongoing oversight of the proceedings until after
the filing hearing.
7.8 It is not surprising that the DPP does not become actively involved in
reviewing cases and pursuing early resolution in the lower
courts given the
informant bears most of the initial responsibilities in relation to charging and
disclosure.
New South Wales
7.9 As part of reforms to the criminal justice system introduced in New
South Wales in 2018, Legal Aid New South Wales has restructured
its serious
crime section to provide a continuity of representation model. This means that
solicitors now have carriage of criminal
cases for the lifetime of the case,
whereas previously one solicitor would have
carriage of a case during the committal phase and another would assume
carriage if the accused was committed to a higher court. Legal
Aid New South
Wales has also changed its fee structure to increase the allocation of funds
provided to private practitioners at the
‘front end’ of the process.
This is designed among other things to address the ‘perverse
incentive’ that
previously existed to only resolve matters at trial. Legal
Aid New South Wales are also now briefing defence counsel more regularly
an earlier stage in proceedings.9
7.10 The New South Wales Government initially provided $9.3 million in
recurrent funding— although limited to two years, to
support the new Legal
Aid fee model. A further grant of $10 million in non-recurrent funding was
subsequently allocated to help front-load
resourcing and ensure continuity of
representation.10
7.11 The New South Wales Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
(ODPP) has also created a continuity of representation
model, with
practitioners working in teams led by a senior practitioner who is the
ultimate decision maker. More junior practitioners
are involved in refining the
issues and identifying the applicable offences. The introduction of this model
was supported by additional
government funding for the ODPP.11
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
, definition of informant.
4 The informant must also provide an address for service of documents
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
, may apply for a compulsory
examination order (
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
, and must file
a case direction notice if the DPP is not conducting the committal proceeding
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
6 Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria, ‘Our Role in
Prosecutions’,
(Web Page, 2016)
http://www.opp.vic.gov.au/About-Us/Our- Legal-Practice/Our-role-in-prosecutions
. Other agencies such as WorkSafe
Victoria may also conduct committal proceedings.
7 This is so even though it has been the DPP’s long-standing policy to
take responsibility for the prosecution of matters during
committal proceedings:
see Directors of Public Prosecutions and National Legal Aid,
Best Practice
Model for the Determination of Criminal Charges
(1988) 2 [1], available as
an annexure to Brian Ross Martin,
Review of the Major Indictable
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
(As Amended by the Summary Procedure
(Indictable Offences) Amendment Act 2017
(Report, 13 September 2019),
annexure 7.
8 In regional areas, a Victoria Police prosecutor usually appears for the
prosecution at the filing hearing.
9 Consultation 34 (Legal Aid New South Wales).
11 Consultation 33 (Director of Public Prosecutions (New South Wales)).
Role of the DPP and
defence practitioners: stakeholder views
Prosecution not in a
position to negotiate
7.12 Even after a conduct solicitor is appointed, the Magistrates’
Court reports that OPP duty solicitors appear in committal
mentions rather than
the conduct solicitor.12 Duty solicitors do not have authority to make
significant decisions such as to withdraw
charges and thus are not able to
negotiate effectively with the defence. According to the Magistrates’
Court, it is common
for matters to be ‘needlessly adjourned for
instructions to be obtained.’13
7.13 The Commission was told by regional defence practitioners that OPP
practitioners who appear at committal mentions in circuit
courts do not have
authority to negotiate and commonly have a poor understanding of the issues in
7.14 A further problem identified by the Magistrates’ Court and
commented on by regional defence practitioners is that it is
difficult to
determine who has conduct of a file at
the OPP. This makes engaging in proactive and early resolution discussions
almost impossible.14
7.15 The Commission heard that the OPP formerly had a dedicated regional team
of practitioners who had carriage of matters and who
travelled to circuit
locations and engaged in constructive resolution discussions with defence
practitioners.15
7.16 The Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service suggested the OPP:
should receive additional funding to ensure that senior prosecutors with
authority to negotiate can provide oversight during charging
disclosure.16
7.17 Victoria Legal Aid similarly called for:
senior prosecutors ... to prepare and engage with the evidence at the
earliest stage of committal proceedings, including for case
conferencing and
appearance in the committal proceedings.17
Inadequate preparation by
both parties
7.18 It is common in Victoria as in many other Australian jurisdictions to
brief less experienced solicitor-advocates or counsel during
proceedings and to transfer briefs to more senior counsel at the trial
7.19 The Magistrates’ Court reported:
Magistrates are frustrated by the lack of accountability on [the] part of
both defence and the OPP in [engaging in timely resolution
discussions]. Delayed
brief analysis by defence leads to delayed request[s] for further disclosure
material and delayed negotiation.
Meanwhile, OPP solicitors wait on defence to communicate their position,
rather than proactively communicating the bottom line, which
magistrates
frequently encourage them to do.19
12 Submission 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria).
13 Submission 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria), 13 (Victoria Legal
14 ‘It is ... a common complaint from defence practitioners that they
have difficulty determining who at the OPP has conduct
of a particular
file and commence disclosure or resolution discussions at an early stage.’
Submission 14 (Magistrates’
Court of Victoria).
15 Consultations 13 (Goulburn Valley practitioners), 38 (Victoria Legal Aid
regional practitioners).
16 Submission 19 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
17 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
18 Jason Payne,
Criminal Trial Delays in Australia: Trial Listing Outcomes
(Research and Public Policy Series No 74, Australian Institute of
Criminology, 2007) 45–6.
19 Submission 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria).
7.20 The Court claimed that in response to questioning from the bench it
often became apparent that the parties left it very late
to engage in
resolution discussions or to identify the issues that prevent the case from
resolving.20
7.21 While it is Victoria Legal Aid’s policy that solicitors have
carriage of indictable matters for the lifetime of a case,
senior practitioners
for both the prosecution and defence are commonly briefed only at the trial
stage. This has been identified
as an impediment to early resolution and a
contributing factor to delay in jurisdictions around Australia.21
Having different counsel appear in the lower and higher courts also leads to
a duplication of efforts.22 Victoria Legal Aid attempts
to address this issue by
paying a supplementary ‘uplift’ fee to counsel who act both in
committal proceedings and subsequently
in the trial court.
7.22 The County Court has tried to tackle the same issue by requiring counsel
who appear at a committal hearing also to appear at
the initial directions
hearing in the County Court, and by emphasising that counsel must have a sound
understanding of the case.23
Compliance with this requirement is, however,
Commission’s
conclusions
Early involvement of the
7.23 The informant has primary responsibility for charging and disclosure
throughout committal proceedings. This has led to problems
that are discussed in
subsequent chapters.
7.24 The DPP should assume formal prosecutorial responsibility for all
indictable stream matters from the point of filing in the Magistrates’
Court onwards (see recommendation 8, Chapter 6). This would improve appropriate
charging and disclosure. It would also encourage
consistent representation and
facilitate the earlier involvement of experienced prosecutors.
Early engagement of
experienced practitioners
7.25 It is essential that both parties are equipped to negotiate at an early
stage in the Magistrates’ Court, and to assist
the Court in its oversight
of cases by having a sound understanding of the issues.
7.26 The Magistrates’ Court should be more assertive in its use of
costs orders to penalise practitioners who appear at court
without adequate
instructions.
7.27 Victoria Legal Aid, the Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service, and the DPP
• appoint experienced practitioners at an early stage
• endeavour to ensure that practitioners who accept conduct of matters
do not withdraw before the matter has finally resolved,
unless they have good
reasons for doing so.
20 Submission 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria). In accordance with
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
Practice Direction 6 of 2013: Directions
Concerning the Case Direction Notice
, 10 October 2013, the parties are
required to engage in resolution discussions at least 14 days before the
committal mention hearing.
The parties are required to file a case direction
notice with the outcomes of their discussions at least seven days before the
mention hearing:
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
21 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Encouraging Appropriate Early
Guilty Pleas
(Report No 141, December 2014) 9–10; Jason Payne,
Criminal Trial Delays in Australia: Trial Listing Outcomes
(Research and
Public Policy Series No 74, Australian Institute of Criminology, 2007)
22 Submission 20 (County Court of Victoria).
23 County Court of Victoria,
Criminal Division Practice Note PNCR 1-2015,
12 July 2019,
7.28 The Commission recognises the logistical challenges associated with
ensuring the early and continuous involvement of experienced
practitioners. A
mentoring system could be adopted, allowing less experienced practitioners to
appear and conduct negotiations
in committal proceedings and have conduct of pre-trial matters in the trial
courts with consistent oversight by experienced practitioners
who are familiar
with and ultimately responsible for the matter. Supervising practitioners would
need to be reliably available to
provide instructions.
7.29 Fee structures at the OPP and Victoria Legal Aid should provide for the
early appointment of experienced practitioners. As
discussed earlier, Victoria
Legal Aid currently provides
an uplift fee to counsel who act both in committal proceedings and
subsequently in the trial court. The DPP could consider introducing
incentives for counsel for the prosecution.
7.30 Additional funding should be provided to Victoria Legal Aid and the DPP
for initiatives to engage experienced practitioners at
an early stage and to
ensure they remain involved throughout proceedings.
Charging practices
Introduction
Current approach to charging
Historical backdrop to current charging practices
Overcharging
Is overcharging a problem in Victoria?
Commission’s conclusions: addressing overcharging
91 Consulting victims about charging decisions
Introduction
8.1 Appropriate charging is important for ensuring fair trial rights,
efficiency in the criminal justice system, and to minimise trauma
for victims
and witnesses. Charges filed against an accused person must be
evidence-based.
8.2 Consistently with this, the
Victoria Police Manual
requires the
informant to ‘ensure there is sufficient admissible evidence to cover all
points of proof relevant to each charge
and that there is a reasonable prospect
of a conviction being secured.’1 The
Policy of the Director of Public
Prosecutions for Victoria
Director’s Policy
) requires that for
a prosecution to proceed, there must be a reasonable prospect of conviction and
it must be in the public interest.2
8.3 Nonetheless, in Victoria, as in many other jurisdictions, it is common
for more charges to be filed than are ultimately prosecuted
or result in a
guilty plea.3 Frequently, Victoria Police or the Director of Public
Prosecutions (DPP) withdraws or downgrades charges
during negotiations with the
defence or as a result of its own case review.4
8.4 This chapter examines the current approach and historical backdrop to
charging in Victoria. It describes the phenomenon of
overcharging, which
unnecessarily
filing more charges than are pleaded or indicted,
and considers if this is a problem in Victoria. After concluding that
overcharging
is a problem, the chapter discusses the consequences of
overcharging for the accused, for efficiency, and for victims and witnesses.
8.5 The Commission considers a range of responses to overcharging. It
concludes there is a need to provide Victoria Police with better
training and support, and to involve the DPP in charging decisions at an early
stage. It describes recent initiatives to
improve consultation with victims
trauma experienced
by victims and other witnesses when charges are
1 Victoria Police,
Victoria Police Manual
(CD-Rom, 29 April 2019) 6
2 Director of Public Prosecutions for Victoria, Office of Public Prosecutions
Policy of the Director of Public Prosecutions for Victoria
(17 December 2019) 2
http://www.opp.vic.gov.au/Resources/Policies
See also Victorian Law Reform Commission,
(Issues Paper, June
2019) 12 [3.9]–[3.13], discussing the factors that the police and the DPP
must take into account before
deciding to file charges or an indictment.
3 Submissions 13 (Victoria Legal Aid), 19 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal
Service); Consultations 8 (Victoria Legal Aid), 13 (Goulburn
practitioners), 16 (LaTrobe Valley practitioners), 18 (Academic Roundtable), 29
(Bendigo Magistrates’ Court).
4 The informant or prosecution may seek leave to withdraw charges or file
additional charges: see
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Current approach to
Responsibility for
investigating criminal conduct and filing charges
8.6 Several agencies have responsibility for investigating criminal conduct.
Victoria Police conducts most criminal investigations
in this state.
Commonwealth offences are investigated by the Australian Federal Police,
sometimes in collaboration with Victoria
Police.5 Statutory agencies such as
WorkSafe Victoria and the Environmental Protection Authority also have the power
to investigate
criminal conduct falling within their statutory authority. While
the DPP has the power to provide advice about the investigation
of a criminal
offence,6 its longstanding policy has been not to give advice about
‘operational or investigative matters’.7
8.7 Criminal proceedings are commenced in the lower courts by an
investigating officer (‘the informant’) filing a charge
sheet.8 The
charge sheet must be signed by the informant personally.9 In most cases, the
informant is a Victoria Police officer.
8.8 The DPP is not involved in the initial drafting of charges but is
available to provide charging advice to Victoria Police or
other investigative
agencies in cases that are ‘complex’, ‘novel’, have
policy implications, or raise potential
conflicts of interest for the
8.9 After apprehension, if the accused has not been released by the police on
summons or bail, they must be brought before a bail
justice or a magistrate
within ‘a reasonable period of time’.11 In most cases involving
indictable offences, bail may
only be granted
in ‘exceptional circumstances’12 or if the accused can
‘show compelling reasons why bail should be granted.13 The
compelling reasons’ test, introduced in 2018, means that it is now less
common for police or a bail justice to
grant bail; magistrates are hearing more
applications for bail; and more people are being detained on remand.14
Responsibility for
conduct of committal proceedings and charge review
8.10 Both the informant and the DPP have responsibilities in relation to
the conduct of committal proceedings (see Chapter 7), but
in the early stages of
the proceedings, active consideration or review of the charges by the DPP is
rare. In some cases, charges
not reviewed until just before the committal mention, when they may be
re-assessed in the context of completion of the case direction
notice. In other
cases, charges may not be reviewed at all until after the accused has been
committed for trial, when they are considered
in the context of the DPP’s
decision to file an indictment.15
5 Note that Victorian courts have jurisdiction to hear matters relating to
Commonwealth criminal offences. Victoria’s criminal
procedure rules apply
in these instances:
Judiciary Act 1903
The offences are
prosecuted by the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions.
Public Prosecutions Act
s 22(1)(ce).
7 Director of Public Prosecutions, Office of Public Prosecutions for
Policy of the Director of Public Prosecutions for Victoria
(17 December 2019) 22 [64]
http://www.opp.vic.gov.au/Resources/Policies
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(1)(a). If the accused
was arrested without a warrant and is released on bail, the proceedings can be
commenced by filing a charge
sheet with a bail justice:
Criminal Procedure
Proceedings can also be commenced by a police
officer or public official signing a charge sheet and issuing a summons to
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
criminal proceedings in the Children’s Court are commenced in the same
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
10 Director of Public Prosecutions for Victoria,
Policy of the Director of
Public Prosecutions for Victoria
(17 December 2019) 22 [64], Submission 4
(Director of Public Prosecutions (Victoria)).
Crimes Act 1958
Crimes Act 1958
for a list of matters that may be considered for the purposes of
determining what constitutes ‘a reasonable time’. See
(Vic), which requires a person refused bail by an authorised police
officer to be bought before a court ‘as soon as practicable
period of 48 hours after being so remanded’:
Bail Act 1977
13 Ibid sch 2.
14 See Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
15 Submission 11 (Criminal Bar Association (Victoria)), Consultations 13
(Goulburn Valley practitioners), 16 (LaTrobe Valley practitioners),
21 (Geelong
practitioners), 29 (Bendigo Magistrates’ Court).
Historical backdrop to
current charging practices
8.11 The involvement of investigative agencies in filing charges and
conducting committal proceedings is, to some degree, a historical
8.12 Victoria established Australia’s first independent DPP in 1982,
and the first Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
was established in
1984.17 The DPP was appointed, and the Office of the DPP created, in response to
concerns about the politicisation
of criminal prosecutions and the lack of an
independent, non-partisan
prosecuting agency.18 Before this, investigators tended not to consult with
prosecutorial authorities, who were embedded in government
departments.19
8.13 The need to enhance public confidence in police investigations and the
criminal justice system more broadly was recognised by
(among others)
Australia’s DPPs. While DPPs did not seek to influence investigative
processes, they moved to separate
them from the prosecution of offences. They
also addressed concerns about the quality of police prosecutions by establishing
prosecution and disclosure guidelines.20
8.14 In the 1980s, other common law countries separated the investigation
of criminal offences from their prosecution, abolishing
the role that the
police had previously performed in prosecuting crime, even in relation to
summary offences.21 Corns points out
the prohibition on the police conducting criminal prosecutions is based on
the ideological and operational need to separate criminal
investigative
functions from prosecutorial functions to ensure ... independence and
impartiality in prosecution decision-making.22
8.15 In the United Kingdom, Crown Prosecutors rather than the police are
responsible for making indictable charging decisions. The
separation between
criminal investigations and indictable prosecutions has been reduced, however,
because Crown Prosecutors may advise
the police on reasonable lines of enquiry
to take in an investigation. If police fail
to pursue lines of enquiry suggested by a Crown Prosecutor, or to provide
information requested by the prosecutor about an investigation,
the prosecutor
may defer a charging decision or refuse to make it at all.23 Even so, there is
an attempt to retain the separation
between investigative and prosecutorial
roles: prosecutors are not meant to
police or other investigators
in the conduct of their investigations, and are characterised as independent of
16 This is also true of the fact that Victoria Police has responsibility for
prosecuting all summary offences in the Magistrates’
Christopher Corns,
Public Prosecutions in Australia: Law, Policy and Practice
(Thomson Reuters, 2014) 242–244 [7.140]–[7.160].
17 Damian Bugg, ‘The Role of the DPP in the 20th Century’
(Speech, Judicial College of Australia Colloquium, 1999) 3.
Tasmania was the
first jurisdiction in Australia to establish an independent prosecuting agency,
with the creation in 1973 of the
Crown Advocate.
18 In the United Kingdom, according to Sir Thomas Hetherington DPP, the role
of the Crown Prosecution service was established with
broader objectives,
including ‘To be, and to be seen to be, independent of the Police’.
Damian Bugg, ‘The Role
of the DPP in the 20th Century’ (Speech,
Judicial College of Australia Colloquium, 1999) 2–3. See also Christopher
Public Prosecutions in Australia: Law, Policy and Practice
(Thomson Reuters, 2014) 242–244 [7.140]–[7.160].
19 Damian Bugg, ‘The Role of the DPP in the 20th Century’
(Speech, Judicial College of Australia Colloquium, 1999) 2.
20 Ibid 18–20. In Tasmania, the role of Crown Advocate was changed to
Director of Public Prosecutions in 1986. At the same time,
prosecutor’s obligation ‘to provide advice and representation to
Police’ was removed in order ‘to recognise
the independence of the
DPP from the policing and investigative function.’ Ibid 5.
21 Chris Corns, ‘Police Prosecutions in Australia and New Zealand: Some
Comparisons’
[2000] UTasLawRw 10
(2000) 19(2)
University of Tasmania Law Review
23 Crown Prosecution Service (England and Wales),
Disclosure Manual
(Report, 14 December 2018) 9.
24 Crown Prosecution Service (England and Wales), ‘The Code for Crown
Prosecutors’,
Publications
(Web Page, 26 October 2018) [2.1],
www.cps.gov.uk/publication/code-crown-prosecutors
Overcharging
overcharging?
8.16 ‘Overcharging’ involves unnecessarily filing more charges
than are ultimately indicted or pleaded. Three distinct
forms of charging are
often conflated, and all are sometimes described as ‘overcharging’:
alternative charging, discrete
event charging and inflated charging. Each of
these is explained below.
8.17 Whilst is generally appropriate to characterise ‘discrete event
charging’ and ‘inflated charging’ as
overcharging,
‘alternative charging’ may be defensible and appropriate. This is
only so, however, in circumstances where
it seems likely, on the available
evidence, that the accused is guilty of an offence or offences at the more
serious end of the spectrum.
Using alternative charging as a strategy for the
conduct of plea negotiations is inappropriate and constitutes overcharging.
Alternative charges
8.18 In relation to the same offending conduct, it is common for the accused
to be charged with the most serious version of the
alleged offence—such
as intentionally cause serious injury—as well as less serious versions,
such as intentionally cause
8.19 Alternative charging has a statutory basis.25 It may be warranted in
situations where charges must be filed while an investigation
is still in its
infancy.26 It is important that charges reflect the most serious offence on
the available evidence, as this will
influence decisions such as the
an investigation is
complete, it may be apparent that the available
evidence does not support the most serious offence charged. As a result,
alternative less serious versions of the offence may proceed.
8.20 An accused is entitled to have his or her alleged criminal conduct
dealt with as promptly as possible.27 Filing less serious
alternative charges
at the outset means that, if the more serious charges are withdrawn, the
remaining alternative charges can be
dealt with immediately.
Discrete event charges
8.21 Sometimes criminal offending occurs over the course of numerous discrete
events. The
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) (CPA) allows for an accused
to be charged according to a ‘course of conduct’ if the offending
involves more than
one incident of a relevant offence—either a sexual
offence or an offence under specified sections of the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic)28—and other conditions are met.29
8.22 Instead of a course of conduct charge, however, the informant will often
charge the accused for each of the discrete events.
For example, 20 separate
charges of obtaining property by deception on 20 separate days may be filed
rather than a single charge
of obtaining property by deception over a sustained
period. This practice reflects police culture and there is no statutory
requirement
Inflated charges
8.23 Inflated charging involves speculative charging for offences that are
more serious than the available evidence is likely
to support, alongside
charging for less serious offences for which there is evidence. While this may
appear similar to alternative
charging, it differs in that the evidence at the
outset does not credibly support the most serious charges.
Crimes Act 1958
div 1 (19).
26 Submission 11 (Criminal Bar Association (Victoria)).
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) sch 1, 4A(1)(b).
29 Ibid sch 1, 4A. Note that the police must not file a course of conduct
charge for a sexual offence without prior consent from the
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) sch 1, 4A(12).
Is overcharging a problem
in Victoria?
8.24 Victoria Police denied that overcharging is an issue, suggesting that
its charge rate is at the lower end of the spectrum
by comparison with other
Australian jurisdictions.30 It told the Commission that filing alternative
charges is its standard practice,
and claims that this is legitimate
‘as a basis for plea negotiations’.31
8.25 The Criminal Bar Association and the Magistrates’ Court both note
that charges are often laid at the time of an accused’s
arrest, when
police might have little evidence in admissible form available to them.32 In
these circumstances, some disparity between
the charges initially filed and
those prosecuted or pleaded is inevitable.
8.26 While acknowledging that ‘divergence between charges filed by
police and those ultimately prosecuted can be problematic’,
suggested it ‘is understandable that police often file charges for more
serious offences than those ultimately proceeded
8.27 The Magistrates’ Court acknowledged this complexity:
there may be times when more serious charges than are warranted are laid as a
form of negotiation. However, the Court appreciates
that charges are often laid
at the time of an accused’s arrest, when police may have little evidence
in admissible form available
them. As more evidence becomes disclosed and witnesses are identified and
questioned, it is appropriate for charges to be reviewed,
and only those charges
that could be supported by evidence pursued. The prosecution should be
encouraged to review and negotiate
charges as investigation and disclosure
progresses.34
8.28 The Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service reports that in its experience
there is often disparity between charges initially filed
and those ultimately
prosecuted.35
Consequences of
overcharging
8.29 Overcharging is problematic because charges that do not have a strong
evidentiary basis may be discharged at committal; withdrawn
by the prosecution
at some point prior to trial; or lead to an acquittal. It is of course
appropriate that the accused is acquitted
of ill- founded charges, or even
better, is not indicted on those charges, but it would be better still if they
were not charged
8.30 Overcharging undermines fair trial rights, is inefficient, and can have
consequences that are traumatic for victims and witnesses.
Overcharging undermines fair trial rights
8.31 Overcharging may undermine fair trial rights if it leads to unnecessary
delay and prevents timely disposition of evidence-based
charges. The Judicial
Criminal Procedure Manual
says the prosecution
‘should not include every conceivable charge on a charge sheet or
indictment as this is unfair and tends
to impede the proper disposition of the
more serious offences’.36
8.32 Victoria Legal Aid points out that overcharging increases the likelihood
of an accused person being refused bail in circumstances
in which they may be
entitled to bail.37 The Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service also emphasises the
danger of this.38
30 Consultation 19 (Victoria Police).
32 Submissions 11 (Criminal Bar Association (Victoria)), 14
(Magistrates’ Court of Victoria).
33 Submission 4 (Director of Public Prosecutions (Victoria)).
34 Submission 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria).
35 Submission 19 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
36 Judicial College of Victoria, ‘2.1 Charge Sheet and
Indictment’,
Victorian Criminal Proceedings Manual
(Online Manual,
1 March 2017)
www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/eManuals/VCPM/indexpage.htm#27318.htm
[2004] VSC 411
37 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
38 Submission 19 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
Overcharging undermines efficiency
8.33 As well as placing time and resource burdens on the courts, defence, and
prosecutors, Victoria Legal Aid told the Commission
that overcharging can delay
early guilty pleas.39
8.34 One practitioner described overcharging as a ‘very negative
thing’, telling the Commission that in his experience,
many charges at the outset is problematic because psychologically, the tendency
of the accused is to want to respond
by flipping one finger up to the
prosecution.’40
Overcharging can lead to trauma for victims
8.35 The Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse
(RCIRCSA) emphasised the distress felt by victims when
charges are withdrawn or
downgraded, particularly in instances where victims feel the remaining charges
‘do not reflect the
worst abuse or the extent of the abuse they
suffered.’41 RCIRCSA also found:
The later in the course of a prosecution that charges are downgraded or
discontinued, the greater the likely negative impact on
victims and the
criminal justice system. In particular, discontinuing prosecutions close to the
trial date raises significant concerns.42
8.36 Domestic Violence Victoria told the Commission that using overcharging
as a basis for negotiation:
reflects the fact that these things get developed in a vacuum and very much
separate from the experience of the victim. How the victim
might feel about
charges being downgraded is just seen as an unfortunate side-effect ... [the
system has not been developed] with
the victim at the centre.43
8.37 The legal centre knowmore, which represents victims of child sexual
abuse, suggests that decisions to withdraw or downgrade charges
particularly difficult for victims when they do not understand the
prosecutor’s decision or feel as though they
have not been properly
consulted about it’.44
8.38 According to the Victims of Crime Commissioner:
Some victims are relieved if a lesser charge means that their matter
won’t go to trial, they don’t need to give evidence,
offender admits their guilt—other victims can feel completely let down and
8.39 The Victims of Crime Commissioner emphasised that the risk of
participation in the criminal justice system causing ‘secondary
victimisation’ is reduced:
if victims are given information about the process, are kept informed of the
progress of their case and have the opportunity to have
their views
heard—even if the outcome doesn’t result in a conviction or a
lengthy sentence.46
Commission’s
conclusions: addressing overcharging
8.40 While divergence between the charges filed and those prosecuted is
inevitable in some cases, there is a need to reduce the disparity
charges filed by investigating agencies and those prosecuted on indictment.
39 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
40 Consultation 8 (Victoria Legal Aid).
41 Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse,
Criminal Justice
(Consultation Paper, September 2016) 280.
42 Ibid 289.
43 Consultation 14 (Domestic Violence Victoria).
44 Submission 7 (knowmore).
45 Submission 23 (Victims of Crime Commissioner).
Do not introduce charge
certification
8.41 In New South Wales and South Australia, recent reforms require that
police disclose the evidence in the case to the prosecution,
which must then
certify the charges (in New South Wales) or make a charge determination in
respect of the charges (in South Australia)
that will proceed to trial.47
8.42 Some stakeholders suggested that charge certification ‘may be a
useful mechanism for ensuring that appropriate charges
are laid at an early
8.43 In New South Wales, the requirement for charge certification has led to
delay.49 The Director of Public Prosecutions (New South
Wales) told the
Commission he has been reluctant to certify charges until the brief of evidence
is complete, and frequently has to
request additional material from police
following service of the brief.50 He added:
in a way, that’s not unexpected. We have been working closely with the
police and have restructured to align our working groups
with Police Commands.
Senior lawyers are going out and talking to the police and educating them about
what they should provide.51
8.44 The Director commented that ‘it is a work in progress.’ He
said his office will not certify a charge unless it thinks
it has the right
material and if necessary the ODPP will requisition the police until it gets
further material:
This means that the Local Court gets requests to extend the time period for
charge certification, especially in complex matters.52
8.45 NSW Legal Aid told the Commission that sometimes an accused may wish to
plead but is unable to do so under the legislation until
the charges have been
certified.53
8.46 The Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions in South Australia has
also been reluctant to certify charges until a complete
brief of evidence is
provided by South Australia Police.
Although a recent review concluded the delays resulting from the reforms have
been over-stated and ‘Signs to date are positive’,54
the Commission
was told that, in some cases, charges had not been certified twelve months after
they were originally filed. As a
result, magistrates are discharging cases where
certification has not occurred.55
8.47 The logic behind charge certification—of requiring the prosecution
to review charges at an early stage in proceedings—is
sound. Due to the
practical issues associated with it in New South Wales and South Australia,
however, and a lack of clear evidence
concerning its effect on delay in those
states, the Commission does not recommend adopting a requirement for charge
certification
at this point.
Provide charging training
for Victoria Police
8.48 Victoria Police’s position that alternative charging may serve
appropriately as a basis for plea negotiations is at
odds with the need to
ensure that only evidence-based charges are filed.
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Procedure Act 1921
48 Submissions 7 (knowmore), 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
49 Consultations 32 (Local Court of New South Wales), 33 (Director of Public
Prosecutions (New South Wales)).
50 Consultation 33 (Director of Public Prosecutions (New South Wales)).
53 Consultation 34 (Legal Aid New South Wales).
54 While the report found ‘it is too early in the operations of the
reforms to draw any firm conclusions as to [their] impact’,
it concluded
it is possible they have succeeded in reducing delay between the time of the
defendant’s first appearance in
the Magistrates’ Court and
committal. Brian Ross Martin,
Review of the Major Indictable
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
(As Amended by the Summary Procedure
(Indictable Offences) Amendment Act 2017
(Report, 13 September 2019) 99
[198] see also [387].
55 Consultation 28 (South Australia Major Indictable Review).
8.49 Victoria Police should ensure police informants are trained to charge
appropriately on the basis of the evidence, and not to
view ‘the use of
alternative charges to allow for early pleas’56 as tactically
advantageous.
8.50 This training needs to be provided for both junior members and
experienced officers and should be regularly updated. The work
of drafting
charges needs to be treated as an integral part of police officers’
duties, not as an adjunct to their operational
Require earlier
involvement of DPP in charging
8.51 In order to reduce disparity between charges initially filed and those
ultimately prosecuted, the DPP should be involved in reviewing
and instructing
on the most appropriate charges in serious criminal matters at an earlier
8.52 Earlier involvement of the OPP in advising investigating agencies on the
most appropriate charges, and in reviewing at an early
stage the charges filed
by the investigating agency, would strengthen the separation of the
police’s investigative functions
from their role
in prosecuting offences. The police’s prosecutorial role should be
minimal in relation to indictable offences.
8.53 Twenty years ago the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General recommended
that DPPs review charges laid by police at a much earlier
proceedings.57 It also suggested that DPPs should provide prosecution advice
during the investigative process in complex
cases. On its face this might appear
to threaten the separation between investigation and prosecution functions, but
the separation
can be maintained by ensuring that the DPP’s advice is
confined to ‘reviewing the sufficiency of evidence, advising on
be obtained and suggesting appropriate charges’, as the committee then
recommended.58
8.54 There is widespread support among stakeholders for earlier involvement
by the DPP59 in providing charging advice.
8.55 Victoria Legal Aid suggested:
there would be substantial value in having earlier support from the
prosecuting agency’s lawyers ...This would assist police
investigators to
advance the preparation of the complete hand-up brief in accordance with the
rules of evidence and admissibility,
to ensure that appropriate evidence is
obtained and included, and ensure that the process is completed in a timely
8.56 Victoria Legal Aid clarified that it ‘does not recommend that the
prosecution provide investigative advice, rather, pre-charge
advice about what
evidence would be required to support the charge.’61
56 Consultation 19 (Victoria Police).
57 Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Report of the Deliberative
Forum on Criminal Trial Reform
(Report, June 2000).
59 Or other prosecuting agency, such as the CDPP.
60 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
8.57 The Magistrates’ Court supported DPP involvement ‘at the
earliest possible stage of decision making in relation to
the charges’.62
When this should occur ‘would be a matter for consultation with the OPP.
In the Court’s view, the
process could easily commence with the service of
the [hand-up brief], or as early as the filing hearing’.63
8.58 The County Court supported improvement of procedures for charging,
saying that it supports the model adopted in the United Kingdom
whereby senior
lawyers from
the prosecution service play a role in determining the appropriate charges.
The Court submitted that ‘it stands to reason that
the DPP should also
file the charges at the commencement of the proceeding,’ recognising that
this process would increase resource
demands on the DPP.64
8.59 Victoria Police argued that decisions regarding what charges to file
should remain with Victoria Police, ‘but [it should
have ...] early access
to advice from [the] DPP.’65 While this occurs currently, Victoria Police
claimed ‘it is not as
widespread as desirable.’66
8.60 The Commission concludes that it is appropriate to give decision-making
power in relation to charging indictable matters to the
DPP in some
circumstances. How the DPP is involved in providing charging instructions will
differ depending on the nature of the
alleged offending and its
investigation.
Charge immediately following apprehension—cases
where remand is sought
8.61 It is generally accepted that it may be necessary in some instances for
the police to file charges before an investigation is
complete. This may be
because the police believe an alleged offender poses a risk to the community and
should be remanded in custody
pending prosecution.
8.62 In South Australia, the Office of the Department of Public Prosecutions
(SA ODPP) undertakes an adjudication in all cases in
which a person is charged
with a major indictable offence, including when charges need to be filed without
the benefit of a full
investigation. The SA ODPP provides advice to the South
Australia Police on the appropriate charge or charges that should be filed
provides advice about the likely evidence required.67
8.63 Requiring adjudication at an early stage and for all cases was a part of
South Australia’s Major Indictable Reform package.
In his review of the
reforms, the Hon. Brian Martin AO QC described the availability of
adjudication for all cases as a ‘sensible
administrative step
... that should be encouraged and appropriately resourced.’68
8.64 To implement a similar process in Victoria would be expensive and
would involve a major cultural shift. Given this is not
a system that
stakeholders have advocated for, the Commission does not recommend placing
onerous adjudication obligations on the
Even so, adjudication could be considered in the future if the South
Australian experience demonstrates that:
• it is practical for the DPP to adjudicate charges in every case
involving a suspected indictable offence
• adjudication leads to more accurate charging.
62 Submission 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria).
64 Submission 20 (County Court of Victoria).
65 Consultation 19 (Victoria Police).
67 Brian Ross Martin,
Review of the Major Indictable
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
(As Amended by the Summary Procedure
(Indictable Offences) Amendment Act 2017
(Report, 13 September 2019) 27. See
pages 46–50 for an explanation of the adjudication.
68 Ibid 92.
8.65 In instances in which charges must be laid soon after the accused is
apprehended, the informant should not be required to seek
nor the DPP required
to provide pre-charge instructions. The charges should be reviewed by the DPP
when it assumes carriage of the
matter. There should be a formal requirement
that the DPP review the charges within seven days of receiving the hand-up
from the informant and prior to serving it on the accused.
Charge following investigation
8.66 There are some matters that can be thoroughly investigated and a brief
of evidence prepared before charges are filed. The New
South Wales DPP
In matters that lend themselves to it, the police need to have an adequate
brief before arrest. Especially in sexual assault cases,
police need to check
all the evidence and supporting material beforehand.69
8.67 Where there is an opportunity to investigate alleged serious offending
prior to arrest, the investigating agency should prepare
an ‘initial
charge brief’ for review by the DPP. It should contain:
• a summary of the alleged indictable offending and available
• a draft charge sheet.
8.68 The DPP should be required to review initial charge briefs and provide
instructions to the informant as to the suitability of
the proposed charges
according to the evidence presented.
8.69 The DPP’s instructions should be binding on the informant. This
would entrench the distinction between the role of investigative
agencies to
investigate crime and the DPP to prosecute it.
8.70 This distinction enhances the independence and impartiality of
prosecution decision making. It recognises that the police’s
current role
in prosecuting indictable matters (along with summary offences) in the
Magistrates’ Court is a historical legacy,
is inefficient and may lower
justice standards because:
• prosecuting indictable crime is not a ‘core function’ of
investigating agencies
• investigating agency personnel need not be legally qualified.70
69 Consultation 33 (Director of Public Prosecutions (New South Wales)).
70 Chris Corns, ‘Police Prosecutions in Australia and New Zealand: Some
Comparisons’
[2000] UTasLawRw 10
(2000) 19(2)
University of Tasmania Law Review
Improve disclosure and
early engagement
8.71 Victoria Legal Aid argued:
the most effective way to ensure that charges are amended at the earliest
possible stage in a case is to ensure that the available
evidence has been
properly disclosed, and the parties have been properly funded and incentivised
to consider the evidence at the
earliest stages in proceedings.71
8.72 Recommendations to ensure full and early disclosure are discussed in
detail in Chapter 9, and recommendations to support early
involvement of the DPP
and experienced practitioners are set out in Chapter 7.
Codify the DPP’s
power to withdraw charges
8.73 There may be a need to withdraw, add or amend charges during the
course of a case. The CPA does not specifically allow
the DPP to withdraw
charges.72 According to the DPP:
There are differences of opinion as to whether the prosecution gives notice
of its decision to withdraw charges to a magistrate or
applies to a magistrate
to make the decision.73
8.74 Given the differences of opinion cited by the DPP, the Commission
recommends that the CPA should be amended to explicitly
set out the power of
the DPP to decide to withdraw charges. This power should be subject to the
Court’s inherent power to avoid
an abuse of process.
71 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
72 Currently the Magistrates’ Court can order that a charge sheet be
amended in any manner that the court thinks necessary,
required amendment cannot be made without injustice to the accused:
Procedure Act 2009
The DPP says that recent Court of
Appeal obiter has called into question its power to withdraw charges and give
its decision to the court: Submission 4 (Director of Public
Prosecutions).
73 Submission 4 (Director of Public Prosecutions).
Consulting victims about
charging decisions
8.75 Although the DPP’s decision about what charges should be filed on
indictment should ultimately be made independently,74
the DPP is required to
consult with victims and consider their views regarding certain charging
decisions. The
Victims Charter Act 2006
(Vic) requires the DPP to seek
victims’ views before deciding to:
• substantially modify charges
• discontinue a prosecution
• accept a plea of guilty to a lesser charge.75
8.76 If a decision is made on these issues, the DPP must inform victims and
provide reasons as soon as reasonably practicable.76
8.77 Such consultations recognise that victims have an interest in the
decision, and ensure victims are treated with respect.77 This
can result in
victims feeling fairly treated and able to accept the outcome of a
prosecution.78 There is some research to suggest
that victims who perceive
procedures to be fair suffer less symptoms of trauma than those who felt they
were treated unfairly.79
8.78 Citing the experience of its clients,80 knowmore suggested the quality
of information provided to victims and their ability to
understand and engage
meaningfully in the consultation process has been inadequate.81 Amendments to
Victims Charter Act
in 2018 requiring greater consultation, and initiatives
by the DPP to strengthen communication with victims, should address these
8.79 In 2018 the DPP adopted a ‘Discontinuance Review Framework’
that sets out a detailed procedure for obtaining victims’
views about
discontinuing a prosecution. It also requires prosecutors to inform victims of a
decision to discontinue before the decision
is announced in court.82
8.80 Also in 2018 the DPP commissioned the Centre for Innovative Justice
(CIJ) to conduct research into victims’ experience
of their consultations
with OPP lawyers about resolution decisions. The research found that while OPP
lawyers can and do consult
effectively
with victims about resolution decisions, there is room for improvement.83 The
CIJ recommended that:
• the OPP develop a best practice guide for communicating with and
consulting victims. It proposed a guide to support OPP lawyers
relationship of trust with victims; communicate effectively; manage
victims’ expectations and any misunderstandings;
and consult about case
resolution proposals. It said the guide should be provided to all lawyers and
Witness Assistance Service staff.
• the OPP liaise with Victoria Police to identify strategies to support
police officers to communicate effectively with victims
processes and decisions, recognising that police interactions with victims often
lead to victims having unrealistic
expectations of the prosecution process.
74 The Director’s policy explains that ‘Prosecutors represent the
DPP, not the government, the police, the victim or any
other person’:
Director of Public Prosecutions, Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria,
Policy of the Director of Public Prosecutions for Victoria
(17 December
2019) 6 [14].
Victims Charter Act 2006
77 Centre for Innovative Justice,
Communicating with Victims about
Resolution Decisions: A Study of Victims’ Experiences and Communication
(Report, April 2019) 20.
78 Ibid 20–21.
79 Jo-Anne Wemmers, ‘Victims’ Experiences in the Criminal
Justice System and Their Recovery from Crime’
(2013) 19(3)
International Review of Victimology
80 As well as the experience of victims reported in: Royal Commission into
Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse,
Criminal Justice Report
(Report, August 2017)
–VI, 346–347.
81 Submission 7 (knowmore).
82 Director of Public Prosecutions, Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria,
Discontinuance Review Framework
(Guide, 26 March 2019)
http://www.opp.vic.gov.au/Resources/Discontinuance-Review-Framework
83 Centre for Innovative Justice, RMIT University,
Communicating with
Victims about Resolution Decisions: A Study of Victims’ Experiences and
Communication Needs
(Report, April 2019) 8.
• the OPP liaise with court representatives to highlight the value of
providing sufficient time to consult with victims about
proposals for
resolution.84
8.81 The OPP told the Commission that it is in the process of implementing
the recommendations of the CIJ report, including training
staff in line with the
best practice guide.85 It reported that multi-disciplinary teams have been
established, involving
trial lawyers and social workers from the Victims and Witness Assistance
Service, who together develop and implement victim engagement
plans for all
indictable prosecutions.86
8.82 If a victim has a complaint regarding the prosecution’s compliance
Victims Charter Act
, they can address them to the OPP and if they are
dissatisfied with the response they may make a complaint to the Victims of Crime
Commissioner.87
84 The CIJ said this was necessary because the OPP is sometimes pressured to
make a decision quickly when pleas are received at the
last minute: Centre for
Innovative Justice,
Communicating with Victims about Resolution Decisions: A
Study of Victims, Experiences and Communication Needs
(Report, April 2019)
85 Letter from Office of Public Prosecutions to Victorian Law Reform
Commission, 19 December 2019.
Victims and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2018
inserting new Division 3A to
Victims of Crime Commissioner Act
Introduction
Current disclosure regime
101 Problems with disclosure
102 Commission’s conclusions: improving disclosure
Introduction
9.1 Fair trials, and fairness in the conduct of pre-trial negotiations,
require early and adequate disclosure. This ensures that the
accused understands
the evidentiary basis for the charge and is able to prepare a defence.
Inadequate disclosure can be ‘a
potent source of injustice’.1
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
recognises that a person charged with a criminal offence is entitled to be
‘informed promptly and in detail of the nature
and reason for the
9.2 Disclosure helps to redress the imbalance that would otherwise
characterise an adversarial system in which investigators and prosecution
the backing of the state. As Justice Kevin Bell points out, the prosecution
usually ‘enters a criminal trial with
two advantages: having superior
resources and having conducted the investigation that led to the charges being
Requiring the prosecution to disclose all relevant material to
the accused, including material that may undermine the prosecution
case,4 goes
some way to achieving ‘equality of arms’ between the parties, and
thus a fair trial.5
9.3 Aside from its importance for fair trial rights, disclosure can
facilitate early resolution and early identification of the issues
in dispute.
Victoria Legal Aid told the Commisison it is of ‘critical’
importance that:
the case against the accused be adequately disclosed [early in the pre-trial
stage of proceedings]. This ensures that the accused
and their legal
representative has sufficient information to enable them to enter into
meaningful negotiations and potentially enter
an early guilty plea.6
9.4 This chapter describes Victoria’s current disclosure regime,
including the prosecution’s general duty of disclosure
at common law and
the distinct disclosure obligations imposed by the
Criminal Procedure Act
(Vic) (CPA) on the informant and the prosecution. The chapter outlines
current approaches in New South Wales and the United Kingdom,
where reforms have
been introduced to improve disclosure. It discusses the problem of inadequate
disclosure in Victoria and concludes
by considering ways to improve
disclosure.
[1993] 2 All ER 577
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
Ragg v Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
[2008] VSC 1
[2008] VSC 1
(2008) 18 VR 300.
BA v Attorney-General
[2017] VSC 259
[2017] VSC 259
319 FLR 329.
Ragg v Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
[2008] VSC 1
6 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
Current disclosure
Disclosure at common
R v Farquharson
, the Victorian Court of Appeal said:
It is axiomatic that there must be full disclosure in criminal trials. The
prosecution has a duty to disclose
all relevant material
. A failure of
proper disclosure can result in a miscarriage of justice.7
9.6 The scope of the duty to disclose extends beyond material that the
prosecution intends to rely on for its own case. In
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
, Justice Bell set out an extensive
list of material that is disclosable at common law, including material in the
possession of or
known to the prosecution that may:
• undermine the prosecution case
• assist the defence case
• exculpate the accused
• affect the credit of prosecution witnesses.8 Additional disclosable
material includes:
• statements of material witnesses whom the prosecution does
intend to call
• ‘documents, photographs and other real evidence, including
scientific analysis’.9
9.7 While emphasising the breadth of the prosecution’s disclosure
obligations, Justice Bell noted that:
require the disclosure of material that might undermine
the defence case, such as matters affecting the credibility of defence
the defence is responsible for making its own inquiries in this
9.8 The prosecution’s duty of disclosure extends beyond material in its
possession or that is known to it. The duty encompasses
an obligation to
material likely to be
relevant, and therefore disclosable. In
Anile v The Queen
Victorian Court of Appeal noted that:
the rule requiring disclosure applies in relation to material both in the
possession of the prosecution, and material which it should
obtain. In other
words, the obligation to disclose includes, in an appropriate case, an
obligation to make enquiries.11
9.9 When considering whether non-disclosure has infringed on an
accused’s right to a fair trial, it is immaterial whether
the failure
to disclose material is attributable to the
informant or the prosecution. This was confirmed in
Farquharson.
of the grounds of appeal in that case was the informant’s failure to
disclose, to
the prosecutor or the accused, pending criminal
charges against the prosecution’s key witness. The Court accepted the
of Public Prosecutions’ concession that ‘there is no
distinction for disclosure purposes to be drawn between the prosecution
the police informant’.13
R v Farquharson
[2009] VSCA 307
[2009] VSCA 307
(2009) 26 VR 410
added. See also
Metro Trains Melbourne Pty Ltd v Paciocco
[2017] VSC 778
Ragg v Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
[2008] VSC 1
[2008] VSC 1
(2008) 18 VR 300
BA v Attorney-General
[2017] VSC 259
Ragg v Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
[2008] VSC 1
[73], cited
BA v Attorney-General
[2017] VSC 259
10 Ibid, emphasis added.
Anile v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 235
[130], citing
AJ v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 215
(2011) 32 VR 614
, 620 [22].
R v Farquharson
[2009] VSCA 307
(2009) 26 VR 410.
Cannon v Tahche
[2002] VSCA 84
(2002) 5 VR 317
[56]–[60] and
Mallard v The Queen [2005] HCA 68,
[2005] HCA 68
(2005) 224 CLR 125
R v Farquharson
[2009] VSCA 307
Policy of the Director for Public Prosecutions for Victoria
Director’s Policy
) guides disclosure by the Director of Public
Prosecutions (DPP). Based on the test set out in
R v Spiteri
adopted by the Supreme Court of Victoria in
Farquharson
Director’s Policy
requires prosecutors to disclose to the accused
‘any material which is known to them which, on their sensible
• is relevant or possibly relevant to an issue in the case; or
• raises or possibly raises a new issue that is not apparent from the
evidence the prosecution proposes to use; or
• holds out a real as opposed to fanciful prospect of providing a line
of inquiry which goes to [the] above.’16
9.11 Also mirroring the position at common law,17 the
notes that the prosecution’s duty of disclosure does not extend
to disclosing material:
• ‘relevant only to the credibility of the defence (as distinct
from prosecution) witnesses
• relevant only to the credibility of the accused
• relevant only because it might deter an accused from giving false
evidence or raising an issue of fact which might be shown
to be false
• for the purposes of preventing an accused from creating a trap for
themselves, if at the time the prosecution became aware
of the material it was
not a relevant issue at trial’.18
9.12 Nor are prosecutors required by the
Director’s Policy
disclose material that is subject to a claim of public interest immunity or
legal professional privilege, or if there is a statutory
basis for not
disclosing the material.19 These exceptions are discussed further below.
Statutory disclosure
requirements
of the CPA outlines how the prosecution case is to be disclosed
during committal proceedings.
includes further provisions relating to
disclosure after an accused is committed for trial or a direct indictment is
The informant’s statutory disclosure
obligations
9.14 Unless the accused consents to service of a plea brief,20 the informant
must prepare a hand-up brief containing the evidence
in the case.21 The hand-up
brief must be served on the accused,22 filed with the court, and forwarded to
9.15 The brief must include
• copies of material on which the prosecution intends to rely in the
committal proceeding
• copies or details of other material in the possession of the
prosecution that is relevant to the alleged offending but which
the prosecution
does not intend to tender at the committal hearing, or on which the prosecution
does not intend to rely.24
R v Spiteri
[2004] 61 NSWCCA 321
, (2004) 61 NSWLR 369.
R v Farquharson
[2009] VSCA 307
[213], cited in
Gild v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 317
16 Director of Public Prosecutions, Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria,
Policy of the Director of Public Prosecutions for Victoria
(17 December
2019) 6 [15]
http://www.opp.vic.gov.au/Resources/Policies
R v Farquharson
[2009] VSCA 307
[214], citing
R v Spiteri
[2004] 61 NSWCCA 321.
18 Director of Public Prosecutions, Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria,
Policy of the Director of Public Prosecutions for Victoria
December 2019) 6 [16]
http://www.opp.vic.gov.au/Resources/Policies
19 The issue of how and when objections may be made to disclosure on public
interest immunity or other grounds is discussed below.
[insert paragraph
cross-reference] Director of Public Prosecutions, Office of Public Prosecutions
Policy of the Director of Public Prosecutions for Victoria
December 2019) 6 [15]
http://www.opp.vic.gov.au/Resources/Policies
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
This requirement only applies if the DPP is conducting the
committal proceeding.
See Chapter 2 for the requirements of what must be included
in a hand-up brief.
9.16 The informant’s disclosure obligations are continuing.25 If, after
service of the hand-up brief, the informant obtains
or becomes aware of material
that should have been included or listed in the hand-up brief, the informant
must serve copies of this
material on the accused as soon as practicable.26
Copies must also be filed with the court and forwarded to the DPP.27
9.17 Through the case direction notice, which must be filed jointly by the
parties before the committal mention hearing,28 the accused
may request:
• the production of material that was listed in the hand-up brief29
• copies of material
included in the hand-up brief but that
the accused considers ought to have been included.30
9.18 The informant may object to the production of material requested by the
accused on any ground:
• referred to in
of the CPA, which covers material the
informant considers would, or would be reasonably likely to:
- prejudice the investigation of a contravention or possible contravention
of the law or prejudice the enforcement or proper administration
of the law in
a particular instance
- prejudice the fair hearing of the charge against a person or the impartial
adjudication of a particular case
- disclose, or enable a person to ascertain, the identity of a confidential
source of information in relation to the enforcement or
administration of the
- disclose policing methods in a way likely to prejudice the effectiveness of
those methods
- endanger the lives or physical safety of people engaged in or connected
with law enforcement, including those who have provided
confidential
information
- endanger the life or physical safety of a person or a family member in
cases involving family violence
- result in the disclosure of child abuse material to the accused
personally31
• referred to in
section 114
of the CPA, which provides that the
informant must not, with limited exceptions, disclose in materials provided to
the accused the
address or telephone number of any person.32
9.19 In addition, the informant may claim public interest immunity over
certain material. The informant may withhold material on the
basis of public
interest immunity if the material relates to ‘matters of state’ and
the court determines that the public
interest in preserving the material’s
secrecy or confidentiality outweighs the public interest in disclosing it.33 In
cases, public interest immunity is most commonly claimed in respect of
material that may identify police informers or policing methods.
This requirement only applies if the DPP is conducting the
committal proceeding. 27 Ibid
s 119(e)(i).
s 119(e)(ii).
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Evidence Act 2008
9.20 If the accused seeks the production of material and the informant
objects to its production, the Magistrates’ Court may
hear and determine
the objection at the committal mention.34
The prosecution’s statutory disclosure
obligations
Section 185
of the CPA places a continuing obligation of disclosure on
the prosecution commencing after an accused is committed for trial or
indictment is filed.35 The prosecution must serve on the accused copies of (or
provide a list of) any material that comes
into its possession that would have
been required to be included in the hand-up brief.36
9.22 The prosecution is not, however, required to disclose material that it
is required or permitted to withhold under any statute
or rule of law.37 This
captures cases in which the prosecution may object to producing material on the
basis of public interest
immunity or on any of the grounds set out in
of the CPA and discussed earlier in relation to the informant’s
statutory disclosure duties.
9.23 The CPA expressly states that nothing it contains ‘derogates from
a duty otherwise imposed on the prosecution to disclose
to the accused material
relevant to the charge.’38 Thus the prosecution’s statutory
disclosure obligations co-exist with
its disclosure obligations at common
Approaches to disclosure
in other jurisdictions
New South Wales
9.24 In New South Wales, the prosecution is responsible for serving the brief
of evidence on the accused.39 Informants prepare the
brief and since 2001 have
had a statutory duty of disclosure to the New South Wales DPP.40 The
of Public Prosecutions Act 1986
(NSW) imposes a duty on law enforcement
officers investigating alleged offences:
to disclose to the Director all relevant information, documents or other
things obtained during the investigation that might reasonably
be expected to
assist the case for the prosecution or the case for the accused person.41
9.25 The law enforcement officer must complete and sign a disclosure
certificate acknowledging:
• the officer’s duty to disclose all relevant material to the
DPP, and explaining that the officer understands the meaning
of ‘relevant
material’ to include:
all relevant information, documents or other things obtained during the
investigation that might reasonably be expected to assist
the case for the
prosecution
or the case for the accused person
• that the duty to disclose continues until the DPP decides not to
prosecute the accused for the alleged offence, the accused
is found guilty or
acquitted, or the prosecution is terminated
• that the duty to disclose is subject to claims of privilege, public
interest immunity, statutory immunity, and statutory publication
restrictions.42
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
s 125(1)(e).
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Director of Public Prosecutions Act 1986
; in effect
since 19 November 2001.
The duty only arises if the DPP is exercising a
prosecutorial function, which may include providing advice to an informant
Director of Public Prosecutions Regulation 2015
[NSW] sch 1,
emphasis added.
9.26 The disclosure certificate also includes a statement that the officer
certifies the truth of information provided in attached
schedules.43 These
schedules acknowledge the existence of, and describe, relevant material not
contained in the brief of evidence
• is the subject of a claim of privilege, public interest immunity or
statutory immunity
• is the subject of a statutory publication restriction and can be
disclosed without contravening the restriction
• is not the subject of a claim of privilege or immunity or a statutory
publication restriction.44
9.27 Where relevant material is the subject of a privilege, public interest
immunity or statutory immunity, the officer is required
• disclose to the DPP ‘the existence and nature of all such
• retain the material for as long as the officer’s duty to
disclose exists
• provide the material to the DPP on request.45
9.28 The disclosure certificate must also be signed by the law enforcement
officer’s superior officer. The merits of disclosure
certificates are
discussed below.
United Kingdom
9.29 In the United Kingdom, investigating agencies and their officers have
duties of disclosure to the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS),
responsible for disclosing material to the accused.46 The investigating agencies
and the CPS are expected to work collaboratively
to ensure full disclosure to
the accused47 and to engage with disclosure issues from an early stage in
proceedings, especially in
large or complicated cases.48
9.30 Material is disclosable to the accused, subject to public interest
considerations, if:
• it is relevant
• it has not previously been disclosed
• it ‘might reasonably be considered capable of undermining the
case for the prosecution ... or of assisting the case
for the accused.’
9.31 Material is relevant if it appears to have ‘some bearing on
[an] offence under investigation or [a] person being investigated,
surrounding circumstances of the case, unless it is incapable of having
any impact on the case’.50
9.32 Dedicated police disclosure officers are appointed in all criminal
investigations.51 In order to identify material that
may be disclosable, they
examine or listen to all relevant material retained by the investigator that
does not form part of the prosecution
43 Ibid sch 1.
45 Ibid. The disclosure certificate also includes an acknowledgement that if
the officer objects to the disclosure of material that
is subject to a claim of
privilege, public interest immunity or statutory immunity, the officer
‘can request a conference with
the responsible solicitor in the Office of
the Director of Public Prosecutions to discuss reasons for this.’
46 The duties are set out in the
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act
(UK) and the Ministry of Justice (UK),
Criminal Procedure and
Investigations Act 1996 (section 23(1))
(Code of Practice, March 2015). The
application of the Code is limited to England and Wales: Ministry of Justice
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 (section 23(1))
(Code of Practice, March 2015) [1.4]. In addition to their statutory
disclosure obligations, investigators have common law disclosure
obligations to
disclose at an early stage material that ‘would assist the accused in the
preparation of the defence case, including
the making of a bail
application’: Crown Prosecution Service (England and Wales),
(Report, 14 December 2018) 9. See also
R v DPP ex parte Lee
[1999] EWHC Admin 242
[1999] 2 All ER 737.
47 The prosecution team, which includes investigators and the CPS, should
‘have at an early stage an agreed strategy and plan,
with sufficient
resources attached, for completing the disclosure exercise.’ Crown
Prosecution Service (England and Wales),
Disclosure Manual
(Report, 14
December 2018) 22. If in doubt about what material to disclose to the
prosecution, the officer responsible for disclosure
should liaise with the
prosecutor: Crown Prosecution Service (England and Wales),
Disclosure Manual
(Report, 14 December 2018) 27.
48 Crown Prosecution Service (England and Wales),
Disclosure Manual
(Report, 14 December 2018) 29.
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 (UK)
Ministry of Justice (UK), Crown Prosecution Service (England and Wales),
Disclosure Manual
(Report, 14 December 2018) 5.
50 Ministry of Justice (UK),
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act
1996 (section 23(1))
(Code of Practice, March 2015) [2.1].
51 The disclosure officer need not be a sworn police officer, but may be a
‘police support employee’: Crown Prosecution
Service (England and
Disclosure Manual
(Report, 14 December 2018) 11–13.
Investigations conducted by agencies other than the police should
same disclosure procedures: Crown Prosecution Service (England and
Disclosure Manual
(Report, 14 December 2018), 4–5.
52 Director of Public Prosecutions, Crown Prosecution Service (England and
Disclosure Manual
(Report, 14 December 2018) 12. The
officer in charge of the investigation is responsible for ensuring that all
relevant material
is revealed to the disclosure officer, except in cases
of highly sensitive material. The existence of this material should
revealed directly to the prosecutor: Director of Public Prosecutions,
Crown Prosecution Service (England and Wales),
Disclosure Manual
14 December 2018), 29.
They prepare schedules of materials that are potentially disclosable for
provision to the prosecutor.53 They must certify to the prosecutor
existence of all relevant material retained in the case has been revealed to the
prosecutor.54
9.33 The prosecutor must review the schedules and decide what material is
disclosable and must be provided to the accused.55 The schedules
themselves are
also provided to the accused, with the exception of schedules of material
subject to public interest immunity.56 If
the prosecutor believes it is not in
the public interest to disclose the material, the prosecutor must either
withdraw the prosecution
or apply to the court for a ruling as to whether the
public interest requires disclosure.57
9.34 If the accused believes that the prosecution has failed to disclose
material that should have been disclosed, the accused may
apply to the court for
a disclosure order.58
9.35 The investigating agency’s disclosure duties to the prosecution59
and the prosecution’s disclosure duties to the
accused continue at least
until the accused is acquitted or convicted or the prosecutor decides not to
proceed with the case.60 Where
the accused is convicted and a custodial sentence
is imposed, relevant material must be retained until after the convicted person
has been released from custody.61 If an appeal against
conviction is in progress when the person is released from custody,62 all
material that may be relevant must be retained until the
determined.63
9.36 Disclosure failures in the United Kingdom have been a cause of concern
and the subject of public inquiries since at least 2011.
The House of Commons
Justice Committee’s report,
Disclosure of Evidence in Criminal Cases,
lists ‘six reports in as many years that have highlighted issues and
made recommendations’ for improved disclosure.64
The Justice
Committee’s consideration of the issue was prompted by a series of cases
in 2017 and 2018 that collapsed or had
guilty verdicts overturned on appeal
because of errors in the disclosure process.65
9.37 After reviewing the United Kingdom’s disclosure regime, the
Justice Committee concluded that the legislative framework
principles governing disclosure were adequate but that these principles were
not applied consistently by police
officers and prosecutors. The Committee
attributed the failures to:
• a culture within both police and prosecution that views disclosure as
‘an administrative add on’ rather than ‘a
core justice
• inadequate skills and technology to review the large volumes of
digital material that are now routinely collected by the police
53 Separate schedules are prepared for material that: could undermine the
case for the prosecution or assist the case for the accused;
is non- sensitive
and which the prosecution does not intend to use; is sensitive (meaning that it
may be subject to public interest
immunity) and which the prosecution does not
intend to use: Director of Public Prosecutions, Crown Prosecution Service
(England and
Disclosure Manual
(Report, 14 December 2018). As
noted above (footnote 52), in exceptional circumstances, sensitive material need
not be listed in a
schedule. Instead, its existence may be revealed separately
to the prosecution by the investigator who knows the details of the
54 Crown Prosecution Service (England and Wales),
Disclosure Manual
(Report, 14 December 2018) 12. A series of certifications are
required to cover the fact the duty of disclosure is continuing:
Prosecution Service (England and Wales),
Disclosure Manual
(Report, 14 December 2018) 29.
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996
(UK) ss 3, 7A. The
material may be provided in the form of copies or made available for
inspection.
56 Crown Prosecution Service (England and Wales),
Disclosure Manual
(Report, 14 December 2018) 24.
57 Ibid 29.
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996
‘Material must not be disclosed to...the extent that the court, on an
application by the prosecutor, concludes that
it is not in the public interest
to disclose it and orders accordingly.’
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996
(UK) s 8. The
accused may only do so after the accused has provided a ‘defence
statement’, setting out in general
terms the nature of the
accused’s defence: see
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996
59 Director of Public Prosecutions, Crown Prosecution Service (England and
Disclosure Manual
(Report, 14 December 2018) 29, 30.
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996
(UK) s 7A; Crown
Prosecution Service (England and Wales),
Disclosure Manual
(Report, 14
December 2018) 5.
61 Ministry of Justice (UK),
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act
1996 (section 23(1))
(Code of Practice, March 2015) [5.9]. In other
instances, relevant material must be retained at least until six months from the
of conviction: ibid.
62 Or at the end of the six-month period after conviction if a custodial
order has not been imposed.
63 Ministry of Justice (UK),
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act
1996 (section 23(1))
(Code of Practice, March 2015) [5.10].
64 House of Commons Justice Committee, Parliament of the United Kingdom,
Disclosure of Evidence in Criminal Cases
(Final Report, 17 July 2018)11
65 Ibid 4 [2].
• inadequate guidelines for handling sensitive material66
• inadequate funding for the police, Crown Prosecution Service,
criminal defence and legal aid.67
Problems with
9.38 Failure to provide the accused with early and adequate disclosure is a
widely acknowledged and persistent issue in Victoria,
but the problem is not
unique to this state—ensuring adequate disclosure is a challenge in most
common law jurisdictions. In
Victoria, the Magistrates’ Court notes
Disclosure is always an issue, especially in complex matters ... Disclosure
issues in the higher [courts] are frequently commented
upon as an expensive
cause of delay.
Experience in other jurisdictions ... shows that no matter the legislative
requirements for disclosure, the lack of it is a major
cause of trial delay and
9.39 The DPP believes there are three main reasons why adequate and timely
disclosure is not consistently provided in Victoria:
• police sometimes misunderstand their disclosure obligations
• police often wait to see whether the defence requests disclosure of
specific items rather than providing appropriate disclosure
• police tend to merge the concepts of disclosure and public interest
immunity.69
9.40 The DPP’s views were echoed by others, who attributed inadequate
disclosure to:
• lack of clarity among investigating agencies, particularly police
informants, about their disclosure obligations to the accused
and the DPP,
especially about what material is disclosable70
• failure by investigating agencies, particularly Victoria Police, to
prioritise their disclosure obligations to the accused
and the DPP, and to
devise appropriate internal systems to facilitate adequate and early
disclosure71
• delay in seeking and obtaining forensic reports, particularly those
provided by Victoria Police forensic services.72
9.41 The Commission heard there is a tendency among police informants to
define ‘relevant’ evidence narrowly, with reference
primarily to
evidence that corroborates the allegations.73 The result is that exculpatory
evidence is not routinely disclosed. The
Law Institute of Victoria cited
‘numerous’ cases where cross-examination of a witness at a committal
hearing revealed
the witness had taken part in a photo-board identification
process during which the witness failed to identify the accused, yet no
reference to this was made in the hand-up brief.74
66 Ibid 3 [9].
67 House of Commons Justice Committee, Parliament of the United Kingdom,
Disclosure of Evidence in Criminal Cases
(Final Report, 17 July 2018) 3,
12–17. The National Police Chiefs’ Council, College of Policing, and
CPS have collaborated
on a ‘National Disclosure Improvement Plan’
to, among other things: modernise the prosecution’s data management
systems; review how sensitive material is handled, stored and disclosed;
provide specialised disclosure training to investigators
and disclosure
officers; and update the disclosure training provided by the College of
Policing: National Police Chiefs’
Council, College of Policing and Crown
Prosecution Service (UK),
National Disclosure
Improvement Plan
(Report, January 2018), National Police Chiefs’
Council, College of Policing and Crown Prosecution Service (UK),
Disclosure Improvement Plan—Progress Update
(Report, Spring 2019);
Crown Prosecution Service (England and Wales), ‘Joint National Disclosure
Improvement Plan—June
Publications
(Web Page, 2019)
www.cps.gov.uk/publication/joint-national-disclosure-
improvement-plan-june-update>
68 Submission 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria). The
Magistrates’ Court refers specifically in this quote to other
Magistrates’ Court, this points to the need
to retain the opportunity to
cross-examine witnesses during committal hearings in Victoria. The Court
says that cross-examination
frequently alerts the court and the defence
to material that has not been fully or adequately disclosed. This argument is
addressed separately in Chapter 11.
69 Submission 4 (Director of Public Prosecutions (Victoria)).
70 Consultations 10 (Law Institute of Victoria), 19 (Victoria Police);
Submissions 11 (Criminal Bar Association (Victoria)), 13 (Victoria
Legal Aid),
24 (Law Institute of Victoria).
71 Consultations 10 (Law Institute of Victoria), 12 (Shepparton
Magistrates’ Court); Submission 11 (Criminal Bar Association
(Victoria)).
72 Consultation 1 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service); Submission 13
(Victoria Legal Aid).
73 Submissions 11 (Criminal Bar Association (Victoria)), 24 (Law Institute of
74 Submission 24 (Law Institute of Victoria).
9.42 Another issue is apparent systemic failure by Victoria Police to ensure
that the DPP and the accused are told about the existence
of material that may
be subject to statutory or public interest immunity claims. The Royal
Commission into the Management
of Police Informants is currently inquiring
into matters relating to Victoria Police’s use and management of
sources. One of its terms of reference is to consider the appropriateness
of Victoria Police practices around the disclosure or non-disclosure
prosecuting authorities of the use of human sources.75
9.43 Victoria Police acknowledged that inconsistent disclosure by police
informants is an issue but told the Commission there is
‘improved transparency, predictability and guidance for
investigators’ regarding what materials should
routinely be
disclosed.76 It pointed out that disclosure is an onerous task, particularly
in complex cases and those involving
extensive digital evidence. It stated that
increased resources would allow it to implement better electronic document
systems, which would speed up the disclosure process.77
Lack of clarity about
objecting to disclosure
9.44 Section 110 of the CPA provides that copies of disclosable material must
be provided in the hand-up brief. Section 110 does not,
however, specify how
material should be
included or referred to where the informant objects to the production of that
material.78
9.45 The hand-up brief must be accompanied by a list of its contents, signed
by the informant.79 The prescribed form for the list
of hand-up brief contents
does not include any field for material that the informant objects to
producing.80
9.46 Section 110 also provides that a notice containing information about
committal proceedings must be included in the hand-up brief.
The prescribed
notice is Magistrates’ Court Form 29.81 Form 29 directs the parties to
engage in discussions about the case
before the committal mention hearing, and
to prepare a case direction notice explaining the outcome of their
discussions.82 Form
29 explains that during these discussions, the accused may
notify the informant they wish to inspect items listed in the hand-up
the informant may object to this inspection.83
9.47 In some cases, however, the accused may be unaware of the existence of
material that the informant objects to producing, given
it has not been included
nor its existence mentioned in the hand-up brief. Currently there is no clear
mechanism enabling notification
by the informant in the hand-up brief of the
existence of such material.
Commission’s
conclusions: improving disclosure
9.48 The statutory regime for disclosure in indictable stream matters in
Victoria does not provide clear guidance for informants.
It could be improved by
clarifying:
• that the informant is required to disclose all relevant material,
including exculpatory material or material that otherwise
assists the case for
the defence or undermines the case for the prosecution, and including material
on which the prosecution does
intend to rely
• the process by which an informant may object to disclosure on public
interest immunity or other grounds, including those set
out in section 45 of the
75 The Royal Commission’s report will be delivered on 1 July 2020:
Royal Commission into the Management of Police Informants
(Web Page, 21
February 2020) <https://
www.rcmpi.vic.gov.au/
76 Consultation 19 (Victoria Police).
section 122(2)
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
informant may object to the production of an item on any ground referred to in
sections 45
. The informant may also object to the production of material
on the grounds of public interest immunity.
Magistrates’ Court Criminal Procedure Rules 2019
80 Ibid r 57(2) (Form 30).
81 Ibid r 57(1) (Form 29).
82 In accordance with
sections 118
Criminal Procedure Act
83 The case direction notice includes a field allowing the parties to state
that ‘The accused seeks the production of an item
or items listed in the
hand-up brief and the informant objects to the production of the item or
items’. The item or items must
be listed and the grounds for objection
9.49 The DPP should also provide greater assistance to informants in relation
to the nature of their disclosure obligations. Practitioners
in the Office of
Public Prosecutions are legally trained and have expertise in this regard. While
some informants have legal training,
and all should receive training in
relation to their disclosure obligations, their investigative role means
they are less
likely to focus on disclosure as a fundamental aspect of every
prosecution and an overriding duty.
9.50 Although the problems with disclosure are attributed by stakeholders
primarily to Victoria Police, the Commission’s recommendations
strengthening disclosure obligations should apply to all informants, including
those working for agencies such as WorkSafe and
the Environmental Protection
Authority. The potential consequences of disclosure failures by these agencies
are as significant as
in the case of Victoria Police.
9.51 Flowing from its earlier recommendation that the DPP should have
prosecutorial responsibility for indictable stream matters
from the filing
hearing onwards, and should be actively involved in providing informants with
guidance in relation to discharging
their obligations during committal
proceedings, the DPP should have formal responsibility for disclosure to the
accused. The informant’s
disclosure obligations should be to the DPP
rather than directly to the accused. Further detail is provided below.
Strengthen the
prosecution’s statutory disclosure obligations
9.52 The DPP should have formal prosecutorial responsibility for
indictable stream matters from the filing hearing onwards.
advising on or reviewing charging decisions at an early stage, the DPP
should assume responsibility for disclosure
to the accused, and the
informant’s disclosure obligations should be to the DPP rather than
directly to the accused.
9.53 While the informant will be obliged to prepare the brief of evidence, as
is currently the case, it should be the DPP’s
responsibility to file and
serve it. The informant will be able to seek advice from the DPP in relation to
preparation of the brief
and will be expected to communicate with the DPP about
the progress of its preparation. The DPP should also be formally empowered,
through amendments to the
Public Prosecutions Act 1994
(Vic), to make
enquiries of the informant in relation to disclosure, and the informant
be required to respond to those enquiries. This means that the DPP should not
require extensive additional time to review the brief,
once it is complete,
before filing it with the court and serving it on the accused.
9.54 Where material exists that the informant objects to producing on
statutory or public interest immunity grounds, the DPP should
be required to
ensure the existence of the material is communicated to the accused via the
hand-up brief.
9.55 The CPA should be amended to specify that the prosecution’s
disclosure obligations are continuing from the filing hearing
until the death of
the accused, regardless of the outcome of the prosecution and even in
circumstances in which the prosecution is
discontinued. This is necessary to
capture situations in which relevant evidence comes to light after a prosecution
has been finalised.
This material may be significant for the accused even if the
charges were withdrawn or there was a verdict of not guilty. The
potential consequences of having been the subject of indictable charges
include not being eligible for a Working with Children check,
despite a finding
of not guilty.84
9.56 Assuming disclosure obligations at an earlier stage in proceedings will
place a resource burden on the DPP. The DPP should be
provided with adequate
funding to ensure these recommendations are implemented effectively in a way
that addresses the deficiencies
with disclosure discussed earlier.
Working with Children Act 2005
(Vic) ss 14 (1) (d), 14 (2), 14
No change to the
prosecution’s common law disclosure obligations
9.57 The prosecution’s disclosure obligations at common law exist
alongside the informant’s and the prosecution’s
distinct statutory
disclosure obligations. The Commission recommends retaining explicit recognition
that nothing in the CPA removes
or reduces the duty of the prosecution to
disclose to the accused material relevant to a charge.85
Strengthen the
informant’s statutory disclosure obligations
9.58 There is a need to provide Victoria Police with greater clarity about
the nature of an informant’s disclosure obligations,
the meaning of
‘relevant’ material, and how and when to object to the production of
material on public interest or other
grounds. There is also a need for cultural
change within Victoria Police, so that the importance of early disclosure of all
materials, and the obligation to make enquiries about the existence of
relevant materials, is recognised and becomes entrenched in
the force’s
operating procedures.
9.59 Along with other investigative agencies, Victoria Police should
establish internal procedures to ensure that informants
are made aware of, or
able to obtain information concerning, potentially disclosable material that
exists or is known about
within other parts of the agency. Informants
should be obliged to retain potentially disclosable material for as long as
disclosure obligations continue, and systems should be established
at investigating agencies to ensure potentially disclosable material is
retained and not destroyed.
9.60 Early and active oversight by the DPP will assist informants to
understand and meet their disclosure obligations. The informant
should continue
to have disclosure obligations
in relation to all indictable stream matters under the CPA, but these should
be to the prosecution rather than the accused and should
be continuing from the
filing hearing until the death of the accused.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
9.61 The informant should remain responsible for preparation of the brief of
evidence. The informant should liaise directly with the
DPP about preparation of
the brief, provide all brief materials to the DPP as soon as they are
available, and should respond to
the DPP’s disclosure enquiries.
Require the informant to give disclosure evidence at
the issues hearing
9.62 Unless the prosecution and defence agree otherwise, the informant should
be required to appear at the issues hearing86 and provide
sworn evidence to the
court that the informant has discharged their disclosure obligations. When
setting the date for an issues hearing,
the court should take into account the
informant’s availability. The defence may also seek leave to cross-examine
the informant
regarding their disclosure evidence. Any cross-examination should
be narrow, targeted, and properly managed by the presiding magistrate.
86 Or committal mention hearing if the Commission’s recommendation to
replace committal mention hearings and committal hearings
with a single issues
hearing is not implemented.
The process for objecting to disclosure
9.63 If the informant believes material should not be disclosed or produced
because it is subject to a public interest immunity claim,
or on the basis of
one of the grounds set out in
sections 45
of the CPA, the informant
should be required to disclose in general terms the existence of the material to
the DPP. The informant
should not be obliged to describe the specific contents
of the material. The informant should, however, explain the nature of the
objection to production, including whether it is on the grounds of public
interest immunity or with reference to
if the objection is made under
that section.
9.64 In the hand-up brief, the informant should note the existence of
material in relation to which a statutory objection to production
is made, and
to the degree feasible, the grounds on which an objection is made.
9.65 The informant need not produce the material in relation to which the
objection relates to the DPP or the accused unless directed
by order of the
9.66 After service of the hand-up brief on the accused, if the accused seeks
production of material that has been withheld, the informant
responsible for making an application to the court for an order that the
material does not need to be produced.
9.67 When considering an objection to production on the grounds of public
interest immunity or any of the grounds set out in
sections 45
the CPA, the Magistrates’ Court may choose to refer the matter to a
higher court for determination of the objection
if in its view it is more
appropriate that the trial court makes the determination.
Relevant material includes exculpatory material
9.68 In order to provide greater clarity to informants about the nature of
their disclosure obligations, the CPA should be amended
to explain that relevant
material includes exculpatory material and that any such material must be
included in the hand-up brief.
Expand the indicative list in section 110 of materials
that must be included in the hand-up brief
9.69 Magistrates’ Court Practice Direction 3 of 2019 sets out certain
procedural requirements relevant to
section 123
matters, involving sexual
offences where the complainant was a child or person with a cognitive impairment
when proceedings commenced.
The Practice Direction also sets out ‘standard
disclosure material’ that the informant must serve on the accused and
the DPP at the time of service of the hand-up brief, in addition to the other
material that
section 110
directs must be included in the hand-up brief.
9.70 The standard disclosure material includes such things as copies of crime
reports, attendance registers, police notes, diary and
day-book entries,
relevant INTERPOSE data entries and copies of relevant Victoria Police LEAP
data-based entries.
9.71 Victoria Legal Aid suggests that as the Standard Disclosure Material is
often requested ‘as a matter of course’ in
all cases, not just
section 123
cases, requiring that it be included in the hand-up brief would
reduce the delay caused by the need to request it, which would
‘facilitate[...]
pre-hearing negotiations and early
resolution’.87
9.72 The Law Institute of Victoria suggests including Standard Disclosure
Material in the hand- up brief requirements would ‘improve
consistency and
reduce disclosure indiscretions and inordinate delay.’88
87 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
88 Submission 24 (Law Institute of Victoria).
A disclosure certificate
regime should not be introduced
9.73 Some stakeholders supported the introduction of a disclosure certificate
requirement similar to that established under section
15A of New South
Director of Public Prosecutions Act 1986
9.74 The Law Institute of Victoria suggested that a disclosure certificate
requirement would force the police, as the principal investigating
the agency in relation to which most disclosure issues arise, to focus on its
disclosure obligations and to have systems
in place to ensure these are
9.75 Victoria Legal Aid advocated for the introduction of a disclosure
certificate requirement but suggested this would fall on the
prosecution rather
than the investigating agency. The Commission is of the view, however, that the
DPP cannot be required to certify
as to the adequacy of the investigating
agency’s disclosure.
9.76 The NSW Disclosure Certificate explains the meaning of
‘relevant’ material and includes an acknowledgement by the
that they have an ongoing duty of disclosure. Introducing a similar certificate
in Victoria would mean that the police’s
disclosure obligations are
reiterated and the police are routinely reminded of these obligations.
9.77 On the other hand, inadequate disclosure by the police remains a problem
in New South Wales, despite the disclosure certificate
regime.91 Disclosure
certificates are frequently signed despite disclosure not being complete.92
Given this is the case, introducing
a disclosure certificate requirement may represent a costly reform in terms
of the administrative burden on police, with little substantive
9.78 In light of the experience in New South Wales, a disclosure certificate
regime should not be introduced in Victoria. A more
proactive approach should
be adopted to ensuring police informants, in particular, disclose all
relevant material (or its existence,
where there is an objection to
production), to the prosecution. Requiring informants to give evidence on
oath at an issues hearing
that they have discharged their disclosure
obligations, and providing the opportunity for the accused to cross-examine the
regarding disclosure, will impose a stronger discipline on informants
than a disclosure certificate.
89 Submissions 13 (Victoria Legal Aid), 20 (County Court of Victoria), 24
(Law Institute of Victoria).
90 Submission 24 (Law Institute of Victoria).
91 Consultations 33 (Director of Public Prosecutions (New South Wales)), 34
(Legal Aid New South Wales), 36 (Police Prosecutions Command
92 Consultations 33 (Director of Public Prosecutions (New South Wales)), 36
(Police Prosecutions Command New South Wales).
Forensic reports
Introduction
Forensic services in Victoria
Timelines for forensic reports
Delay in the provision of forensic reports: stakeholder views
Commission’s conclusions: better resourcing for forensic service
Forensic reports and
Introduction
10.1 The Commission was told frequently about difficulties obtaining timely
forensic analysis.1 This chapter examines the provision
of forensic services in
Victoria and associated delay, and how to address this. It concludes that
funding for forensic service providers
should be increased and conferencing
between the parties and forensic experts should be encouraged. To the degree
possible, the lower
courts should ensure that the time frames set for service of
forensic reports are realistic.
Forensic services in
10.2 Forensic science ‘is the application of science to assist in the
judicial process’,2 primarily through analysis of
physical evidence. It
includes a variety of disciplines such as medicine, toxicology, pathology,
biology, chemistry, and engineering.3
The use of these disciplines for the
purposes of forensic analysis is a highly specialised area requiring extensive
Victoria Police Forensic
Services Department
10.3 Most forensic services are provided by Victoria Police’s Forensic
Services Department (FSD). FSD provides forensic services
in a variety of areas
relevant to indictable cases, including:
• biological analysis, such as DNA profiling; detection and
identification of biological material including blood, semen, and
bloodstain pattern analysis
• ballistics
• drug analysis
• processing major crime scenes, which involves searching, collection
of exhibits, and recording scenes using photography and
1 See Submissions 11 (Criminal Bar Association (Victoria)), 13 (Victoria
Legal Aid), 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria), 19
(Victorian Aboriginal
Legal Service), 20 (County Court of Victoria), 22 (Supreme Court of Victoria),
24 (Law Institute of Victoria);
Consultations 1 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal
Service), 8 (Victoria Legal Aid), 10 (Law Institute of Victoria), 13 (Goulburn
practitioners), 15 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria), 16 (La Trobe
Valley Practitioners), 23 (Children’s Court of Victoria),
30 (County Court
of Victoria), 31 (Supreme Court of Victoria).
2 National Institute of Forensic Science, ‘What is Forensic
Forensic Sciences
http://www.anzpaa.org.au/forensic- science/forensic-sciences
3 Consultations 17 (Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine), 37 (Victoria
Police Forensic Services Department); National Institute
of Forensic Science,
‘What is Forensic Science?’
Forensic Sciences
http://www.anzpaa.org.au/forensic-science/forensic-sciences
4 Consultations 17 (Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine), 37 (Victoria
Police Forensic Services Department).
5 Victoria Police, ‘Areas of Forensic Science’,
(Web Page, 13 March 2019) <https://
www.police.vic.gov.au/forensic-services
The Victorian Institute
of Forensic Medicine
10.4 The Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine (VIFM) is a statutory
authority that primarily provides assistance to the Coroner6
but also provides
forensic services in criminal cases. These include:
• forensic pathology, involving death-related investigations and
preparation of autopsy reports7
• forensic toxicology, involving analysis of drugs and poisons in
biological tissues8
• clinical forensic medicine, involving medical examinations of victims
of crime and alleged perpetrators.9
Other providers
10.5 Victoria Police’s E-Crime Squad conducts analysis of digital
material. In Commonwealth cases, forensic analysis is generally
conducted by
Commonwealth agencies, such as the Australian Federal Police.10
Timelines for forensic
10.6 The time taken to produce a forensic report varies according to the
disciplines involved, the forms of testing required, and
the volume of material
to be analysed.
10.7 FSD publishes the turnaround time for its reports11 and the current
backlogs within each discipline for the information of courts,
investigators,
prosecutors and defence practitioners.12 FSD is engaged in a multi-year program
to modernise its service delivery
model,13 which it said has ‘dramatically
reduced turnaround times and minimised backlogs in several key areas’.14
Nevertheless,
backlogs remain an issue.15
10.8 In some disciplines, such as DNA analysis, the turnaround time is
relatively short (12.8 working days) and there is no reported
backlog. In
others, such as drug analysis, there is large backlog of cases (92 cases) with a
longer turnaround time (four months).16
10.9 VIFM told the Commission that it is usually able to provide an autopsy
report within 12 weeks of having a case referred to it.17
In some more
straightforward matters the report may be completed in eight weeks but in more
complex matters the turnaround time may
be longer than 12 weeks.18
10.10 According to the Magistrates’ Court, Victoria Police’s
E-Crime Squad takes 24 months to conduct standard e-crime
analysis, or eight
months where a matter is urgent.19
10.11 While the Commission does not have specific turnaround times for
reports generated by Commonwealth agencies, representatives
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions said that in their experience,
‘State-based forensic services have longer
delays than Commonwealth
agencies’.20
Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine Act 1985
7 Consultation 17 (Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine).
8 Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine, ‘Supporting Victoria
Forensic Services
(Web Page) <https://
www.vifm.org/forensic-services/
overview/victoria-police/>.
10 Consultation 7 (Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions).
11 Turnaround time is the time taken to provide a report from the receipt of
the case at FSD—not from the date of offence or
date of arrest: Victoria
Police Forensic Services Department,
Turnaround Times and Backlogs for
Forensic Units
(Report, 1 October 2019)
www.police.vic.gov.au/turn-around-times-and-backlogs
13 Letter from Victoria Police Chief Commissioner Graham Ashton to Chair of
the Commission, 28 December 2019.
14 Consultation 37 (Victoria Police Forensic Services Department).
15 Victoria Police Forensic Services Department,
Turnaround Times and
Backlogs for Forensic Units
(Report, 1 October 2019)
www.police.vic.gov.au/turn-around-times-and-backlogs
17 Consultation 17 (Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine).
19 Submission 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria).
20 Consultation 7 (Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions).
Delay in the provision of
forensic reports: stakeholder views
10.12 The Supreme, County, Magistrates’, and Children’s Courts,
Victoria Legal Aid, the Law Institute of Victoria, the
Criminal Bar Association
and the Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service, all described the time taken to
prepare forensic reports as
a major source of delay in pre-trial
proceedings.21
10.13 The Magistrates’ Court told the Commission:
Delay in drug and forensic analysis provided by ... FSD ... is the single
greatest cause of delay in this jurisdiction.22
10.14 The Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service attributed delay in provision of
forensic and medical reports to an ‘apparent under-resourcing’
VIFM and FSD.23
10.15 Victoria Legal Aid said forensic analysis of IT evidence typically took
‘a minimum 6-9 months to process’.24 Victoria
Legal Aid also
explained that delay obtaining forensic evidence was often greater in regional
10.16 CASA Forum viewed delay in conducting forensic medical examinations
after alleged sexual assaults, and subsequent delays in
the provision of
forensic reports, as a serious problem warranting the provision of extra funding
for VIFM.26
10.17 VIFM told the Commission that it had a ‘service level
agreement’ with Victoria Police and was contracted to attend
victims of alleged assault within a certain timeframe. It said it was meeting
its performance indicators for timely completion
of examinations, but pointed
As Melbourne is getting bigger it is difficult and we cover the whole
state—not just Melbourne—this does raise issues
rostering.27
10.18 VIFM explained that it did its best to accommodate court deadlines for
the provision of reports. It told the Commission that
as long as police
informants provided indicative timelines in advance, it met court deadlines
‘95 per cent of the time’.28
Causes of delay
10.19 The variation in indicative timeframes for forensic reports relates in
part to the complexity of forensic science disciplines,
with some requiring
much more time for analysis than others.
10.20 The Magistrates’ Court of Victoria, Victoria Legal Aid, and the
Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service all suggested that
informants tended to delay
requesting forensic reports. According to these stakeholders, informants wait to
see if the defence will
request a report rather than acting on their own
initiative to obtain reports at an early stage.29
10.21 Victoria Police acknowledged that delay has been a long-standing issue
Historically, FSD has had testing backlogs and extended turn-around times
that have impacted [its] ability to meet court dates.30
10.22 FSD suggested its service modernisation project would help it to reduce
delays and backlogs in the provision of reports.
21 See Submissions 11 (Criminal Bar Association (Victoria)), 13 (Victoria
Legal Aid), 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria), 19
(Victorian Aboriginal
Legal Service), 20 (County Court of Victoria), 22 (Supreme Court of Victoria),
24 (Law Institute of Victoria),
Consultations 1 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal
Service), 8 (Victoria Legal Aid), 10 (Law Institute of Victoria), 13 (Goulburn
practitioners), 15 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria), 16 (La Trobe
Valley Practitioners), 23 (Children’s Court of Victoria),
30 (County Court
of Victoria), 31 (Supreme Court of Victoria).
22 Submission 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria).
23 Submission 19 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
24 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
25 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid) and see Consultation 13 (Goulburn
Valley practitioners).
26 Consultation 3 (CASA Forum).
27 Consultation 17 (Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine).
29 Submissions 13 (Victorian Legal Aid), 14 (Magistrates’ Court of
Victoria), 19 (Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
30 Letter from Victoria Police Chief Commissioner Graham Ashton to Victorian
Law Reform Commission Chair, 28 December 2019.
10.23 VIFM observed in relation to the provision of its forensic medical
reports that:
there has been investment in Court services to improve the timelines of the
criminal process which in turn raised an expectation
that forensic medical
reports be provided more quickly. This presents us with a very big resource
issue which can only be met by
a redesign and investment in technology,
laboratory infrastructure, laboratory process, and specialist workforce funding
has not been forthcoming.31
Effects of delay
10.24 Delay in the provision of forensic reports undermines the efficient
functioning of the justice system. The Supreme Court observed:
Inefficiencies are created when one or more aspects of the system are not
resourced to keep up with the processes of other parts of
the system.
Bottlenecks and adjournment are typical signs of this occurring. For example ...
the adjournment of cases otherwise ready
to proceed because resources to process
forensic evidence do not match demand.32
10.25 In cases in which forensic evidence is central to the prosecution case,
delay in the provision of forensic analysis can prevent
early resolution. As
Victoria Legal Aid pointed out:
If forensic evidence is pivotal to the prosecution case, then the delay in
collecting and analysing forensic evidence will affect
the ability of the
parties to enter into plea negotiations.
Commission’s
conclusions: better resourcing for forensic service providers
10.26 The complexity of forensic analysis and the amount of material
requiring analysis in many indictable cases, especially those
involving e-crime,
mean that Victoria’s forensic service providers are sometimes failing to
keep up with demand for their services.
10.27 In the case of FSD, this may not be attributable solely to a lack of
resources. Delay in the provision of reports by FSD appears
to be a product of
internal workflow issues that FSD is currently redressing.33 Nevertheless,
additional funding would allow FSD
to cater for increasingly complex cases in
some areas of forensic analysis.
10.28 VIFM does not have enough specialised personnel nor the infrastructure
necessary to support its work. Along with FSD, it should
be provided with
additional funding.
31 Consultation 17 (Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine).
32 Submission 22 (Supreme Court of Victoria).
33 Consultation 37 (Victoria Police Forensic Services Department).
Publicise timeframes for
the provision of forensic reports
10.29 Victoria Legal Aid proposed that:
forensic services and analysts should have an active presence or voice in
communicating to the court which services they can realistically
deliver, as
well as the time frames in which [those services] can be delivered.34
10.30 Better awareness of forensic processes among courts and practitioners
will assist with issues such as courts setting hearing
dates based on
unrealistic expectations about how long forensic reports take to prepare.35
10.31 As well as publishing FSD turnaround times and backlogs, FSD told the
Commission it had established a case management group
to provide improved
visibility to lawyers and investigators about the progress of forensic
10.32 VIFM explained that it had been engaging actively with the courts and
practitioners to ensure they understand what timeframes
are feasible for the
provision of its reports.37
10.33 These measures should allow the courts to set realistic timeframes for
service of reports.
Conferencing with
forensic experts
10.34 The Commission was told that conferencing between forensic experts and
prosecutors and defence practitioners would improve efficiency
involving reliance on forensic evidence.38
10.35 VIFM explained that it does not see itself as a witness for the
prosecution but as a witness for the court, whose role is
to ‘support
the court and the justice system’.39 It proposed that time would be saved
if, instead of requiring its experts
to provide pre-trial oral evidence, the
parties clarified forensic issues during out-of-court consultations with
experts.40 If the
forensic issues in dispute can be narrowed, there will be less
need to traverse highly technical material that is potentially difficult
juries to follow during a trial.41 Professor Ransom, from VIFM, said:
A great example of effective communication was the Palm Island case—I
... travelled to Brisbane and spent an entire day with
the prosecution team ...
and later a day with
the defence team. This process ... short-circuited many issues that might
have otherwise been a matter of dispute at trial.42
34 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
35 This was a problem commented on by VIFM: Consultation 17 (Victorian
Institute of Forensic Medicine).
36 Consultation 37 (Victoria Police Forensic Services Department).
37 Consultation 17 (Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine).
38 Submission 25 (Victoria Police); Consultations 17 (Victorian Institute of
Forensic Medicine), 37 (Victoria Police Forensic Services
Department).
39 Consultation 17 (Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine).
10.36 Conferencing between forensic experts and prosecution lawyers already
occurs in cases involving clandestine drug laboratories.43
According to Victoria
Police, these meetings are ‘essential in streamlining work flow and
meeting set dates by targeting key
items for analysis and ensuring appropriate
prioritisation of work’.44 Victoria Police and FSD supported expanding
conferences to a broader category of cases.45
10.37 As well as expanding conferencing with the prosecution, conferencing
between forensic experts and defence practitioners will
often be appropriate.
Defence practitioners may be reluctant initially to engage in pre-trial
conferencing with forensic staff because
of concerns about the independence of staff whose reports have been sought by
the prosecution. The professionalism of FSD and VIFM
staff should ameliorate
concerns.46 Defence practitioners should be conscious of the substantial
benefits for the accused flowing from reduced delay and greater
clarity about
the issues in the case.
10.38 As the County Court noted, ‘there is no property in witnesses and
a cultural change needs to [occur] whereby the defence
are more proactive in
speaking to forensic witnesses’.47 As a general rule, conferencing should
take place before leave is
granted to cross-examine forensic experts during
committal proceedings.
Preliminary forensic reports?
10.39 New South Wales now permits brief, or ‘short-form’ forensic
reports in limited circumstances.48 The reports present
the results of
preliminary forensic analysis. They were introduced to ensure that unnecessary
time and resources are not expended
‘producing evidence [in circumstances
in which] the defendant is ultimately likely to plead guilty’.49
10.40 The Director of Public Prosecutions (New South Wales) told the
Commission that preliminary forensic reports:
provide flexibility and do cut down on unacceptable delay, especially in
drugs and ballistics cases. They allow us, for example, to
identify what the
drug is and let the other side know quicker or let them know if the bullets
match the gun.50
43 Submission 25 (Victoria Police); Consultation 37 (Victoria Police Forensic
Services Department).
44 Submission 25 (Victoria Police).
45 Ibid; Consultation 37 (Victoria Police Forensic Services Department).
46 Although not necessarily a marker of independence, a third of VIFM’s
forensic pathologists have legal as well as medical
qualifications: Consultation
17 (Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine).
47 Consultation 30 (County Court of Victoria).
48 Instances in which short-form reports may be provided include drugs and
ballistics cases: Consultation 33 (Director of Public Prosecutions
49 New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Encouraging Appropriate Early
Guilty Pleas
(Report No 141, December 2014)
50 Consultation 33 (Director of Public Prosecutions (New South Wales)).
10.41 Caution was expressed in Victoria and New South Wales about the
efficacy of preliminary forensic reports.51 VIFM told the Commission
providing a preliminary report prior to the completion of thorough forensic
examination can pre-judge an issue and set
the case on a particular path,
which may not be the right one.52 VIFM also warned that it can be difficult to
revise the trajectory
of a case on the basis of a full report, even where the
full report demonstrates the preliminary report got it wrong.53
10.42 New South Wales Legal Aid expressed scepticism about reliance on
short-form reports, saying that while these reports tend to
be less problematic
in drug identification cases, the conclusions provided are scientifically
dubious where they involve DNA testing,
fingerprint tests, and firearms
10.43 The Commission did not receive submissions in favour of introducing
preliminary forensic reports. It does not support their
immediate introduction,
but their use in other states should be monitored. This will allow an
evidence-based assessment of whether
preliminary reports should be adopted if
delays in the provision of forensic reports continue to be a major issue.
51 Consultations 6 (Criminal Bar Association (Victoria)), 17 (Victoran
Institute of Forensic Medicine), 34 (Legal Aid New South Wales).
52 Consultation 17 (Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine).
54 Consultation 34 (Legal Aid New South Wales).
cross-examination
Introduction
Pre-trial cross-examination in the present system
Cross-examination in the lower courts
Protecting additional classes of witness from
cross-examination
Should the test for leave to cross-examine witnesses in the lower courts
be strengthened?
Reducing trauma during cross-examination
cross-examination
Introduction
11.1 The ability to cross-examine some witnesses during committal proceedings
was one of the most polarising issues raised during
the consultation
11.2 Some stakeholders told the Commission the opportunity to cross-examine
in the lower courts was fundamental to ensuring adequate
disclosure and
therefore a fair trial. Victoria Legal Aid,2 the Criminal Bar Association3 and
the Magistrates’ Court of Victoria4
advised that full disclosure is
sometimes impossible without cross-examination during committal proceedings.
They argued that abolishing
cross-examination in the lower courts would
significantly reduce the number of cases that resolve, either summarily or as a
of guilty to an indictable offence, at a relatively early stage.5
11.3 On the other hand, Victoria Police,6 the Victims of Crime Commissioner,7
CASA Forum,8 Domestic Violence Victoria,9 and the Director
Prosecutions10 (DPP) told the Commission that cross-examination during committal
proceedings can be unnecessarily traumatic
for victims and witnesses. In
addition to cross-examination being intrinsically stressful, having to be
cross-examined more than
once—during committal or other
pre-trial procedures and again at trial—may be an additional source of
trauma. These stakeholders also regarded the committal
hearing as a source of
delay that unnecessarily duplicated higher court pre-trial and trial
processes.11
11.4 While the DPP supported retaining the ability to cross-examine some
witnesses in the lower courts in limited circumstances,
it did not view
disclosure as a legitimate purpose of cross-examination: ‘Disclosure, in
its legal sense, does not include
cross-examination of witnesses’.12 The
DPP’s rejection of disclosure as a legitimate purpose of
cross-examination
is considered under the heading ‘Cross-examination and
disclosure’ below.
11.5 This chapter explains the situations in which pre-trial
cross-examination is currently available, either during a committal
prior to trial in the jurisdiction of the higher courts. The focus here is on
forms of cross-examination that do not
preclude or substitute for
cross-examination during a trial.
1 In this chapter, references to witnesses include the complainant unless
otherwise specified.
2 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
3 Submission 11 (Criminal Bar Association (Victoria)).
4 Submission 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria).
5 Submission 11 (Criminal Bar Association (Victoria)), 13 (Victoria Legal
Aid), 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria).
6 Submission 25 (Victoria Police).
7 Submission 23 (Victims of Crime Commissioner).
8 Consultation 3 (CASA Forum).
9 Consultation 14 (Domestic Violence Victoria).
10 Submission 4 (Director of Public Prosecutions (Victoria)).
11 See also Consultation 9 (Women’s Housing Ltd).
12 Submission 4 (Director of Public Prosecutions (Victoria)).
11.6 The discussion then addresses the question of whether there exists
‘a culture of pre-trial cross-examination’ in
Victoria before
turning to consider the major issues associated with cross-examination in the
lower courts:
• the trauma associated with cross-examination for victims and
• disclosure
• early resolution and narrowing of the issues in dispute.
11.7 The Commission concludes that cross-examination in the lower courts
should be retained because of its importance for disclosure,
early resolution
and narrowing the issues in dispute. This conclusion leaves open the questions
of whether:
• existing prohibitions on cross-examining certain classes of witness
in the lower courts should be expanded
• the test for leave to cross-examine witnesses in the lower courts
needs to be strengthened.
11.8 The question of whether to expand existing prohibitions on
cross-examination is addressed in the next part of the chapter. The
then turns to the question of whether to strengthen the test for granting leave
to cross-examine witnesses to whom prohibitions
do not apply. The Commission
recommends limited expansion of existing prohibitions on cross-examination in
the lower courts. It also
recommends measures to:
• ensure the test for leave to cross-examine is applied
consistently
• require that additional criteria for leave, including the need to
minimise trauma, are met for witnesses with cognitive
impairments, and victims
in cases involving sexual or family violence.
11.9 It is now well recognised that the criminal justice system has failed in
the past to adequately protect victims. Cross-examination
in the lower courts is
a particularly contentious issue and it causes distress and sometimes trauma for
11.10 The final part of the chapter outlines how some trauma-informed
approaches are being implemented in criminal proceedings; the
available for victims and witnesses; and the measures courts can take to
reduce trauma for victims and witnesses. Combined
with its other recommendations
for limiting cross-examination and strengthening judicial oversight, the
Commission concludes that
these initiatives will assist in protecting victims
from harm and promoting a culture of respect for victims within the criminal
system. To further support and entrench such a culture, the Commission makes
additional recommendations to expand the availability
of intermediaries and to
clarify courts’ existing powers to order alternative arrangements for
giving evidence.
cross-examination in the present system
11.11 In indictable stream matters, cross-examination may occur:
• during a committal hearing
• in the trial court before a trial commences
• during trial.13
13 Except for cases covered by
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic), to which prohibitions on cross-examination apply.
Cross-examination during
committal proceedings
Leave to cross-examine witnesses
11.12 In order to cross-examine a witness at a committal hearing, the defence
must apply for leave of the court.
11.13 Historically there was no leave requirement. When initially enacted,
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
(Vic) merely required an accused
to notify the court of their intention to cross-examine a witness during
the committal proceeding.14
The court could prevent cross-examination if it was
considered ‘frivolous, vexatious or oppressive in all the
circumstances’.15
11.14 In 2000, a test for leave was introduced.16 The introduction of the
test acknowledged the harm that cross-examination can cause
and recognised the
need to better protect victims and other witnesses.
11.15 When the
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) (CPA) was enacted in
2009 it adopted the test contained in the Magistrates’ Court Act.17
11.16 Before leave to cross-examine a witness is granted, the court must be
satisfied that:
• the accused has identified an issue to which the proposed questioning
• the accused has provided a reason why the evidence of the witness is
relevant to that issue19
• cross-examination of the witness on that issue is justified.20
11.17 In determining whether cross-examination on an issue is justified, the
court must have regard under
section 124(4)
of the CPA to the need to ensure
• the prosecution case is adequately disclosed
• the issues are adequately defined
• the evidence is of sufficient weight to support a conviction for the
offence with which the accused is charged
• a fair trial will take place if the matter proceeds to
trial—this includes ensuring that the accused is able to prepare
present a defence
• matters relevant to a potential plea of guilty are clarified
• matters relevant to a potential discontinuance of prosecution ... are
• trivial, vexatious or oppressive cross-examination is not
• the interests of justice are otherwise served.21
11.18 If the witness is a child, the court must consider additional matters,
including the need to minimise the trauma that might
be experienced by the
witness in giving evidence.22
11.19 When deciding whether to grant leave to cross-examine, the court may
have regard to whether the informant consents to or opposes
leave being
11.20 If leave is granted, the court must identify each issue on which the
witness may be cross- examined.24 The scope of the cross-examination
to the issues identified.25
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
(Vic) sch 5 cl 3(4).
15 Ibid sch 5 cl3(7).
Magistrates’ Court (Committal Proceedings) Act 2000
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
s 124(3)(a).
s 124(3)(a).
s 124(3)(b).
11.21 Despite the requirement to identify each issue on which a witness may
be cross- examined, a magistrate has the power to grant
leave during a committal
hearing to cross- examine a witness on an issue not previously identified.26 A
magistrate cannot grant leave
to cross-examine on any new issues unless
satisfied that the witness’s evidence is relevant to the issue and the
cross-examination
is justified on the same grounds as apply to the original
grant of leave to cross-examine.27
cross-examination in the higher courts
Sexual offence cases where the complainant was a child
or person with a cognitive impairment when proceedings commenced
11.22 Pursuant to
section 123
of the CPA, a magistrate must not grant leave
during committal proceedings to cross-examine the complainant or any other
in cases involving a sexual offence where the complainant was a child
or person with a cognitive impairment when the proceedings
11.23 Complainants in these cases can be cross-examined once only over the
course of the criminal proceeding, and only if the matter
is listed for trial.
The cross-examination occurs during a special hearing in the trial court.28
section 123
cases, the defence may apply in the higher courts for
leave under
section 198A
to cross-examine witnesses other than the complainant
prior to trial.
11.25 The prohibition in
section 123
on cross-examining any witnesses during
committal proceedings, and the provision in
section 198A
allowing for pre-trial
cross-examination in the higher courts of witnesses other than the complainant,
took effect in March 2019.
The amendments were introduced to create greater
contemporaneity between the cross- examination for trial purposes of
complainants
in these cases and the pre-trial cross- examination, if any, of
other witnesses. Then Attorney-General Martin Pakula said the amendments
designed to reduce delay and allow ‘the trial court to conduct more case
management of these matters’.29
11.26 Before leave to cross-examine a witness under
section 198A
is granted,
the court must be satisfied that:
• the accused has identified an issue to which the proposed questioning
• the accused has provided a reason the evidence of the witness is
relevant to that issue
• cross-examination of the witness on that issue is justified.30
11.27 In determining whether cross-examination is justified, the court must
have regard to the criteria set out in
section 124(4)
of the CPA, including
the need to ensure that the prosecution case is adequately disclosed.31 If the
witness is a child, the court
must also have regard to the criteria set out in
section 124(5).32
The court may have regard to whether the prosecution consents
to the order for cross-examination being made.33
11.28 If the court makes an order for cross-examination under
section 198A
the court must identify each issue on which the witness may be
cross-examined.
ss 132(1)(b)
and see generally ch 8,
29 Victoria, Parliamentary Debates, Legislative Assembly, 21 June 2018, 2146
(Martin Pakula, Attorney-General).
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
s 198A(5)(a).
See the criteria listed in paragraph 11.17, above.
s 198A(5)(b).
Section 198B (formerly Basha hearings)
Section 198B
of the CPA codifies hearings previously known as
‘Basha hearings’.34 The trial court is able to order
cross-examination
of a witness prior to trial if satisfied that it is necessary
to avoid a serious risk that the trial would be unfair.35 As with
section 198A
the court must consider the criteria in
section 124(4)
of the CPA before making
an order under section 198B.36
11.30 A witness may be cross-examined prior to trial in the course of a voir
dire hearing. The purpose of a voir dire hearing is to
allow the court to
determine questions of law, often related to whether a witness’s evidence
is admissible or should be rejected
on discretionary grounds.37
Cross-examination in the
lower courts
11.31 This section considers the claim that Victoria has a culture of
pre-trial cross-examination. The discussion then turns to consideration
issues raised during consultations:
• trauma for victims and witnesses
• the importance of cross-examination for disclosure
• the contribution of cross-examination to early resolution or
narrowing the issues in dispute.
Does Victoria have a
culture of pre-trial cross-examination?
11.32 The DPP submitted that Victoria has a ‘culture’ of
pre-trial cross-examination that means it is common for witnesses
cross-examined several times during a single indictable proceeding.38 Other
stakeholders objected to this characterisation,
suggesting the DPP
‘overstates the frequency at which witnesses are required to give evidence
11.33 The Commission is unable to gauge accurately how frequently
cross-examination occurs both during a committal hearing and subsequently
other pre-trial hearings and/or during a trial.
11.34 The Commission is also unable to determine from the available data how
frequently witnesses are cross-examined during committal
hearings. In
2017–18, leave to cross- examine at least one witness was granted in 46
per cent of all committal stream cases—
a total of 1,569 cases.40 Data is
not available to show:
• whether committal hearings were held in all cases in which leave to
cross-examine was granted
• in respect of how many witnesses leave to cross-examine was
• the type of witnesses in respect of whom leave was granted, for
example: informants, experts, complainants, or civilian witnesses.
34 The common law procedure of an accused cross-examining a witness to enable
the accused to adequately prepare and present a defence,
derived from
(1989) 39 A Crim R 337, has been abolished:
Criminal Procedure Act
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
37 Judicial College of Victoria, ‘17 Voir Dire’,
Criminal Proceedings Manual
(1 April 2011) [4].
38 Submission 4 (Director of Public Prosecutions (Victoria)).
39 Submission 9 (Australian Lawyers for Human Rights).
40 Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Committal Data Requested by VLRC
(24 April 2019). See also Victorian Law Reform Commission,
(Issues Paper, June 2019) 17–18 [3.44]. Data obtained by the
Commission in 2016 shows that in 2015, one or more witness was
cross- examined
in 46 per cent of matters that proceeded through a committal hearing: Victorian
Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the Criminal Trial
(Report No 34, August 2016) 210 [8.86].
11.35 There are unlikely to be more than a handful of cases each year in
which a higher court is satisfied there is justification
cross-examining a witness prior to trial who has already been examined at a
committal hearing. The Judicial College of
Proceedings Manual
suggests, for example, that voir dire hearings
will ‘rarely be necessary if the witnesses were cross-examined at the
hearing’.41
11.36 In the experience of Victoria Legal Aid, child witnesses are rarely, if
ever, cross-examined during committal proceedings.42
Victoria Legal Aid
attributes this to the additional matters the court must consider before
granting leave to cross-examine children
at a committal hearing, including the
need to minimise trauma.43
Trauma associated with
cross-examination
11.37 Cross-examination is a stressful experience for many witnesses. This is
particularly true for victims of crime, and even more
so for those victims who
are young or have a cognitive impairment.
11.38 How a witness’s evidence is tested in an adversarial criminal
justice system helps explain why cross-examination can be
stressful and even
traumatising. Often the role of defence counsel is to shed doubt on the
reliability or veracity of a witness’
evidence. The Victims of Crime
Commissioner noted that ‘variations in storytelling are common (even
‘inevitable’)’,44
yet inconsistencies between accounts given
by a witness on different occasions may be seized on by the defence as
indicating that
a witness is unreliable or duplicitous. Occasionally this
conclusion may be justified, but not always.
11.39 In its 2016 report
The Role of Victims in the Criminal Trial Process
the Commission noted that many victims it spoke to ‘felt disrespected
by the way they were treated during cross- examination
and the type of questions
they were asked.’45
11.40 knowmore, a community legal centre, pointed out that some survivors who
gave evidence at the Royal Commission into Institutional
Responses to Child
Sexual Abuse described being cross-examined as ‘re-traumatising and
offensive’ and ‘as bad as
the child sexual abuse they
suffered’.46 The centre explained that many of its clients ‘have
likewise reported difficulties
in persisting with their complaint due to the
stress and trauma of being examined in court.’47 This problem was also
highlighted
by CASA Forum.48
Cross-examination during a committal hearing
11.41 Cross-examination during a committal hearing has been described as
‘worse than at the trial.’49 An explanation for
this is that
witnesses are not generally given an opportunity to tell their story in their
own way through evidence-in-chief.50 Another
explanation is that defence counsel
is ‘not constrained by the presence of a jury’ and may therefore be
‘more oppressive
or intimidating’.51
41 Judicial College of Victoria, ‘17 Voir Dire’,
Criminal Proceedings Manual
(1 April 2011) [9].
42 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
44 Submission 23 (Victims of Crime Commissioner), citing Diana Eades,
‘Telling and Retelling Your Story in Court: Questions,
Assumptions and
Intercultural Implications’
(2008) 20(2)
Current Issues in Criminal
45 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the
Criminal Trial Process
(Report No 34, August 2016) 93 [5.36].
46 Submission 7 (knowmore).
48 Consultation 3 (CASA Forum).
49 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the
Criminal Trial Process
(Report No 34, August 2016) 207 [8.64].
50 It is common practice at committal hearings for witness’ statements
to be tendered in lieu of them giving oral evidence-in-chief:
Victorian Law
Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the Criminal Trial Process
(Report No 34, August 2016) 207 [8.64].
51 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the
Criminal Trial Process
(Report No 34, August 2016) 207 [8.64].
11.42 A representative from CASA Forum told the Commission:
While it may be positive in some respects that victim survivors are not
required to give their evidence-in-chief prior to trial at
committal stage, it
can also be very negative for them to have to respond only to questions that
cast doubt on their story. In practice,
they are denied the opportunity to tell
their own story, and are limited to responding to questions that cast doubt on
their evidence.52
11.43 Domestic Violence Victoria questioned whether it is fair to expect
survivors of domestic violence to undergo cross-examination
at a committal
in terms of procedural fairness—if victims are so traumatised by the
pre-trial process that they want to pull out—how
is that fair?53
11.44 The Office of the Public Advocate suggested:
the potential for cross-examinations in committal hearings to retraumatise
victims and witnesses is high and, as such, cross-examination
should be avoided
wherever possible.54
11.45 Some County Court judges favoured abolishing the opportunity to
cross-examine witnesses in the lower courts. They suggested
‘witnesses have a greater degree of protection in the trial court because
cross-examination can be restricted to the key
issues in dispute at the
11.46 Recognition that cross-examination can be stressful or worse was shared
by those who believe cross-examination in the lower
courts is nevertheless an
important foundation for ensuring fair trials. These stakeholders also claimed,
however, that some opportunities
for cross-examination at committal may benefit
victims and other witnesses by contributing to early resolution.56 Victoria
Aid acknowledged that giving evidence in court, especially during
cross-examination, can be traumatic and intimidating.57
11.47 The Criminal Bar Association (Victoria), which represents both
prosecution and defence counsel, told the Commission:
Giving evidence in court might be a stressful process, but there are a range
of responses. There are instances when witnesses, including
victims, look
forward to giving evidence and having their day in court. Other witnesses are
assisted by the opportunity of giving
evidence in the Magistrates’ Court
before potentially having to do so in a higher court, often before a jury. One
rule that all witnesses are likely to be traumatised by any
questioning, and particularly so at committal hearing, is not helpful.58
11.48 During its inquiry The Role of Victims of Crime in the Criminal Trial
Process, the Commission heard from victims who ‘found
giving evidence at
the committal to be positive—it was an opportunity to
“practise” for the trial and to be heard
by a court’.59
52 Consultation 3 (CASA Forum).
53 Consultation 14 (Domestic Violence Victoria).
54 Submission 6 (Office of the Public Advocate).
55 Submission 20 (County Court of Victoria).
56 See discussion below under the heading, ‘Cross-examination and early
resolution’.
57 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
58 Submission 11 (Criminal Bar Association (Victoria)).
59 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the
Criminal Trial Process
(Consultation Paper, July 2015) 138 [7.39].
Cross-examination and
11.49 A witness’s evidence is usually recorded during the investigative
phase in a written statement.60 In most cases, written
statements are prepared
by the police based on the witness’s oral account. The statement is then
signed by the witness in the
presence of a police officer. Written statements,
along with any other relevant evidence, are compiled into the hand-up brief and
provided to the court, DPP and accused.61
11.50 Many stakeholders viewed the opportunity to obtain leave to
cross-examine witnesses in the lower courts as necessary to obtaining
disclosure of the prosecution case.62
11.51 The Criminal Bar Association submitted that relying only a written
statement may sometimes be ‘sufficient—or at
least sufficient to
form the basis of an allegation to which an accused can plead guilty—other
times it is not’.63 This
is, they say, because ‘a written statement
is not set in stone’ and early pre-trial cross-examination can
if a witness will maintain, change or add to their account
previously given in written form’,64 affecting how a case will
11.52 The Magistrates’ Court submitted that relying only on a written
witness statement can be problematic as the process of
compiling one is
‘not merely the recording of events as detailed in a narrative form by a
complainant or witness’ but
includes content which evolves through
discussion between the police officer and the witness.65 Consequently,
It is ... not unusual for a witness to give differing accounts under
cross-examination which may in fact constitute a minimal departure
statements, but which are significant in terms of making out the elements of the
offence charged.66
11.53 According to the Law Institute of Victoria (LIV), its members report
poor disclosure practices by investigative agencies. A
particularly common
problem is failure by informants to recognise that non-incriminating evidence
may be relevant and therefore disclosable.
In the LIV’s view, the opportunity to cross-examine at a committal
hearing is ‘essential to ensure effective and
disclosure.’67 The LIV illustrated its point with reference to the use of
photoboards, citing the following ‘generic’
case study as one of
‘numerous examples ... with consistently similar facts’ provided by
its members:
There was no indication in the hand-up brief of the witness having partaken
in a photoboard identification procedure during which
the witnesses had not
picked out the accused or had selected a number of persons on the photoboard.
This is important exculpatory
evidence that only came to light during
cross-examination of the witness at committal. 68
11.54 In the DPP’s submission, cross-examination and disclosure
‘should not be conflated’ as ‘disclosure in
its legal sense
does not include cross-examination of witnesses’.69 The
DPP submitted that improving other aspects of the system such as earlier
engagement of prosecutors and better charging and disclosure
practices [among
informants] would
remove the need to rely on cross-examination to achieve early disclosure.70
Victoria Police agreed, saying that ‘adequate pre-trial
processes can be
implemented’ to achieve the disclosure that currently occurs during
cross-examination.71
60 The evidence of child complainants and complainants with cognitive
impairments in cases involving certain offences
is audio-visually
recorded by the police. The relevant offences include: sexual offences, an
offence where the conduct
constituting the offence consists of family
violence within the meaning of the
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
(Vic), an indictable offence which involves an assault on, or
injury or a threat of injury to, a person or certain unlawful
assault offences
Summary Offences Act 1966
Criminal Procedure Act
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
62 Submissions 11 (Criminal Bar Association (Victoria)), 14
(Magistrates’ Court of Victoria), 24 (Law Institute of Victoria),
(Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service).
63 Submission 11 (Criminal Bar Association (Victoria)).
65 Submission 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria).
67 Submission 24 (Law Institute of Victoria).
69 Submission 4 (Director of Public Prosecutions (Victoria)).
71 Submission 25 (Victoria Police). Victoria Police does not specify what
these processes might be.
11.55 Despite differences of opinion about the benefits of committal
proceedings,72 the judges of the County Court are united in their
pre-trial cross-examination of witnesses exists as a central part of the full
and fair disclosure of the prosecution case. It is a
process that, when
conducted efficiently and fairly, is of benefit to all parties, as well as the
court. It can facilitate early
resolution, full disclosure, and the elucidation
of issues in dispute.73
11.56 The CPA currently treats the opportunity to cross-examine witnesses
during a committal hearing as a component of disclosure
and an element of
ensuring a fair trial.74 Despite this, it explicitly prohibits cross-examination
during committal proceedings of
any witnesses in
section 123
Cross-examination and
early resolution
11.57 Appropriate early resolution of a case has numerous benefits. It allows
resources to be allocated elsewhere; means that many
victims and witnesses are
spared the stress and uncertainty of extended proceedings; and it can benefit
the accused by providing
certainty and, where the accused has entered a guilty
plea, may lead to a reduced sentence.
11.58 Differing views were put to the Commission about the contribution made
by cross- examination during committal hearings to early
resolution, and the
degree to which cross- examination can narrow the issues for trial if a case
cannot be resolved.
11.59 In the view of Victoria Legal Aid, cross-examination at the pre-trial
stage can be ‘pivotal in
... facilitating a guilty plea and precluding the need for a trial’.76
Victoria Legal Aid points out that cross-examination
‘can also reduce the
number of charges committed or the issues in dispute, thereby narrowing and
shortening the subsequent
11.60 The Magistrates’ Court submitted that because ‘the quality
of evidence at committal is highly probative, this often
leads to resolution,
obviating the need for trial and minimising trauma for potential
witnesses’.78 The Magistrates’
Court described one committal
proceeding which:
was listed for 5 days on a charge of murder with 16 witnesses listed for
cross- examination. After hearing the evidence of the first
witness, the case
was resolved to a plea for manslaughter obviating the need for further
witnesses...
There was no significant departure by the first witness from her statement
but rather a clarification of the incident. Court time
and stress to witnesses
were avoided.79
11.61 Those County Court judges who supported retaining the opportunity to
cross-examine witnesses in the lower courts emphasised
its role in narrowing
issues for trial:
For matters that do proceed to the trial court, committals ensure that the
issues are clarified ... and the scope of the charges are
limited ...80
72 ‘There are two broad views within the Court regarding the need to
reform committals, particularly regarding the overall merit
of transferring
pre-trial cross-examination to the trial court’: Submission 20 (County
Court of Victoria).
73 Submission 20 (County Court of Victoria).
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
75 As noted earlier, these are cases involving sexual offences where the
complainant was a child or person with a cognitive impairment
proceedings commenced.
76 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
78 Submission 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria).
80 Submission 20 (County Court of Victoria).
11.62 The Commission was asked to consider the experience of comparable
11.63 In Western Australia, cross-examination in the lower courts has been
effectively abolished.82 Discussing these amendments in
2009, Western Australian
Chief Justice Wayne Martin suggested that ‘the abolition of committal
hearings [has] expedited the
final resolution of many criminal cases, to the
advantage of the community generally’.83
11.64 By contrast, the Magistrates’ Court of Victoria uses Western
Australia as an example of a jurisdiction where, following
the abolition of
pre-trial cross-examination, ‘many examples have arisen of non-disclosure
issues resulting in convictions
being overturned and trials being adjourned or
aborted’.84
11.65 England and Wales is another jurisdiction where cross-examination is
not available in the lower courts. Figures provided by
the Magistrates’
Court of Victoria show that between January and December 2017, approximately 69
per cent of indictable cases
in England and Wales were sent from the
Magistrates’ Court to the Crown Court for trial and only 31 per cent for
sentence.85
In Victoria in 2016–17, the Magistrates’ Court committed
46 per cent of cases to the higher courts for trial and 54 per
sentence.86 This differential is consistent with the opportunity to
cross-examine in the lower courts in Victoria contributing
to securing early
guilty pleas.
Commission’s
conclusion: retain cross-examination in the lower courts
11.66 Cross-examination in the lower courts should be retained in appropriate
11.67 In combination with other recommendations made in this report,
retaining the opportunity to cross-examine some witnesses in
the lower courts
will ensure criminal cases in Victoria are dealt with efficiently, with less
trauma for victims and witnesses, while
preserving the right to a fair
11.68 The Commission now turns to a consideration of whether the prohibition
on cross- examining certain classes of witnesses in
section 123
should be expanded.
Protecting additional
classes of witness from cross-examination
11.69 Stakeholders have divergent views about whether existing prohibitions
on cross- examining some classes of witness in the lower
courts should be
11.70 The DPP’s suggested approach, supported by Victoria Police,87 is
• prohibit pre-trial cross-examination (whether in the lower or higher
courts) of any complainants where the proceeding relates
to a sexual or family
violence offence
• prohibit pre-trial cross-examination (whether in the lower or higher
courts) of any ‘vulnerable witnesses’, unless
for the purposes of
recording the witnesses’ evidence for use at trial.88
81 Submission 9 (Australian Lawyers for Human Rights), Submission 10 (Rape
and Domestic Violence Services Australia).
82 Pre-trial cross-examination is only available where the prosecution has
been unable to obtain a written statement from a witness
to take their evidence in a process similar to Victoria’s compulsory
witness examination hearing.
83 Chief Justice Wayne Martin, ‘The Law Reform Commission of WA: Review
of the Civil and Criminal Justice System—10 Years
On’ (Speech,
Supreme Court of Western Australia, 13 October 2009) 11 <https://
www.supremecourt.wa.gov.au/_files/Law_Reform_
Commission_20091013.pdf>.
84 Submission 14 (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria).
87 Submission 25 (Victoria Police).
88 Submission 4 (Director of Public Prosecutions (Victoria)).
11.71 The DPP proposed a ‘vulnerable witness’ should be defined
as any child or person with a cognitive impairment, regardless
of whether they
are a complainant in the matter.89
11.72 The supervising magistrates of the Family Violence and Sexual Offences
Lists suggested
section 123
should be expanded to cases involving family
violence.90 This would prevent cross-examination in the lower courts of any
in cases involving a sexual offence or family violence where the
complainant was a child or person with a cognitive impairment when
proceedings
commenced. Beyond the inclusion of family violence offences, these magistrates
opposed any further expansion of
section 123.
They claimed it was still too
early to assess if the recent amendment to
section 123
and introduction of
section 198A
, ‘has assisted to reduce trauma for complainants, promote
resolution or avoid delay.’91
11.73 The Victims of Crime Commissioner and the Office of the Public Advocate
endorsed recommendations made by the Commission in
The Role of Victims of
Crime in the Criminal Trial Process: Report
to prohibit cross-examination
in the lower courts of ‘protected victims’. The report says a
protected victim should be
defined as ‘a victim who is likely to suffer
severe emotional trauma or be so intimidated or distressed as to be unable to
give evidence or give evidence fairly.’92 Who should count as a
‘protected victim’ should be assessed on a case-by-case
having regard to factors such as the nature of the offending and the
victim’s relationship with the accused.93
Commission’s
conclusion: expand section 123 to some family violence cases
11.74 For many witnesses, being cross-examined is confronting and
distressing. This is a more common experience for some witnesses
their personal circumstances or the type of offending.
Section 123
of the CPA should be expanded to preclude cross-examination
in the lower courts of any witnesses in cases involving family violence
the complainant was a child or person with a cognitive impairment when the
proceedings commenced.94
11.76 The expansion of
section 123
and implementation of
section 198A
in March 2019 created a different situation to that considered by the
Commission in
The Role of Victims in the Criminal Trial Process: Report.
Until the results of the recent changes become clear, it would be
premature to implement a separate ‘protected victim’
category, as
recommended in that report.
11.77 The current recommendation to expand
section 123
to include family
violence cases is not as broad as the DPP’s proposal but is consistent
with it. The recommendation has the
support of the supervising magistrates of
the Family Violence and Sexual Offences Lists.95 Expanding
section 123
include cases involving family violence is consistent with other parts of the
CPA that already provide certain protections in
family violence cases.96
90 Submission 14a (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria – additional
submission).
92 Recommendation 37: Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims
of Crime in the Criminal Trial Process
(Report No 34, August 2016) 213.
93 Ibid. Recommendation 38 says that ‘All child victims other than
child victims of sexual offences [who are already protected
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
should be considered protected
victims unless the court is satisfied that the child victim is aware that the
protective procedures
are available and does not wish to use them.’
94 Defined as an offence where the conduct constituting the offence consists
of family violence within the meaning of the
Family Violence Protection Act
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
s 353(1)(b).
sexual offences, which can be more exhaustively defined, offending committed in
the context of family violence may take a
number of forms, including sexual
offences, serious assaults, homicide offences, threats to kill or cause serious
injury, as well
as property offences involving theft burglary and damage to
property: Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in
the Criminal Trial Process
(Report No 34, August 2016) 201–202
95 Submission 14a (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria – additional
submission)
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
s 353(1)(b).
11.78 At the same time, the proposal will not have the far-reaching
consequences of the DPP’s proposal, which could lead to
applications and special hearings. Special hearings involve complainants
being cross-examined on their trial evidence. The cross-examination
occurs from
the trial court by video link, with the complainant located in a remote witness
facility. Although technically part of
the trial, special hearings are conducted
in the absence of the jury and are often conducted before the trial proper
commences.97
Recordings of the complainant’s evidence-in-chief and
cross-examination are then admitted as the complainant’s evidence
trial and played for the jury.98
11.79 While a strong case can be made to expand the scope of
section 123
further to cover other victims, especially those who may be vulnerable to or
experiencing severe forms of trauma, who may benefit
from giving evidence once
only during special hearings, the Commission notes that special hearings are
resource intensive and time
consuming.99 The effects of amending
section 123
implementing
section 198A
have not been formally evaluated. Without knowing how
these changes have affected efficiency or the experience of victims, the
does not recommend any further expansion of
special hearings at this time, beyond its recommendation to include family
violence cases.
11.80 Even the Commission’s limited recommendation to expand
to include family violence offences will require more special hearings and
likely result in more
section 198A
applications.
11.81 Before any additional expansion of
section 123
is considered, the
Commission recommends a formal evaluation of its operation in conjunction with
section 198A.
The evaluation should assess if the changes are reducing trauma
for complainants and other witnesses while also reducing delay and
resources efficiently.
11.82 If the Commission’s recommendation to extend
section 123
include family violence offences is adopted, it should be accompanied by
increased funding for the courts, the Office of Public
Prosecutions and Victoria
99 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the
Criminal Trial Process
(Report No 34, August 2016) 196–226.
Should the test for leave to cross-examine witnesses in the lower courts
be strengthened?
11.83 As discussed earlier, the test in
section 124
of the CPA for leave to
cross-examine witnesses at a committal hearing requires an accused to:
• identify an issue to which the proposed questioning relates100
• provide a reason why the evidence of the witness is relevant to that
• satisfy the Magistrates’ Court that cross-examination of the
witness on that issue is justified.102
11.84 In determining whether cross-examination is justified, the court must
have regard to several factors, including the need to
ensure the case is
adequately disclosed.103
Section 124(5)
lists additional criteria the court must have regard
to if the witness is a child, including the need to minimise the trauma
might be experienced by the
witness in giving evidence. The supervising magistrates of the Sexual
Offences and Family Violence Lists suggest the Magistrates’
Court should
also be required to have regard
to the criteria in
section 124(5)
if an application for leave to
cross-examine relates to a witness who has a cognitive impairment.104
11.86 Having regard to communication and comprehension difficulties faced by
witnesses with cognitive impairments, and without opposition
from any other
stakeholders, the Commission supports this approach.
11.87 The DPP proposed strengthening the test for leave to cross-examine
to require that the Magistrates’ Court is satisfied
substantial reasons why, in the interests of justice, the witness should attend
to give oral evidence (‘substantial
reasons’ test).105
In the DPP’s view consideration of the ‘interests of
justice’ should include ‘whether the cross-examination
of a witness
is central to resolution discussions or likely to inform what charges are
included on an indictment’.106
11.88 Changing the test was also considered in
The Role of Victims of
Crime in the Criminal Trial Process: Report
. The Commission recommended
introducing a test restricting cross- examination to matters that relate
‘directly and substantially
to the decision to commit for trial’.107
In response to the current terms of reference, the Commission now recommends
the test for committal be abolished (see Chapter 4). While reference to the
for committal as part of the test for cross-examination in the lower courts
is no longer appropriate, the substance of the recommendation
The Role of
Victims of Crime in the Criminal Trial Process: Report
aligns with the
DPP’s ‘substantial reasons’ test.
11.89 Some stakeholders defended the current test for leave to
cross-examine but said there was a need for greater consistency
application. The Commission was told during consultations that some magistrates
apply the test appropriately, but in some
courts leave to cross-examine is
granted almost automatically.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
s 124(3)(a).
s 124(3)(a).
s 124(3)(b).
104 Submission 14a (Magistrates’ Court of Victoria – additional
submission).
105 Submission 4 (Director of Public Prosecutions (Victoria)).
107 Recommendation 39: Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of
Victims of Crime in the Criminal Trial Process
(Report No 34, August 2016)
209 [8.79].
Commission’s conclusions: expand application
of section 124(5) and better apply the test for leave to cross-examine
Section 124(5)
should be expanded so that the additional criteria
listed must also be considered in relation to applications for leave to
cross-examine:
• witnesses who have cognitive impairments
• victims in cases involving sexual or family violence.
11.91 The main problem identified by the Commission concerning the test for
leave to cross- examine is that in some cases the test
is not properly applied
according to its terms but rather that leave is granted almost as a matter of
course. The solution to this
problem is not to alter the test, but rather to
ensure that magistrates apply the test according to its terms.
11.92 One way of promoting this change is to require magistrates to give
written reasons, even if brief, for a decision to grant
leave. The requirement
to provide written reasons is a significant discipline likely to improve the
proper application of the test
and obviate the need to recast it.
11.93 Combined with rigorous judicial oversight, the enhanced range of
protective measures now available in the lower courts (see
below), not all of
which were available when the Commission made its recommendation in
of Victims in the Criminal Trial Process: Report
to strengthen the test for
cross-examination,108 should ensure that witnesses are not exposed to
unnecessary harm or trauma during
cross-examination.
Reducing trauma during
cross-examination
11.94 Giving evidence and being cross-examined is a confronting and
challenging experience for many victims and witnesses.
For some, it is
distressing and even traumatising. It is now recognised that the present
system does not sufficiently protect
victims and the culture around
cross-examination of victims in the lower courts needs to change. A range of
recent initiatives
seek to improve victims’ experience and to protect them
from harm. These initiatives are described below, followed by discussion
use of intermediaries and alternative arrangements for giving evidence. The
Commission recommends
making intermediaries more widely available and promoting the use of
alternative arrangements. Together with the other initiatives
described here,
and the Commission’s recommendations in relation to
sections 123
this will promote a culture of respect for victims and help protect them from
108 Recommendation 39: Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of
Victims of Crime in the Criminal Trial Process
(Report No 34, August 2016)
209 [8.79].
11.95 The Judicial College of Victoria’s 2019 guide
Victims of Crime
in the Courtroom
explains that victims and witnesses who have been exposed
to traumatic events can experience:
• difficulties discussing or recounting the traumatic event/s in
• impaired recollection of events due to fragmented memory or emotional
arousal that interferes with encoding and recollection
• fear of going to court and seeing the accused or people associated
with the accused
• fear of possible credibility issues if they are unable to present a
coherent narrative of events and/or advocate for themselves
• fear of being blamed by the community, family members and/or legal
professionals
• lack of trust in, and sense of safety around, authority figures in
the legal system.109
11.96 A trauma-informed approach should be adopted to tackle these
challenges.110 This requires that:
• judicial officers, court staff, investigators and prosecutors are
informed about the nature of trauma and equipped to manage
its impact on
participation in legal processes
• victims and witnesses are provided with appropriate information about
the need for and process of pre-trial cross-examination
• victims and witnesses are provided with effective support and
facilities before, during and after cross-examination.111
Victims of Crime in the Courtroom
is a useful tool for educating
judicial officers, court staff and other justice system workers about trauma and
its effects within
criminal proceedings. The Judicial College also provides
training to judges and magistrates on how trauma manifests in court
environments.112
11.98 In addition to community organisations like Court Network,113 a range
of government services provide information to victims
and witnesses and support
them to give their best evidence without being further traumatised. These
• The OPP’s Victims and Witness Assistance Service (VWAS),
staffed by social workers who provide information and support
to adult victims
and witnesses
• The Child Witness Service, which aims to reduce trauma and stress
experienced by child witnesses by familiarising them with
the court process and
personnel; supporting them and their families throughout the criminal
proceeding; and providing debriefing
and referrals to community agencies114
• The Intermediaries Pilot Program, which assesses and makes
recommendations regarding the communication style and needs of
complainants in
sexual offence cases and witnesses in homicide cases who are children or persons
with cognitive impairments115
• The OPP’s Victim Support Dog Program, which uses trained
support dogs to comfort vulnerable witnesses when they are
evidence.116
109 Judicial College of Victoria,
Victims of Crime in the Courtroom: A
Guide for Judicial Officers
110 Submissions 4 (Director of Public Prosecutions (Vcitoria)), 6 (Office of
the Public Advocate), 7 (knowmore), 9 (Australian Lawyers
for Human Rights), 10
(Rape and Domestic Violence Services), 13 (Victoria Legal Aid), 16 (Ari
Wigdorowitz), 19 (Victorian Aboriginal
Legal Service), 23 (Victims of Crime
Commissioner), 24 (Law Institute of Victoria), 25 (Victoria Police).
111 See Judicial College of Victoria,
Victims of Crime in the Courtroom: A
Guide for Judicial Officers
112 Judicial College of Victoria, ‘Insight into Trauma Event’,
Programs and Events
(Web Page, 2019) <https://
www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/
programs-and-events/insight-trauma>.
113 Court Network is a community organisation that provides support,
information and referral to people attending court and advocates
for the needs
of all court users. See Court Network, ‘About Us’,
(Web Page, 2020) <https://courtnetwork.com.au/about/what- we-do/>.
114 Victims Support Agency, ‘Child Witness Service’,
(Web Page, 23 August 2019) <https://
www.victimsofcrime.vic.gov.au/
going-to-court/child-witness-service>.
115 County Court of Victoria,
Multi-Jurisdictional Court Guide for the
Intermediary Pilot Program: Intermediaries and Ground Rules Hearings
(Guide, 28 June 2018) <https://
www.countycourt.vic.gov.au/practice-notes?filters
[division]=2>.
116 ‘Program Overview’,
Court Dogs Victoria
2020) <https://
www.courtdogsvictoria.org.au/program
11.99 The CPA also expressly provides that the court may make directions for
alternative arrangements for taking the evidence of witnesses
in cases involving
a charge for:
• a sexual offence
• a family violence offence
• obscene, indecent, or threatening language or behaviour in public
• sexual exposure.117
The OPP’s Victims
and Witness Assistance Service
11.100 The Victims and Witness Assistance Service (VWAS) is staffed by social
workers who operate within a trauma-centred framework.118
It provides adult
victims and witnesses of serious crime with information and support.119 It
prioritises assistance and support
to families who have lost loved ones;
victims and witnesses in sexual assault and family violence matters; and
vulnerable victims.120
VWAS provides information about giving
evidence and discusses with victims and witnesses any concerns they may have
referrals to other support
agencies.121
11.101 Since 2019, teams of four social workers from VWAS have worked in each
of the four trial divisions at the OPP to develop victim
engagement plans and to
provide advice on how best to support victims and witnesses throughout the
course of indictable prosecutions.122
11.102 During its 2016 inquiry, The Role of Victims of Crime in the Criminal
Trial Process, the Commission was told that victim support
services, including
the Witness Assistance Service—as VWAS was then called—were
underfunded. This underfunding was particularly
severe in regional Victoria.123
In response to a recommendation from the Commission for better regional services
and more effective
victim support services generally,124 the OPP received
funding to strengthen its support services. It has now established a
and Witnesses’ website, in consultation with the Victims of
Crime Consultative Committee, which provides information about
the court process
and giving evidence and is accessible throughout Victoria.125
11.103 The OPP has redesigned its regional prosecution process to ensure
consistency with matters dealt with in Melbourne.126 This
redesign should
‘allow for more consistent delivery of services to victims and
witnesses’ but the OPP notes that:
While in principle we endeavour to provide equal access to our services in
every matter, whether regional or metro-based, this is
always subject to the
challenge of funding.127
11.104 The Commission reiterates that the VWAS should have a strong presence
in regional Victoria.
Expanding the use of
intermediaries
11.105 In 2018, the CPA was amended to provide that intermediaries may be
appointed to assess the communication style and needs of
child witnesses and
witnesses who have cognitive impairments and make recommendations for how to
best evidence.128
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
118 Email from the Office of Public Prosecutions to the Victorian Law Reform
Commission, 28 January 2020.
119 Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria,
Witness Assistance Service
(Brochure, 2014).
122 Letter from Office of Public Prosecutions to Victorian Law Reform
Commission, 19 December 2019.
123 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the
Criminal Trial Process
(Report No 34, August 2016) 117 [6.72].
124 Recommendation 22: Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of
Victims of Crime in the Criminal Trial Process
(Report No 34, August 2016)
125 Letter from Office of Public Prosecutions to Victorian Law Reform
Commission, 19 December 2019.
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
11.106 An Intermediaries Pilot Program was established in July 2018 and will
continue until June 2020129 in courts in metropolitan
Melbourne.130 It is
limited to:
• complainants in sexual offences cases who are children or persons
with a cognitive impairment
• witnesses in homicide cases who are children or persons with a
cognitive impairment.
11.107 Intermediaries are appointed by the court on its own motion or
following an application by a party.131 This may occur at any
proceedings, including before committal hearings.132 Intermediaries are officers
of the court and have a duty to act impartially.133
11.108 If an intermediary is appointed, a ‘ground rules hearing’
must be held before the hearing at which the witness
gives evidence.134 At the
ground rules hearing, the court considers the intermediary’s assessment
report and recommendations
and may make directions for the fair and effective
conduct of the proceeding, including:
• how the witness may be questioned
• the duration of questioning
• questions that may or may not be put to a witness
• the use of aids to help communicate a question or an answer.135
11.109 The intermediary must be present when the witness gives evidence.136
Where necessary, they can facilitate communication between
the witness and other
parties to prevent or overcome a communication breakdown.137
11.110 Several stakeholders supported an expansion of the Intermediaries
Pilot Program.
11.111 The Office of the Public Advocate (OPA) ‘looks forward to the
evaluation of the pilot and a state-wide roll-out’.138
In the meantime,
given that:
Intermediaries ... can promote one of the purposes of the committals
hearing—of full disclosure of the prosecution case—and
need for cross-examination of witnesses, by better enabling people to tell their
stories ... the program [should] be expanded
to support people with cognitive
impairment in a broader range of offence categories than is currently
offered.139
11.112 Echoing the Final Report of the Royal Commission into Institutional
Sexual Abuse, knowmore proposed expanding the intermediary
scheme to, ‘at
a minimum’, adult complainants in child sexual abuse cases. It added that,
‘pending positive outcomes
from the Intermediary Pilot Program’, and
acknowledging potential resource constraints, intermediaries should eventually
available to ‘any prosecution witness with a communication
difficulty’.140
129 County Court of Victoria,
Multi-Jurisdictional Court Guide for the
Intermediary Pilot Program: Intermediaries and Ground Rules Hearings
(Guide, 28 June 2018) 1.
130 As well as some police sexual offence and child investigative team sites:
County Court of Victoria,
Multi-Jurisdictional Court Guide for the
Intermediary Pilot Program: Intermediaries and Ground Rules Hearings
28 June 2018) 1–3 [1]–[11].
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
137 Department of Justice and Community Safety (Vic), ‘Victorian
Intermediaries Pilot Program,’
Justice System
(Web Page, 26 April
www.justice.vic.gov.au/justice-system/courts-and-tribunals/victorian-intermediaries-pilot-program
138 Submission 6 (Office of the Public Advocate).
140 Submission 7 (knowmore).
11.113 Victoria Legal Aid proposed that intermediaries and ground rules
hearings be made available at all court locations and for
more victims and
witnesses, potentially including all:
• complainants with vulnerabilities
• complainants in family violence matters
• witnesses with significant cognitive disabilities or mental health
• witnesses with limited English or from a vulnerable community
• witnesses in cases where the offending is likely to cause particular
11.114 Expanding the intermediary program to all victims and witnesses with
communication difficulties would advance fair trial rights.
communication helps witnesses give their best evidence. This promotes better
disclosure to the accused, which supports a
fair trial. Expansion of the program
could also help minimise trauma for victims and witnesses by allowing them to
feel supported,
and confident that their voice is heard and their meaning
understood.
Alternative
arrangements
11.115 Under the CPA, a court may direct that alternative arrangements be
made for a witness, including a complainant, to give evidence
in proceedings
that relate to a charge for:
• a sexual offence
• a family violence offence
• obscene, indecent, or threatening language or behaviour in public
• sexual exposure.142
11.116 Alternative arrangements include:
• using remote witness facilities
• using screens in the courtroom to remove the accused from the
victim’s line of vision when the victim is giving evidence
• having a support person beside the victim to provide emotional
support when the victim is giving evidence
• allowing only specified people to be present in court
• prohibiting lawyers from wearing robes and requiring them to be
seated rather than standing when questioning the victim.143
The Role of Victims in the Criminal Trial Process: Report
Commission noted that it consulted with victims who used alternative
arrangements when giving evidence, some of whom found the
positive.144 During its consultations, there was
support for expanding the availability of alternative arrangements to a
broader group of victims.145 The Commission recommended that
all child victims
should be eligible to use alternative arrangements should they wish to do so, as
well as victims who fell within
the Commission’s proposed definition of
‘protected victim’.146 At the time of this reference, that
recommendation
has not been implemented.
Submissions to the current reference focussed on whether cross-examination
during pre-trial committal proceedings should be abolished
altogether or
retained, rather than whether alternative arrangements should be used more
widely. Victoria Legal Aid noted, however,
that ‘distress can be minimised
by giving evidence under alternative arrangements’ and it supported the
Commission’s
previous recommendation to make alternative arrangements
available to a wider group.147
Magistrates already have a general power to make directions for how witnesses
give evidence, including making special arrangements
if the circumstances so
require, as part of the necessary authority to control proceedings and ensure
fair trials. The CPA power
to direct the making of alternative arrangements in
proceedings involving certain offences is the statutory recognition of one
of the general power. The court’s general power should be
explicitly recognised in the CPA in order to encourage the use of
alternative
arrangements for all victims and witnesses who require them as a measure to
reduce potential trauma.
144 Victorian Law Reform Commission,
The Role of Victims of Crime in the
Criminal Trial Process
(Report No 34, August 2016) 206 [8.57]. 145 Ibid
146 Ibid [8.62].
147 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
The Children’s Court
Introduction
Committals in the Children’s Court: the present system
Removing committals from the Children’s Court
Children accused of Supreme Court offences
Areas of reform specific to the Children’s Court
The Children’s
Introduction
12.1 The specialist jurisdiction of the Children’s Court deals with
cases involving children accused of criminal offending.1
The Court’s
Criminal Division has jurisdiction to hear and determine:
• all charges against children for summary offences2
• all charges against children for indictable offences triable
summarily, other than six ‘death-related’ offences,
which must be
determined in the higher courts.3
12.2 The Children’s Court conducts committal proceedings for cases that
it cannot hear and determine. In addition to the six
death-related offences,4
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
(Vic) (CYFA) prescribes
several other offences that are presumed too serious to be dealt with
summarily by the Children’s
Court.5 These are referred to as
‘Category A Serious Youth Offences’,6 and they can only be heard
and determined
in the Children’s Court if the child or prosecution
requests it, the court is satisfied that the sentencing options available
it are adequate to respond to the child’s offending, and:
• it is in the interests of the victim or victims that the charge be
heard and determined summarily, or
• the accused is particularly vulnerable because of cognitive
impairment or mental illness, or
• there is a substantial and compelling reason why the charge should be
heard and determined summarily.7
12.3 If a case involves a ‘Category B Serious Youth Offence’,8
before dealing with the case summarily, the Children’s
Court must consider
whether the charge is suitable to be heard and determined summarily.9
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
s 516(1)(b).
4 Murder, attempted murder, manslaughter, child homicide, arson causing death
and culpable driving causing death: Ibid
s 516(1)(b).
5 This presumption only applies if the accused is 16 years or older: Ibid
The offences are murder; attempted murder; manslaughter; child
homicide; intentionally causing serious injury (
Crimes Act 1958
; aggravated home invasion (
Crimes Act 1958
; aggravated
carjacking (
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic) s 79B); arson causing death (
; culpable driving causing death (
Crimes Act 1958
; an offence against
Terrorism (Community
Protection) Act 2003
(Vic); a provision of Subdivision A of Division 72 of
Chapter 4 of the Criminal Code of the Commonwealth; a provision of Part 5.3
5.5 of the Criminal Code of the Commonwealth; a provision of the
(Foreign Incursions and Recruitment) Act 1978
(Cth) as in force before
its repeal.
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
(8). The offences are recklessly causing injury in
circumstances of gross violence (
Crimes Act 1958
Crimes Act 1958
; rape by compelling sexual
penetration (
Crimes Act 1958
; home invasion (
; carjacking (
Crimes Act 1958
See s 356(8) for a list of the court’s mandatory considerations when
making this determination.
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
12.4 This chapter considers how the Commission’s recommendations will
operate in the Children’s Court and makes additional
recommendations that
apply only in this jurisdiction.
Committals in the
Children’s Court: the present system
The role of the
Children’s Court
12.5 The purpose of the Criminal Division of the Children’s Court is
• divert children away from the criminal justice system where possible
and appropriate
• reduce the stigma caused to a child by contact with the criminal
justice system
• encourage a child to accept responsibility for unlawful behaviour
• respond to a child’s offending behaviour in a manner that
acknowledges the child’s needs and assists with rehabilitation
• provide children with opportunities to strengthen and preserve
relationships with family and other persons of importance in
the child’s
• provide children with ongoing pathways to connect with education,
training and employment.10
12.6 Children charged with serious indictable offences often present with
complex and multifaceted issues. These include:
• child protection involvement
• a history of, or being victims of, abuse, trauma and neglect
• neuro-disabilities
• a history of, or current, drug and alcohol abuse issues and poor
mental health
• other characteristics that underscore the complexity of offending by
children and young people.11
12.7 Accordingly, a ‘very different approach to both the ascertainment
of and response to criminality on the part of young persons’
is required.
As Justice Frank Vincent observed:
It is only where very special, unusual, or exceptional, circumstances exist
of a kind which render unsuitable the determination of
a case in the
matter should be removed from that jurisdiction
to the adult courts.12
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
also recognises:
A child charged with a criminal offence has the right to a procedure that
takes account of his or her age and the desirability of
promoting the
child’s rehabilitation.13
Current committal process
in the Children’s Court
12.9 Prior to the introduction of Category A and B Serious Youth Offences in
2018, the six death-related offences were the only offences
the Children’s
Court did not have
uplifted to the higher courts for determination following
application by the
prosecution.
10 Ibid s 356C.
11 Submission 17 (Children’s Court of Victoria).
DL v Reynolds
[1994] (Supreme Court of Victoria, Vincent JA, 9
August 1994) in
[2010] VChC 2
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
12.10 In cases it cannot or will not hear and determine, the Children’s
Court conducts committal proceedings, following the
procedure prescribed in the
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) (CPA),14 before the case is heard and
determined in the County or Supreme Courts.
12.11 As it is presumed that cases involving Category A Serious Youth
Offences should be heard and determined by the higher courts,
Children’s Court is now managing a greater number of committal
proceedings. In 2014–15 there were nine cases in the
Court committal stream.
12.12 In 2018–19 there were 52 cases.15 Of these:
• 24 were dealt with summarily in the Children’s Court16
• 10 were committed to the high courts, four following a plea of guilty
and six following a plea of not guilty
• 18 remain pending in the Children’s Court.17
Removing committals from
the Children’s Court
12.13 The Children’s Court and Victoria Legal Aid are ‘strongly
opposed’18 to removing committal proceedings from
the Children’s
12.14 The Children’s Court submitted that the risks and disadvantages
far outweigh any perceived advantages for several reasons:
• The Court’s judicial officers have specialist expertise in
determining matters involving children and young people.
• Its courtrooms, facilities, processes and procedures are
child-centric and/or have been modified for the jurisdiction of the
• As a specialist court, it has greater scope to hear and determine
indictable matters summarily.
• Transferring the committal process to the higher courts will risk
delaying proceedings involving child accused and reverse
the status quo, namely
that child accused should be tried in the Children’s Court unless a
statutory exception arises.19
12.15 Victoria Legal Aid submitted:
Removing committals in the children’s jurisdiction will undermine the
longstanding specialist framework under the CYFA, which
has been designed to
respond to criminal offending by children and young people. [The CYFA] demands
more effort and rehabilitative
innovation, to secure a reduction in harm and
recidivism for these young people who will almost certainly re-enter the
community.20
12.16 Consistent with the recommendations made in this report to keep
committal proceedings in the Magistrates’ Court, the Commission
propose any changes that would reduce the involvement of the Children’s
Court in cases where a child is accused of
a serious criminal offence.
Children’s, Youth and Families Act 2005
(Vic) ss 356(3),
516(1)(c), 528(2)(b).
15 Submission 17 (Children’s Court of Victoria).
16 Of these cases, the indictable charge was ‘struck out’ in 12
cases, the Children’s Court granted summary jurisdiction
in five, in five
all charges were struck out, one was dealt with summarily as the accused was
under 16 and it was erroneously commenced
in the committal stream, and one case
was transferred to the Magistrates’ Court due to the accused’s age:
17 (Children’s Court of Victoria).
17 As at 6 September 2019: Submission 17 (Children’s Court of
18 Submission 17 (Children’s Court of Victoria).
20 Submission 13 (Victoria Legal Aid).
Children accused of
Supreme Court offences
12.17 In Chapter 5, the Commission recommends that all cases involving
offences within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
should be filed
in the Supreme Court, aside from Children’s Court cases.
12.18 The current framework for managing inherent jurisdiction matters in the
Children’s Court should be maintained. This will
Children’s Court, with its appropriate facilities and specialised judicial
officers, to initially manage the case.
12.19 The new case management approach recommended in Chapter 6, including
court- supervised case conferencing, replacement of committal
mention and
committal hearings with an issues hearing and the availability of
cross-examination, should similarly apply
to all cases managed by the Children’s Court that are then transferred
to the County or Supreme Court for hearing and determination.
Areas of reform specific
to the Children’s Court
12.20 The Children’s Court asked the Commission to consider
recommending reform in relation to:
• the timing of applications for summary jurisdiction
• management of cases involving adult and child co-accused
• transfer to the trial court of related indictable offences.21
Timing of applications
for summary jurisdiction
12.21 In cases involving a Category A Serious Youth Offence (except in those
involving a death- related offence) a child accused can
make an application for
summary jurisdiction.22 The Children’s Court must be satisfied the
sentencing options available to
it are adequate to respond to the child’s
alleged offending, and either:
• it is in the interests of the victim that the charge be heard and
determined summarily
• the child accused is particularly vulnerable because of cognitive
impairment or mental illness
• there is a substantial and compelling reason why the charge should be
heard and determined summarily.23
12.22 The CYFA does not prescribe when an application for summary
12.23 In the view of the Children’s Court, summary jurisdiction
applications create delay as they require it to make a detailed
assessment as to
[Lawyers] are turning their minds to argue jurisdiction and preparing
arguments to establish/contest substantial and compelling reason
to enable the
charges to be heard summarily in the Children’s Court away from other
procedural aspects of the case.25
12.24 The Children’s Court submitted that ‘it is essential for
the issue of jurisdiction to be resolved as soon as possible’,
accordingly supported a recommendation that applications for summary
in exceptional
circumstances.26
21 Submission 17 (Children’s Court of Victoria).
Children’s, Youth and Families Act 2005
(Vic) s 356(6).
23 Ibid s 356(6)(b).
24 Consultation 23 (Children’s Court of Victoria).
26 Ibid, Submission 17 (Children’s Court of Victoria).
Management of cases
involving adult and child co-accused
12.25 Currently in cases involving adult and child27 co-accused charged with
a death-related offence,28 a joint committal proceeding
may occur.29 In doing
so, victims and witnesses are only required to participate in one committal
proceeding. There is no equivalent
mechanism available in relation to other
Category A Serious Youth Offences.
12.26 The Children’s Court submitted that the Commission consider
addressing this. In its view, allowing joint committal proceedings
involving the other Category A Serious Youth Offences will:
promote efficiency in the use of court time and resources, avoid the
duplication of witness evidence and cross-examination across
the jurisdictions,
reduce delay and allow streamlined processes where co-accused are being
prosecuted across two jurisdictions.30
Transfer of related
indictable offences to trial court
12.27 If a child accused is committed for trial, all related summary
offences31 are transferred to the trial court along with the
indictable offence
on which the accused was committed.32
12.28 There is no legislative mechanism by which the Children’s Court
can transfer related indictable offences where a child—aged
16 years or
older at the time of the alleged offence—is also charged with a Category A
(or B) serious youth offence and is
committed to stand trial. The Court can only
transfer related indictable offences if it finds that ‘exceptional
circumstances’
12.29 According to the Children’s Court, ‘the potential
consequence of this procedural limitation is that separate jurisdictions
determining charges/sentencing the child for related offending’.34
27 This only applies to children over the age of 15 at the time the
proceeding commenced:
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
s 516A(1)(b)(i).
28 Murder, attempted murder, manslaughter, child homicide, arson causing
death or culpable driving causing death:
Children, Youth and Families Act
s 516A(1)(b)(ii).
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
30 Submission 17 (Children’s Court of Victoria).
31 ‘Related offences’ are those that are ‘founded on the
same facts or form... a series of offences of the same
or a similar
character’:
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Children, Youth and
Families Act 2005
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
34 Submission 17 (Children’s Court of Victoria).
12.30 To address this, the Children’s Court recommends that where cases
are uplifted from its jurisdiction, the CYFA should
allow for related indictable
offences to be transferred to the higher court without the need for a finding
that exceptional circumstances
Appendix A: Submissions
Appendix B: Consultations
Appendix C: Standard Disclosure Material
Appendix A:
Submissions
1 Michael Lillas
2 Name withheld
3 Name withheld
4 Director of Public Prosecutions (Victoria)
5 Thomas Gillick
6 Office of the Public Advocate
8 Confidential
9 Australian Lawyers for Human Rights
10 Rape and Domestic Violence Services Australia
11 Criminal Bar Association (Victoria)
12 Neville Rudston
13 Victoria Legal Aid
14 Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
14a Magistrates’ Court of Victoria – additional submission
15 Liberty Victoria
16 Ari Wigdorowitz
17 Children’s Court of Victoria
18 Name withheld
19 Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service
20 County Court of Victoria
21 Name withheld
22 Supreme Court of Victoria
23 Victims of Crime Commissioner
24 Law Institute of Victoria
25 Victoria Police
26 Name withheld
27 Roger Wu
Appendix B:
Consultations
1 Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service
2 Victims of Crime Consultative Committee
3 CASA Forum
4 Child Witness Service
5 Victims of Crime Commissioner
6 Criminal Bar Association (Victoria)
7 Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
8 Victoria Legal Aid
9 Women’s Housing Ltd
10 Law Institute of Victoria
11 Director of Public Prosecutions
12 Shepparton Magistrates’ Court
13 Goulburn Valley practitioners
14 Domestic Violence Victoria
15 Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
16 La Trobe Valley practitioners
17 Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine
18 Academic roundtable: Professor Gideon Boas, Professor Arie Freiberg,
Professor Jeremy Gans, Professor Felicity Gerry, Associate
Professor Peter Rush,
Dr Jamie Walvisch
19 Victoria Police
20 Geelong Magistrates’ Court
21 Geelong practitioners
22 The Hon. Justice Mark Ierace
23 Children’s Court of Victoria
24 Australian Federal Police
25 Victorian intermediaries pilot program
26 Representatives of Victims Assistance Programs
27 Office of Public Advocate
28 South Australia Major Indictable Review
29 Bendigo Magistrates’ Court
30 County Court of Victoria
31 Supreme Court of Victoria
32 Local Court of New South Wales
33 Director of Public Prosecutions (New South Wales)
34 Legal Aid New South Wales
35 Confidential
36 Police Prosecution Command New South Wales
37 Victoria Police Forensic Services Department
38 Victoria Legal Aid regional practitioners
Appendix C: Standard Disclosure Material1
The Accused seeks the production of the following items to be served with the
hand-up brief:
1 Copies of all crime reports, attendance registers, police notes, diary and
day book entries (whether official or otherwise), Form
501/502 (running sheets)
in relation to the investigation of the Accused and/or the subject of the
allegations against the Accused,
which were made or created by any member of
Victoria Police during the course of the investigation of the Accused.
2 A copy of any notes (whether in written, printed, or in electronic form)
made or created by any civilian witness (including any
complainant) if in the
possession of the Informant.
3 Copies of all relevant INTERPOSE database entries made in relation to the
subject matter of this investigation and/or the allegations
against the
Accused, including but not limited to the Full Response Report.
4 Copies of all relevant Victoria Police LEAP database entries made in
relation to the subject matter of this investigation and/or
the allegations
against the Accused, including but not limited to the Incident Report and Case
Progress information, inclusive of
sub-heading:
Incident Report & Case Progress
a. Persons Involved
b. Accused Details
c. Case Progress
5 Copies of any audio or video recordings or transcripts thereof, and other
notes or documents (whether in written, printed, or electronic
form) concerning
any interviews, discussions, debriefings, or conversations conducted during the
course of the investigation of the
Accused, between any member of Victoria
Police and:
a. any witnesses in this proceeding
b. any person who could or might be called as witnesses for the prosecution,
c. any person suspected of or investigated in relation to the commission of
an offence or offences the subject of this investigation.
6 Copy of all covert recordings (video and/or audio) between any member of
Victoria Police and any other person, made in the course
of the investigation of
the Accused.
7 Copies of any statements (including drafts of such statements) obtained
from any person during the course of the investigation of
the Accused which are
not contained in the hand-up brief (whether or not those statements were
finalised and/or signed).
8 A copy of any notes or documents used by any prosecution witness relied
upon in any way to assist them with drafting/preparing their
9 Copies of all warrants obtained by police during the course of this
investigation.
10 Complete copy of all photographs and video footage taken by any member of
Victoria Police in the course of this investigation (digital
copies on a CD/DVD
are sufficient).
11 Copies of any audio, visual, or audio-visual material (such as
photographs, audio recordings or video recordings) made or created
civilian witness in relation to the subject matter of the allegations against
the Accused, irrespective of whether such
witness is to be called.
1 Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
Practice Direction 3 of 2019:
Procedural Requirements for Section 123 Committal Proceeding,
www.mcv.vic.gov.au/for-lawyers/practice-directions/procedural-requirements-section-123-committal-proceedings-sexual
12 Copies of all exhibit logs, property receipts, property book entries, and
other similar documentation relating to all exhibits
and property obtained or
seized during the course of the investigation of the Accused.
13 All prior convictions and findings of guilt from all Australian states of
any witnesses (including for any alias of any witness)
who is or may be called
to give evidence for the prosecution save for Police or expert witnesses.
These documents are to be served on defence and prosecution at the same time
as the hand-up brief is served.
The documents must be appropriately redacted by the informant prior to being
served on the parties.
While the material is to be served at the same time as the hand-up brief, it
does not form part of the hand-up brief and should be
clearly identified as
disclosure material.
As soon as possible after the Filing Hearing, the Informant and OPP solicitor
will discuss the production of these standard disclosure
items including issues
of relevance and any grounds for objection.
The order to produce these standard disclosure items does not preclude the
Informant from objecting to provision of any items if appropriate.
Reasons for
any objection should be given.
Where there is objection to the production of any standard disclosure
item(s), notice should be given to the accused as soon as
possible. The parties
are encouraged to discuss the nature of the objection.
Bibliography
Bibliography
Attorney-General (SA), ‘About the Reforms’,
Major Indictable
Reform Review
(Web Page, 2019)
www.agd.sa.gov.au/major-indictable-reform-review
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Criminal Courts, Australia
No 4513.0, 27 February 2019) Australian Psychological Society,
Psychology Topics
(Web Page, 2020)
www.psychology.org.au/for-the-public/Psychology-topics/Trauma
Blackstone, Sir William,
Commentaries on the Laws of England
(Clarendon Press, 1769, 1966 reprint) bk 4
Brereton, David and John Willis, ‘Evaluating the Committal’ in
Julia Vernon (ed),
The Future of Committals—Proceedings of a Conference
Held 1-2 May 1990
(Australian Institute of Criminology, January 1991)
Bugg, Damian, ‘The Role of the DPP in the 20th Century’ (Speech,
Judicial College of Australia Colloquium, 1999)
Centre for Innovative Justice, RMIT University,
Communicating with Victims
Communication Needs
(Report, April 2019)
Coldrey, John,
- ‘Committal Proceedings: The Victorian Perspective’ in Julia
Vernon (ed),
The Future of Committals—Proceedings of a Conference Held
1-2 May 1990
(Australian Institute of Criminology, January 1991)
Report of Advisory Committee on Committal Proceedings
Government Printer, February 1986)
Corns, Chris, ‘Police Prosecutions in Australia and New Zealand: Some
Comparisons’ (2000) 19(2)
University of Tasmania Law Review
Corns, Christopher,
Public Prosecutions in Australia: Law, Policy and
(Thomson Reuters, 2014)
County Court of Victoria,
Annual Report 2018-19
(Report, 2019)
- ‘Circuit Courts’,
Court Divisions
(Web Page, 27 November
www.countycourt.vic.gov.au/learn-about-court/court-divisions/circuit-courts
- ‘Criminal Division’,
Court Divisions
(Web Page, 27
November 2019)
www.countycourt.vic.gov.au/learn-about-court/court-divisions/criminal-division
Multi-Jurisdictional Court Guide for the Intermediary Pilot Program:
Intermediaries and Ground Rules Hearings
(Guide, 28 June 2018)
www.countycourt.vic.gov.au/practice-
notes?filters[division]=2>
Court Network, ‘About Us’,
(Web Page, 2020)
<https://courtnetwork.com.au/about/ what-we-do/>
Court Services Victoria,
- ‘Case Management System Project’,
(Web Page, 23
www.courts.vic.gov.au/projects/case-management-system-project
Strategic Asset Plan 2016-2031
(Report, 2016) Crown Prosecution
Service (England and Wales),
- ‘Joint National Disclosure Improvement Plan—June update’,
Publications
(Web Page, 2019)
www.cps.gov.uk/publication/joint-national-disclosure-improvement-plan-june-
- ‘The Code for Crown Prosecutors’,
Publications
Page, 26 October 2018)
www.cps.gov.uk/publication/code-crown-prosecutors
Disclosure Manual
(Report, 14 December 2018)
Department of Justice and Attorney-General (Qld),
Reform of the Committal
Proceedings Process
(Discussion Paper, 2008)
Department of Justice and Community Safety (Vic), ‘Victorian
Intermediaries Pilot Program,’
Justice System (Web Page, 26 April 2019)
www.justice.vic.gov.au/justice-system/courts-and-
tribunals/victorian-intermediaries-pilot-program>
Department of Justice and Regulation (Vic),
Proposed Reforms to Criminal
Procedure: Reducing Trauma and Delay for Witnesses and Victims—Criminal
(Discussion Paper, 2017)
Devlin, Patrick,
The Criminal Prosecution in England
University Press, 1960) Director of Public Prosecutions, Office of Public
Prosecutions Victoria,
Discontinuance Review Framework
(Guide, 26 March 2019)
http://www.opp.vic.gov.au/ Resources/Discontinuance-Review-Framework
Policy of the Director of Public Prosecutions for Victoria
December 2019)
http://www.opp. vic.gov.au/Resources/Policies
Proposed Reforms to Reduce Further Trauma to Victims and Witnesses
(Policy Paper, 1 October 2018)
http://www.opp.vic.gov.au/getattachment/0da88912-0a57-48f0-9048-31a0ad1b15df/ DPP-Policy-Paper-Proposed-reforms-to-reduce-furthe.aspx
Eades, Diana, ‘Telling and Retelling Your Story in Court: Questions,
Assumptions and Intercultural Implications’
(2008) 20(2)
Current Issues
in Criminal Justice
Fair Work Ombudsman, Australian Government, ‘Minimum Wages’,
Pay (Web Page, 2020)
www.fairwork.gov.au/how-we-will-help/templates-and-guides/fact-sheets/minimum-
workplace-entitlements/minimum-wages#what-is-the-national-minimum-wage-order>
Flynn, Asher, ‘A Committal Waste of Time? Reforming Victoria’s
Pre-trial Process: Lessons from Other Jurisdictions’
Law Journal
House of Commons Justice Committee, Parliament of the United Kingdom,
Disclosure of Evidence in Criminal Cases
(Final Report, 17 July 2018)
Ierace, Mark,
Early Guilty Pleas: A New Ball Game
(Report, 28 April
www.publicdefenders.nsw.gov.au/Pages/public_defenders_EAGP.aspx
Johnson, John, ‘A Case for Abolition’ in Julia Vernon (ed),
The Future of Committals—Proceedings of a Conference Held 1-2 May 1990
(Australian Institute of Criminology, January 1991)
Judicial College of Victoria,
- ‘2.1 Charge Sheet and Indictment’,
Victorian Criminal
Proceedings Manual
(Online Manual, 1 March 2017) <https://
www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/eManuals/VCPM/indexpage.
htm#27318.htm>
- ‘2.5 Summary and Indictable Offences’,
Victorian Criminal
Proceedings Manual
(Online Manual, 1 November 2019) <https://
www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/eManuals/VCPM/indexpage.
htm#27318.htm>
- ‘4.4.5 Determination of Committal Proceedings’,
Criminal Proceedings Manual
(Online Manual, 1 November 2019) <https://
www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/eManuals/VCPM/
indexpage.htm#27318.htm>
- ‘17 Voir Dire’,
Victorian Criminal Proceedings Manual
(Online Manual, 1 April 2011) <https://
www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.au/eManuals/VCPM/indexpage.htm#27318.htm
- ‘Insight into Trauma Event’,
Programs and Events
www.judicialcollege.vic.edu.
au/programs-and-events/insight-trauma>
Victims of Crime in the Courtroom: A Guide for Judicial Officers
Law Council of Australia,
The Justice Project Final Report
August 2018)
Leclerc, Marie-Eve et al,
Assessing and Treating Traumatic Stress in Crime
(Research Brief, February 2017)
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria,
- `Bail Support (CISP)’,
Find Support
(Web Page, 4 July 2019)
www.mcv.vic.gov.au/find-
support/bail-support-cisp>
Martin, Brian Ross,
Review of the Major Indictable Reforms—
Procedure Act 1921
(As Amended by the Summary Procedure (Indictable Offences)
Amendment Act 2017)
(Report, 13 September 2019)
Martin, Chief Justice Wayne ‘The Law Reform Commission of WA: Review of
the Civil and Criminal Justice System—10 Years
On’ (Speech, Supreme
Court of Western Australia, 13 October 2009)
www.supremecourt.wa.gov.au/_files/Law_Reform_Commission_20091013.pdf
Ministry of Justice (UK),
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996
(section 23(1)) (
Code of Practice, March 2015)
Moloney, Susan, ‘A New Approach to Civil Litigation? The Implementation
of the “Woolf Reforms” and Judicial Case
Management’ (2001)
Judicial Studies Institute Journal
National Institute of Forensic Science, ‘What is Forensic
Forensic Sciences
http://www.anzpaa.org.au/forensic-science/forensic-sciences
National Police Chiefs’ Council, College of Policing and Crown
Prosecution Service (UK)
National Disclosure Improvement Plan
(Report, January 2018)
National Disclosure Improvement Plan—Progress Update
Spring 2019)
Naylor, Bronwyn, ‘Justiciability of Decisions in the Criminal Process:
Review of Committal Proceedings in the Federal Court’
New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research,
Early Appropriate
Guilty Plea Reform Program: The First 13 Months of Implementation
September 2019)
New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Encouraging Appropriate Early
Guilty Pleas
(Report No 141, December 2014)
Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria,
- ‘Our Role in Prosecutions’,
(Web Page, 2016)
http://www.opp.vic.gov.au/About-Us/ Our-Legal-Practice/Our-role-in-prosecutions
Witness Assistance Service
(Brochure, 2014)
Payne, Jason,
Criminal Trial Delays in Australia: Trial Listing Outcomes
(Research and Public Policy Series No 74, Australian Institute of
Criminology, 2007)
Productivity Commission, Australian Government,
Report on Government
Services 2020
(Report, 2020) <https://
www.pc.gov.au/research/ongoing/report-on-government-services/2020/justice/
‘Program Overview’,
Court Dogs Victoria (Web Page, 2020)
www.courtdogsvictoria.org.
au/program>
Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse,
Criminal Justice Report
(Report, August 2017) <https://
www.childabuseroyalcommission.gov.
au/criminal-justice>
Criminal Justice
(Consultation Paper, September 2016)
Royal Commission into the Management of Police Informants
21 February 2020)
www.rcmpi.vic.gov.au/
Sentencing Advisory Council Tasmania,
Statutory Sentencing Reductions for
Pleas of Guilty
(Final Report No 10, October 2018)
Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Report of the Deliberative Forum
on Criminal Trial Reform
(Report, June 2000)
‘Stirling Gardens Magistrates Court’,
Supreme Court of Western
(Web Page, 1 March 2019) <https://
www.supremecourt.wa.gov.au/M/magistrates_court_stirling_gardens.
aspx?uid=4946-0149-8167-1518>
Victims Support Agency,
‘Child Witness Service’, Victims of
Crime (Web Page, 23 August 2019)
www.victimsofcrime.vic.gov.au/going-to-court/child-witness-service
Victoria Legal Aid,
- ‘12 Means Test’,
VLA Handbook for Lawyers
Handbook, 2 January 2020)
<https://handbook.vla.vic.gov.au/handbook/12-means-test>
- `24 Payments to Lawyers and Service Providers’,
VLA Handbook for
(Online Handbook, 15 January 2020) <
https://handbook.vla.vic.gov.au/handbook/24-payments-to-
lawyers-and-service-providers>
Victoria Police,
- ‘Areas of Forensic Science’,
Forensic Services
Page, 13 March 2019)
www.police.vic.gov.au/forensic-services
Victoria Police Manual
(CD-Rom, 29 April 2019)
Victoria Police Forensic Services Department,
Turnaround Times and
Backlogs for Forensic Units
(Report, 1 October 2019) <https://
www.police.vic.gov.au/turn-around-times-and-backlogs
Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine, ‘Supporting Victoria
Forensic Services
www.vifm.org/forensic-services/overview/victoria-police/
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
(Issues Paper, June 2019)
Review of the Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act
(Consultation Paper, May 2013)
The Role of Victims of Crime in the Criminal Trial Process
(Consultation Paper, July 2015)
The Role of Victims of Crime in the Criminal Trial Process
No 34, August 2016) Victorian Office of Public Prosecutions,
Annual Report
(Report, 2018)
Wemmers, Jo-Anne, ‘Victims’ Experiences in the Criminal Justice
System and Their Recovery from Crime’ (2013) 19(3)
International Review
of Victimology
Western Australia Law Reform Commission,
Review of the Criminal and Civil
Justice System
(Report No 92, 1999)
Legislation
Bail Act 1977
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
Children and Justice Legislation Amendment (Youth Justice Reform) Act 2017
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
Constitution
County Court Act 1958
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1958
Evidence Act 2008
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
Justice Legislation Miscellaneous Amendment Act 2018
Magistrates’ Court (Committal Proceedings) Act 2000
Magistrates’ Court Act 1989
Public Prosecutions Act 1994
Sentencing Act 1991
Summary Offences Act 1966
Victims and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2018
Victims’ Charter Act 2006
Victims of Crime Commissioner Act 2015
Victorian Institute of
Forensic Medicine Act 1985
Wrongs Act 1958
Commonwealth
Judiciary Act 1903
Other Australian Jurisdictions
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Director of Public Prosecutions Act 1986
Justices Act 1886
Summary Procedure (Indictable Offences) Amendment Act 2017
International
Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
signature 16 December
1966, 999 UNTS 171
(entered into force 23 March 1976)
United Nations Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of
Crime and Abuse of Power
, GA Res 40/34, UN Doc A/Res/40/34 (29 November
AJ v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 215
(2011) 32 VR 614
Anile v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 235
BA v Attorney-General
[2017] VSC 259
319 FLR 329
Cannon v Tahche
[2002] VSCA 84
(2002) 5 VR 317
Cook v The Queen
[2019] VSCA 87
DL v Reynolds
[1994] (Supreme Court of Victoria, Vincent JA, 9 August
Edebone v Allen
[1991] VicRp 100
[1991] 2 VR 659
Gild v The Queen
[2018] VSCA 317
Metro Trains Melbourne Pty Ltd v Paciocco
[2017] VSC 778
[2010] VChC 2
[2003] VSCA 223
R v Farquharson
[2009] VSCA 307
(2009) 26 VR 410
[2006] VSC 481
(2006) 14 VR 228
[2004] VSC 411
Ragg v Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
[2008] VSC 1
(2008) 18 VR
Commonwealth
Alister v The Queen
[1984] HCA 85
(1984) 154 CLR 404
Barton v The Queen
[1980] HCA 48
(1980) 147 CLR 75
Director of Public Prosecutions Reference No 1 of 2017
[2019] HCA 9
(2019) 364 ALR 407
Dupas v The Queen
[2010] HCA 20
(2010) 241 CLR 237
Forsyth v Rodda
(1988) 37 A Crim R 50
Forsyth v Rodda
[1989] FCA 312
(1989) 87 ALR 699
Grassby v The Queen
[1989] HCA 45
(1989) 168 CLR 1
Jago v District Court of New South Wales
[1989] HCA 46
(1989) 168 CLR 23
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
Mallard v The Queen
[2005] HCA 68
(2005) 224 CLR 125
Maxwell v The Queen
(1996) 184 CLR 501
[2002] HCA 55
, (2002) 213 CLR 635
R v Glennon
[1992] HCA 16
(1992) 173 CLR 592
Thorp v Abbotto
[1992] FCA 112
(1992) 34 FCR 366
Walton v Gardiner
(1993) 177 CLR 378
Williams v Spautz
[1992] HCA 34
(1992) 174 CLR 509
Other Australian Jurisdictions
R v Spiteri
(2004) 61 NSWLR 369,
[2004] 61 NSWCCA 321
International
[1993] 2 All ER 577
Reports published by the
Victorian Law Reform Commission
1 Criminal Liability for Workplace Death and Serious Injury in the Public
Sector (2002)
2 Disputes between Co-owners (2002)
3 Failure to Appear in Court in Response to Bail (2002)*
4 People with Intellectual Disabilities at Risk:
A Legal Framework for Compulsory Care (2003)
5 Sexual Offences (2004)
6 Defences to Homicide (2004)
7 Workplace Privacy (2005)
8 Implementing the
Evidence Act 1995
9 Uniform Evidence Law (2006)
10 Review of Family Violence Laws (2006)
11 Residential Tenancy Databases (2006)*
12 Assisted Reproductive Technology and Adoption (2007)
13 Review of the
Bail Act 1997
14 Civil Justice Review (2008)
15 Law of Abortion (2008)
16 Assistance Animals (2008)*
17 Jury Directions (2009)
18 Surveillance in Public Places (2010)
19 Protection Applications in the Children’s Court (2010)
20 Review of the
Property Law Act 1958
21 Supporting Young People in Police Interviews (2010)*
22 Easements and Covenants (2010)
23 Sex Offenders Registration (2011)
24 Guardianship (2012)
25 Birth Registration and Birth Certificates (2013)*
26 Succession Laws (2013)
27 Jury Empanelment (2014)
28 Review of the
Crimes (Mental Impairment and Unfitness to be Tried) Act
29 The Forfeiture Rule (2014)
30 Trading Trusts—Oppression Remedies (2015)
31 Photographing and Filming Tenants’ Possessions for Advertising
Purposes (2015)*
32 Medicinal Cannabis (2015)
33 Use of Regulatory Regimes in Preventing the Infiltration of Organised
Crime into Lawful Occupations and Industries (2016)
34 The Role of Victims of Crime in the Criminal Trial Process (2016)
35 Funeral and Burial Instructions (2016)*
36 Review of the
Adoption Act 1984
37 Access to Justice—Litigation Funding and Group Proceedings
38 Review of the
Victims of Crime Assistance Act 1996
39 Neighbourhood Tree Disputes (2019)*
40 Contempt of Court (2020)
41 Committals (2020)
* Community law reform project.
For a full list of publications, and to access the above reports, see
www.lawreform.vic.gov.au
GPO Box 4637
Melbourne Victoria 3001 Australia
333 Queen Street Melbourne Victoria 3000 Australia
+61 3 8608 7800
1300 666 555
(within Victoria)
+61 3 8608 7888
law.reform@lawreform.vic.gov.au
www.lawreform.vic.gov.au
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.85 MB)
PDF format (1.22 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter