URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCIP/2005/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:36:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Uniform Succession Laws: Intestacy - Issues Paper [2005] NSWLRCIP 26
Issues Paper 26 (2005) - Uniform Succession Laws: Intestacy
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of Issues
INTRODUCTION
INTESTACY IN CONTEXT
Indigenous people
LEGISLATIVE DEFINITION OF “INTESTACY”
MECHANISMS FOR ACHIEVING DISTRIBUTION
TITLE AND POWERS OF THE PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE
Distinction between wholly and partially intestate estates
Beneficially Interested Personal Representative
WHAT IS AVAILABLE FOR DISTRIBUTION ON INTESTACY?
IS THERE A NEED TO EMPOWER THE PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE TO SELL?
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF DISTRIBUTION
DISTRIBUTION ACCORDING TO FIXED LISTS
The Statute of Distributions
Modern provisions
Provisions relating to persons who, at the death of the intestate, are minors
Use and enjoyment of chattels
Business Estates
DISCLAIMED INTERESTS
DISTRIBUTION TO SPOUSES AND PARTNERS
WHO IS A SPOUSE OR PARTNER?
Bigamous unions
De facto relationships
Requirements for recognition as a de facto partner
SPOUSES TO BE TREATED AS SEPARATE PERSONS
DISTRIBUTION TO SPOUSES AND PARTNERS
Intestate leaves spouse or partner but no issue
Intestate leaves spouse or partner and issue
Surviving spouse’s entitlement to personal chattels
Spouse’s entitlement to a statutory legacy
Interest on statutory legacy
Apportionment between spouse and issue
Intestate leaves a spouse and a de facto partner
Distribution in Queensland
Distribution Elsewhere
Intestate leaves more than one de facto partner
RIGHTS OF SPOUSE OR PARTNER TO THE SHARED HOME
THE SHARED HOME
The residential requirement
THE SPOUSE OR PARTNER’S ENTITLEMENT
VALUING THE INTESTATE’S INTEREST IN THE SHARED HOME
Spouse may require valuation
Fixing the value
ELECTION BY THE SURVIVING SPOUSE OR PARTNER
Procedural requirements
Election must be in writing
Time for making the election
To whom the election must be made
Power of a surviving spouse or partner who is a minor to make an election
Power of a surviving partner with mental disability to make a valid election
Revocation of the election
POWER OF THE PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE TO DISPOSE OF THE SHARED HOME
Where the spouse is a trustee
RESTRICTIONS ON THE SPOUSE’S RIGHT TO ACQUIRE THE SHARED HOME
DETERMINATION OF THE CURTILAGE OF THE SHARED HOME
Power of administrator to create easements, etc
ISSUE AND PARENTS OF THE INTESTATE
WHO ARE ISSUE?
Presumptions of parentage
Step children
Artificially conceived children
Children not yet born (en ventre sa mere)
Delayed conception and suspended gestation
DISTRIBUTION PER STIRPES
DISTRIBUTION TO ISSUE AND PARENTS OF THE INTESTATE
Intestate leaves issue but no partner
Intestate leaves no partner and no issue but leaves a parent or parents
STATUTORY TRUST IN FAVOUR OF ISSUE OF THE INTESTATE
DISTRIBUTION TO NEXT OF KIN OF THE INTESTATE
THE GENERAL ORDER OF DISTRIBUTION
Relationships of the whole and half blood
BROTHERS AND SISTERS OF THE INTESTATE
GRANDPARENTS OF THE INTESTATE
AUNTS AND UNCLES OF THE INTESTATE
MORE REMOTE NEXT OF KIN
MEANING OF STATUTORY TRUST FOR ANY CLASS OF RELATIVES OTHER THAN ISSUE OF THE INTESTATE
ISTRIBUTION WHEN NO RELATIVES ARE ENTITLED
BONA VACANTIA
PROVISION FOR DEPENDANTS
ACCOUNTING FOR BENEFITS RECEIVED UPON OR BEFORE DEATH
GIFTS GIVEN BEFORE DEATH
Statute of Distributions
Modern provisions
TESTAMENTARY GIFTS
INDIGENOUS PEOPLE
INDIGENOUS KINSHIP
CURRENT PROVISIONS
Recognition of customary marriage
The relevance of de facto relationships provisions
Additional/separate distribution regimes
Western Australia
Northern Territory
New Zealand
A WAY FORWARD?
MISCELLANEOUS
SURVIVORSHIP AND INTESTACY
Surviving the intestate by less than a month
ABOLITION OF COURTESY AND RIGHT OF DOWER
REFERENCES TO STATUTES OF DISTRIBUTION, HEIRS AND NEXT OF KIN
Table of cases
Table of legislation
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Issues Paper 26 (2005) - Uniform Succession Laws: Intestacy
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
In 1991 the Standing Committee of Attorneys General (SCAG) approved the
development of uniform succession laws for the whole of Australia.
1995 a National Committee on Uniform Succession Laws was established to
review the existing State laws relating to succession
and to propose
model national uniform laws. The Committee comprises representatives
from the various jurisdictions in Australia and
the Queensland Law
Reform Commission is the co-ordinating agency. The New South Wales
Attorney General asked the New South Wales
Law Reform Commission to
participate in the deliberations of the National Committee under terms
of reference that were issued on
5 May 1995:
To inquire into and report on the existing law and procedure
relating to succession and to recommend and draft a model State and
Territories
law on succession.
The National Committee has divided the project into different phases,
each of which deals with a discreet area of succession law.
of law are:
the law of wills;
family provision (or Testator’s family maintenance);
administration of estates of deceased persons;
This Issues Paper, is the first stage of the review of the law
relating to intestacy and raises, and invites comments on, a number
issues in relation to the law of intestacy in the different Australian
included for the sake of comparison. The provisions relating to
intestacy are principally contained in the following pieces
legislation:
Succession Act 1981
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act 1969 (NT) Part 3, Div 4-5
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1903
Administration Act 1969 (NZ) Part 3
Administration of Estates Act 1925 (Eng) Part 4
Unless otherwise stated, these Acts are the ones referred to in
the summary tables at the commencement of each section of this Issues
The issues set out in this Issues Paper have been framed by the New
South Wales Law Reform Commission and do not necessarily reflect
views of the National Committee which is yet to adopt a position in
relation to the issues discussed. The National Committee
members of the public and organisations with an interest or expertise
in the issues under review to comment on the issues
raised or any other
issues that should be addressed.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
. See New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Succession Laws: The Law of Wills
(Issues Paper 10, 1996); See New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Succession Laws: The Law of Wills
(Report 85, 1998).
. See New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Succession Laws: Family Provision
(Issues Paper 11, 1996); National Committee on Uniform Succession Laws,
Report to the Standing Committee of Attorneys General on Family Provision
(Queensland Law Reform Commission, Miscellaneous Paper 28, 1997); National Committee for Uniform Succession Laws,
Family Provision: Supplementary Report to the Standing Committee of Attorneys General
(Queensland Law Reform Commission, Report 58, 2004).
. See See New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Succession Laws: Administration of Estates of Deceased Persons
(Discussion Paper 42, 1999); Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of Interstate and Foreign Grants of Probate and Letters of Administration
(Discussion Paper, WP 55, 2001); New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Succession Laws: Recognition of Interstate and Foreign Grants of Probate and Letters of Administration
(IP 21, 2002).
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 26 (2005) - Uniform Succession Laws: Intestacy
Terms of reference
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
(NSW), the Attorney General, the Honourable Jeff Shaw QC MP, referred the following matter to the Law Reform Commission by letter
dated 16 May 1995:
To inquire into and report on the existing law and procedure relating to succession and to recommend and draft a model State and Territories
law on succession.
In undertaking this inquiry the Commission is to consult with the Queensland Law Reform Commission which has accepted responsibility
for the coordination of a uniform succession laws project.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 26 (2005) - Uniform Succession Laws: Intestacy
Particpants
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
(NSW) the Chairperson of the Commission constituted a Division for the purpose of conducting the reference. The members of the Division
Master Joanne Harrison
The Hon Justice David Hodgson (Commissioner-in-charge)
The Hon Gordon Samuels AC CVO QC
Professor Michael Tilbury
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Legal Research and Writing
Mr Brendan Atkinson
Mr Joseph Waugh
Ms Anna Williams
Desktop Publishing
Mr Terence Stewart
Administrative Assistance
Ms Wendy Stokoe
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 26 (2005) - Uniform Succession Laws: Intestacy
Submissions
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
The Commission invites submissions on the issues relevant to this review, including but not limited to the issues raised in this
Issues Paper.
All submissions and enquiries should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy,
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
Postal addresses:
GPO Box 5199, Sydney NSW 2001
or DX 1227 Sydney
Street Address:
Level 17, 8-12 Chifley Square, Sydney NSW
nsw_lrc@agd.nsw.gov.au
Telephone (02) 9228 8230
Facsimile (02) 9228 8225
TTY (02) 9228 7676
The closing date for submissions is
10 June 2005
Confidentiality and use of submissions
In preparing further papers on this reference, the Commission will refer to submissions made in response to this Issues Paper. If
you would like all or part of your submission to be treated as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. The Commission
will respect requests for confidentiality when using submissions in later publications.
Copies of submissions made to the Commission will also normally be made available on request to other persons or organisations. Any
request for a copy of a submission marked “confidential” will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
Other publication formats
The Commission is committed to meeting fully its obligations under State and Commonwealth anti-discrimination legislation. These laws
require all organisations to eliminate discriminatory practices which may prevent people with disabilities from having full and equal
access to our services. This publication is available in alternative formats. If you have any difficulty in accessing this document
please contact us.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 26 (2005) - Uniform Succession Laws: Intestacy
List of issues
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Should there be a legislative definition of “intestate” or “intestacy”?
If so, how should it be defined?
Should special provision be made for dealing with partially intestate estates:
(a) for the purposes of bringing into account; and/or
(b) for other purposes?
Is there a need for a special provision negating the statutory trusts where the personal representative takes the intestate estate
beneficially?
How should the estate that is available for distribution be identified?
Is there a need for separate provision to be made for trusts for sale in relation to intestate estates?
What provision (if any) should be made for minors who are entitled to part or all of an intestate estate?
Should minors take their share of an intestate estate unconditionally (that is without having to turn 18 or marry - but subject to
the property being held for them until they turn 18 or marry)?
If not, and the minor dies before turning 18 or marrying, should the property available for distribution be reduced by the amount
spent on them before their death?
If a minor’s share in the intestate estate does not pass to him/her because the minor dies before reaching majority should the
share pass to surviving issue of the minor?
What special provision, if any, should be made to accommodate minor issue of the intestate when the estate available for distribution
What provision, if any, ought to be made with respect to the use and enjoyment by minors of chattels of the estate?
Should any provision be made for carrying on the business where one or more of those entitled is a minor?
Should any legislative provision be made to deal with situations where a person otherwise entitled to an interest in the intestate
estate disclaims that interest?
What provision, if any, ought to be made for bigamous unions?
Should the meaning of de facto partner be standardised for the purposes of intestacy or should the National Committee’s draft
Family Provision Bill be followed (that is, allow the definition of each jurisdiction to be applied)?
If there is to be a standardised meaning of “de facto partner”, how should that term be defined?
In any event should a special period, or periods, apply to the recognition of de facto relationships for purposes of intestacy? If
so, what periods?
Should any restrictions be placed on the ability of a de facto partner to succeed to an intestate’s estate?
Is it necessary for the intestacy provisions to continue to contain an express statement that spouses are to be considered separate
If the intestate is not survived by any issue, should the surviving spouse or partner be entitled to the whole of the estate?
If not, who else should be entitled to a share and to how much should the surviving spouse or partner be entitled and in what proportions
should the remainder of the estate be divided?
Should personal chattels be included in the spouse or partner’s entitlement?
In principle, should the estate be divided between the spouse and issue?
Should the surviving spouse be entitled to the intestate’s personal possessions?
If so, should a detailed list of chattels be included or should reference simply be made to “articles of personal or household
use or adornment”?
If a detailed list is to be provided, what should be included in it?
Should a statutory legacy be retained?
If so, should the prescribed amount be specified in uniform legislation or left to be fixed by Regulation in each jurisdiction?
How much should the legacy be?
Should interest be paid on the surviving spouse’s statutory legacy?
Should the interest rate be set in uniform legislation or by regulation in each jurisdiction?
What is an appropriate proportion of the remaining estate to go to the surviving spouse?
Should the proportion alter according to the number of surviving issue? If so, how?
Would it be useful to distinguish dependent from non-dependent issue?
What provision ought to be made for situations where the intestate is survived by a spouse and a de facto partner?
Should special provision be made for personal chattels?
What provision should be made where there is more than one de facto partner?
How should the shared home be defined?
Should the spouse and the intestate have been residing in the home at the intestate’s death before the surviving spouse will
be entitled?
Should the surviving spouse or partner be entitled to obtain the intestate’s interest in the shared home?
To what extent, if any, ought the intestate’s interest in the shared home be used in satisfaction of the share of the estate
to which the surviving spouse or partner is entitled on distribution?
How should any outstanding balance be met if the value of the intestate’s interest in the shared home exceeds the value of the
spouse or partner’s entitlement if there were no shared home available?
Should provision be made so that the spouse may require a valuation of the shared home before making an election?
How and when should the value of the intestate’s interest in the shared home be determined?
Should the value be the market value less any amount needed to discharge any mortgage, charge or other encumbrance to which the interest
is subject at the date valued?
Should the election be required to be in writing?
Should the surviving spouse or partner be required to make an election within a certain time? If so, how long?
Should it be possible for the Court to grant an extension of time for a surviving spouse or partner to make an election? If so, when
should the value of the intestate’s interest in the shared home be fixed?
Should personal representatives be required to give the surviving spouse or partner notice of their rights to make an election? If
so, when should that notice be given?
To whom should the spouse’s election be given?
Should surviving spouses who are minors be able to make an election to acquire a shared home?
What provision should be made for spousal election when the spouse has a mental disability?
Should there be provision for the revocation of an election?
If there is to be a provision for the revocation of an election, whose consent should be required and should that consent be in writing?
What restrictions, if any, should be placed on the personal representative’s powers to dispose of the shared home?
Should the restriction apply if the surviving spouse is a personal representative of the intestate’s estate?
Should the validity of the sale of any of the intestate’s estate, by the personal representative/s, be affected by the restriction?
On what conditions, if any, should it be possible to dispose of the intestate’s interest in the shared home before the expiration
of the period within which election may be made?
Should express provision be made that a surviving spouse or partner may acquire the intestate’s interest in the shared home
notwithstanding any role as trustee?
Should the spouse’s right be restricted where the interest in the shared home is a tenancy that will determine within 2 years
after the intestate’s death, or if the landlord would be entitled to determine the lease within that period?
Should there be any other restrictions on the spouse’s right to obtain the intestate’s interest in the shared home?
Should the shared home include curtilage?
If so, how should curtilage be defined?
Is it necessary to include the power to create easements or restrictions in intestacy rules?
Should the definition of issue be included in the uniform legislation or should it be left to other enactments in the individual jurisdictions?
Should any special provisions be made in uniform legislation in relation to presumptions of parentage?
Are there any circumstances when stepchildren should be entitled to an issue’s share in intestacy?
What provision, if any, ought to be made for artificially conceived children in the context of intestacy?
Should provision be made for surrogacy in the context of intestacy?
Should children en ventre sa mere continue to be treated as issue for the purposes of intestacy?
If so, should model legislation impose a time period within which the child must be born following the death of the intestate?
Should special provision be made, in the context of intestacy, to deal with children who have been born following delayed conception
or gestation?
If so, on what conditions should the interests of children so born be recognised?
Should per stirpes distribution apply in all cases?
If not, in what circumstances should per capita distribution be applied?
If the intestate dies without spouse or partner and without issue, should the parents of the intestate be entitled to the estate?
If so, should surviving parents be solely entitled to distribution? And if not, what other next of kin should be entitled to share
with them in the estate and in what proportions?
Does special provision need to be made for statutory trusts in favour of issue of the intestate?
Is the general scheme appropriate whereby the next of kin are entitled to a share of an intestate estate in the following order:
1. brothers and sisters of the intestate;
2. grandparents of the intestate; and then
3. aunts and uncles of the intestate?
If not, what order of distribution should be adopted?
Should any distinction be made between relatives of the whole and half blood?
What provision should be made for distribution to brothers and sisters of the intestate and their issue?
Where the intestate is predeceased by a brother or sister, should the share of the intestate’s estate to which the brother or
sister would otherwise have been entitled be taken by:
(a) the remaining brothers and sisters in equal shares;
(b) the children of the deceased brother or sister; or
(c) the issue of the deceased brother or sister?
If the issue of a deceased brother or sister are to take the share of the intestate’s estate to which the brother or sister
would otherwise have been entitled:
(a) should the issue take per stirpes, per capita, or according to the modified form of per capita distribution that applies in South
Australia; and
(b) what account ought to be taken of the provision that spouses are to be treated as separate persons?
What provision should be made for distribution to the grandparents of the intestate?
What provision should be made for distribution to aunts and uncles of the intestate and their issue?
Where an intestate is predeceased by an aunt or uncle, should the share of the intestate’s estate to which the aunt or uncle
would otherwise have been entitled be taken by:
(a) the surviving siblings of the deceased aunt or uncle;
(b) the children of the deceased aunt or uncle; or
(c) the issue of the deceased aunt or uncle?
If the issue of a deceased aunt or uncle are to take the share of the intestate’s estate to which the aunt or uncle would otherwise
have been entitled:
(a) should the issue take per stirpes, per capita, or according to the modified form of per capita distribution that applies in South
Australia; and
(b) what account ought to be taken of the provision that spouses are to be treated as separate persons?
What provision, if any, should be made for distribution to remoter next of kin?
If the estate of an intestate is to be held on trust for relatives who are not issue in the same manner as for issue of the intestate,
is it necessary to include a separate provision to that effect?
Are the present provisions for the disposal of intestate estates where no relatives of the intestate are entitled to distribution
under the rules of intestacy satisfactory?
Should uniform legislation allow persons to petition the Crown to make provision for them out of bona vacantia?
If so, what criteria should be used to identify the people who are entitled to apply?
What provisions, if any, should be made to take into account gifts given by the intestate before death to persons who are entitled
to take according to the rules of intestacy?
What provision, if any, should be made for the taking into account of testamentary benefits received by persons who are also entitled
under the rules of intestacy?
What provision, if any, should be made to recognise Indigenous customary marriages for purposes of intestacy?
Should the Northern Territory scheme for distribution on intestacy according to Indigenous customs and traditions be adopted?
If yes, does it require modification?
If no, should any separate scheme for distribution on intestacy be adopted for Indigenous people?
What provision, if any, should be made to deal with situations where a person otherwise entitled on intestacy dies within a month
of the intestate?
Should any provision be limited in application to surviving spouses or partners?
Should the abolition of courtesy and right of dower be retained in any future legislative provisions relating to intestacy?
Is there a need to retain provisions for the construction of references to:
any statutes of distribution;
an heir or heir at law; or
next of kin?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 26 (2005) - Uniform Succession Laws: Intestacy
1. Introduction
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Intestacy in context
Legislative definition of “Intestacy”
Mechanisms for achieving distribution
Title and powers of the personal representative
What is available for distribution on intestacy?
Is there a need to empower the personal representative to sell?
1.1 Succession may be testate or intestate. Justice Heenan recently explained:
the transmission of the estate of a person on death, whether
involving testate or intestate succession, is an inevitable consequence
for any person who dies owning real or personal property of any kind.
It is the death which effects the transmission of the property
the law provides mechanisms for the deceased, during his or her
lifetime, to direct, if he or she should choose to do so,
estate is to be distributed after death. Similar considerations arise
in the case of intestate succession where, whether
the omission by the
deceased to give directions as to the distribution of his estate after
death was intentional or otherwise, the
distribution of the estate is
determined by the statutory rules for intestate distribution. Again, it
is the death of the deceased
which effects the transmission of property
once its future can no longer be enjoyed by the deceased. The case of
intestate distribution
perhaps shows this more plainly.
1.2 Intestacy occurs when the whole or part of the estate of a deceased
person is not disposed of by will. Total intestacy arises
circumstances where the whole of the estate of a deceased person is not
disposed of by will, for example, where the deceased:
· fails to make a will;
· fails to make a valid will; or
· makes a valid will but all beneficiaries die before the deceased.
A partial intestacy arises in circumstances where part of the estate of
a deceased person is not disposed of effectively by will,
for example,
where the deceased:
· fails to dispose of the residue of the estate (that
is, property that has not otherwise been specifically disposed of)
expressly or impliedly;
fails to appoint a substitute in the will and some beneficiaries
repudiate, or for other reasons cannot take (for example,
forfeiture);
· makes a gift of the residue and part of the gift fails to take effect.
There was once a distinction between total and partial intestacies for
the purposes of administering an estate. Provision is now
made so that
partially intestate estates are administered, so far as possible,
according to the same rules that apply to wholly intestate
INTESTACY IN CONTEXT
1.5 Intestacy would appear to occur quite frequently in
Australia. In 1994, in South Australia, 6.44% of applications for
grants were
made in circumstances of intestacy. The rate was believed
to be 14% in Queensland, just over 10% in Western Australia, and
6% and 8% in other jurisdictions.
In 2003 in New
South Wales, of the 23,140 matters dealt with in the Probate Division,
6% involved the grant of letters of administration.
In 2002, 46,712
deaths were registered, 22,828 matters were dealt with in the Probate
Division and 6% of these involved the grant
of letters of
administration. It is not known how many of the approximately 20,000
estates per year that do not come to the Probate
Division are
administered informally in intestacy.
1.6 Distribution of an estate, or part of an estate, on
intestacy is governed by statutory provision. These rules can be seen
as producing
the same kind of result as a will would have done if the
intestate had had the foresight, the opportunity, the inclination or
ability to produce such a document. The law identifies
beneficiaries for the estate from the intestate’s family in an
of preference beginning with those to whom the intestate is most
closely related – starting with the intestate’s spouse
issue (children, grandchildren and so on) then parents, siblings,
nephews and nieces, grandparents, uncles and aunts, and finally
cousins. Such a distribution scheme will generally suit many people who
die intestate with substantial estates that need to be administered.
These people will often be older, have a surviving spouse who will be
in the same age group, and issue who are mature rather than
infants and
no longer dependent on their parents.
intestate’s parents will probably be dead. The private home,
where not held in joint tenancy, will still constitute a significant
proportion of an intestate’s estate.
1.7 The Law Commission of England and Wales recognised that the rules of intestacy:
should be certain, clear and simple both to understand and to
operate. They do not lay down absolute entitlements, because the
is always free to make a will leaving his property as he
chooses. They operate as a safety net for those who, for one reason or
have not done this. If the rules can conform to what most
people think should happen, so much the better. If they are simple and
easy to understand, the more likely it is that people who want their
property to go elsewhere will make a will. It is also important
enable estates to be administered quickly and cheaply. The rules should
be such that an ordinary layman can easily interpret them
consequently administer them. Also the rules should make it unnecessary
for an administrator to have to determine complex or
questions of fact.
1.8 While the aim can be seen as producing the will that the intestate
would have made, it is important to note that any system that
cover all situations adequately will not cover individual cases
perfectly. Families may not be close in the sense that the
legislation
assumes. Relatives who appear biologically closer to the intestate may
be further away from the intestate’s favour
than those who seem
to be biologically distant. Close family members may not get on. A
spouse may become estranged.
1.9 People cannot be forced to make comprehensive wills and may
fail to produce a valid will through no fault of their own. It is
this in mind that the rules of intestacy should be standardised and
reformed to the extent that will enable them to produce
a result that
will be fair, albeit necessarily overly objective, in most cases. Any
hardship produced by the uniform application
of standard rules of
intestacy may be alleviated by an application under family provision
legislation.
The rules of intestacy should not be viewed
as removing the need for wills, and they should not be seen to be
lessening the importance
of making a valid will.
Indigenous people
1.10 It is quite common for Indigenous people to die intestate.
It is questionable whether it is appropriate, or always appropriate,
for the general law to apply without qualification in cases
Indigenous person dies intestate. Indigenous concepts of family and
time may well be incompatible with the assumptions underlying
general law. If so, the extent to which different distribution rules
can, and should, apply arises. This issue is addressed separately
LEGISLATIVE DEFINITION OF “INTESTACY”
Trustee Act 1893
1.11 Not all jurisdictions include a definition of intestacy in
their relevant statutes. A number of Acts define
“intestate”
a person who dies and either does not leave a will, or leaves a
will but does not dispose effectively by will of the whole or part
his or her property.
Others provide that an “intestate”
a person who leaves a will but dies intestate as to some beneficial interest in his real or personal estate.
1.12 In the Northern Territory, the
Trustee Act 1893
deems a persons to have died intestate in respect of a
“beneficial interest in real estate or land” where that
is “owing to the failure of the objects of the devise or
other circumstances happening before or after the death of such person
in whole or in part not effectually disposed of”.
1.13 Intestacy appears to have an accepted meaning. A legislative definition may, therefore, be unnecessary.
Should there be a legislative definition of “intestate” or “intestacy”?
If so, how should it be defined?
MECHANISMS FOR ACHIEVING DISTRIBUTION
1.14 Each jurisdiction has different mechanisms for achieving the
distribution of an intestate’s estate. Some of the mechanisms
broadly similar with only minor variations between some jurisdictions,
but others are very different. For example, in South Australia
Australian Capital Territory, the personal representative holds the
estate on trust for the persons entitled under the intestacy
provisions.
Some jurisdictions, such as Queensland, rely on the general provisions
relating to administration of estates (whether testate or
while others, such as New South Wales and Tasmania, expressly provide for statutory trusts to take effect in intestacy.
Some jurisdictions include provisions that deal with old distinctions
that may no longer be relevant to a modern system of administration
1.15 The remainder of this chapter needs to be considered in
the context of any recommendations the National Committee makes in
to the general administration of estates and in the light of
considerations such as:
· whether there is any need for separate rules dealing with the administration of intestate estates;
· whether such rules should appear among the provisions dealing with intestacy or the administration of estates; and
· whether the mechanisms for the distribution of intestate and testate estates should be assimilated as far as possible.
TITLE AND POWERS OF THE PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE
s 38, s 45(2), s 52(1)
s 61B(1), s 61F
1.16 In general the intestate estate is held on trust by the
personal representative to be distributed to the persons entitled to
it. The persons entitled are those who are eligible to receive an
interest under the rules of distribution on intestacy.
1.17 Where the deceased has made a will (and the executor
appointed does not refuse to act) the estate will be held in trust by
executor and any part of it that is subject to intestacy will be
distributed by the executor according to the rules of intestacy.
Where the deceased has not made a will, or has made a will and
the executor refuses to act, the estate will be held in trust by an
administrator appointed by the court and the estate or any part of the
estate that is subject to intestacy will be distributed by
administrator according to the rules of intestacy.
Distinction between wholly and partially intestate estates
s 61B(1), s 61F
s 44, s 47(a)
s 52, s 53(a)
1.18 All jurisdictions make some provision (express or implied)
to the effect that the administrator or executor holds the intestate
estate on trust to be distributed according to the rules of
distribution. Some jurisdictions make a statement covering both wholly
intestate and partially intestate estates. For example, the Australian
Capital Territory’s provision states:
The personal representative of an intestate holds, subject to his
or her rights, powers and duties for the purposes of administration,
the intestate estate on trust for the persons entitled to it in
accordance with this division.
Most jurisdictions, however, make a distinction between wholly
intestate estates and partially intestate estates. There seem to be
reasons for this distinction: a substantive reason and one relating to
statutory construction or interpretation.
1.19 The substantive reason for the distinction is to require the
issue to bring into account benefits received under the will. This
the situation, for example, in Tasmania and Victoria where general
provision is made for dealing with intestate estates
subject to the bringing into account of any beneficial interests acquired by the issue of the deceased under the will.
The question of bringing into account beneficial interests acquired under a will is discussed in Chapter 8.
1.20 New Zealand also follows this pattern,
the special provisions relating to partially intestate estates include
provisions relating to the nature of the beneficial interest
in some cases.
1.21 Elsewhere the distinction has been made for reasons of
statutory construction or interpretation. New South Wales, for example,
provides, in respect of wholly intestate estates:
Where a person dies wholly intestate, the real and personal estate
of that person shall, subject to the payment of all such funeral
administration expenses, debts and other liabilities as are properly
payable out of the estate, be distributed or held in trust
manner specified in this section…
And, in respect of partially intestate estates:
Where a person dies having made a will which effectively disposes
of only part of the person’s estate, [the division], so far
applicable and subject to the modifications specified in subsection
(2), shall apply to and in relation to the part of the person’s
estate that is not disposed of by the will as if the last-mentioned
part had comprised the whole of the person’s estate.
1.22 In Queensland general provision is made for distribution according to the rules of distribution
but separate provision is still made in relation to partial intestacies:
The executor of the will of an intestate shall hold, subject to the
executor’s rights and powers for the purposes of administration,
the residuary estate of an intestate on trust for the persons entitled
Should special provision be made for dealing with partially intestate estates:
(a) for the purposes of bringing into account; and/or
(b) for other purposes?
Beneficially Interested Personal Representative
1.23 Some jurisdictions also make special provision in relation to beneficially interested personal representatives.
In Tasmania, for example, the relevant provision states that:
The personal representative shall, subject to his rights and powers
for the purposes of administration, be a trustee for the persons
entitled under this Part in respect of the part of the estate not
expressly disposed of unless it appears by the will that the personal
representative is intended to take such part beneficially.
1.24 Queensland had a similar provision
which was not carried over when the
Succession Act 1981
was enacted. The Queensland Law Reform Commission recommended the
removal of the provision in 1978 on the grounds that it “might
construed as meaning that where the spouse or issue of an intestate
happen to be his executor they cannot take benefit under a
intestacy”.
The provision was originally intended
to deal with the historical position that an executor was entitled at
law to such personalty
of the testator that was undisposed of by will.
Equity, however, took the view that an executor would be entitled to
the testator’s
personalty that was not expressly disposed of,
unless a contrary intention could be found on the part of the testator
the executor from the benefit. In such cases the personalty
went to those entitled upon intestacy.
The English
Executors Act of 1830
upon which the former Queensland provision was based, shifted the
burden of proof in such circumstances in favour of those entitled
take on intestacy so that the executor was deemed to hold undisposed of
personalty for the persons entitled to take on intestacy
express statement could be found in the will that the executor was
intended to take the residue beneficially. The Queensland
Commission concluded that:
It is quite clear that the only persons who may take on intestacy
in Queensland are those persons designated by [the intestacy
provisions]
and, therefore, there is no need to retain what is, in
effect, an archaic amendment to an even more archaic rule.
Is there a need for a special provision negating the
statutory trusts where the personal representative takes the intestate
beneficially?
WHAT IS AVAILABLE FOR DISTRIBUTION ON INTESTACY?
s 5, s 34(1)
s 5(1), s 45
s 6(1), s 62
s 33, s 44(1)
s 38(4), s 52(1)
s 10(1), s 13(1)
1.25 Most jurisdictions make provision to identify the estate
that is available for distribution. In general the estate available
distribution is so much of the estate that has not been disposed of by
will (either in whole or in part) less such expenses,
liabilities as may be payable by the estate in the course of the
administration. The provisions in each jurisdiction vary
respects but the general outcome would appear to be the same.
1.26 In Queensland separate provision is made for wholly and
partially intestate estates. The property available for distribution
a wholly intestate estate is that which remains after payment of all
such debts as are properly payable.
is defined as including “funeral, testamentary and administration
expenses, debts and other liabilities
payable out of the estate of a
deceased person”.
The property available for
distribution in a partially intestate estate is that which “is
not effectively disposed of by the
1.27 Similarly in New South Wales a wholly intestate estate that
is available for distribution or to be held in trust is “subject
to the payment of all such funeral and administration expenses, debts
and other liabilities as are properly payable out of the estate”.
Likewise in Western Australia the intestate estate is to be held in
trust, subject to “the payment of all duties and fees and
debts of the deceased in the ordinary course of administration”.
1.28 In the Australian Capital Territory and Northern Territory
the personal representative holds the intestate estate, “subject
to his or her rights, powers and duties for the purposes of
administration”.
The “purposes of
administration” are defined as including “the payment in
due course of administration of the debts,
funeral and testamentary
expenses duties and commission, and the costs, charges and expenses of
the executor or administrator, and
any costs that may be ordered to be
paid out of the estate”.
1.29 South Australia adopts a similar approach, with the value
of the intestate estate being the gross value of the estate less the
intestate’s debts and liabilities, funeral expenses, testamentary
expenses, the costs of administering the estate and, where
intestate is survived by a spouse, the value of the intestate’s
personal chattels.
1.30 As noted below, Tasmania and Victoria establish trusts for
sale of the estate of an intestate and make rather more complex
as to identify the “residuary estate” on
1.31 New Zealand would appear to make no provision to identify
the estate that is available for distribution in its intestacy rules.
1.32 The question of what is available for distribution to
those entitled to a share in an intestate’s estate is closely
to questions of the order of the application of assets for the
payment of debts of the deceased. For example, in the administration
solvent estates, most jurisdictions make the property of the deceased
that is undisposed of by will available first for the payment
It should be noted that, in its Discussion Paper on the Administration
of Deceased Estates, the National Committee has proposed the
property not disposed of by will into the category of “residuary
estate” for the purpose of the payment of
debts in the
administration of a solvent estate.
How should the estate that is available for distribution be identified?
IS THERE A NEED TO EMPOWER THE PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE TO SELL?
Conveyancing Act 1919
s 153(1)(b)
1.33 Some jurisdictions make specific provision for the powers
of personal representatives in dealing with intestate estates. The
majority effectively give the executor an unfettered power of sale
– no matter how it is expressed.
1.34 In New South Wales, the personal representative of the
intestate estate has the power to “sell the real estate of the
person as to which the deceased person died intestate for the
purposes of distribution or division amongst the persons
1.35 The South Australian and New Zealand provisions simply
permit the personal representative to “sell, or convert into
the whole, or any part, of an intestate estate”.
1.36 Other jurisdictions operate to similar effect, giving
personal representatives, in relation to intestate estates, the same
as personal representatives in relation to testate estates.
Examples of such jurisdictions are Queensland,
Western Australia,
the Northern Territory
and England.
1.37 In contrast to the above jurisdictions, some seek to limit
the power of sale to cases where there is a “special
for example, when the proceeds are needed to meet the
costs of administration.
In the Australian Capital Territory and Victoria, this power of sale covers the intestate’s personalty and realty.
1.38 Tasmania and Victoria seek to regulate the proceeds of the sale further.
Victoria, for example, first establishes a trust for the sale or conversion of the property of the intestate into money.
Out of any money arising from such sales or conversions and any ready
money of the deceased (not otherwise disposed of by will),
the personal
representative must meet “all such funeral testamentary and
administration expenses debts and other liabilities
as are properly
payable thereout having regard to the rules of administration”
and then “set aside a fund sufficient
to provide for any
pecuniary legacies bequeathed by the will (if any) of the
The “residuary estate” of the intestate is then identified as:
The residue of the said money and any investments for the time
being representing the same, including (but without prejudice to the
trust for sale) any part of the estate of the deceased which may be
retained unsold and is not required for the administration purposes
Tasmania makes provision in similar terms.
Is there a need for separate provision to be made for trusts for sale in relation to intestate estates?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Re Full Board of the Guardianship and Administration Board
[2003] WASCA 268
(2003) 27 WAR 475
at para 48 (Heenan J).
. See para 1.18-1.22 below.
. W A Lee and A A Preece,
Lee’s Manual of Queensland Succession Law
(5th edition, LBC Information Services, 2001) at 173.
. While some groups in the community may die intestate at a
younger age, for example, Indigenous people (who have lower life
expectancies
than the general population) and young people who are
killed in car accidents, these groups are less likely to have
substantial assets
to be distributed upon death.
. England and Wales, Law Commission,
Family Law: Distribution on Intestacy
(Report 187, 1989) at 7.
. See the proposals of the National Committee for Uniform
Succession Laws relating to family provision: National Committee for
Succession Laws,
Report to the Standing Committee of Attorneys General on Family Provision
(Queensland Law Reform Commission, Miscellaneous Paper 28, 1997); and National Committee for Uniform Succession Laws,
Family Provision: Supplementary Report to the Standing Committee of Attorneys General
(Queensland Law Reform Commission, Report 58, 2004).
. R F Atherton and P Vines,
Succession: Families, Property and Death: Text and Cases
(2nd ed, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2003) at 32.
Succession Act 1981
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 61(1);
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 2(1);
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 55(1).
Trustee Act 1893
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Succession Act 1981
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1969
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration Act 1903
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
. See para 8.19-8.25.
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 78 and s 79.
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 79(2)-(4).
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(1).
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61F(1). See also
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 49(1).
. The Queensland Act states that “the personal
representative of a deceased person shall be under a duty to …
the estate of the deceased, subject to the administration
thereof, as soon as may be”:
Succession Act 1981
s 52(1)(d).
Succession Act 1981
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61F(3);
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1903
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 49(1)(b).
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Succession Act 1867
(Qld) s 34(2).
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
The Law Relating to Succession
(Report 22, 1978) at 23.
. W A Lee, “Queensland Intestacy Rules 1968” (1970) 7
University of Queensland Law Journal
. 11 George IV and 1 William IV c 40.
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
The Law Relating to Succession
(Report 22, 1978) at 23-24.
Succession Act 1981
definition of “residuary estate”.
Succession Act 1981
definition of “debts”.
Succession Act 1981
definition of “residuary estate”.
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(1).
Administration Act 1903
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1969
Administration and Probate Act 1929
(ACT) s 5(1) definition of “purposes of administration”;
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 6(1) definition of “purposes of administration”.
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1935
See para 1.38 below. See also
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 33(4).
. See New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Succession Laws: Administration of Estates of Deceased Persons
(DP 42, 1999) para 15.34-15.55; Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Administration of Estates of Deceased Persons
(Discussion Paper, MP 37, 1999) at 198-208.
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Succession Laws: Administration of Estates of Deceased Persons
(DP 42, 1999) para 15.54; Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Administration of Estates of Deceased Persons
(Discussion Paper, MP 37, 1999) at 207.
Conveyancing Act 1919
s 153(1)(b).
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 27(1).
Succession Act 1981
Administration Act 1903
Administration and Probate Act 1969
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 41.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 26 (2005) - Uniform Succession Laws: Intestacy
2. General principles of distribution
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Distribution according to fixed lists
Disclaimed interests
DISTRIBUTION ACCORDING TO FIXED LISTS
The Statute of Distributions
2.1 The rules governing the distribution of an intestate estate have their origins in the English
Statute of Distributions of 1670
2.2 Distribution under this statute was complex, at least so far
as it involved distributing to the next of kin. Once the
“surplusage”
of the personal estate was determined, a
surviving husband would take the whole of his deceased wife’s
remaining estate. A
widow, however, would take one third of her
husband’s estate if he left issue, the remainder passing to the
children, with
the share of any child who predeceased their father
going to their descendants; but a widow would take one half if her
husband left
no issue, the other half passing, in such cases to the
next of kin of the deceased who were in “equal degree”.
2.3 Degrees of relationship were determined in accordance with
the civil law progression, that is, essentially the order established
late in the development of Roman Law,
counting up the number of generations from the intestate to the nearest
ancestor held in common with the claimant and then counting
number of generations from the nearest common ancestor until the
claimant was reached. Relatives who were separated from
the intestate
by a smaller number of steps, those who were of a higher degree, took
to the exclusion of those of a lower degree,
that is who were separated
from the intestate by a greater number of steps. Those who were the
same distance, or number of steps,
from the intestate took equally.
2.4 Subject to the spouse and descendents exercising their
rights, the father of the intestate was next in line, then the mother,
brothers and sisters – on an equal footing (although the children
of brothers and sisters could take their deceased parent’s
grandchildren could not), grandparents (in the absence of brothers and
sisters), nieces and nephews, and so on.
2.5 Although the Crown was ultimately entitled to take the personal estate if no other relatives were entitled,
the extent of the civil law list of distribution and the fact that
executors could take as against the Crown, suggests that this
Modern provisions
s 72G, s 72H, s 72I, s 72J
s 51-52, s 55
2.6 The provisions outlined above have been subject to reforms
over the years, resulting in the regimes that apply today. The level
complexity has been reduced to an extent, at least in so far as
identifying next of kin goes. All Australian jurisdictions now
fixed lists which must be followed in determining the distribution of
an intestate’s estate. Although these lists vary,
the general
progression can be summarised as below. Each category will be discussed
in more detail later in this Issues Paper:
1. The intestate’s estate will go wholly to the surviving spouse or de facto partner if the intestate has left no issue.
2. If one or more issue and spouse or de facto partner survive, the
spouse or de facto partner is entitled to a prescribed amount
interest), the personal chattels and a proportion of the remaining
estate. The issue are entitled to the rest.
3. If a spouse and a de facto survive the intestate, the
spouse’s entitlement must be divided between them or rest wholly
one at the expense of the other.
4. If one or more issue, but no spouse or de facto partner,
survives the intestate those issue are entitled to the whole of the
5. If a parent, or parents, of the intestate survives, but no
spouse, de facto partner or issue, they are entitled to the whole of
the intestate estate (if both parents survive the estate is divided
equally between them).
6. If the intestate is not survived by any of the above but is
survived by next of kin, then the intestate estate will go to them
according to the relevant list.
7. If the intestate is not survived by any of the above the intestate estate shall be deemed to be
bona vacantia
and the Crown will be entitled to it (or to deal with it as it sees fit).
Provisions relating to persons who, at the death of the intestate, are minors
2.7 Some jurisdictions make separate provision for those who
have not yet attained the age of 18 and are entitled to receive a share
of an intestate estate upon distribution. In these cases we are dealing
with children or minors whether they are issue of the deceased
(for example, they could also be collateral relatives or the issue of
collateral relatives).
2.8 First, these jurisdictions provide that a person who is
entitled to the whole, or a share, of the intestate estate, is under 18
and not married, is entitled to take beneficially upon reaching 18 or
2.9 Secondly, these jurisdictions make provision for
circumstances where a minor dies who would otherwise be entitled to a
distribution. The Northern Territory and Australian Capital
Territory provide that if the person otherwise entitled dies unmarried
before they turn 18, then the intestacy provisions take effect as if
the person had died before the intestate.
In Tasmania and
England the same effect is achieved by stating that the estate is held
in trust for any children “who attain
the age of 18 years or
2.10 Thirdly, the relevant provisions state that they do not
affect any law that authorises expenditure for the maintenance,
advancement
or benefit of a minor out of property held on trust for him
The Australian Capital Territory and Northern
Territory both add that any amount expended from the estate for the
maintenance, advancement
or benefit of a minor shall be deemed, upon
the death of that minor, before they marry or turn 18, to have reduced
the amount of
the intestate estate available for distribution by the
amount expended.
Tasmania, New Zealand and England all
add that minors who have married before they turn 18 shall “be
entitled to give valid
receipts for the income” of their share or
2.11 An advantage of such a provision is that, should an
entitled person die unmarried and intestate in their infancy, the
entitlement
will pass to a blood relative of the intestate, rather than
to the surviving parent of the infant who has no such connection to the
original intestate. However, to omit such a provision, means vesting
occurs as soon as the intestate dies, allowing vested interests
quickly identified.
2.12 Western Australia has a provision so that, when an infant
is entitled on distribution to a share worth less than $10,000, that
infant, or a person on their behalf, may apply to the Court to
authorise the executor or administrator to expend all or part of the
share for the infant’s “maintenance, advancement or
education”. This provision is stated to be in addition to any
power the executor or administrator may otherwise have to undertake
expenditure on behalf of an infant.
Likewise, in
Victoria, if the estate that remains to be distributed is less than
$1,000 and no partner but only a child or children
have survived the
intestate, the administrator may pay the entitlement of any of the
children to “to any person having the
care and control of such
child or children without seeing to the application thereof and without
incurring any liability in respect
of such payment”.
2.13 All other jurisdictions make no specific provision relating
to persons who are minors at the death of the intestate, apparently
relying on the law relating to trusts.
2.14 While allowance is sometimes made for children to take
their share if they marry before they turn 18, consideration should
be given to allowing children to take their share before they turn
18 where they have not married but have, nevertheless, parented
children of their own.
What provision (if any) should be made for minors who are entitled to part or all of an intestate estate?
Should minors take their share of an intestate estate
unconditionally (that is without having to turn 18 or marry - but
the property being held for them until they turn 18 or
If not, and the minor dies before turning 18 or marrying,
should the property available for distribution be reduced by the amount
spent on them before their death?
If a minor’s share in the intestate estate does not
pass to him/her because the minor dies before reaching majority should
share pass to surviving issue of the minor?
What special provision, if any, should be made to accommodate
minor issue of the intestate when the estate available for distribution
Use and enjoyment of chattels
s 47(1)(iv)
2.15 In some jurisdictions a specific provision is included that
states that a minor who has a vested or contingent interest in any
personal chattels may be permitted, by the administrator, to have the
use and enjoyment of the chattels in such a manner and subject
conditions, if any, as the administrator may consider reasonable, and
without being liable to account for any consequential
What provision, if any, ought to be made with respect to the use and enjoyment by minors of chattels of the estate?
Business Estates
Trustee Companies Act 1968
(Qld) provides that where
administration is granted to a trustee company and the estate or part
of it is employed in a business or
undertaking, and one or more of
those entitled on intestacy is a minor, the trustee company may
(subject to the court’s approval)
postpone the sale and
conversion of the property into money and the trustee company may carry
on the business during the minority
of the person so entitled.
Should any provision be made for carrying on the business where one or more of those entitled is a minor?
DISCLAIMED INTERESTS
2.17 A question also arises about what may happen if a person
entitled to take in intestacy disclaims that interest. There exists
statutory provision for such a situation. The common law position was
explained by Justice Walton:
Books had it, nobody can put an estate into another in spite of his
teeth … Now what effect does that [disclaimer] have? It seems to
me that it leaves the executor of the will still holding
the interest
attempted to be disposed of under the statute, and still holding it as
part of the estate of the deceased.
2.18 If those entitled to an interest in the intestate estate disclaim
that interest, the estate will be distributed as though the
disclaiming had predeceased the intestate. Their interest will not pass
to the Crown by
bona vacantia
unless no other entitled people can be ascertained. This is because the
intestate estate does not automatically vest in those who
are entitled
to a share in it. Rather the estate vests in the administrator and an
entitled party may disclaim their interest before
any distribution has
2.19 This has been followed in New South Wales
and in South Australia
where Justice Legoe said, “…the interest does not go to
the Crown bona vacantia, but devolves upon other members of
beneficiary class as if the … disclaiming person were
non-existent”.
2.20 In New Zealand successors on intestacy have a statutory
right to disclaim their entitlement. The successor must have reached
majority and be of sound mind to exercise the right. The disclaimer
must relate to the whole of the successor’s entitlement
be made within one year of the date on which administration of the
intestate estate is first granted. The successor cannot
have enjoyed or
disposed of any part of his or her interest, accepted valuable
consideration for the disclaimer, provide who is to
be entitled to the
disclaimed interest, nor be bankrupt when the disclaimer is made. The
effect of a valid disclaimer is as if the
successor had died
immediately before the intestate, survived by as many issue as were
alive at the time of the intestate’s
The advantage of this provision over the common law is that the position of the issue of the person disclaiming is clarified.
2.21 It should be noted that disclaimed interests in an
intestate estate may amount to “deprived assets” and may be
as assets of the person disclaiming for the purpose of
determining his or her eligibility for Commonwealth social security
Should any legislative provision be made to deal with situations
where a person otherwise entitled to an interest in the intestate
estate disclaims that interest?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
. 22 & 23 Charles II c 10
as amended in 1685 by 1 James II c 17
. See J A C Thomas,
Textbook of Roman Law
(North Holland Publishing Co, Amsterdam, 1976) at 524-525; R W Lee,
The Elements of Roman Law
(4th ed, Sweet and Maxwell, London, 1956) at 263-264. See also
Mentney v Petty
(1722) Prec Ch 593 at 594;
at 266; and W Blackstone,
Commentaries on the Laws of England
(9th ed, 1783) at 504.
. I J Hardingham, M A Neave and H A J Ford,
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand
(2nd ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1989) at 352.
. I J Hardingham, M A Neave and H A J Ford,
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand
(2nd ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1989) at 353.
Halsbury’s Laws of England
(Butterworth & Co, London, 1910) vol 11 at para 55-64. See para 7.1 below.
. See para 3.21-3.27.
. See para 3.28-3.59.
. See para 3.60-3.73.
. See para 5.33-5.34.
. See para 5.35.
. See para 6.1-6.25.
. See para 7.1-7.11.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1969
s 63(1). Tasmania, New Zealand and England make provision to the same
effect, but make a distinction between issue of the intestate
minor relatives:
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 78(1);
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 47.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 63(2). See also
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 78(2).
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 47. New Zealand uses “attain full age or marry under that age”:
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 78(1)(a).
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 47(1)(ii);
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 63(3).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 63(3).
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 78(1)(b); and
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 47(1)(ii).
. I J Hardingham, M A Neave and H A J Ford,
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand
(2nd ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1989) at 363.
Administration Act 1903
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 78(1)(c); and
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 47(1)(iv).
Trustee Companies Act 1968
Re Scott (deceased); Widdows v Friends of the Clergy Corporation
(1975) 1 WLR 1260 at 1271 (Walton J).
Rex v Skinner
[1972] 1 NSWLR 307.
In the Estate of Simmons (deceased)
(1990) 56 SASR 1.
In the Estate of Simmons (deceased)
(1990) 56 SASR 1
at 14 (Legoe J).
Administration Act 1969
Social Security Act 1991
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 26 (2005) - Uniform Succession Laws: Intestacy
3. Distribution to spouses and partners
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Who is a spouse or partner?
Spouses to be treated as separate persons
Distribution to spouses and partners
WHO IS A SPOUSE OR PARTNER?
3.1 As spouses and partners are the first parties considered
when distributing the estate of an intestate it is important to know
who can be considered a spouse or partner and how broadly the term is
to be construed.
Interpretation Act 1978
3.2 A person will be a spouse of another when the two marry in Australia in accordance with the
Marriage Act 1961
(Cth) or, when a person is married overseas, that marriage is recognised in Australia under
Marriage Act
3.3 In some jurisdictions the term “spouse” is now
taken to include not only husband or wife but also de facto partner
other equivalent terms such as putative spouse or domestic partner.
The Australian Capital Territory includes “spouse” together
with “domestic partner” within the term
Other jurisdictions specifically make reference to the intestate’s husband or wife rather than spouse.
Issues relating to the identification of de facto partners are dealt with below.
3.4 The Northern Territory is the only jurisdiction which
specifically includes in its definition of spouse Aboriginal or Torres
Islander people who marry each other in accordance with the
customs and traditions of the particular community of Aboriginal or
Strait Islander people with which either person identifies.
Bigamous unions
3.5 A question may arise as to the status of a surviving spouse
who finds that the deceased entered into a bigamous union with that
Where a deceased man, for example, underwent a marriage ceremony in
Australia at the time he had a valid subsisting
marriage to another
woman, what is the position of the more recent wife? Can she claim to
be the deceased’s spouse for the
purposes of intestate
distribution?
Re Milanovic
the deceased had been
married in Serbia. During the Second World War he was separated from
his wife and did not return to her. Some
years later he “went
through a form of marriage” with a second woman, who had no
knowledge of his previous marriage.
Despite the unwitting nature of
this bigamous union (at least on the second wife’s part), the
Court held that the second wife
was not entitled to make an application
for testator’s family maintenance. Douglas J held that the nature
of this second marriage
meant that, “[s]he is thus not the widow
of the testator, and not in the class of persons who may make
application for provision
out of the testator’s
3.7 However, this situation may be addressed by the provisions
that have been enacted by most jurisdictions to deal with situations
where the deceased is married and also has a de facto partner.
So, although not married, a bigamist’s second or subsequent
partners may be entitled to a share of an intestate estate if they
found to be in a de facto relationship with the deceased.
What provision, if any, ought to be made for bigamous unions?
De facto relationships
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Legislation Act 2001
s 32G, s 61B(3B);
Property (Relationships) Act 1984
Schedule 6, Pt 2;
De Facto Relationships Act 1991
Family Relationships Act 1975
s 44(3A), (3B) and (9);
Relationships Act 2003
Property Law Act 1958
Interpretation Act 1984
Property (Relationships) Act 1976
s 2, s 2C, s 2D
3.8 For the purposes of this paper the term “de facto
partner” has been adopted with the intention of encompassing the
variety of terms used to describe such a person – de facto
spouse, putative spouse, partner or domestic partner.
3.9 The de facto partner of the intestate will usually be
entitled to take the spouse’s share of the deceased’s
A de facto partner is often given a high priority in the
distribution of the intestate’s property. The possible extent of
entitlement means it is important that such partners be identified
and distinguished from mere cohabitants, close friends or carers,
3.10 De facto partners are included in intestacy provisions in
all Australian jurisdictions. This inclusion was necessary to remove
the legal difficulties faced by de facto partners. Before de facto
partners were included in intestacy provisions the surviving partner
was eligible to apply to the court under family provision legislation
for provision out of the estate. However, it was acknowledged
“such application for family provision may prove costly and time
consuming and may not be worthwhile where the estate
3.11 Each jurisdiction provides requirements that must be met
before a de facto relationship will be recognised in law. The presence
of further requirements to be met by de facto partners seeking to
become entitled in intestacy must also be determined. A decision
be made as to whether such further requirements are to be brought into
the uniform legislation or left to the individual jurisdictions.
Requirements for recognition as a de facto partner
3.12 Generally a de facto partner is either one of two persons
who are living together as a couple on a genuine domestic basis but
are not married to each other or related by family. In most
3.13 The indicia of a de facto relationship, which are
identified in separate statutes that deal with such relationships,
the nature and extent of their common residence; the length of
their relationship; whether or not a sexual relationship exists or
existed; the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any
arrangement for financial support; their ownership, use and
acquisition
of property; the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life,
including the care and support of each other, the care
and support of
children; the performance of household tasks; the reputation and public
aspects of their relationship.
3.14 For the purposes of determining entitlement on intestacy,
most jurisdictions recognise a de facto partner only if the
relationship
has existed continuously for a certain period before the
death of the intestate or if a child has been born to the de facto
relationship.
The jurisdictions differ in what they
consider to be an acceptable time period for the relationship to have
existed prior to the
death of the intestate. South Australia requires
either five continuous years or a five year aggregate over a six year
A number prefer a much briefer two years.
3.15 In New South Wales and Tasmania, where the intestate is
survived by a de facto partner and issue (not being issue of the de
partner), the de facto will not be entitled to anything if the
relationship has existed for less than two years.
3.16 In some jurisdictions, the requirement that a child be born
to the relationship is subject to an additional requirement that
child must be under eighteen years at the intestate’s death if
the surviving partner is to be eligible to take on intestacy
having to prove the relationship existed for a continuous period
immediately before the intestate’s death.
3.17 In South Australia a person must apply to the court for a declaration of their status as a de facto partner.
Such a claim will not be entertained unless it is supported by credible corroborative evidence.
3.18 In its Supplementary Report on Family Provision, the
National Committee for Uniform Succession Laws, in considering how to
a de facto relationship for the purposes of family provision,
noted that, while the various jurisdictions enjoyed a degree of
consistency
in their definitions, each jurisdiction had slightly
different provisions for determining whether two people had been in a
relationship and that there were also differences in relation
to the qualifying period to establish a de facto relationship for the
purposes of family provision. The Committee noted that the differences
in each jurisdiction were necessary “to achieve consistency
across the range of legislation within [each] individual jurisdiction
concerning the rights or obligations of de facto partners”.
The Committee, therefore, decided that the uniform legislation should
not attempt a uniform definition of de facto partner but rather
de facto partner should be identified “according to the relevant
legislation in the enacting jurisdiction”.
A similar approach could be taken to identifying de facto partners for the purposes of distribution on intestacy.
Should the meaning of de facto partner be standardised for the
purposes of intestacy or should the National Committee’s draft
Family Provision Bill be followed (that is, allow the definition of
each jurisdiction to be applied)?
If there is to be a standardised meaning of “de facto partner”, how should that term be defined?
In any event should a special period, or periods, apply to
the recognition of de facto relationships for purposes of intestacy? If
so, what periods?
Should any restrictions be placed on the ability of a de facto partner to succeed to an intestate’s estate?
SPOUSES TO BE TREATED AS SEPARATE PERSONS
Property Law Act 1974
s 52(1)(f)(viii)
Law of Property Act 1925
3.19 In Australia, a woman’s property does not become that
of her husband upon marriage. Married women have the same powers
deal with their interests in property that single women (and men,
married or not) enjoy.
Nevertheless,
most of the intestacy provisions state that spouses are to be treated
as separate persons for the purposes of distribution
under intestacy.
The issue of spouses being treated as separate persons arises, for
example, where parents, grandparents or married cousins are entitled
distribution on intestacy. It goes without saying that each partner
ought to be able to take the share to which they are entitled.
surprising to find this expressly stated in modern statutes since the
proposition is so obviously part of the general law today.
cousins who are married and have issue give rise to a particular
problem. This is discussed below.
Is it necessary for the intestacy provisions to continue to
contain an express statement that spouses are to be considered separate
DISTRIBUTION TO SPOUSES AND PARTNERS
3.20 The following paragraphs outline the current provisions for the
distribution of intestate estates where there is a surviving
partner. Some of the more complex provisions outlined below have been
enacted to deal with situations where it is necessary
to apportion a
share for the surviving spouse or partner in order to accommodate other
relatives who are also entitled to take, usually
the surviving issue of
the intestate. A simpler plan may be for the intestate estate to
devolve in its entirety to the surviving
spouse or partner, regardless
of the presence of other relatives. These issues are dealt with in more
detail below.
Intestate leaves spouse or partner but no issue
s 35; Sch 2 Pt 1 It 1(1)
s 49(1),(2); Sch 6 Pt 6.1 It 1
s 61B(1), s 61B(2)
s 66(1),(2); s 67(1),(2); Sch 6 Pt 1 It 1, It 3
s 14(1) Table It 1 3-4; s 14(2)
s 77 It 1 and It 3
s 46(1)(i) Table It 1 and It 3
3.21 Where the intestate is survived by a spouse or partner, but
no issue, the spouse or partner will either receive his or her
entitlement
in preference to other relatives, or will be entitled to
the whole of the estate in the absence of specific relatives.
3.22 In most jurisdictions the surviving spouse or partner is
entitled to the whole of the intestate’s estate in the absence
surviving issue.
3.23 Some jurisdictions, however, only allow such automatic
entitlement when the intestate has not been survived by any issue,
nor siblings (nor the issue of siblings).
Zealand, in the absence of surviving issue, only the presence of a
parent will affect the surviving spouse’s right to
the whole of
the estate.
3.24 In the case of these latter jurisdictions (apart from New
Zealand) if the intestate is survived by a parent or brother or sister
(or the issue of a sibling), the spouse or partner is only entitled to
the whole of the intestate’s estate if its value is
prescribed amount - $75,000 in Western Australia. If the value is
greater than this prescribed amount, the spouse or partner
is entitled
to the threshold amount (plus interest calculated from the date of the
death of the intestate until the date of payment
) and half of the intestate estate remaining.
The spouse or partner’s absolute right to the personal (household) chattels
remains untouched.
3.25 A similar situation applied in Queensland before
recommendations of the Queensland Law Reform Commission were adopted in
The Queensland Law Reform Commission recommended that a surviving
spouse or partner should have to share only with the issue of the
3.26 Such a provision might have been justified in the past by
the belief that it would be unreasonable that a widow, who might
could carry off the whole of the intestate’s estate in
preference to consanguine relatives of the intestate.
1993 the Queensland Law Reform Commission observed that the
“relatively ungenerous provisions which intestacy rules make
surviving spouses” possibly reflected such concerns, “as
may the fact that a significant majority of surviving spouses
who have traditionally been discriminated against in succession
3.27 If, as it has been said in Queensland, the surviving spouse
“will most probably be a retired woman in the 75 to 80 year
it seems inequitable today that he or she
should have to share the estate with anyone other than the issue of the
intestate. Where
the estate is only small, the unfairness of any forced
division will be even more apparent.
If the intestate is not survived by any issue, should the surviving spouse or partner be entitled to the whole of the estate?
If not, who else should be entitled to a share and to how
much should the surviving spouse or partner be entitled and in what
proportions
should the remainder of the estate be divided?
Should personal chattels be included in the spouse or partner’s entitlement?
Intestate leaves spouse or partner and issue
s 35; Sch 2, Part 1, It 2
s 49(1),(2), s 49A, s 49AA; Sch 6, Pt 6.1, It 2
s 61B(1),(3),(3B),(14)
s 66(1),(2); s 67(1),(2); Sch 6 Pt 1 It 2
s 44(1),(2)(a),(3),(3B)
s 51(2), s 51(3), s 52(1)(a)
s 14(1) Table It 1-2, s 14(3)
s 46(1)(i) Table It 2
3.28 When the intestate is survived by a spouse or partner and
issue the intestate estate will be divided between them. While this
common to all jurisdictions, the methods adopted are not.
3.29 Questions have been raised from time to time concerning
the desirability of preferring the surviving spouse or partner to the
issue of the intestate.
3.30 In 1992 the Queensland Law Reform Commission proposed, on
a preliminary basis, that where an intestate is survived by a spouse
partner and issue of the relationship, the surviving spouse or partner
should take the entire estate to the exclusion of all others.
approach was justified on the grounds that the surviving spouse or
partner would be expected, in the normal course of events,
after the needs of children of the intestate who were still in their
minority. This proposal envisaged that where the surviving
partner was a step parent to the intestate’s children, the
surviving spouse or partner would be entitled to a generous
legacy of $500,000 and half the residue of the estate. The other half
of the residue would then go to the surviving issue
of the intestate
who were also not the issue of the surviving spouse or partner.
3.31 Some submissions to the Queensland Law Reform Commission
considered that these proposals might be too generous to the surviving
spouse or partner in the case of large estates and paid insufficient
attention to the “legitimate expectations” of issue.
3.32 The Queensland Law Reform Commission therefore recommended
a generous provision for the surviving spouse or partner, including,
the personal property of the intestate, a statutory legacy of $100,000,
the matrimonial home, a sum of up to $150,000 sufficient
to discharge
any mortgage on the matrimonial home, and one half of intestate estate
The Queensland Law Reform Commission
considered that making provision for issue in this way was consistent
“with the discernible
policy of the courts in dealing with
“usual” family provision applications and of the practice
of many spouses who do
make wills”.
3.33 In 1989 the Law Commission of England and Wales recommended
that the surviving spouse should receive the whole estate no matter
what other relatives remain. It was recognised that, “[i]f the
statutory legacy is raised to a level which is sufficient to
adequate provision for the surviving spouse, the practical result in
the vast majority of cases will be that the surviving
spouse receives
the whole estate”.
3.34 Some argument may be made for drawing a distinction between
surviving issue who are dependent on their parents and those who
not. However, in both cases there are grounds to support the spouse
receiving the greater proportion of the estate. In many cases
surviving (usually elderly) spouse will have greater need of the
intestate’s estate than the issue of the intestate, who
usually mature, rather than mere infants or young adults, and not
financially dependent on the deceased.
In cases where
surviving issue are in their minority or still dependent on their
parents it can usually be assumed that they will
be taken care of by
the surviving spouse.
So far as surviving non-dependant children (and their “legitimate expectations”) go, it has been suggested:
If it seems unfair that issue should inherit nothing on the death
of their first parent to die, nevertheless under ordinary circumstances
they should not have to wait long for the death of the surviving parent.
3.35 However, there will be cases where “legitimate
expectations” will not be met, especially where the issue are not
also the issue of the surviving spouse, or where a surviving spouse
remarries. The current rules in all jurisdictions make some provision
for such circumstances by allowing provision for surviving issue in
addition to the surviving spouse, at least in the case of larger
estates. An argument can, however, be made, for keeping the intestacy
provisions as simple as possible and allowing the “legitimate
expectations” of issue to be dealt with by way of applications
for family provision. In most family provision cases the interests
the surviving spouse or partner will be preferred over that of
surviving adult children of the intestate.
In principle, should the estate be divided between the spouse and issue?
Surviving spouse’s entitlement to personal chattels
s 34A; Sch 2 Part 1 It 2
s 44(1), s 49(2), s 49A
s 61A(2), s 61B(3)(a)
s 61(1), s 66(2), s 67(1),(2)
s 72B(1), s 72F(b), s 72H(1)
s 5(1), s 51(2)(a)
s 14(1) Table It 1; s 14(2)(a)
s 2(1), s 77 It 1, 2, 3
s 46(1)(i) Table It 2; s 55(1)(x)
3.36 In most jurisdictions the surviving spouse is entitled to the household (or personal) chattels.
It is generally stated that these chattels include articles of household or personal use or adornment (ornament).
The spouse’s right to the personal, or household, chattels has
been recognised as minimising the disruption caused by the death
intestate, and producing “some continuity of lifestyle for the
spouse and any surviving children”.
Another reason
for giving the surviving spouse or partner a right to personal, or
household, chattels is that it spares the surviving
spouse or partner
from a potentially unseemly struggle with other beneficiaries over the
ownership of particular chattels, for example,
kitchenware, lawnmowers,
and so on, where it may be difficult or impossible for the surviving
spouse or partner to prove ownership,
and undesirable to require her or
him to do so.
3.37 Of the seven jurisdictions which give detailed definitions of chattels,
there are a number of common inclusions. Linen, china, glassware,
liquors, consumable stores and domestic animals are all considered
Most also include furniture,
and motor car accessories
(not used for business at the time of the intestate’s death), as
well as plate (and/or plated articles), books, pictures, prints,
jewellery, and musical and scientific instruments or apparatus.
Any chattels used for business at the intestate’s death,
money and securities for money
are generally excluded.
3.38 Other items which are specifically identified as personal
chattels in some jurisdictions include curtains, drapes, carpets,
domestic appliances and utensils, garden appliances and
utensils, other chattels of ordinary household use or decoration,
garden effects or appliances,
carriages (not used for business),
horses (not used for business), stable furniture and effects (not used for business),
vehicles and accessories, boats and accessories and aircraft and accessories.
3.39 Items which some jurisdictions do not consider chattels
include motor vehicles, boats, aircraft, racing animals, original
trophies, clothing, jewellery, chattels of a personal nature,
and original paintings and other original works of art.
3.40 Contentious items are vehicles (cars, carriages, boats and aircraft), clothing and jewellery.
3.41 Rather than go into any detail, Western Australia, provides
a general definition – articles of personal or household use
The Queensland Law Reform Commission favoured
this position, considering it more appropriate to exclude
“…items which
would not ordinarily be treated as personal
property, rather than to devise a definition which attempts to list all
possible items
of property which should be treated as personal
3.42 Tasmania, on the other hand, has not provided for the
surviving spouse’s entitlement to any of the intestate’s
possessions. This was not the position of the Law Reform
Commission of Tasmania, which suggested that a definition of personal
could be provided similar to that provided in New Zealand.
3.43 In three jurisdictions, where the intestate is survived by
a partner, the personal chattels of the intestate are not included
the intestate estate for the purposes of distribution.
3.44 In some jurisdictions, a “thing” (household
chattel) will be taken as owned by the intestate even if it was held
subject to a charge, encumbrance or lien securing the payment of money;
or the intestate only held the interest as grantor under
a bill of sale
or as hirer under a hire-purchase agreement.
In some of these jurisdictions the owner’s rights with respect to the item are also expressly preserved.
Should the surviving spouse be entitled to the intestate’s personal possessions?
If so, should a detailed list of chattels be included or
should reference simply be made to “articles of personal or
use or adornment”?
If a detailed list is to be provided, what should be included in it?
Spouse’s entitlement to a statutory legacy
Sch 2 Pt 1 It 2
Sch 6 Pt 6.1 It 2(2)(a)
s 61A(2), s 61B(3)(b), s 61B(10)
Sch 6 Pt 1 It 2(1), It 3(1)
s 72G(b)(i)(B)
s 14(1) Table It 2, 3
s 77 It 1, 2, 3
s 46(1)(i) Table It 2, 3
3.45 Throughout Australia, the spouse is entitled to a statutory legacy,
in most jurisdictions in addition to the household or personal chattels.
Although there is limited correspondence, there is no uniformity and
the amount differs between jurisdictions. The prescribed amount
left to be fixed by Regulations
or a specific amount may
have been included in the legislation. In New South Wales the amount
prescribed by regulation is $200,000.
In Queensland and the Australian Capital Territory legislation states that the amount is $150,000,
$100,000 in Victoria,
$50,000 in Tasmania
and Western Australia
and $10,000 in South Australia.
3.46 The Law Reform Commission of Tasmania were not satisfied with that State’s law:
It seems that the original purpose of the legacy was to enable the
spouse to remain in the matrimonial home if he or she so desired
to assist in his or her day to day maintenance. The sum of $50 000 is
widely acknowledged as being insufficient for these purposes.
The Law Reform Commission of Tasmania also suggested that the legacy
should be altered by regulation, rather than statute, to allow
easier adjustments to take place in a climate of fluctuating property
It is important to bear in mind that property values differ according
to location as well as over time. The Law Commission of England
Wales observed that, if the purpose of the statutory legacy is to allow
the surviving spouse to purchase the intestate’s
share of their
shared home, a legacy which allows for the purchase of a London house
will provide a spouse who lives elsewhere with
a substantial surplus.
3.47 The surviving spouse’s entitlement to a fixed statutory
legacy was intended to remove financial hardship and ensure that
spouse can continue living in the manner to which he or she has become
accustomed.
The spouse will be able substantially to
reduce any mortgage to which the matrimonial home may be subject. If
the estate is only
small, the entitlement to a legacy means the spouse
may avoid severe financial hardship and the associated “expense
and domestic
unpleasantness” of a family provision application.
3.48 The provision of a small legacy to the surviving spouse was
supported by the Law Reform Committee of South Australia which
a problem in that:
[t]he amount is the same whether the wife is the first wife or
second wife, whether she has been married for one year, five years
thirty years, whether any of the husband’s assets came from the
use of money provided by the wife or the wife’s relatives
her co-operation in a business, whether the relationship between the
husband and wife was good or ill, whether she remarries
speedily, and
many other permutations and combinations of facts.
3.49 It was intended that the presence of a fixed legacy should take
pressure off the surviving spouse to sell essential assets so
their proceeds may be distributed to the intestate’s children. In
New South Wales an example was given of:
a case where a woman died and left a widower with children [and]
the estate had to be shared between a father and his children. The
children became upset with their father and demanded their share of the
estate. Naturally, he could not understand why his wife’s
did not pass to him and why he had to share it with his married
children. The result was that members of the family were at
loggerheads, other solicitors had to be brought in, barristers had to
be engaged and much distress was caused by unnecessary litigation
court appearances.
3.50 The Queensland Law Reform Commission in 1993 observed that:
the main purpose of giving a statutory legacy of a reasonably
substantial amount is that it makes easy the administration of all
of less than the amount of the statutory legacy plus the
personal property. There can be no doubt as to who will inherit. This
particularly important in the case of very small estates.
3.51 Another reason for a comparatively large statutory legacy is that
if the estate includes the intestate’s interest in a
business, and the business is the surviving spouse or partner’s
source of livelihood, the surviving spouse or partner
may be unable to
continue to operate the business if a substantial share of it has to be
removed to meet the entitlements of other
beneficiaries.
Should a statutory legacy be retained?
If so, should the prescribed amount be specified in uniform legislation or left to be fixed by Regulation in each jurisdiction?
How much should the legacy be?
Interest on statutory legacy
s 49(1),(4); Sch 6, Pt 6.1, It 2(2)(b)
s 61B(12), s 84A
s 51(2)(c)(ii), s 51(3);
Penalty Interest Rates Act 1983
Table It 2-3,
s 39, s 77 It 1-3
s 46(1)(i) Table It 2 and 3
3.52 When the spouse is entitled to a prescribed amount to be
drawn from the intestate’s estate, they are often entitled to
interest in addition to the legacy, which is also payable from the
estate. Provisions of this sort are said to be statutory recognition
the common law principle that “pecuniary legacies carry interest
unless the contrary is indicated in the will or instrument
However, the position at common law was
strictly that if a legacy was charged out of land, the legacy carried
interest from the date
of death of the deceased, but if a legacy was
given out of personal estate, the legacy carried interest only from the
the death of the deceased, unless other provision was made
in the will.
interest on the statutory legacy calculate it from the date of death of
the intestate until
the prescribed amount is paid (or appropriated) to
the spouse.
The interest rate is sometimes flexible – set by Regulation
or subordinate legislation.
In Victoria the rate is currently 9.5% per annum and in New South Wales 6% per annum.
Where the rate is fixed by legislation is it is 8% per annum in the Australian Capital Territory,
5% per annum in Western Australia and 4% per annum in Tasmania.
3.53 Charging interest on the statutory legacy can be said to
reflect the general objective of the law “that estates should
distributed as soon as may be”.
3.54 Queensland, the Northern Territory and South Australia make no provision for interest on the statutory legacy.
Should interest be paid on the surviving spouse’s statutory legacy?
Should the interest rate be set in uniform legislation or by regulation in each jurisdiction?
Apportionment between spouse and issue
Sch 6, Pt 6.1, It 2(2)(c), It 2(3)
s 61B(3)(c)
Sch 6 Pt 1 It 2, It 3
s 51(2)(c)(iii), s 52(1)(a)
s 14(1) Table It 2(b); s 14(2b)
s 46(1)(i) Table It 2
3.55 If any of the intestate estate remains after the
distribution of personal or household chattels and the statutory legacy
surviving spouse, the estate is then divided proportionally
between the surviving spouse and issue.
3.56 There are currently two approaches to apportioning the remaining intestate estate among the surviving spouse and issue.
3.57 One approach is to make different provisions for situations
where there is only one child of the intestate and situations where
there is more than one child of the intestate. So, if only one child
survives the intestate, the spouse is entitled to the prescribed
and one half of the remaining intestate estate. If more than one of the
intestate’s children has survived, the spouse
is entitled to the
prescribed legacy and one third of the remaining estate.
This approach dates back at least as far as the Statute of Distributions of 1670.
3.58 The other approach is to make no distinction in determining
the proportions for distribution between situations where there is
one child and situations where there are a number of children of the
intestate. That is to say, that the spouse is entitled
to the same
proportion of the remainder of the estate no matter how many children
or their issue survive. This entitlement may be
of the remainder; the issue sharing the remaining half or two-thirds respectively.
3.59 The Law Reform Commission of Tasmania suggested an approach
similar to that which the Queensland Law Reform Commission proposed
a preliminary basis in 1992.
It was thought that, where a
spouse and one child survive the intestate, the spouse would be in
greater need of financial assistance
than the child. If the child is a
minor the spouse will generally be responsible for his or her support.
If the child is an adult,
he or she will generally be capable of
supporting him or herself. Where more than one child have survived the
intestate greater provision
should be made for them.
What is an appropriate proportion of the remaining estate to go to the surviving spouse?
Should the proportion alter according to the number of surviving issue? If so, how?
Would it be useful to distinguish dependent from non-dependent issue?
Intestate leaves a spouse and a de facto partner
s 35, s 36; Sch 2 Part 1 It 1(2), It 2(2)
s 61B(1), s 61B(3A)
s 66(1),(2); s 67(3); Sch 6 Pt 3
s 72H(2),(3)
s 15(2),(3)
3.60 When an intestate is survived by a spouse, that spouse will
be entitled to a share in the intestate’s estate. When the
intestate is survived by a spouse and a de facto partner, the
spouse’s entitlement will be divided between them. The situation
envisaged is the presence of a surviving spouse and a sole surviving de
facto partner. There are a number of ways by which the spouse’s
entitlement can be divided between them.
Distribution in Queensland
3.61 Queensland is not concerned with the length of the
relationship between the de facto and the intestate; only that it
There are three methods that may be employed in dividing the
spouse’s entitlement between a spouse and a de facto partner.
3.62 The first method is for the spouse and de facto partner to
produce a distribution agreement. They reach agreement amongst
as to how the spouse’s entitlement is to be divided
amongst them and put it in writing.
3.63 The second method involves a partner or the personal
representative applying to the court for a distribution order. The
of such an order may be conditional. It may require that
entitlement be distributed in a way the court considers just and
– in so requiring, no assumption will be made in favour
of an equal distribution as a starting point or otherwise; it may find
one partner to be solely entitled. The conditions for the granting of a
court order are that there is no distribution agreement and
personal representative has not commenced distribution of the estate.
3.64 The third approach allows the personal representative to
divide the estate into equal shares to distribute to the partners. This
will be subject to the presence of surviving issue. Where issue exist,
the statutory legacy must be equally split between the partners.
conditions must be met for distribution to occur in this manner:
the partners must have three months notice (given as soon as practicable) of the distribution;
the personal representative must have no notice of a distribution agreement; and
the personal representative must:
have no notice of an application for a distribution order, or
have a copy of a court order striking out or discontinuing an application for a distribution order, or
have been notified that the partners agree that the estate
should be equally distributed by the personal representative (despite
prior application for a distribution order).
Distribution Elsewhere
When the whole entitlement goes to the de facto partner.
In many jurisdictions the de facto partner of an intestate will take
the spouse’s entitlement exclusively if a number of conditions
are met. The de facto relationship must have existed for a specified
period before the intestate’s death. In New South Wales,
Northern Territory and Tasmania the relevant period is at least two
at least five years in Western Australia
and the Australian Capital Territory;
and 6 years or more in Victoria.
3.66 Some jurisdictions require that the relationship should have existed continuously for the period specified.
In some of these jurisdictions the period is also required to have been immediately before the intestate’s death.
Another condition is added in some jurisdictions that the intestate
must not have lived with their lawful spouse (or lived as the
their lawful spouse
) at any time during that period.
3.67 In the Northern Territory and Victoria the de facto will
take the spouse’s share regardless of the above conditions, where
the intestate is survived by issue
of the intestate and the de facto partner.
When the whole entitlement goes to the spouse.
In some jurisdictions, if the applicable conditions are not met by the
surviving de facto partner, the spouse will be entitled to
spouse’s share exclusively.
In Victoria, this will
be the case if the de facto has not lived with the intestate
continuously for at least two years immediately
intestate’s death and if the intestate was not survived by issue
of the intestate and de facto partner, or such
issue was not under
eighteen years at the intestate’s death.
A similar position applies in the Australian Capital Territory.
When the entitlement is apportioned between the spouse and the de facto partner.
In South Australia and New Zealand, the spouse and each de facto
partner will be entitled to an equal share in the spouse’s
entitlement regardless of the length, or nature of, the relationships
3.70 In a number of jurisdictions the spouse and de facto will
share the spouse’s entitlement subject to a number of
requirements
and variations. The de facto relationship must have
existed for a specified period before the intestate’s death. This
at least two years but less than five years in the Australian
Capital Territory and Western Australia.
Additionally,
in Western Australia, the relevant period is that immediately before
the death of the intestate, and the intestate
must not have lived as
the spouse of his or her lawful spouse during that period.
Victoria and the Australian Capital Territory require the period to have been continuous.
Where the appropriate conditions are met the spouse’s share will
be divided equally between the spouse and de facto partner.
3.71 It is also possible to apportion entitlements according to
the duration of the relationships involved. In Victoria, if the de
facto relationship has existed for at least two years but less than
four years before the death of the intestate, the spouse will
entitled to two-thirds and the de facto partner one-third of the
spouse’s entitlement. Where the de facto relationship has
for at least four years but less than five, the spouse’s
entitlement is one half and where the de facto relationship
has existed
for at least five years, but less than six, the spouse’s
entitlement is one-third while that of the de facto partner
two-thirds.
3.72 South Australia provides that, where an intestate is
survived by a lawful spouse and a putative spouse, they shall both be
to equal shares in the property (including personal chattels).
Where any dispute arises between the two as to the division of personal
chattels of an intestate between them, the administrator
may sell the
personal chattels and divide the proceeds of the sale equally between
3.73 In the Northern Territory, where the intestate is survived
by both a spouse and a de facto partner – (a) the de facto
is entitled to the personal chattels absolutely if – (i)
he or she was the de facto partner of the intestate for a continuous
period of not less than 2 years immediately preceding the
intestate’s death, and the intestate did not at any time during
period live with the person to whom he or she was married; or (ii)
the intestate is also survived by issue of the intestate and the
facto partner; and (b) except where paragraph (a) applies, the spouse
is entitled to the personal chattels absolutely.
What provision ought to be made for situations where the intestate is survived by a spouse and a de facto partner?
Should special provision be made for personal chattels?
Intestate leaves more than one de facto partner
3.74 The situation is less clear where the intestate is survived
by more than one de facto partner. In New South Wales a de facto
partner will only be entitled to the spouse’s share of an
intestate estate, if they were the sole partner in a de facto
relationship
with the deceased and were not a partner in any other de
facto relationship.
In the Australian Capital Territory
the definitions of “spouse” and “domestic
partner” are such that there
can only be one eligible partner (in
addition to a spouse).
Western Australia and New
Zealand, however, provide that where an intestate has been survived by
two or more de facto partners they
are entitled to equal shares in the
de facto partner’s entitlement.
3.75 In Queensland, however, provision is made for the
distribution of the spouse’s entitlement if more than one spouse
than a spouse and a de facto partner) survives the intestate.
Since “spouse” is defined to include de facto partners, it
appears that the spouse’s entitlement may, therefore,
apportioned when the intestate is survived by more than one de facto
3.76 In South Australia, the question of multiple putative
spouses arguably cannot arise since a putative spouse is required to be
living with the deceased “as the husband or wife de facto”.
It can be argued that the reference to “husband or wife”
imports the idea of a relationship that is like marriage and,
monogamous.
3.77 While the Northern Territory provides that a couple will
be in a de facto relationship “if they are not married but have
marriage-like relationship”,
in determining
whether such a relationship exists it is expressly irrelevant that
“either of the persons is in another defacto
relationship”.
Western Australia also requires the relationship to be “marriage-like”
but makes it irrelevant that either of the persons is in another de facto relationship.
3.78 The other Australian jurisdictions also do not appear to
import the idea of monogamy into the concept of de facto relationships.
3.79 Envisaging the impracticalities of addressing the
intestacy of “the itinerant with a ‘wife in every
or the open polygamist, perhaps with many children,”
the Queensland Law Reform Commission in its 1993 Report suggested that,
where the intestate was survived by more than one de facto, none should
be entitled to the spouse’s share.
What provision should be made where there is more than one de facto partner?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Succession Act 1981
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Administration and Probate Act 1929
(definition of “eligible partner” and “partner”).
Administration Act 1903
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 77; and
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 46.
. See para 3.8-3.18.
Interpretation Act 1978
(NT) s 19A(1) and para 9.7 and 9.10 below.
. R F Atherton and P Vines,
Succession: Families, Property and Death: Text and Cases
(2nd ed, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2003) at 59.
Re Milanovic
[1973] Qd R 205.
Re Milanovic
[1973] Qd R 205
at 206 (Douglas J).
. Para 3.8-3.18.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
, Legislative
Assembly, 17 October 1984, Wills, Probate and Administration (De Facto
Relationships) Amendment Bill, Second Reading
Succession Act 1981
s 5AA(1)(b)
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
s 32DA(5)(a)
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Legislation Act 2001
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Property (Relationships) Act 1984
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) Sch 6 Pt 2-3;
De Facto Relationships Act 1991
(NT) s 3A(3)(a);
Relationships Act 2003
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1903
Interpretation Act 1984
s 13A(3)(a)
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 2(1);
Property (Relationships) Act 1976
(NZ) s 2D(1).
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Property Law Act 1958
(Vic) s 275(2);
Legislation Act 2001
De Facto Relationships Act 1991
Relationships Act 2003
Interpretation Act 1984
Property (Relationships) Act 1976
(NZ) s 2D(2); and
Property (Relationships) Act 1984
Family Relationships Act 1975
Administration and Probate Act 1929
(definition of “eligible partner”);
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) Sch 6 Pt 2;
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
definition of “domestic partner”; and
Administration Act 1903
Family Relationships Act 1975
s 11(1)(a).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
paragraph (b)(i) to the definition of “eligible partner”;
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) Sch 6 Pt 2;
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
paragraph (b)(i) of the definition of “domestic partner”; and
Administration Act 1903
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(3B);
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1929
paragraph (b)(ii) to the definition of “eligible partner”;
Administration and Probate Act 1958
para (b)(ii) to the definition of “domestic partner”.
Family Relationships Act 1975
. National Committee for Uniform Succession Laws,
Family Provision: Supplementary Report to the Standing Committee of Attorneys General
(Queensland Law Reform Commission, Report 58, 2004) at para 2.21.
. National Committee for Uniform Succession Laws,
Family Provision: Supplementary Report to the Standing Committee of Attorneys General
(Queensland Law Reform Commission, Report 58, 2004) at para 2.22 and cl 3(1) of the
Family Provision Bill
in Appendix 2.
Property Law Act 1974
Married Persons’ Property Act 1986
Married Persons (Equality of Status) Act 1996
Married Persons (Equality of Status) Act 1989
Law of Property Act 1936
Married Women’s Property Act 1935
(Tas) s 3(1);
Marriage Act 1958
s 156(1)(a)
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1941
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(9);
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 61(2)(a);
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1958
s 52(1)(f)(viii)
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 46(2); and
Law of Property Act 1925
(Eng) s 37. In Queensland
Property Law Act 1974
applies generally to the “acquisition of any interest in property”.
. See para 6.12 and para 6.17.
. Para 3.28-3.35.
Succession Act 1981
(Qld) Sch 2 Pt 1 It 1(1);
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(2);
Administration and Probate Act 1929
(ACT) Sch 6 Pt 6.1 It 1;
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1903
Table It 4;
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) Sch 6 Pt 1 It 3; and
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 46(1)(i) Table It 1.
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 77 It 3.
. See para 3.52 below.
Administration Act 1903
Table It 3; and
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 46(1)(i) Table It 3.
. See para 3.36-3.44.
Administration Act 1903
Table It 1;
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 66(2), s 67(1) and (2); and
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 46(1)(i) Table It 3.
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Intestacy Rules
(Report 42, 1993) at para 4.2.
. See an analogous argument in
Blackborough v Davis
(1701) P Wms 41
[1701] EngR 6
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Intestacy Rules
(Report 42, 1993) at para 2.8.1.
. Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
, 20 August 1997, Succession Amendment Bill, Second Reading at 3017.
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Intestacy Rules
(Working Paper 37, 1992) at para 3.4 and para 4.3.
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Intestacy Rules
(Report 42, 1993) at 15, 34.
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Intestacy Rules
(Report 42, 1993) at 37-38.
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Intestacy Rules
(Report 42, 1993) at 35.
. England and Wales, Law Commission,
Family Law: Distribution on Intestacy
(Report 187, 1989) at para 30.
. Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
, 20 August 1997, Succession Amendment Bill, Second Reading at 3017.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
, Legislative Assembly, 28 November 1977, Wills, Probate and Administration (Amendment) Bill, Second Reading at 8995.
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Intestacy Rules
(Report 42, 1993) at 35.
Succession Act 1981
(Qld) Sch 2 Pt 1 It 2(1)(a), It 2(2)(a);
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 67(1), (2);
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration Act 1903
Table It 1;
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(3)(a);
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 46(1)(i) Table It 2;
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 77 It 1, 3.
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 55(1)(x);
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 2(1);
Administration and Probate Act 1929
paragraph (a) to the definition of “personal chattels”;
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 61(1) paragraph (a) to the definition of “personal chattels”;
Administration Act 1903
Administration and Probate Act 1919
. I J Hardingham, M A Neave and H A J Ford,
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand
(2nd ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1989) at 362.
Succession Act 1981
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61A(2);
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 61(1) paragraph (a) to the definition of “personal chattels”;
Administration and Probate Act 1958
definition of “personal chattels”;
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 2(1); and
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 55(1)(x).
Succession Act 1981
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61A(2);
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 55(1)(x);
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1929
paragraph (a) to the definition of “personal chattels”;
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 61(1) paragraph (a) to the definition of “personal chattels”; and
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 2(1).
Succession Act 1981
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61A(2);
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 55(1)(x);
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 2(1).
Succession Act 1981
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 55(1)(x);
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1929
paragraph (a) to the definition of “personal chattels”;
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 61(1) paragraph (a) to the definition of “personal chattels”; and
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 2(1).
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 55(1)(x);
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1919
paragraph (b) to the definition of “personal chattels”;
Administration and Probate Act 1929
paragraph (b) to the definition of “personal chattels”; and
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 61(1) paragraph (b) to the definition of “personal chattels”.
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 55(1)(x);
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1929
paragraph (b) to the definition of “personal chattels”; and
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 61(1) paragraph (b) to the definition of “personal chattels”.
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 55(1)(x);
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1929
paragraph (a) to the definition of “personal chattels”;
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 61(1) paragraph (a) to the definition of “personal chattels”; and
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 2(1).
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 55(1)(x);
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 2(1);
Administration and Probate Act 1929
paragraph (c) to the definition of “personal
chattels” (where chattel used exclusively for business purposes);
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 61(1) paragraph
(c) to the definition of “personal chattels” (where chattel
used exclusively for business purposes).
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 55(1)(x);
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1929
paragraph (d) to the definition of “personal chattels”;
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 61(1) paragraph (d) to the definition of “personal chattels”; and
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 2(1).
Succession Act 1981
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61A(2).
Succession Act 1981
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61A(2);
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 55(1)(x);
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 2(1).
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 55(1)(x); and
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 55(1)(x);
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 2(1).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
paragraph (a) to the definition of “personal chattels”; and
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 61(1) paragraph (a) to the definition of “personal chattels”.
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 2(1).
Succession Act 1981
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61A(2).
Succession Act 1981
Administration Act 1903
s 14(2)(a).
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Intestacy Rules
(Report 42, 1993) at 40.
. Law Reform Commission of Tasmania,
Report on Succession Rights on Intestacy
(Report 43, 1985) at 12.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 66(2); and
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Succession Act 1981
s 34A(3)(b)
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 2(1); and
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61A(2).
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(10); and
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 77 It 1, 2, 3.
Succession Act 1981
(Qld) Sch 2 Pt 1 It 2(1)(a), It 2(2)(a);
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(3)(b);
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1919
s 72G(b)(i)(B)
Administration Act 1903
Table It 2(b) and It 3(b);
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1929
(ACT) Sch 6 Pt 6.1 It 2(2)(a);
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) Sch 6 Pt 1 It 2 and It 3. See also
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 77 It 2 and It 3; and
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 46(1)(i) Table It 2 and It 3.
. See para 3.36-3.44 above.
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) Sch 6 Pt 1 It 2(1), It 3(1);
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61A(2);
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 77 It 1, 2, 3; and
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 46(1)(i) Table It 2.
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61A(2);
Probate and Administration Regulation 2003
(NSW) cl 5(2).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
(ACT) Sch 6 Pt 6.1 It 2(2)(a);
Succession Act 1981
(Qld) Sch 2
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration Act 1903
Table It 2.
Administration and Probate Act 1919
s 72G(b)(i)(B).
. Law Reform Commission of Tasmania,
Report on Succession Rights on Intestacy
(Report 43, 1985) at 13.
. Law Reform Commission of Tasmania,
Report on Succession Rights on Intestacy
(Report 43, 1985) at 13.
. England and Wales, Law Commission,
Family Law: Distribution on Intestacy
(Report 187, 1989) at 5.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
, Legislative Council, 28 November 1977, Wills, Probate and Administration (Amendment) Bill, Second Reading at 10326.
. I J Hardingham, M A Neave and H A J Ford,
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand
(2nd ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1989) at 363.
. Law Reform Committee of South Australia,
Relating to the Reform of the Law on Intestacy and Wills
(Report 28, 1974) at 6.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
, Legislative Assembly, 25 October 1977, Wills, Probate and Administration (Amendment) Bill, Second Reading at 8998.
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Intestacy Rules
(Report 42, 1993) at 41.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard
) Legislative Assembly, 25 October 1977, Second Reading at 8994. See, eg,
Succession Act 1981
Maxwell v Wettenhall
[1722] EngR 24
(1722) 2 P Wms 26
Bird v Lockey
[1716] EngR 46
; (1716) 2 Vern 743;
; and F Jordan,
Administration of the Estates of Deceased Persons
(3rd ed, 1948) at 34-36.
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(12);
Administration and Probate Act 1929
(ACT) Sch 6 Pt 6.1 It 2(2)(b);
Administration and Probate Act 1958
s 51(2)(c)(ii)
Administration Act 1903
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 77 It 1, 2, 3; and
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 46(1)(i) Table It 2 and It 3.
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(12) and
. The Attorney-General under
Penalty Interest Rates Act 1983
(less 2.5%); the Governor-General by Order in Council in New Zealand under
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 39(2)(b); and the Lord Chancellor in England.
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(12);
Probate and Administration Regulation 2003
(NSW) cl 6(2).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
(ACT) Sch 6
It 2(2)(b).
Administration and Probate Act 1935
. W A Lee and A A Preece,
Lee’s Manual of Queensland Succession Law
(5th edition, LBC Information Services, 2001) at 131.
Succession Act 1981
(Qld) Sch 2 Pt 1 It 2(1)(b)(ii) and It 2(2)(b)(ii),
Administration and Probate Act 1929
(ACT) Sch 6 Pt 6.1 It 2(2)(c); and
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) Sch 6 Pt 1 It 2(1)(b)(ii).
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(3)(c);
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 46(1)(i) Table It 2.
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
s 51(2)(c)(iii)
Administration Act 1903
Table It 2(b); and
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 77 It 2.
. See para 3.30 above.
. Law Reform Commission of Tasmania,
Report on Succession Rights on Intestacy
(Report 43, 1985) at 13.
Succession Act 1981
Succession Act 1981
s 36(1)(a).
Succession Act 1981
s 36(1)(b).
Succession Act 1981
s 36(1)(c).
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) Sch 6 Pt 3 It 1(a);
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(3A); and
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration Act 1903
Administration and Probate Act 1929
s 45(1)(b).
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) Sch 6 Pt 3 It 1(a);
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1929
s 45A(1)(b)
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(3A)(a); and
Administration and Probate Act 1935
s 44(3A)(a).
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) Sch 6 Pt 3 It 1(a);
Administration Act 1903
Administration and Probate Act 1935
s 44(3A)(a).
Administration Act 1903
s 15(3)(b).
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) Sch 6 Pt 3 It 1(a);
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(3A)(a); and
Administration and Probate Act 1935
s 44(3A)(a).
. In Victoria the issue must have been under eighteen years at the intestate’s death.
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) Sch 6 Pt 3 It 1;
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(3A)(b); and
Administration and Probate Act 1935
s 44(3A)(b).
Administration and Probate Act 1958
definition of “domestic partner”.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
definition of “eligible partner”.
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 77C.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
s 45A(1)(a)
Administration Act 1903
s 15(2)(a).
Administration Act 1903
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) Sch 6 Pt 3.
Probate and Administration Act 1898
. “Domestic partnership” is defined as
“the relationship between 2 people, whether of a different or the
living together as a couple on a genuine domestic
Legislation Act 2001
Administration Act 1903
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 77C.
Succession Act 1981
See para 3.61-3.64.
Family Relationships Act 1975
De Facto Relationships Act 1991
(NT) s 3A(1).
De Facto Relationships Act 1991
(NT) s 3A(3)(c).
Interpretation Act 1984
Interpretation Act 1984
s 13A(3)(b).
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Intestacy Rules
(Report 42, 1993) at para 2.4.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 26 (2005) - Uniform Succession Laws: Intestacy
4. Rights of spouse or partner to the shared home
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
The shared home
The spouse or partner’s entitlement
Valuing the intestate’s interest in the shared home
Election by the surviving spouse or partner
Power of the personal representative to dispose of the shared home
Restrictions on the spouse’s right to acquire the shared home
Determination of the curtilage of the shared home
s 34B, Part 3 Div 3
s 61A(2), s 61B(13), s 61D, s 61E Sch 4
s 72B(1), 72L
s 14(6), Sch 4
Intestate’s Estates Act 1952
s 5; Schedule 2
4.1 Most jurisdictions (except Tasmania and New Zealand) extend to
the surviving spouse or partner a conditional right to the
intestate’s
(undisposed) interest in the home they shared until
the intestate’s death. The nature of this right differs among the
In some the spouse may elect to acquire the
intestate’s interest in the shared home towards satisfaction of
their entitlement
in intestacy, making up for any shortfall out of
their own assets. In other jurisdictions the spouse may raise any
shortfall from
the intestate estate or an election will amount to
complete satisfaction of the spouse’s entitlement regardless of
any shortfall.
4.2 There is a limited range of circumstances in which the
question of the shared home will arise. In many cases the surviving
or partner will have been a joint tenant with the intestate and,
therefore, entitled to the shared home by survivorship. In other
the surviving spouse or partner will be the one who owns the shared
owned the shared home either in whole or in part (for example, as a
tenant in common with the surviving spouse or partner).
4.3 The spouse’s access to this right will only arise if
the intestate has an interest in a shared home that is not effectively
disposed of by will.
Although New South Wales states that
the home must be within the State, it is not expressly limited to
interests that are not effectively
disposed of by will.
4.4 Provisions relating to the use of the shared home by a
surviving spouse or partner may be rendered unnecessary if it is
to give the whole of the intestate estate to any surviving
spouse or partner.
Such an approach
could be highly desirable, especially in light of the complex
provisions outlined below, for example, in relation
to the election by
the surviving spouse to acquire the shared home or the determination of
the curtilage of the shared home.
THE SHARED HOME
4.5 The home is generally stated to be a building
, or part of a building, designed to be used solely
as a separate
residence for one family or person.
In Western Australia, reference is made to a “dwelling house
that... was ordinarily used by the surviving husband or wife as
her ordinary place of residence”.
In Queensland, it also includes caravans and manufactured homes.
4.6 Most jurisdictions also include the curtilage of the home in
the interest that the spouse has the right to appropriate or acquire.
In Victoria, no reference is made to the “curtilage” but
provision is made for subdivision if a shared home is not “part
but is “part of a larger property
and the intestate’s interest in the shared home cannot be severed
from the intestate’s
interest in the larger property without
subdividing”.
4.7 Queensland defines interest as a registered or registrable
interest that is, or includes, a shared home. “Shared home”
includes manufactured homes and caravans.
How should the shared home be defined?
The residential requirement
4.8 Most jurisdictions require that the spouse or partner must have
been residing in the shared home at the intestate’s death.
In New South Wales the spouse or partner and/or the intestate must have
occupied the home at the time, as their only or principal
In Victoria, it must have been the principal residence of both parties.
4.9 Principal residence has been held to mean
“…that the residence has to be the first in rank or
importance to the [surviving
partner] and the deceased”.
4.10 One reason for requiring that the surviving spouse or
partner must have lived in the shared home at the death of the
is to reduce the likelihood of a surviving spouse and partner
having to divide the shared home between them if they have to share
spousal entitlement.
Should the spouse and the intestate have been residing in the
THE SPOUSE OR PARTNER’S ENTITLEMENT
4.11 The Law Reform Commission of Tasmania has suggested that:
Wherever possible, if the surviving spouse so desires, he/she
should be able to remain in the matrimonial home. To be forced to leave
the home after the partner’s death, and after possibly years of
The jurisdictions that give the surviving spouse some right to the
shared home generally achieve this by allowing the surviving spouse
elect to obtain the intestate’s interest in the shared home.
However, there are many different ways in which the surviving spouse or
partner can make satisfaction for the value of the intestate’s
interest in the shared home. Most jurisdictions allow the value of the
interest to be met in part from the surviving spouse or partner’s
share of the estate.
4.12 In some jurisdictions the surviving spouse or partner can
provide satisfaction for the interest in the shared home, first by
relying on any share of the intestate estate to which they are entitled
on distribution and, then, if their share in the estate is
insufficient
to cover the value of the intestate’s interest in the shared
4.13 In New South Wales the surviving spouse or partner can
provide satisfaction for the shared home, first by relying on any share
of the intestate estate to which they are entitled on distribution,
but, if the value of the intestate’s interest in the shared
exceeds the surviving spouse or partner’s entitlement, any
difference is then met from the share of the estate to which
of the intestate are entitled.
4.14 Finally, a number of jurisdictions provide that the
surviving spouse or partner may elect to use the shared home in
satisfaction
of any entitlement the surviving spouse or partner may
have in a share of the intestate estate.
However, these jurisdictions appear to make no provision to cover any
difference that may arise if the value of the intestate’s
interest in the shared home exceeds the value of the survivor’s
share in the intestate estate.
4.15 It has been argued that the intestate’s interest in
the shared home cannot be seen as going towards, or as satisfying,
partner’s share if its value exceeds the value of that share. It
has been suggested that, “[o]ne does not …
properly speak
of the ‘satisfaction’ of a surviving spouse’s
entitlement to receive, say, $250,000 by the transfer
to him or her of
property worth $600,000, especially when that would mean that other
close family members … would be deprived
of an entitlement to
$350,000”. A better alternative may be to have the surviving
partner pay any excess into the intestate
estate to be distributed.
Whatever approach is adopted, however, the manner in which any
shortfall is made up should, in the interests of clarity, be expressly
stated in the legislation.
4.16 Each of the above scenarios could potentially leave a
surviving spouse with only the shared home and no other assets from the
estate, assuming the value of the shared home is equal to, or greater
than, any share in the estate to which the surviving spouse
may be entitled on distribution. In some jurisdictions the surviving
spouse or partner may also end up substantially out
of pocket if they
wish to continue living in the shared home. While it may be considered
that a home’s “value is not
purely monetary, but extends to
the emotional investment and the sense of wellbeing and security that
comes with long-term home ownership”
continued right to the shared home may be meaningless if there are no
other assets available to the surviving spouse or partner.
4.17 Hardingham, Neave and Ford support the spouse’s
ability to acquire the intestate’s interest in the matrimonial
for the same reasons they are in favour of the spouse’s
entitlement to the household, or personal, chattels. That is, such
provision will help minimise the disruption caused by the
intestate’s death and will “produce some continuity of
for the spouse and any surviving children”.
Should the surviving spouse or partner be entitled to obtain the intestate’s interest in the shared home?
To what extent, if any, ought the intestate’s interest
in the shared home be used in satisfaction of the share of the estate
to which the surviving spouse or partner is entitled on distribution?
How should any outstanding balance be met if the value of the
intestate’s interest in the shared home exceeds the value of the
spouse or partner’s entitlement if there were no shared home
VALUING THE INTESTATE’S INTEREST IN THE SHARED HOME
s 34B(4), 39A(5)
s 49G(6), s 49H
s 61A(2), s 61E, Sch 4 cl 2(3)
s 73(6), s 74
s 37A(2), s 37A(6)
Sch 4 cl 4(3) and cl 5
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
Schedule 2, para 3(2)
Spouse may require valuation
4.18 Prior to making an election, the spouse may require
the personal representative
the value of the intestate’s interest from a qualified valuer and inform
the spouse.
In Queensland the personal representative must promptly comply with such a request.
4.19 In Victoria, no provision is made for the surviving spouse
to request a valuation. However, where the intestate is survived by
child or other issue, the personal representative “must”
obtain a valuation of the home.
Should provision be made so that the spouse may require a valuation of the shared home before making an election?
Fixing the value
4.20 The value of the intestate’s interest in the shared home
is usually the market value of the intestate’s interest,
although it is sometimes given no more elaboration than “value”.
4.21 While the professional engaged to value the interest may be generally be said to be a valuer
, most jurisdictions provide, more specifically, that this person shall be a registered valuer
, qualified valuer
, duly qualified agent
, duly qualified valuer
or a Fellow or an associate member of the Australian Institute of
Valuers Incorporated, and includes a person who, in the opinion
Minister, possesses equivalent qualifications.
4.22 The value will usually be calculated as at the death of the intestate.
The alternative is to determine the value as at the date when the spouse exercises their right.
Where the spouse is entitled to acquire the intestate’s interest,
Queensland provides that it shall be acquired for its transfer
rather than value, at the intestate’s death. As in New South
Wales, this is held to mean the market value of the interest,
amount needed to discharge any mortgage, charge, encumbrance or lien to
which the interest may be subject at the time of
4.23 Given the rapid increases that can occur in the price of
real estate, the time of its valuation can make a great difference to
the value of the property. This was seen in
Robinson v Collins,
“…where the matrimonial home was appropriated at
£8,000, its value at the date of appropriation, and not
its value at the date of death of the deceased”.
This case was cited by the Law Commission of England to support its argument that:
[i]n the interval between the intestate’s death and the time
of appropriation, house prices will often have risen quite sharply
that the statutory legacy will no longer be sufficient to enable the
surviving spouse to remain in the matrimonial home.
How and when should the value of the intestate’s interest in the shared home be determined?
Should the value be the market value less any amount needed
to discharge any mortgage, charge or other encumbrance to which the
is subject at the date valued?
ELECTION BY THE SURVIVING SPOUSE OR PARTNER
Procedural requirements
Sch 4 cl 2, cl 3
Sch 4 cl 3, cl 4
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 3
4.24 There are a number of procedural requirements that must be
met by the surviving spouse or partner in order for the election to
Election must be in writing
4.25 In some jurisdictions it is expressly stated that the election must be in writing.
Should the election be required to be in writing?
Time for making the election
4.26 The spouse is generally required to make an election within a
certain time. In South Australia and Queensland, if the spouse
personal representative (administrator in South Australia), election
must be made within three months of the representative’s
appointment (or from the granting of administration).
4.27 If the spouse is not the representative, election must be
made within three months of being given written notice by the
representative,
which states that the spouse has three months to
exercise their right.
Queensland also requires
the notice to state that the spouse must obtain a court order before
they can make an election if any restrictions
apply to the home.
Victoria provides that the personal representative must, within thirty
days of the granting of administration, provide written notice
partner advising of the partner’s right to make an election.
4.28 In a number of other jurisdictions the time limit is one
year from the granting of representation or administration subject to
the court’s power to extend it.
Australian Capital Territory, and Northern Territory such an extension
may be granted where probate of the intestate’s
will has been
revoked because the will was invalid; a question of the existence, or
nature, of a person’s interest in the intestate
estate, had not
been determined when administration of the estate was first granted; or
for any other reason, affecting the administration
or distribution of
the estate, where the Court considers it proper to do so.
Should the surviving spouse or partner be required to make an election within a certain time? If so, how long?
Should it be possible for the Court to grant an extension of
time for a surviving spouse or partner to make an election? If so, when
should the value of the intestate’s interest in the shared home
Should personal representatives be required to give the
surviving spouse or partner notice of their rights to make an election?
so, when should that notice be given?
To whom the election must be made
4.29 The spouse’s election must be communicated to different
people in different circumstances. If the spouse is not the personal
representative, election must be given to the personal representative.
If the spouse is one of two or more representatives, then election must be given to each other representative.
In Victoria
if the partner is not a personal representative, the election must be
given to the personal representative who sent the notice advising
the spouse’s right to make an election.
If the spouse is the sole representative, election must be given to the Registrar.
In Victoria, if the partner is a representative election must be given to the Registrar,
while election must be given to the Public Trustee if the spouse is an administrator in South Australia.
To whom should the spouse’s election be given?
Power of a surviving spouse or partner who is a minor to make an election
s 37A(9)(b)
Sch 4 cl 8(2)
Intestate’s Estates Act 1952
Sch 2 para 6(2)
4.30 Some jurisdictions include a specific provision concerning
the power of a surviving spouse who is also a minor to make a valid
requirement, election or consent where required.
4.31 In most of these jurisdictions a requirement or consent
made or given concerning the acquisition of a shared home by a
spouse who is a minor is as valid and effective as it would
be if the spouse had attained majority.
Should surviving spouses who are minors be able to make an election to acquire a shared home?
Power of a surviving partner with mental disability to make a valid election
Sch 4, cl 8(1)
Intestate’s Estates Act 1952
Sch 2 para 6(1)
4.32 In some jurisdictions, where the surviving spouse has a
mental disability, a requirement or consent concerning the
right to the shared home may be validly made or given on
their behalf. In the different jurisdictions, this may be done by their
their guardian,
a person who has the care and management of their estate
, or, should there be no such carers, the Court.
What provision should be made for spousal election when the spouse has a mental disability?
Revocation of the election
Sch 4 cl 2(2)
Sch 4 cl 4(2)
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
Sch 2 para 3(2)
4.33 Once made, an election in some jurisdictions may only be
revoked with consent. In most of these jurisdictions the consent is
that of the personal representatives.
In Queensland the consent must be in writing
and in New South Wales the consent of the Court is required.
Should there be provision for the revocation of an election?
If there is to be a provision for the revocation of an
election, whose consent should be required and should that consent be
in writing?
POWER OF THE PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE TO DISPOSE OF THE SHARED HOME
s 61D, Sch 4 cl 3(3) and (4)
Sch 4 cl 6(2)
Intestate’s Estates Act 1952
Sch 2, para 4
4.34 Most jurisdictions limit a personal representative’s
powers concerning the disposal of an intestate’s interest in
shared home in two situations:
when the surviving spouse’s election is pending; and
when the election has been made to acquire the interest.
4.35 The intestate’s interest in a shared home is not to be
sold, or otherwise disposed of, if the time within which an election
may be made has not expired, or if to do so would be contrary to an
election. This restriction does not, however, stop a personal
representative from disposing of such an interest as a last resort
should the proceeds be needed to satisfy any of the intestate’s
liabilities.
4.36 In some jurisdictions this restriction will not apply if the
surviving spouse is the personal representative (or one of them),
and in some it is also expressly stated that the restriction will not
affect the validity of the sale of any of the intestate’s
4.37 In New South Wales and the Northern Territory the
intestate’s interest in the shared home may be disposed of,
expiration of the period within which election may be made,
if the Court rejects the application of a surviving spouse to acquire
the shared home.
4.38 In South Australia, the surviving spouse or partner is
entitled to continue to live in the shared house until the expiration
of the period in which they can elect to acquire the house. However the
administrator (personal representative) may sell the intestate’s
interest in a shared house, before the expiration of the period within
which an election may be made has expired, if the spouse or
partner has
ceased to live there.
What restrictions, if any, should be placed on the personal representative’s powers to dispose of the shared home?
Should the restriction apply if the surviving spouse is a personal representative of the intestate’s estate?
Should the validity of the sale of any of the
intestate’s estate, by the personal representative/s, be affected
by the restriction?
On what conditions, if any, should it be possible to dispose
of the intestate’s interest in the shared home before the
of the period within which election may be made?
Where the spouse is a trustee
Sch 4 cl 7(2)
s 37A(9)(a)
Sch 4 cl 7(1)
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
Sch 2 para 5(1)
4.39 When the deceased has died intestate the surviving spouse
or partner may be the intestate’s personal representative and,
such, the trustee of the intestate estate for those entitled. In a
number of jurisdictions, where the spouse is a trustee, express
provision is made that they may acquire the intestate’s interest
in the shared home notwithstanding their role as trustee.
If the spouse, as trustee, is not entitled to acquire the
intestate’s interest in the shared home, that interest will
part of the intestate estate to be divided and distributed in
accordance with the rules, potentially leaving the spouse without a
Should express provision be made that a surviving spouse or
partner may acquire the intestate’s interest in the shared home
notwithstanding any role as trustee?
RESTRICTIONS ON THE SPOUSE’S RIGHT TO ACQUIRE THE SHARED HOME
s 73, s 75, s 76
Intestate’s Estates Act 1952
Sch 2 para 1(2) and para 2
4.40 There are a number of situations in which the surviving
spouse’s right to elect to acquire the shared home will be
restricted.
They are generally concerned with maintaining the
administrator’s ability to sell or dispose of the rest of the
intestate’s
4.41 These situations generally concern shared homes forming part:
of a building in which an intestate has an interest in the whole building;
of a registered or registrable interest in land (in which the
intestate has an interest in the whole of that interest) used (either
solely or partly) for agricultural purposes;
of a building used as a hotel, motel, boarding house or hostel at the date of the intestate’s death; or
where part of the shared home was used for purposes other than domestic purposes at the date of the intestate’s death.
Should any of these situations be present, the surviving spouse
will only be entitled to elect to acquire the shared home if the Court
makes an order to that effect. Such an order will only be made if the
Court is satisfied that the acquisition would not be likely
to diminish
the assets of the intestate or make the disposal of the assets
substantially more difficult.
4.42 Some of these jurisdictions also restrict the spouse’s
right if the interest in a shared house is a tenancy that will
within two years after the intestate’s death, or if the
landlord would be entitled to determine the lease within that period.
4.43 In New South Wales, twelve months after the date on which
letters of administration are first taken out in respect of the
intestate’s
estate the spouse will lose their right to acquire
the shared home in a number of circumstances (as well as those above).
These circumstances
will arise:
when the administrator requires the intestate’s interest in
the shared home to meet funeral and administration expenses, debts
other liabilities payable out of the estate of the intestate, or
in any case in which the transfer or conveyance by the
administrator to the spouse of the interest of the intestate in the
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
Conveyancing Act 1919
Strata Schemes (Freehold Development) Act 1973
Strata Schemes (Leasehold Development) Act 1986
(NSW) – all of which concern the division of land.
The former provision is necessary in light of the fact that the value
of the intestate’s interest in the shared home can also
from the share of the estate to which the issue are otherwise entitled.
Should the spouse’s right be restricted where the interest
in the shared home is a tenancy that will determine within 2 years
after the intestate’s death, or if the landlord would be entitled
to determine the lease within that period?
Should there be any other restrictions on the spouse’s right to obtain the intestate’s interest in the shared home?
DETERMINATION OF THE CURTILAGE OF THE SHARED HOME
Sch 4, cl 4
s 37A(10)-(11)
Sch 4 cl 1(4)
Intestate’s Estates Act 1952
Sch 2, para 7(1)
4.44 Curtilage in this context refers to the land, or real
property, associated with and belonging to a dwelling house. The
of a free-standing building is, in some cases, important to
its use and enjoyment. When a shared home stands on part of an
of land and other parts of the allotment are devoted to other
purposes, be they residential, commercial or agricultural, it is
necessary, in the interests of those issue of the intestate
entitled to a share in the estate, to separate the shared home from the
rest of the allotment. In such cases, the curtilage of the home must be
retained and cannot be disposed of separately from the dwelling
It is important to be able to ascertain the curtilage. All land beyond
it is economically available to be used to the benefit
of the rest of
the estate.
4.45 New South Wales provides parameters in determining what
may be considered curtilage. Aside from the land on which the building
itself stands, curtilage is presumed to be that which “is
attached to and occupied with the building for the amenity or
convenience
of the building, does not exceed 2,500 square metres and no
estate or interest in any land contiguous with the land comprised in
that area is comprised in the intestate’s estate…”
If any question arises as to the curtilage of the shared house,
Court may make an order on the issue which it considers to be just, on
the application of the administrator (or any person beneficially
interested in the estate).
4.46 In South Australia the house generally includes the building’s curtilage.
Reference to “house” in a number of other jurisdictions
will include any garden or portion of ground attached to and
occupied with the house or otherwise required for the amenity or
convenience of the house.
4.47 In Victoria, a reference to a home that is part of a farm
is a reference to the entire farm and, if a home is part of a larger
property and cannot be severed from the property without subdividing
the property, a reference to that home will be a reference to
Should the shared home include curtilage?
If so, how should curtilage be defined?
Power of administrator to create easements or restrictions
4.48 In separating the shared home from the rest of an allotment
or building, in New South Wales, the administrator has the power
create easements, or restrictions, which they consider necessary for
the purpose of using any part of the land or building. These
are created when the interest of an intestate in the shared home or
land (or part thereof) is transferred or conveyed by
the administrator.
4.49 In rendering all interests in the building and/or land
usable, the easements, or restrictions, may benefit or burden any part
of the shared building or land. In the case of some subdivisions, for
example, the power to create easements may be necessary, but
Is it necessary to include the power to create easements or restrictions in intestacy rules?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Succession Act 1981
s 39A(1)(a)
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 73(1);
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 1(1)(b); and
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 1(1).
. See para 3.28-3.35 and Issue 3.10.
. A “unit or building lot:” in Northern Territory; and apartment or flat in New South Wales.
. Or “principally” in Queensland and New South Wales.
. “And permanent” in the Northern Territory.
Succession Act 1981
Administration and Probate Act 1919
paragraph (a) of the definition of “dwellinghouse”;
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 72(1);
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61A(2).
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 1(1)(b).
Succession Act 1981
Administration and Probate Act 1929
paragraph (a) to the definition of “dwelling house”;
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61A(2);
Administration and Probate Act 1919
paragraph (b) of the definition of “dwellinghouse”;
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 1(4); and
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 7(1). See also para 4.44-4.47 below.
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Succession Act 1981
Succession Act 1981
s 39A(1)(b)
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 73(1);
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 1(1)(b); and
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 1(1).
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61D(1).
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Laspitis v Laspitis
[2001] NSWSC 749
(Master Macready).
. See para 3.60-3.73 above.
. Law Reform Commission of Tasmania,
Report on Succession Rights on Intestacy
(Report 43, 1985) at 13.
Succession Act 1981
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61D(1);
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 73(1);
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 1(1); and
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 1(1).
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 1(1) and cl 7(2);
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 1 and para 5(2);
Succession Act 1981
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(13). This has particular implications for the administration of the intestate estate. See para 4.43 below.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 73(1).
. N Crago, “The Rights of An Intestate’s Surviving Spouse to the Matrimonial Home” (2000) 29
Western Australian Law Review
197 at 199.
. Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
7 October 1997, Succession Amendment Bill, Second Reading at 3632.
. I J Hardingham, M A Neave and H A J Ford,
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand
(2nd ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1989) at 362.
. “Ask” in Queensland.
. “Administrator” in New South Wales.
. “Ascertain and fix” in New South Wales and England.
. “Give a copy of it to” in Queensland.
Succession Act 1981
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) Sch 4 cl 2(3);
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 73(6) and s 74;
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 4(3); and
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 3(2) and
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 41(3).
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Succession Act 1981
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61E(3)(a);
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 74; and
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 5.
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 41(3).
Administration and Probate Act 1958
. Registered under the
Valuers Registration Act 1992
(Qld) as defined in
Valuation of Land Act 1944
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 5.
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61E(1). A duly qualified agent is one qualified under the
Valuers Act 2003
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 41(3).
Valuation of Land Act 1963
Succession Act 1981
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1958
In New South Wales this is the case where the spouse
exercises their right within twelve months of the intestate’s
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61A(2) paragraph (b)(i) to the definition of “value”.
. In England, see
Robinson v Collins
[1975] 1 All ER
321, and in New South Wales where the spouse has not exercised their
right within twelve months of the intestate’s
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61A(2) paragraph (b)(ii) to the definition of “value”.
Succession Act 1981
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61E(3).
Robinson v Collins
[1975] 1 All ER 321.
. G L Certoma,
The Law of Succession in New South Wales
(3rd ed, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1997) at 35.
. England and Wales, Law Commission,
Family Law: Distribution on Intestacy
(Report 187, 1989) at 9.
Succession Act 1981
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) Sch 4 cl 2(1);
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 73(4);
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 4(1);
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 3(1)(c).
Succession Act 1981
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1958
The period may be extended at the discretion of the Court in South Australia.
Succession Act 1981
s 39A(3)(b)(i)
Administration and Probate Act 1919
s 72L(2)(b).
Succession Act 1981
s 39A(3)(b)(ii).
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 73(2);
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 3;
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) Sch 4 cl 3(1)(b); and
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 3(1)(a).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Succession Act 1981
s 39A(4)(a)
Administration and Probate Act 1929
s 49G(4)(a)
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) Sch 4 cl 2(1)(a);
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 73(4)(a);
Administration and Probate Act 1919
s 72L(3)(a)
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 4(1)(a); and
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 3(1)(c).
Succession Act 1981
s 39A(4)(b)
Administration and Probate Act 1929
s 49G(4)(b)
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) Sch 4 cl 2(1)(b);
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 73(4)(b);
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 4(1)(b); and
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 3(1)(c).
Administration and Probate Act 1958
s 37A(5)(b).
. See para 4.27 above.
Succession Act 1981
s 39A(4)(c)
Administration and Probate Act 1929
s 49G(4)(c)
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) Sch 4 cl 2(1)(c);
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 73(4)(c); and
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 4(1)(c).
Administration and Probate Act 1958
s 37A(5)(a).
Administration and Probate Act 1919
s 72L(3)(b).
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) Sch 4 cl 6;
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 79(2);
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1958
s 37A(9)(b)
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 8(2); and
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 6(2).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 6(1).
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 6(1).
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 79(1).
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 8(1).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 4(2);
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 73(5);
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 3(2).
Succession Act 1981
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) Sch 4 cl 2(2).
Succession Act 1981
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 6(2);
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 77(1);
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 4(1); and
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) Sch 4 cl 3(3).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 77(3); and
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 4(4).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 77(4);
Succession Act 1981
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 4(5).
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 77(2);
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) Sch 4 cl 3(4).
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Succession Act 1981
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) Sch 4 cl 7(2);
Administration and Probate Act 1969
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1958
s 37A(9)(a)
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 7(1); and
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 5(1).
Succession Act 1981
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 2;
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 76(a)-(d);
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) Sch 4 cl 3(2); and
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 2.
Succession Act 1981
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 2;
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 76(e), (f);
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) Sch 4 cl 3(2); and
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 2.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 1(2);
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 75; and
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 1(2).
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) Sch 4 cl 3(1).
. See para 4.13 above.
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) Sch 4 cl 4.
Administration and Probate Act 1919
paragraph (b) of the definition of “dwellinghouse”.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
paragraph (a) to the definition of “dwelling house”;
Administration Act 1903
(WA) Sch 4 cl 1(4); and
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
(Eng) Sch 2 para 7(1).
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) Sch 4 cl 5.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 26 (2005) - Uniform Succession Laws: Intestacy
5. Issue and parents of the intestate
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Who are issue?
Distribution per stirpes
Distribution to issue and parents of the intestate
Statutory trust in favour of issue of the intestate
5.1 The primary purpose of this chapter is to deal with situations
where the intestate’s estate must be distributed to the
the intestate or to the parents of the intestate. In each case
determinations must be made about parentage. The basic principles
relating to the issue of an intestate also applies equally to the issue
of remoter next-of-kin. Distribution to remoter next-of-kin
with in the next chapter.
WHO ARE ISSUE?
5.2 The issue of a person are that person’s lineal
descendants. That is, they are the person’s children,
grandchildren,
great grandchildren, and so on. In most cases, there
will be no difficulty establishing the relevant relationship. Children
adopted will be treated as children of their adopting parents
and, at the same time, cease to be children of their natural parents.
Further, the fact that a person’s parents were not married to
each other will not affect whether a person will be identified
in the distribution of an intestate estate.
In a few cases, however, parentage will be established by presumption.
Presumptions of parentage
Status of Children Act 1978
Parentage Act 2004
Status of Children Act 1996
Status of Children Act 1979
s 4, s 4A, s 5, Part 3A, s 9-9B
Family Relationships Act 1975
Status of Children Act 1974
Status of Children Act 1974
Status of Children Act 1969
s 5, s 7, s 8
5.3 Presumptions of parentage may arise from a number of
circumstances depending on the relevant provisions in each
Parentage may be presumed from:
cohabitation when the parents are not married;
use of artificial fertilisation procedures;
birth registration;
court findings;
acknowledgement of paternity.
Apart from the use of artificial fertilisation procedures, all of the above categories of presumption are contained in the
Family Law Act 1975
5.4 In the Australian Capital Territory, any presumption arising
from registration will only operate in intestacy if the registration
takes place before the death of the intestate.
5.5 In Western Australia and Victoria, in circumstances where parents are entitled to a benefit on the intestacy of a child,
the presumption must be admitted by, or established against, the parent in the lifetime of their child (the intestate).
Should the definition of issue be included in the uniform
legislation or should it be left to other enactments in the individual
Should any special provisions be made in uniform legislation in relation to presumptions of parentage?
Step children
5.6 With the exception of the spouse of an intestate, a person
related only by marriage is not entitled to share in the estate of
Stepchildren of the intestate, therefore, are not entitled to a share in the intestate’s estate.
It was therefore the case, before the introduction of adequate family provision legislation, that:
if a man accepted full responsibility for his wife’s children
by a previous marriage without a formal adoption, those children
rights against his estate.
5.7 It can be argued that the number of stepchildren in the general
community will have increased with the higher incidence of parents
divorcing and subsequently remarrying and that “the traditional
family structure of two parents and associated progeny all
together in the one home can no longer be taken as the norm, and the
modern family structure quite often includes children
relationships, who may become stepchildren upon subsequent marriage of
one or other of their biological parents”.
It may, therefore, be considered unfair that stepchildren are excluded
from intestacy provisions when natural children are included.
5.8 However, there are other considerations to be taken into
account. First, if step children were to be entitled in intestacy to
take upon the death of a spouse of one natural parent, those step
children could not only potentially be beneficiaries under each
parent’s will, or entitled to take upon their intestacy, but also
potentially entitled to a share of any new spouse
of the other natural
parent upon intestacy. This could be perceived, in some cases, as a
form of “double dipping”. Secondly,
it is possible that a
step parent may be estranged from or never even have met their step
child, especially if the marriage has taken
place once the step child
has become an adult.
5.9 Any approach to limit the category of step children to
those who are dependent upon the step parent, or who are under 18 years
of age, would be undesirable as arbitrary and perhaps requiring
investigations as to whether the step children were in fact dependent
upon the step parent. If there is a dependency, it is appropriately
addressed in an application for family provision rather than
it to confuse unnecessarily distributions upon intestacy.
5.10 This is recognised in some jurisdictions in so far as stepchildren may now bring proceedings for family provision.
The National Committee’s proposed
Family Provision Bill
expressly states that a non-adult child of the deceased, for the
purposes of automatic eligibility for family provision, “does
include a step-child of the deceased person”,
leaves a step-child, whether under the age of 18, or not, to apply as a
person to whom the deceased person “owed a responsibility
provide maintenance, education or advancement in life”.
5.11 If the more general approach of allowing the whole estate
of an intestate to go to the surviving spouse even when there are issue
surviving, were to be adopted,
the step children of the
deceased would continue to be cared for by the surviving spouse (that
is, their natural parent) and, if
their natural parent were to die
first, they could always make a family provision application if the
surviving spouse (their step
parent) refused to support them
adequately. On the other hand it could be argued that such a provision
could operate unfairly even
for adult children when the natural parent
dies first and the estate passes to the step parent and then ultimately
to the step parent’s
family by either will or intestacy to the
exclusion of the step children who might otherwise have had an interest
in their natural
parent’s estate.
5.12 The Law Reform Commission of Tasmania mentioned the
situation where the intestate is survived by children of a previous
relationship
and where the existing children cannot rely on the
surviving spouse for support.
Are there any circumstances when stepchildren should be entitled to an issue’s share in intestacy?
Artificially conceived children
Status of Children Act 1978
Parentage Act 2004
Status of Children Act
Status of Children Act 1979
Family Relationships Act 1975
Status of Children Act 1974
Status of Children Act 1974
Artificial Conception Act 1985
Status of Children Act 1969
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990
5.13 When a child is artificially conceived the child’s
mother and her husband are presumed to be the parents of the child.
Paternity will not be imposed unless the procedure was conducted with the husband’s consent.
The couple need not be married; it is sufficient that they be living together on a
domestic basis.
5.14 In three jurisdictions the law expressly applies to heterosexual and same-sex couples alike.
In the latter case, the law can only apply to lesbian relationships.
5.15 Situations of surrogacy may also need to be taken into
account, where a woman carries a child to term, on behalf of another
under an arrangement made before the child’s birth which
sees the assignment of her parental rights to that woman and the father.
5.16 The law can experience difficulty in responding to such recent practices.
As with artificial conception, it would seem preferable for the
intestacy provision to adopt a general approach, leaving the specifics
to each jurisdiction.
What provision, if any, ought to be made for artificially conceived children in the context of intestacy?
Should provision be made for surrogacy in the context of intestacy?
Children not yet born (en ventre sa mere)
Status of Children Act 1978
Parentage Act 2004
Status of Children Act 1996
Status of Children Act 1979
Family Relationships Act 1975
Status of Children Act 1974
Status of Children Act 1974
Status of Children Act 1969
5.17 A child
en ventre sa mere
is a child that, although
conceived or implanted in its mother’s womb, has not yet been
born at the death of its father. References
to a child or issue living
at the death of any person include children or issue
en ventre sa mere
at the death. Children will be presumed to be the issue of the
intestate husband if the wife gives birth within a period ranging
to forty-four weeks
husband’s death (in the absence of evidence to the contrary). No
time limit is specified in Western Australia or
The importance of providing a time limit is, traditionally, to ensure
that the issue is indeed that of the intestate. As administration
the estate traditionally ceased a year after the death, this
presumption should not produce undue administrative difficulty, as
en ventre sa mere
will have been born within that year.
Should children en ventre sa mere continue to be treated as issue for the purposes of intestacy?
If so, should model legislation impose a time period within which the child must be born following the death of the intestate?
Delayed conception and suspended gestation
5.18 Advances in human artificial reproductive technology have rendered current provisions for children
en ventre sa mere
inadequate to deal with all the possible situations where a child of
the deceased is born after the deceased’s death. We are
considering situations where, for example, the sperm of the deceased
has been frozen and inseminated after his death (posthumous
mortem conception) or where insemination has already taken place before
death but the resulting zygote or embryo is frozen
and only placed in
the womb after death.
5.19 An example of such a situation may be found in a 1996
Tasmanian case in which a husband died intestate leaving two frozen
which had been produced by him and his wife as part of an in
vitro fertilisation program. The deceased was survived by his wife and
four children. The embryos were fertilised ova that had been frozen
before they began to divide into cells (zygotes). The questions
the Court were whether the zygotes were living issue at the date of the
intestate’s death, and whether they became issue
on being born
alive. The judge held that zygotes were not actually living at the date
of the deceased’s death. The rights that
attach to the unborn
zygotes are contingent on being born alive. The Court held that a
zygote would become a child of the deceased
on being born alive. No
reason could be seen for differentiating between zygotes and children
en ventre sa mere
5.20 In 1986 the New South Wales Law Reform Commission
considered the question of posthumous conception in so far as it
affected the
rules of distribution on intestacy.
Commission noted the practical difficulty that could arise where the
deceased parent’s estate was either wholly or partly
distributed
after the date of conception or birth of the artificially conceived
child. It therefore recommended that any child so
conceived should not
be entitled to participate in the distribution of the deceased
parent’s estate. It was considered that
this would remove the
need for the personal representative to enquire into the
“possibility of the subsequent birth of persons
who... will be
regarded as children of the deceased”.
Commission, however, also recommended that any children born as a
result of such procedures should be entitled to make an application
family provision on the basis that the complexity of such an
application (involving tracing to beneficiaries) was outweighed
rarity of such cases.
5.21 A United Kingdom Committee of Inquiry into Human
Fertilisation and Embryology which reported in 1984 recommended that
born by artificial conception who was not
the date of death of its father should be “disregarded for the
purposes of succession to and inheritance from the latter”.
The Committee also considered that posthumous conception was a practice that ought to be “actively discouraged”.
5.22 The Ontario Law Reform Commission, on the other hand,
preferred to give the posthumously conceived child, so far as possible,
the same rights of inheritance as though the child were conceived in
the deceased’s lifetime. The Commission did not consider
practical to allow for the postponement of distribution or the
upsetting of distributions already made but instead recommended
a posthumously conceived child of a husband should be entitled to
inheritance rights in respect of any undistributed estate once the
child is born or is
en ventre sa mere
, as if the child were conceived while the husband was alive.
5.23 Legislation and codes of practice in various jurisdictions may
have an impact on whether children can be conceived after the
a parent. For example, in Victoria the use by a surviving spouse or
partner of gametes from the deceased or the transfer
of embryos formed
from the gametes of the deceased may not be possible on account of
consent requirements and the requirement that
the couple be living
together at the time the procedure is carried out.
Various codes of practice also prevent the use of artificial
reproductive technologies in certain circumstances where one partner
Directions under the Western Australian Act state that no consent
given by a gamete provider may include a consent for the posthumous
of the gametes. A person must not knowingly use gametes in an
artificial fertilisation procedure after the death of the gamete
provider. The South Australian Code of Practice states that a licensee
must dispose of an embryo that is kept in storage for future
couple if either member of the couple dies, unless the storage consent
specifies how an embryo is to be dealt with or disposed
of in the event
of death, in which case the licensee must deal with the embryo or
dispose of it in accordance with those conditions.
5.24 On the other hand, in the United Kingdom, a recent enactment has
allowed that a man may be treated as the father of a child
conceived or
implanted as an embryo after his death provided he has consented in
writing to such procedures being carried out after
5.25 It may, however, be preferable to adopt the simple approach of
disregarding for the purposes of intestate succession any child
means of artificial reproductive technologies where the child was not
en ventre sa mere
the death of the intestate. Alternatively, the giving of the whole of
the intestate estate to the surviving spouse or partner will,
normal course of events, ensure that the interests of a child so born
are adequately provided for.
Should special provision be made, in the context of intestacy, to
deal with children who have been born following delayed conception
If so, on what conditions should the interests of children so born be recognised?
DISTRIBUTION PER STIRPES
s 46(1)(a), s 46(3)
5.26 If a person or persons within a group of those who are
entitled to take in an intestate distribution dies, their descendants
(subject to certain limitations discussed below) are entitled to take
the share that they would have taken. There are two ways in
distribution to descendants can be managed. The distribution can be
per stirpes
(by stock) or
(by head). Intestate distribution is generally
per stirpes
Per stirpes
distribution means that the entitlement
of descendants will be determined by the entitlement of those who have
predeceased them and
would otherwise have been entitled to take. For
example, the grandchildren of an intestate will only take
proportionately among themselves
the share that their deceased parent
would have taken if he or she were alive.
5.28 On the other hand
distribution gives
each person entitled to take an equal share regardless of the degree of
their descent. For example, the grandchildren
of an intestate whose
parent has predeceased the intestate will take in equal shares together
with the other surviving children of
the intestate.
5.29 All jurisdictions in Australia, except for South Australia, provide for distribution
per stirpes
South Australia has adopted a modified form of stirpital distribution.
If distribution is to be made to the next of kin, and the
intestate is
not survived by a sibling, aunt nor uncle,
survived by issue of such a relative, the intestate estate devolves
upon that issue, as if the issue were issue of the intestate.
Distribution is then
5.30 In Victoria, while distribution is generally
per stirpes
an exception is made where the intestate’s nieces and nephews are
entitled, and all of the intestate’s siblings are
nieces and nephews will take equal shares, rather than the share to
which their parent would have been entitled.
5.31 An argument in support of
distribution
could be made on the grounds that if all of one generation have
predeceased the intestate, there would appear to be
no valid reason why
some of their children should receive less if they are from a family
with more siblings than some of the others.
Such an approach is fair in
the context of distribution lists which limit entitlement to the
children of deceased siblings, aunts
and uncles and do not allow for
further descent. A similar argument could be made in support of
distribution
in cases where an intestate is predeceased by all of his or her
children and is survived by grandchildren (who are either
all living or
have died without issue).
5.32 Although the Queensland Law Reform Commission originally
supported the South Australian practice, it reconsidered its view after
the Public Trustee of Queensland raised concerns about the
practicalities, rather than the justice, of the proposition. The
was given of a man who died intestate at a very great age
leaving four grandchildren who were the issue of himself and his
wife. He had, however, had a child to a wife he had married,
and subsequently divorced, early in his life. He did not keep in touch
with his first wife and child and, on the intestate’s death, it
was not known whether this child was alive or had produced
grandchildren. Unless this is ascertained distribution
cannot be made.
per stirpes
distribution which operated in Queensland from 1982 was accordingly abandoned in 1998.
Should per stirpes distribution apply in all cases?
If not, in what circumstances should per capita distribution be applied?
DISTRIBUTION TO ISSUE AND PARENTS OF THE INTESTATE
Intestate leaves issue but no partner
s 35, s 36A, Sch 2 Pt 2 It 1
s 49(1), s 49B, Sch 6, Pt 6.2, It 1
s 61B(1),(4), s 61C
s 66(1), s 68; Sch 6 Pt 4 It 1
s 72G(c), s 72I
s 44(5), s 46(1)
s 14(1) Table It 5; s 14(2a), (2b)
s 77 It 4, s 78(1), (2)
s 46(1)(ii)
5.33 Where an intestate has been survived by issue but not by a
partner, all the jurisdictions provide means for, at least part of,
intestate’s estate to flow to the intestate’s issue or to
be divided amongst the issue where more than one survive.
5.34 The method of dividing the estate between the issue of the intestate is determined on a
per stirpes
basis so that if an intestate’s child has predeceased the
intestate, but is survived by issue of his or her own, then such
will be entitled to the share of the intestate’s estate that the
intestate’s issue (their father or mother) would
entitled to, and so on.
Intestate leaves no partner and no issue but leaves a parent or parents
s 35(1); Sch 2 Pt 2 It 2
s 49(1); Sch 6, Pt 6.2, It 2
s 61B(1),(5)
s 66(1); Sch 6 Pt 4 It 2
s 72B(1), s 72G(d), s 72J(a)
s 52(1)(b)-(ea)
s 14(1) Table It 6 and It 7
s 46(1)(iii),(iv), s 47(3)
5.35 If the intestate is not survived by a spouse or de facto
partner, nor by any issue, all jurisdictions provide that the
intestate’s
surviving parent, or parents, will be entitled to the
intestate’s estate. It is commonly the case that the surviving
is entitled to the whole of the intestate’s estate unless
both parents survive, in which case the estate is to be divided equally
between them.
However, in Western Australia, if the
intestate dies without spouse or partner and without issue, but leaves
a parent or parents
and brothers and/or sisters and/or children of a
deceased brother or sister, the surviving parents are entitled to the
first $6,000
of the estate and, in relation to any amount in excess of
the first $6,000, the parents will be entitled to half of the remaining
estate (in equal shares if both parents survive) and the surviving
brothers and sisters or the children of deceased brothers and
will be entitled to the other half.
If the intestate dies without spouse or partner and without
issue, should the parents of the intestate be entitled to the estate?
If so, should surviving parents be solely entitled to
distribution? And if not, what other next of kin should be entitled to
with them in the estate and in what proportions?
STATUTORY TRUST IN FAVOUR OF ISSUE OF THE INTESTATE
s 61C(1)-(2)
s 46(1)-(2)
s 78(1)-(2)
s 47(1)-(2)
5.36 Most jurisdictions do not specifically address statutory
trusts for issue of the intestate. The establishment of such trusts
included in their general provisions. That is, they provide, generally,
for the estate to be held on trust for those entitled.
The separate provisions outlined here may, therefore, be unnecessary.
5.37 In some jurisdictions, trusts in favour of issue of the
intestate are specified to be held for any child, or if there are more
than one, for any child in equal shares, living at the
intestate’s death.
5.38 These trusts are also held for all issue living at the
intestate’s death, of any child of the intestate who has
predeceased
the intestate. No issue can take whose parent is living at
the intestate’s death and is capable of so taking.
5.39 Such issue take according to their stocks, in equal shares
if more than one, the share their parent would have taken if he or
had been alive at the intestate’s death.
This distribution is
per stirpes
5.40 Except for New South Wales, where a trust in favour of
issue fails “by reason of no child or other issue attaining an
vested interest” the intestate estate is held as
though “the intestate had died without leaving issue
his or her death.
Does special provision need to be made for statutory trusts in favour of issue of the intestate?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Adoption of Children Act 1964
Adoption Act 1993
Adoption Act 2000
Adoption of Children Act 1994
Adoption Act 1988
Adoption Act 1988
Adoption Act 1984
Adoption Act 1994
Adoption Act 1955
(NZ) s 16(2);
Adoption Act 1976
(Eng) s 39.
Status of Children Act 1978
Parentage Act 2004
Status of Children Act 1979
Status of Children Act 1996
Family Relationships Act 1975
Status of Children Act 1974
Status of Children Act 1974
Administration Act 1903
Family Law Reform Act 1987
(Eng) s 1(1);
Status of Children Act 1969
(NZ) s 3(1).
Status of Children Act 1996
Parentage Act 2004
Status of Children Act 1978
(Qld) s 18A;
Status of Children Act 1974
Family Relationships Act 1975
Status of Children Act 1974
Status of Children Act 1979
Status of Children Act 1969
(NZ) s 5(1); s 7(1)(a). See also
Family Law Act 1975
Family Court Act 1997
Parentage Act 2004
Status of Children Act 1996
Status of Children Act 1978
(Qld) s 18E;
Status of Children Act 1974
Status of Children Act 1979
(NT) s 5. See also
Family Law Act 1975
Family Court Act 1997
Parentage Act 2004
Status of Children Act 1996
Status of Children Act 1974
Status of Children Act 1974
Family Relationships Act 1975
Status of Children Act 1979
(NT) Part 3A. See para 5.13-5.16 below.
Status of Children Act 1978
(Qld) s 18B;
Status of Children Act 1974
Status of Children Act 1979
Status of Children Act 1996
Parentage Act 2004
Status of Children Act 1974
Status of Children Act 1969
(NZ) s 8(1). See also
Family Law Act 1975
Family Court Act 1997
Status of Children Act 1978
(Qld) s 18C;
Status of Children Act 1974
Status of Children Act 1979
Status of Children Act 1996
Parentage Act 2004
Status of Children Act 1969
(NZ) s 8(3);
Family Relationships Act 1975
Family Law Act 1975
Family Court Act 1997
Court findings are rules of law rather than presumptions.
Status of Children Act 1996
Status of Children Act 1978
(Qld) s 18D;
Status of Children Act 1979
Family Relationships Act 1975
Status of Children Act 1974
Status of Children Act 1974
Status of Children Act 1969
(NZ) s 7(1)(b). See also
Family Law Act 1975
Family Court Act 1997
Family Law Act 1975
-s 69T. See also
Family Court Act 1997
. Para 5.35 below.
Administration Act 1903
Status of Children Act 1974
Status of Children Act 1969
(NZ) s 7(1)(b).
. S Toller,
The Law of Executors and Administrators
(3rd ed, J Butterworth and Son, London, 1814) at 385.
Re Leach (deceased)
[1985] 2 All ER 754 at 759.
Re Leach (deceased)
[1985] 2 All ER 754 at 759. See also K Mackie, “Stepchildren and Succession” (1997) 16
University of Tasmania Law Review
at 23. A child adopted by a husband and wife is, in the event of
divorce and the wife remarrying, a stepchild of the wife’s
Re O’Malley (dec’d)
[1981] Qd R 202.
. K Mackie, “Stepchildren and Succession” (1997) 16
University of Tasmania Law Review
Status of Children Act 1978
(Qld) s 40, s 40A;
Family Provision Act 1969
Family Provision Act 1970
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act 1912
(Tas) s 2(1) paragraph (b) to the definition of “child”, s 3A; and
Family Protection Act 1955
(NZ) s 3. See R F Atherton and P Vines,
Succession: Families, Property and Death: Text and Cases
(2nd ed, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2003) at 74.
Family Provision Bill 2004
cl 6(2) in National Committee for Uniform Succession Laws,
Family Provision: Supplementary Report to the Standing Committee of Attorneys General
(Queensland Law Reform Commission, Report 58, 2004) Appendix 2.
Family Provision Bill 2004
cl 7(1) in National Committee for Uniform Succession Laws,
Family Provision: Supplementary Report to the Standing Committee of Attorneys General
(Queensland Law Reform Commission, Report 58, 2004) Appendix 2.
. See para 3.28-3.35 and Issue 3.10.
. Law Reform Commission of Tasmania,
Report on Succession Rights on Intestacy
(Report 43, 1985) at 13.
Family Provision Act 1969
Status of Children Act 1996
Status of Children Act 1974
Status of Children Act 1974
Family Relationships Act 1975
Status of Children Act 1969
(NZ) s 18. See also
Family Law Act 1975
Status of Children Act 1978
Status of Children Act 1979
Status of Children Act 1974
Status of Children Act 1996
Family Provision Act 1969
Status of Children Act 1974
Artificial Conception Act 1985
Status of Children Act 1969
(NZ) s 18(1)(c); and
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990
s 28(2)(b). The requirement of consent may lead to confusion since it
would seem that a man will not be the child’s father
not consent to his wife undergoing the procedure.
Parentage Act 2004
Status of Children Act 1979
(NT) s 5DA; and
Artificial Conception Act 1985
. R F Atherton and P Vines,
Succession: Families, Property and Death: Text and Cases
(2nd ed, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2003) at 56.
. See the comments by Bryson J concerning the making of an
adoption order in relation to a child who had been born as the result
a surrogacy arrangement:
[2000] NSWSC 640
(2000) 26 Fam LR 317
Family Relationships Act 1975
Status of Children Act 1974
Status of Children Act 1969
(NZ) s 5(1).
Status of Children Act 1978
(Qld) s 18A(2);
Status of Children Act 1996
Status of Children Act 1974
Status of Children Act 1979
(NT) s 4A(2); and
Family Provision Act 1969
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 55(2).
. I J Hardingham, M A Neave and H A J Ford,
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand
(2nd ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1989) at 419.
Re the Estate of the Late K
(1996) 5 Tas R 365
(Slicer J). See also D Clark, “En ventre sa frigidaire: Zygotes as children”
Alternative Law Journal
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Artificial Conception: Human Artificial Insemination
(Report 49, 1986) at para 12.6-12.12
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Artificial Conception: Human Artificial Insemination
(Report 49, 1986) at para 12.9.
. United Kingdom, Department of Health and Social Security,
Report of the Committee of Inquiry into Human Fertilisation and Embryology
(Cmnd 9314, 1984) at para 10.9.
. Ontario Law Reform Commission,
Human Artificial Reproduction and Related Matters
(Report, 1985) vol 2 at 182.
Infertility Treatment Act 1995
(Vic) s 8, s 12.
. New South Wales Department of Health,
Review of the
Human Tissue Act 1983
- Discussion Paper: Assisted Reproductive Technologies
(1998) at para 6.5.
Human Fertilisation and Embryology (Deceased Fathers) Act 2003
Administration and Probate Act 1919
s 72J(d)(iv).
Estate of Hughes
(1985) 38 SASR 5
at 11 (Bollen J).
Administration and Probate Act 1958
s 52(1)(f)(vi).
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Intestacy Rules
(Report 42, 1993) at 56-57.
Succession Amendment Act 1997
(Qld). See also W A Lee and A A Preece,
Lee’s Manual of Queensland Succession Law
(5th edition, LBC Information Services, 2001) at para 1205.
Succession Act 1981
(Qld) Sch 2 Pt 2 It 2;
Administration and Probate Act 1929
(ACT) Sch 6 Pt 6.2 It 2;
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(5);
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) Sch 6 Pt 4 It 2;
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1903
Table It 7;
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 77 It 5; and
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 46(1)(iii) and (iv).
Administration Act 1903
Table It 6.
. See para 1.16.
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61C(1);
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 78(1)(a); and
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 47(1)(i).
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61C(1)(b);
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 78(1)(a) and
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 47(1)(i).
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61C(2);
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 78(1)(a); and
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 47(1)(i).
. See para 5.26-5.32 above.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 26 (2005) - Uniform Succession Laws: Intestacy
6. Distribution to next of kin of the intestate
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
The general order of distribution
Brothers and sisters of the intestate
Grandparents of the intestate
Aunts and uncles of the intestate
More remote next of kin
Meaning of statutory trust for any class of relatives other than issue of the intestate
THE GENERAL ORDER OF DISTRIBUTION
s 35(1A), s 37
s 49(5), s 49C(1)
s 61B(6), s 61C(3)
s 66(5), s 69
s 72B(1), s 72G(d); s 72J
s 44(7), s 46(3)
s 77 It 6-7, s 78(3)
6.1 When the intestate is not survived by a spouse or partner,
issue or parents, each jurisdiction makes provision for the
distribution
of the intestate estate to the next of kin of the
intestate and, in some degree, their issue. The broad order adopted by
each jurisdiction
brothers and sisters of the intestate take first;
grandparents of the intestate take next; and
aunts and uncles of the intestate take if no one else is entitled.
This order is broadly reflective of the old
Statute of Distributions
which established an order whereby those next of kin in closest
relationship to the intestate were entitled to take in preference
relatives of remoter degree.
Is the general scheme appropriate whereby the next of kin are entitled to a share of an intestate estate in the following order:
1. brothers and sisters of the intestate;
2. grandparents of the intestate; and then
3. aunts and uncles of the intestate?
If not, what order of distribution should be adopted?
6.2 While the above applies as a general scheme, each jurisdiction
makes different provision with respect to some of the categories.
Relationships of the whole and half blood
s 52(1)(f)(vii)
s 77 It 6-7
6.3 Two of the categories outlined above, namely brothers and
sisters of the intestate and aunts and uncles of the intestate, require
a consideration of the question of relationships of the whole and half
blood. Siblings who share both parents are relatives of the
whole blood
and siblings who have only one parent in common are relatives of half
6.4 Most jurisdictions now state that the distinction between
whole and half blood is immaterial for the purposes of determining
entitlement,
so that siblings of the half blood are
entitled to take together with siblings of the whole blood. (Siblings
of the half blood may,
therefore, now benefit by the possibility of
inheriting from two family groupings instead of one.)
6.5 The distinction, however, remains in New South Wales and
England. In these jurisdictions, a distinction is still drawn between
brothers and sisters of the whole blood and brothers and sisters of the
half blood, so that brothers and sisters of the whole blood
issue are entitled to take before brothers and sisters of the half
blood and their issue,
and aunts and uncles of the whole
blood and their issue are entitled to take before uncles and aunts of
the half blood and their
6.6 The Law Reform Committee of South Australia recommended
against the incorporation of such a distinction in the law of that
[t]here are many families in which the half blood and the whole
blood live together perfectly happily and it has been the experience
at least one member of this Committee that when distinctions between
whole and the half blood have been made by will, they have
productive of great unhappiness.
6.7 Distinctions between relatives of the whole and half blood appear
to have been relevant for the purposes of identifying an heir
English law relating to the inheritance of land under
primo genitur
, so that, for example, brothers of the half blood could only inherit after sisters of the whole blood, and so on.
This and other such distinctions in the law of heirship were described
in 1881 as “precious absurdities in the English law
There would appear to be no justification for such a distinction in the law of intestate succession today.
Should any distinction be made between relatives of the whole and half blood?
BROTHERS AND SISTERS OF THE INTESTATE
s 37(1)(a), s 37(2)(a), Sch 2 Part 2 It 3
s 49C(1)(a), s 49C(2)
s 61B(6)(a) and (b)
s 69(1)(a), s 69(2)
s 44(7)(a), s 46(3)
s 52(1)(f)(v)-(vi)
s 14(1) Table It 8; s 14(3a)
s 77 It 6; s 78(3)
s 46(1)(v), s 47(3)
6.8 Each jurisdiction provides that if the intestate is not
survived by a spouse or partner, issue or parents, the brothers and
of the intestate who survive are entitled to take.
6.9 Some jurisdictions provide that if any brother or sister
has predeceased the intestate, any surviving children of the deceased
brother or sister (that is, the intestate’s nephews and nieces)
can take their parent’s entitlement in equal shares.
Remoter issue, for example, grand nephews and nieces, are, therefore,
excluded. Both Queensland and Western Australia state that
intestate’s nieces and nephews take according to a
per stirpes
distribution.
6.10 Victoria, however, provides that, if all the brothers and
sisters have predeceased the intestate, their surviving children are
entitled to take on a
Victoria, if all of these surviving nephews and nieces predecease the
intestate, their children (the grand nieces and nephews
intestate), in absence of any surviving grand parents or uncles and
aunts, may be entitled to take as relatives of the fourth
(together with cousins of the intestate) under the modified civil law
distribution scheme that Victoria has retained.
6.11 The remaining jurisdictions provide that if a sister or
brother has predeceased the intestate, the surviving issue of that
or sister are entitled to take a share.
means that, in some cases, grand nieces and nephews of the intestate
may be entitled to take if their parents have predeceased
them. In the
majority of these jurisdictions the issue take according to a
per stirpes
distribution. South Australia, however, offers a modified form of
distribution
whereby, if all the brothers and sisters predecease the intestate,
their surviving issue are treated as if they were
issue of the
6.12 Further, the provision that spouses are to be treated as separate persons for the purposes of intestacy
may cause problems if a person dies intestate and has nieces and
nephews from different siblings and some of these nephews and nieces
have married (being cousins). If those nephews and nieces predecease
the intestate but are survived by children, their children will
represent each of their parents and be entitled to take twice as much
as they would be entitled to if only one parent were entitled.
What provision should be made for distribution to brothers and sisters of the intestate and their issue?
Where the intestate is predeceased by a brother or sister,
should the share of the intestate’s estate to which the brother
sister would otherwise have been entitled be taken by:
(a) the remaining brothers and sisters in equal shares;
(b) the children of the deceased brother or sister; or
(c) the issue of the deceased brother or sister?
If the issue of a deceased brother or sister are to take the
share of the intestate’s estate to which the brother or sister
would otherwise have been entitled:
(a) should the issue take per stirpes, per capita, or
according to the modified form of per capita distribution that applies
Australia; and
(b) what account ought to be taken of the provision that spouses are to be treated as separate persons?
GRANDPARENTS OF THE INTESTATE
s 49C(1)(b)
s 61B(6)(c)
s 52(1)(f)(v)
s 14(1) Table It 9
6.13 Each jurisdiction provides that surviving grandparents are
the next category entitled to take on intestacy. There is generally
variance in these provisions except that New Zealand has established a
regime whereby the maternal and paternal families are treated
separately.
Half of the intestate estate is made
available to the surviving maternal grandparents and if neither of them
has survived, their
half devolves to their children, that is, the
maternal aunts and uncles of the intestate. Likewise, the other half of
is made available to the surviving paternal grandparents and
if neither of them has survived, their half devolves to their children,
that is, the paternal aunts and uncles of the intestate. It is only if
no one from the paternal side of the family has survived that
half then goes to the maternal side, and
What provision should be made for distribution to the grandparents of the intestate?
AUNTS AND UNCLES OF THE INTESTATE
s 37(1)(c), s 37(2)(b)
s 49C(1)(c), s 49C(2)
s 61B(6)(d), (e)
s 69(1)(c), s 69(2)
s 44(7)(c), s 46(3)
s 14(1) Table It 10; s 14(3a)
s 46(1)(v), s 47(3)
6.14 Each jurisdiction provides that surviving aunts and uncles
of the intestate are the next category of next of kin entitled to
on intestacy.
6.15 Queensland and Western Australia provide that if any aunt
or uncle has predeceased the intestate, any surviving children of the
deceased brother or sister (that is, the intestate’s cousins) can
take their parent’s entitlement in equal shares.
Remoter issue, for example, first cousins once removed, are, therefore,
excluded from this category. In both these jurisdictions
intestate’s cousins take according to a
per stirpes
distribution.
6.16 Other jurisdictions provide that if an uncle or aunt has
predeceased the intestate, the surviving issue of that uncle or aunt
are entitled to take a share.
This means that, in some
cases, first cousins once removed of the intestate may be entitled to
take if their parents have predeceased
them. In the majority of these
per stirpes
distribution. South Australia, however, offers a modified form of
distribution
whereby, if all the aunts and uncles predecease the intestate, their
surviving issue are treated as if they were issue
of the intestate.
6.17 Further, the provision that spouses are to be treated as separate persons for the purposes of intestacy
may cause problems if a person dies intestate and has cousins from
different siblings and some of these cousins have married. If
cousins predecease the intestate but are survived by children, their
children will represent each of their parents and be entitled
twice as much as they would be entitled to if only one parent were
6.18 Finally, in Victoria no issue of a deceased aunt or uncle
of the intestate may take in this category. However, cousins of the
intestate may take as part of the next category that is entitled to
distribution (relatives of the fourth degree) under the modified
law distribution scheme that Victoria has retained.
What provision should be made for distribution to aunts and uncles of the intestate and their issue?
Where an intestate is predeceased by an aunt or uncle, should
the share of the intestate’s estate to which the aunt or uncle
would otherwise have been entitled be taken by:
(a) the surviving siblings of the deceased aunt or uncle;
(b) the children of the deceased aunt or uncle; or
(c) the issue of the deceased aunt or uncle?
If the issue of a deceased aunt or uncle are to take the
share of the intestate’s estate to which the aunt or uncle would
have been entitled:
(a) should the issue take per stirpes, per capita, or
according to the modified form of per capita distribution that applies
Australia; and
(b) what account ought to be taken of the provision that spouses are to be treated as separate persons?
MORE REMOTE NEXT OF KIN
6.19 Most jurisdictions make no further provision for
distribution to next of kin of the intestate beyond surviving aunts and
of the intestate and their children or issue. However, both
Tasmania and Victoria allow for further distribution, at least in part,
according to the old civil law rules of distribution.
6.20 Victoria achieves this by stating that distribution shall
be “among the next of kin of the intestate who are in equal
and their representatives”.
Because Victoria also restricts the passing of entitlements to issue after children of brothers and sisters of the intestate,
the next category of relatives to take under the Victorian scheme after
aunts and uncles of the intestate includes grand nephews
and nieces of
the intestate and cousins of the intestate, who are both relatives of
the fourth degree.
6.21 Tasmania, achieves this by providing that the estate
“shall be held in trust for the next-of-kin of the intestate
to the civil law; but there shall be no representation in
relation to persons entitled under this last provision”.
It has been observed that this limits the remaining next of kin to a range that is “narrow and remote”:
Great grandparents, a rare phenomenon even in this day and age, may
claim as kin of the third degree. Brothers and sisters of grandparents
(kin of the fourth degree) and their issue may also claim. It is to be
questioned whether it would not be more appropriate for the
benefit rather than such kin.
6.22 There may be benefits in putting a limit on the classes of
relatives entitled. When going back through ancestors and next of
it has been argued that it would be prudent to put a limit on the
extent to which relatives must be traced. It is when cousins
remoter relatives must be found “that real difficulty and expense
often arise”.
This is particularly the case in a country “a large proportion of
whose population are immigrants, or children or grandchildren
immigrants”.
This problem will be compounded in
some cases where members of some families have migrated to different
countries. Although shares
in the intestate’s estate may be
distributed to known beneficiaries while some remain unknown, the
presence of undiscovered
beneficiaries would require a perpetual trust.
6.23 These difficulties were recognised by the Law Reform
Commission of Tasmania, which identified the problem of having to
all an intestate’s relatives under the current law:
and time consuming job as there is no limitation on how many
generations
must be searched to find the intestate’s nearest
surviving next of kin.
6.24 If the list of distribution is too thorough and expansive it runs
the risk of confusing those who must interpret the Act’s
operation. Before New South Wales limited next of kin to the aunts and
uncles of the intestate, it was thought that “the provisions
concerning next of kin [were] almost as forbidding as is the list of
persons shown at the beginning of the Prayer Book – persons
one is not supposed to marry”.
6.25 In 1993 the Queensland Law Reform Commission considered:
There seems to be no reason to make this list shorter, for example,
by excluding cousins, or to make it longer, by including
great-grandparents,
great uncles and aunts or their issue.
What provision, if any, should be made for distribution to remoter next of kin?
MEANING OF STATUTORY TRUST FOR ANY CLASS OF RELATIVES OTHER THAN ISSUE OF THE INTESTATE
6.26 It is uncommon for jurisdictions to address specifically
statutory trusts for classes of relatives other than the issue of the
intestate. Such trusts will usually be covered by the provisions that
deal generally with the title of the intestate estate.
6.27 In some jurisdictions, for example, New South Wales,
separate provision is, however, made so that where the estate or any
of the estate is directed to be held on statutory trust for any
class of relatives other than issue of the intestate, “that
estate or part shall be held in trust corresponding to the statutory
trust for the issue of the intestate as if that trust were repeated
with the substitution of references to the members or member of that
class for references to the children or child of the intestate”.
New Zealand makes similar provision in almost exactly the same terms,
as do Tasmania and England, except that Tasmania and England also
provide that the “provision for bringing any money or property
into account” does not apply in the case of trusts for relatives
other than the issue of the deceased.
6.28 Separate provision in relation to any estate held on trust
for relatives who are not issue of the intestate would appear to be
unnecessary since the question of distribution to relatives other than
issue is dealt with in the distribution lists.
If the estate of an intestate is to be held on trust for
relatives who are not issue in the same manner as for issue of the
is it necessary to include a separate provision to that
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Succession Act 1981
Administration Act 1903
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 61(2)(b);
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1958
s 52(1)(f)(vii)
Administration and Probate Act 1935
and (c); and
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 77 It 6 and It 7.
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(6)(a) and (b); and
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 46(1)(v).
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(6)(d) and (e);
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 46(1)(v).
. Law Reform Committee of South Australia,
Relating to the Reform of the Law on Intestacy and Wills
(Report 28, 1974) at 7.
. Inheritance Act of 1833 (3&4 William IV c 106) s 9.
In re Goodman’s Trusts
(1881) 17 ChD 266
at 299 (James LJ).
Succession Act 1981
Administration Act 1903
Table It 8,
Administration and Probate Act 1958
s 52(1)(f).
See also I J Hardingham, M A Neave and H A J Ford,
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand
(2nd ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1989) at 369-370).
Administration Act 1903
Succession Act 1981
s 37(2)(a).
Administration and Probate Act 1958
s 52(1)(f)(vi).
Administration and Probate Act 1958
s 52(1)(f).
See para 6.19-6.20 below. See also I J Hardingham, M A Neave and H A J Ford,
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand
(2nd ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1989) at 369-370.
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 69(1)(a) and s 69(2);
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(6)(a) and (b), s 61C(3);
Administration and Probate Act 1929
s 49C(1)(a)
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 46(1)(v) and s 47(3);
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 77 It 6, s 78(3).
Administration and Probate Act 1919
s 72J(b)(iv).
. See para 3.19 above.
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 77 It 7.
Succession Act 1981
Administration Act 1903
Table It 10,
Succession Act 1981
Administration Act 1903
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 69(1)(c) and s 69(2);
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(6)(d) and (e), s 61C(3);
Administration and Probate Act 1929
s 49C(1)(c)
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 46(1)(v), s 47(3);
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 77 It 7, s 78(3).
Administration and Probate Act 1919
s 72J(b)(iv).
. See para 3.19 above.
Administration and Probate Act 1958
s 52(1)(f).
See para 6.19-6.20 below. See also I J Hardingham, M A Neave and H A J Ford,
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand
(2nd ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1989) at 369-370.
Administration and Probate Act 1958
s 52(1)(f).
Administration and Probate Act 1958
s 52(1)(f)(iii).
. I J Hardingham, M A Neave and H A J Ford,
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand
(2nd ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1989) at 370.
Administration and Probate Act 1935
. I J Hardingham, M A Neave and H A J Ford,
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand
(2nd ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1989) at 396.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
, Legislative Council, 23 November 1954, Administration of Estates Bill, Second Reading at 1811.
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Intestacy Rules
(Report 42, 1993) at 63.
. Law Reform Commission of Tasmania,
Report on Succession Rights on Intestacy
(Report 43, 1985) at 14.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
, Legislative Council, 23 November 1954, Administration of Estates Bill, Second Reading at 1815.
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Intestacy Rules
(Report 42, 1993) at 63.
. As is the case in Queensland, Australian Capital Territory,
Northern Territory, South Australia, Victoria and Western Australia.
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61C(3).
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 78(3).
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 47(3).
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 26 (2005) - Uniform Succession Laws: Intestacy
7. Distribution when no relatives are entitled
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Bona vacantia
Provision for dependants
BONA VACANTIA
s 35(1); Sch 2 Pt 2 It 4;
Property Law Act 1974
s 49(1); s 49CA; Sch 6 Pt 6.2 It 4
s 66(1); Sch 6 Pt 4 It 4;
Law of Property Act
s 14(1) Table It 11;
Escheat (Procedure) Act 1940
s 76, s 77 It 8
s 45(1)(d), s 46(1)(vi)
Bona vacantia
is the Crown’s statutory right to
the property of an intestate estate, to which no relatives are
entitled. In most jurisdictions
when the intestate is not survived by a
spouse or partner, issue, parents or remoter eligible relatives, the
Crown (or “Territory”)
is entitled to the intestate’s
bona vacantia.
7.2 The possibility of an intestate’s estate passing to
the Crown may not be so unlikely as it once was, given the reduction
the size of the average family in Australia and the higher incidence of
single child families. The following hypothetical example
illustrates
Alan died intestate leaving no spouse and no issue. Alan was an
only child of parents each of whom was an only child. His parents
all of his grandparents had predeceased him.
A further example may be found in a 1991 case where one third of the
large estate of an elderly woman (who left no relatives entitled
intestacy) went on partial intestacy to the Crown, contrary to her
intention, because her will was badly drawn.
7.3 In the Australian Capital Territory, conditions are imposed upon
the public trustee where the Territory is entitled to an intestate
estate. The estate must be held in trust until six years have passed
since the date of death of the intestate. At that point the
estate must
be sold and the proceeds paid to the Territory (less all costs and
charges lawfully due to the public trustee or any
other person).
7.4 An alternative proposal could be to enact a provision
whereby the intestate’s estate goes to a charity or charities
than to the Crown.
In 1985 the Law Reform Commission of Tasmania noted:
The Commission believes that most people would prefer their estate
to go to charity than to the Crown, given that no close family
the time of their death. Although many people might object to the
property going to the State rather than to relatives of
the deceased,
they are less likely to object to it going to charity.
However, the Tasmanian proposal would involve the establishment of a
“Charities Board” to distribute the funds received.
national legislation would then require the creation of a charities
board in each jurisdiction. The Law Commission of England
and Wales was
opposed to such a proposal as the chosen charity would, then, also have
the job of administering the intestate estate
and would be required to
account to any beneficiaries that are subsequently discovered.
7.5 A provision to similar effect has been enacted in Queensland
with respect to Indigenous people who die intestate. In cases where
chief executive of the Aboriginal and Islander Affairs Corporation is
unable to determine that any person is entitled to succeed
estate or a part of the estate, that property shall “vest in the
chief executive who shall apply the moneys or the proceeds
of the sale
of any property (less the expenses (if any) of such sale) for the
benefit of [Aborigines/Islanders] generally”
under the schemes
whereby the chief executive may grant aid to Indigenous persons who
apply for it on such terms as the chief executive
may think fit.
Are the present provisions for the disposal of intestate estates
where no relatives of the intestate are entitled to distribution
the rules of intestacy satisfactory?
PROVISION FOR DEPENDANTS
Financial Management Act 1994
s 46(1)(vi)
7.6 A number of jurisdictions allow the Crown to provide for
dependants for whom the intestate might have been reasonably expected
to have made provision,
or who might be said to have a “moral claim” against the estate.
In New South Wales the Crown Solicitor has published guidelines on the procedure for applications.
7.7 Such a provision was designed to include foster children and
“will cover also the situation of an old friend, say, who looked
after the intestate in the last days of his life”.
Such a provision could also be used, albeit in limited circumstances,
to provide for step children of the intestate who are otherwise
entitled to distribution on intestacy.
7.8 The provision can be seen to be statutory recognition of the
common law right “of certain dependants of the intestate who,
although not entitled at law, may nevertheless petition the Crown for a
waiver of its rights of
bona vacantia
in any estate in respect of which there are no legal next of kin”.
It has been noted, at least in New South Wales, that the provision
allowing dependants to make application was of particular importance
de facto couples, both heterosexual and same-sex, before the reforms of
1984 and 1999 respectively, since they could not apply
under family
provision legislation.
7.9 Certoma has criticised the discretionary nature of this
provision and argues that, at least in New South Wales,
implies that the intestate would not reasonably have
been expected to make provision for a relative as close as a first
would, one would suspect, be difficult to imagine that any
testator would prefer the Crown as
bona vacantia
rather than to benefit his closest relatives.”
7.10 It can be argued that such a provision is no longer
necessary given the broader scope of family provision legislation to
dependants. In any case, the recommendations of the National
Committee in relation to family provision would appear to cover the
situation, whereby a person, whether or not they are a member of the
family of a deceased person, may apply for a family provision
they are “a person to whom [the] deceased person owed a
responsibility to provide maintenance, education or advancement
In making a family provision order in
relation to such an application, the court may have regard to whether
the applicant “was
being maintained, either wholly or partly, by
the deceased person before the deceased person’s death”.
7.11 It is important to distinguish between the nature of an
application under family provision and the nature of an application for
provision out of
bona vacantia
. In the case of a claim for
family provision a person, who is not entitled to a share of the
deceased’s estate, may only make
a claim if they were being
maintained by the deceased or over whom the deceased had
responsibility. In the case of an application
for provision out of
bona vacantia
application may be made by a person who has a purely moral claim to a share of the estate, for example, foster children.
Should uniform legislation allow persons to petition the Crown to make provision for them out of bona vacantia?
If so, what criteria should be used to identify the people who are entitled to apply?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Succession Act 1981
(Qld) Sch 2 Pt 2 It 4;
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1929
(ACT) Sch 6 Pt 6.2 It 4;
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 66(1) and Sch 6 Pt 4 It 4;
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(7);
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 77 It 8; and
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 46(1)(vi). Western Australia does not employ
bona vacantia
It is the only Australian jurisdiction which maintains escheat to the
Crown. Escheat is the feudal rule whereby real property would
the Crown, or lord of the fee, should the owner of such property die
intestate and without heirs. Land may also have reverted
if the holder
grossly breached his or her feudal bond. In Western Australia escheated
property includes real and personal property:
Administration Act 1903
Table It 11;
Escheat (Procedure) Act 1940
In cases of intestacy, at least, escheat has been expressly abolished in
Property Law Act 1974
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(7);
Law of Property Act
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 76; and
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 45(1)(d).
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Intestacy Rules
(Report 42, 1993) at 65.
Mortensen v State of New South Wales
(NSW Court of Appeal, No 40544/1990, 12 December 1991, unreported).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
. England and Wales, Law Commission,
Family Law: Distribution on Intestacy
(Report 187, 1989) at 13.
. Law Reform Commission of Tasmania,
Report on Succession Rights on Intestacy
(Report 43, 1985) at 15.
. England and Wales, Law Commission,
Family Law: Distribution on Intestacy
(Report 187, 1989) at 14.
Community Services (Aborigines) Act 1984
Community Services (Torres Strait) Act 1984
See para 9.15-9.16 below.
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) s 61B(8);
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 77 It 8; and
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 46(1)(vi).
Escheat (Procedure) Act 1940
. K Mason and L G Handler,
Wills Probate and Administration Service
(Butterworths, Service 69) at para 5206.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
, Legislative Assembly, 16 November 1954, Administration of Estates Bill, Second Reading at 1715.
. See para 5.6-5.12.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
, Legislative Assembly, 25 October 1977, Wills, Probate and Administration (Amendment) Bill, Second Reading at 8993.
. K Mason and L G Handler,
Wills Probate and Administration Service
(Butterworths, Service 70) at para 1305.6.
. G L Certoma, “Intestacy in New South Wales: The 1977 Statutory Amendments” (1979) 53
Australian Law Journal
Family Provision Bill 2004
cl 7 in National Committee for Uniform Succession Laws,
Family Provision: Supplementary Report to the Standing Committee of Attorneys General
(Queensland Law Reform Commission, Report 58, 2004) Appendix 2.
Family Provision Bill 2004
cl 11(2)(j) in National Committee for Uniform Succession Laws,
Family Provision: Supplementary Report to the Standing Committee of Attorneys General
(Queensland Law Reform Commission, Report 58, 2004) Appendix 2.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 26 (2005) - Uniform Succession Laws: Intestacy
8. Accounting for benefits received upon or before death
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Gifts given before death
Testamentary gifts
8.1 To ensure that intestate estates are divided equitably some
before and/or upon death and that person is entitled to a share of the
intestate estate, that benefit is taken into account in determining
their entitlement. That is, the value of any benefit received is
subtracted from the share that the recipient is entitled to under
rules of distribution on intestacy.
8.2 There are essentially two categories of provisions. First,
those that deal with gifts made by the intestate during his or her
lifetime. Secondly, in the case of partial intestacies, those where the
intestate has made provision for someone in his or her will.
8.3 It should be noted that three Australian jurisdictions make
no provision to account for benefits received on or before the death
an intestate.
The absence of any such provisions in these
There is, therefore,
a good case for simplifying the administration of
intestate estates by not including such provisions in any uniform
national legislation.
GIFTS GIVEN BEFORE DEATH
Statute of Distributions
8.4 The rules relating to the taking into account of benefits
conferred on a person entitled on intestacy have their origins in the
Statute of Distributions which provided that settlements and
advancements conferred by the intestate upon his children in his
were to be taken into account in determining their (or their
issue’s) portion upon intestacy.
The rule, which is
sometimes referred to as “the doctrine of hotchpot”, was
narrow in scope, applying only to children
of the male intestate and
applied only in cases of total intestacy.
8.5 Essentially two types of benefits were envisaged:
marriage settlements whereby property was settled upon children upon marriage; and
advancements which were usually intended to set up children in their chosen profession or business.
The rule did not apply to casual payments or gifts made to children.
8.6 The rule as established by the Statute of Distributions has been
modified in some jurisdictions and abolished in New South Wales,
Queensland,
Western Australia,
New Zealand and England.
It has been observed that the parliaments of these jurisdictions
“clearly considered the doctrine of hotchpot to be more
of difficulty than justice”.
certainly difficulty in defining “advancement” and
uncertainty concerning the date of valuation of the benefits
8.7 It has been argued that the abolition showed a
“determination to remove anomalies, anachronisms, relics,
remnants and vestiges
of outmoded and outdated statutory and common
law. No longer will there be problems of gifts
inter vivos
vying with devices and bequests”.
Modern provisions
s 68(3)-(4)
s 52(1)(f)(i)
8.8 Five jurisdictions have provisions relating to gifts that an intestate has made to certain people in his or her lifetime.
8.9 Tasmania and Victoria both have provisions that are closest
to the regime established by the Statute of Distributions. In Victoria
the relevant provision applies where a child has any real or personal
property, or any estate or interest therein, by settlement
intestate, or was advanced by the intestate in his or her lifetime.
In Tasmania the relevant provision applies only to advancements or
marriage settlements to children of the intestate unless a contrary
intention is expressed. The value of any such advancement or settlement
is taken as at the date of the intestate’s death, rather
value at the date on which the advancement or settlement was made.
8.10 The Australian Capital Territory, Northern Territory and
South Australia have extended the application of their provisions by
covering the giving of any money or property for the “benefit
of” the recipient,
unless a contrary intention can be found.
However, each jurisdiction has placed a monetary limit on the value of
such gifts, so that, in order to be taken into account, the
be valued at more than $10,000 in the Australian Capital Territory and
$1,000 in South Australia and the Northern Territory.
8.11 The Australian Capital Territory, Northern Territory and
South Australia have also limited the application of their provisions
to gifts given no more than 5 years before the death of the intestate.
The Law Reform Commission of Tasmania has explained the benefits of a
time limit, before which gifts need not be brought to account:
Details of gifts may become sketchy over long periods of time; and
the law should not place too much constructive interpretation on
treatment of relatives by an intestate during his lifetime. The law
should not retrospectively determine how he should have treated
family during his lifetime, but rather how he most probably would have
treated them had he made a will or had he made a will
which effectively
dealt with his entire estate.
8.12 Each jurisdiction, however, varies considerably as to the people
whose benefits must be taken into account. The Northern Territory
limits the application of its provision to children of the intestate.
South Australia extends it to any person entitled under the
intestacy, other than the surviving spouse or partner of the intestate.
The Australian Capital Territory also extends it to any person entitled
under the rules of intestacy, other than the surviving spouse
partner of the intestate but also extends the coverage of the provision
to any gifts to an otherwise “unentitled”
spouse or partner
of a person who is entitled. An “unentitled partner” is a
person who is not entitled to a share of
the intestate estate and who
was the partner of the entitled person in question at the time of the
gift to the entitled person, and
was either the spouse of the entitled
person at the time of the gift; or had been their domestic partner
continuously for two or
more years at the time; or was a parent of a
child of the entitled person, if the child was under eighteen at the
8.13 The Law Reform Commission of Tasmania suggested that spouses
should not have to account for gifts given to them by the intestate
there would be:
an untold number of substantial gifts given by one spouse to the
other during their time together, and in many cases it might be
to determine what is a gift and what is the result of a
combined contribution by both spouses.
8.14 The Australian Capital Territory and Northern Territory provide
that the valuation of the gifts must be made as at the date
of death of
the intestate.
South Australia fixes the valuation at the date of gift.
8.15 The requirement that any advancement be accounted for presumes
that the intestate “…would have wished to bring about
equality on the distribution of the intestate estate.”
Given the equitable origins of the doctrine of hotchpot, Certoma has
argued that, “[t]hese doctrines are based upon the principle
equity leans against double portions according to which a parent is
presumed to intend to produce equality of benefit amongst
children.” Rather than being abolished, he suggests the doctrine
should be extended to include testamentary gifts.
8.16 General arguments against taking account of gifts made
during the lifetime of the intestate include the difficulty of making
investigations about such gifts and obtaining valuations.
The rule could also be seen as defeating the intentions of the deceased.
8.17 The benefits of abolishing the requirement that
inter vivos
gifts be accounted for may be understood by recognising that
advancements to children, such as those given by way of marriage
settlement,
are not common in contemporary society. Merit, however, may
still be identified in a requirement which, “does not interfere
with planned inequality, but, in the case of issue at least,
…rejects accidental inequality in favour of that degree of
produced by hotchpot.”
8.18 The Queensland Law Reform Commission’s arguments
against the doctrine of hotchpot, as originally established, were based
on the low frequency with which its provisions would be called into
operation. The contemporary intestate, who will have given a
the marriage or setting up for life of a child, will most likely die at
a considerable age. Any gift made upon the marriage
or setting up for
life of a child will have been made many years before any of the time
periods provided by the relevant statutes.
If issue feel that an
inequitable distribution has resulted, they may make a family provision
As noted above, however, some jurisdictions have
overcome some of these concerns by extending the application of the
provisions to
cover benefits other than settlements for advancement or
upon marriage. This may, however, have the effect of unnecessarily
complicating
the administration of estates where gifts to be taken into
account will have to be ascertained and valued.
What provisions, if any, should be made to take into account
gifts given by the intestate before death to persons who are entitled
to take according to the rules of intestacy?
TESTAMENTARY GIFTS
s 44(4), s 47(a)
8.19 Some jurisdictions specify classes of people who are
generally required to account for any testamentary gifts they have
in the case of a partial intestacy. The result is that their
entitlement under the intestacy will be reduced by the value of the
testamentary gift.
8.20 Four jurisdictions make provision for the situation where a
spouse or partner of the intestate receives a benefit under the will.
In three cases, if the value of the beneficial interest given to the
intestate’s spouse or partner is less than the statutory
to which they are entitled in intestacy – the spouse or partner
will be entitled to the statutory legacy less the amount
beneficial interest. If the value of the beneficial interest given to
the spouse or partner is greater than the statutory
legacy to which
they are entitled in intestacy – the spouse or partner will not
be entitled to the statutory legacy.
However, the spouse
or partner will only have to account where the intestate is survived by
particular relatives - issue in the Australian
Capital Territory,
or issue, parents, siblings or the issue of siblings in the Northern Territory.
In Tasmania, however, it is simply stated that a testamentary gift to a
spouse or partner shall be taken to have been given in or
satisfaction of their share of the intestate estate. This will be the
case unless a contrary intention was expressed in the
will or appears
from the circumstances of the case. Tasmania makes the point of stating
that the statutory legacy will only take
effect – if the husband
or wife brings the gift into account at a valuation – as at the
intestate’s death.
8.21 In the Northern Territory, if the intestate’s child
acquires an interest under the intestate’s will and is also
to a share of the intestate’s estate, the testamentary
benefit must be brought into account at a valuation as at the
intestate’s
8.22 South Australia provides that when a testamentary gift is
given to a person who is also entitled to a share of the intestate
estate, the gift must be taken to have been given in or towards
satisfaction of the entitled person’s share of the intestate
estate. This will be the case unless a contrary intention was expressed
or appears from the circumstances of the case, or the value
of the gift
does not exceed $1,000.
8.23 In Victoria, any real or personal property, or any estate
or interest therein acquired by any issue of the intestate under his
her will, must be brought into account by the issue.
8.24 The Queensland Law Reform Commission saw provisions
requiring testamentary benefits to be brought into account as being
to the intestacy theory”:
Proposals that a spouse or indeed any other beneficiary under an
intestacy should bring other benefits into account run counter to
basic assumption of what intestacy rules are about. An administrator
should not be saddled with having to take a general account
benefits which the deceased intentionally conferred, whether directly
or indirectly, on the surviving spouse, so as to
reduce the benefit to
the spouse of intestacy rules. Moreover, it would be unprecedented to
confer upon an administrator the investigatory
powers which would be
necessary to establish the facts and strike an account. Accordingly,
the Commission recommends that a statutory
beneficiary should not be
required to account for any benefits received under any will made by
the intestate or under any gift or
entitlement received from the
intestate during the intestate’s life-time, or payable on the
intestate’s death.
8.25 The Law Commission of England and Wales raised similar concerns
“[i]n particular, it can defeat the very object of the deceased
in making the partial dispositions in the will. The rule is
complicated
and difficult for administrators to apply and its abolition would
greatly simplify the administration of estates”.
What provision, if any, should be made for the taking into
account of testamentary benefits received by persons who are also
under the rules of intestacy?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
. Queensland, New South Wales and Western Australia.
. 22 & 23 Charles II c 10 s 5.
. See Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Intestacy Rules
(Report 42, 1993) at 59; I J Hardingham, M A Neave and H A J Ford,
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand.
(2nd ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1989) at 432-440.
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Intestacy Rules
(Report 42, 1993) at 59.
Wills, Probate and Administration (Amendment) Act 1977
Succession Acts Amendment Act 1968
Administration Act Amendment Act 1976
(WA) s 3, repealing
Administration Act 1903
which imported hotchpot into the law of Western Australia:
In re Cornwall
The abolition of hotchpot was recommended by the Law Reform
Commission of Western Australian: Law Reform Commission of Western
Report on Distribution on Intestacy
(Project No 34,
) at para 36-39.
Law Reform (Succession) Act 1995
. I J Hardingham, M A Neave and H A J Ford,
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand.
(2nd ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1989) at 440.
. See I J Hardingham, M A Neave and H A J Ford,
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand.
(2nd ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1989) at 440.
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
, Legislative Assembly, 25 October 1977, Wills, Probate and Administration (Amendment) Bill, Second Reading at 8998.
Administration and Probate Act 1958
s 52(1)(f)(i).
Administration and Probate Act 1935
s 46(1)(c).
. The Northern Territory adds the old provisions - “to
or for the benefit of his or her child, or settled any money or
for the benefit of his or her child, by way of advancement or
on marriage of the child”:
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 68(3)(b).
Administration and Probate Act 1919
s 72K(1)(a)
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 68(3).
Administration and Probate Act 1919
s 72K(1)(d)
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 68(3)(d).
Administration and Probate Act 1919
s 72K(1)(a)
Administration and Probate Act 1929
s 49BA(1)(a)
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 68(3)(a).
. Law Reform Commission of Tasmania,
Report on Succession Rights on Intestacy
(Report 43, 1985) at 18.
Administration and Probate Act 1919
s 72K(1)(a).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
. Law Reform Commission of Tasmania,
Report on Succession Rights on Intestacy
(Report 43, 1985) at 17.
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 68(4);
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1919
. I J Hardingham, M A Neave and H A J Ford,
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand
(2nd ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1989) at 440.
. G L Certoma,
The Law of Succession in New South Wales
(3rd ed, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1997) at 40.
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Intestacy Rules
(Report 42, 1993) at 60.
. England and Wales, Law Commission,
Family Law: Distribution on Intestacy
(Report 187, 1989) at 12.
. I J Hardingham, M A Neave and H A J Ford,
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand
(2nd ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1989) at 441.
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Intestacy Rules
(Report 42, 1993) at 60.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1919
s 72K(1)(b)
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 70(3) and (4); and
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 79(2).
Administration and Probate Act 1935
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 70(3) and (4); and
Administration Act 1969
Administration and Probate Act 1929
s 49D(3)(b)
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 70(3) and (4); and
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 79(2)(b).
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 70(3) and (4).
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 70(6).
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration and Probate Act 1958
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Intestacy Rules
(Report 42, 1993) at 53.
. England and Wales, Law Commission,
Family Law: Distribution on Intestacy
(Report 187, 1989) at 14.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 26 (2005) - Uniform Succession Laws: Intestacy
9. Indigenous people
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Indigenous kinship
Current provisions
A way forward?
9.1 There are many different types of Indigenous communities in
Australia: rural, urban, traditional and historical communities,
including groups that have gathered together from different regions.
Indigenous people may continue to live traditional lifestyles,
may be involved in various ways and to various extents in
non-Indigenous lifestyles. This makes it difficult to formulate
general scheme that would be inclusive of all the diversity in
Indigenous communities throughout Australia.
INDIGENOUS KINSHIP
9.2 In general in Australia, the distribution of property on
intestacy is based on a relatively narrow range of family relationships
that are reflective of English, or at least Western, law and society.
It may, therefore, be inappropriate to apply the current general
intestacy rules to members of Indigenous communities, who may have a
broader concept of family relationships.
For example, the
Australian Law Reform Commission has stated that, unless the particular
nature of Aboriginal family relationships
was recognised in the
intestacy provisions, the application of the general principles, with
their fixed lists of next of kin, would
remain inappropriate. The
Commission noted that, “[t]he Aboriginal kinship system may
include persons who are not blood relations
at all (as distinct from
classificatory relations), and yet there may be important obligations
and rights existing between the deceased
and such a person”.
Other commentators have observed:
It is very important to note that Aboriginal kinship structures are
very different from Western kinship structures and that customary
obligations flow from those kinship relationships. This applies whether
or not the Aboriginal people seem to have traditional
lifestyles.
9.3 It has also been noted that “the extreme emphasis on lineal,
bloodline relationships in the common law contrast with the
of collateral, adopted and maritally linked relatives in Aboriginal
customary law”.
Examples of such differences include:
willingness to recognise kinship without blood relationship, including adoption and by marriage;
equivalence of some relatives (eg all sisters’ sons may
be regarded as brothers, while opposite-sex siblings may be regarded
non-lineal view of time - kin names like ‘father’
may be repeated at what non-Aborigines would regard as different
generational
levels. This reflects a more circular view of time with
regards to kinship.
9.4 The possibility has been raised that the relationships specified in
the legislation could, for the purposes of that legislation,
interpreted more broadly than they would be at common law. As Justice
McPherson said:
I am conscious of the fact that the designation of Aboriginal
relationships such as mother, brother, sister and so on, may not
necessarily
be the same as those relationships in western society,
which is evidently the criterion used as the basis for distribution on
Succession Act
. It is possible (I say no more) that
for succession purposes relationships are capable in some circumstances
of being understood
in ways that are broader than would ordinarily be
the case at common law…
CURRENT PROVISIONS
9.5 Only a few jurisdictions make provision for Indigenous persons
in relation to intestacy. Broadly, these provisions fall into two
categories. First, those that recognise Indigenous customary marriages
for the purpose of distribution according to the general intestacy
rules. Secondly, those that provide for a separate or additional
distribution regime for Indigenous people in certain circumstances.
Recognition of customary marriage
Community Services (Aborigines) Act 1984
Community Services (Torres Strait) Act 1984
s 6(1), s 6(4), s 67A
Aboriginal Affairs Planning Authority Act 1972
Aboriginal Affairs Planning Authority Act
Regulations 1972
9.6 At its most basic level, the recognition of Indigenous
customary marriages for the purposes of intestacy is simply a means of
bringing Indigenous persons into the general scheme for distribution on
intestacy by including customary marriage in the definition
9.7 In the Northern Territory and Western Australia, Aboriginal
customary marriages are recognised in intestacy. Such recognition
only have effect in intestacy if the couple have not entered into a
valid marriage under the
Marriage Act 1961
(Cth). This may not
be a great obstacle, as the Australian Law Reform Commission recorded
that it had been estimated that at least
ninety per cent of marriages
between “traditional Aborigines” were not made according to
the requirements of the Commonwealth
Older Aboriginal Persons may, however, be caught by this restriction as “a
Marriage Act
is one of the few things that Aborigines living on reserves run by
missions did have performed in a non-Aboriginal manner”.
Western Australia recognises some Aboriginal marriages for the purposes
of intestacy, holding that a spouse may be ascertained and
when the intestate is survived by a person of the opposite sex who,
“according to the social structure of the tribe
to which[s]he
belonged” is the spouse of the deceased. The intestate’s
children and parents may also be determined in
the same manner.
9.8 A provision recognising Indigenous customary marriages was
included in proposed intestacy provisions published by the Queensland
Law Reform Commission in 1992:
Where a relationship between two persons is recognised by
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Island customary law that relationship is
for the purposes of this Part unless recognition of the
relationship would confer rights which would not be conferred by
However, this provision was not included in the Commission’s final report.
9.9 While Aboriginal intestates may be survived by a spouse and
a de facto partner, the situation has also been raised of the deceased
having been in a polygamous customary marriage with more than one
spouse. Despite the decline of polygamy, especially in urban Aboriginal
communities, Dr Sutton observed that, “…it is not uncommon
for second and third marriages to be concealed from authorities
those authorities disapprove of polygyny…At present one must
assume that polygyny will be around for an indefinite future,
it continues to decline in gross terms.”
albeit declining, presence of polygamous customary marriage between
Aboriginal people was identified by the Australian Law Reform
Commission in its report into the recognition of Aboriginal customary
9.10 The Northern Territory specifically provides for Aboriginal
people leaving more than one spouse. The spouse’s entitlement,
including the value of personal chattels, will be divided equally
amongst the spouses.
This position is similar to the
general provisions in South Australia and New Zealand, which divide the
spouse’s entitlement
equally between the spouse and the de facto
regardless of the length of their relationships or their living
arrangements.
The right of a spouse or de facto to appropriate the matrimonial home, however, does not exist in the Northern Territory.
The relevance of de facto relationships provisions
9.11 Even where a marriage between two Aboriginal people is not
recognised under Commonwealth law, the requirements of a de facto
relationship may have been satisfied. In such a case the cohabitation,
rather than the marriage, is recognised.
Distribution can then be made according to the general provisions.
What provision, if any, should be made to recognise Indigenous customary marriages for purposes of intestacy?
Additional/separate distribution regimes
Community Services (Aborigines) Act 1984
Community Services (Torres Strait) Act 1984
s 6(1), s 6(4), s 71-71F
Aboriginal Affairs Planning Authority Act 1972
Aboriginal Affairs Planning Authority Act
Regulations 1972
Te Ture Whenua Maori Act 1993
9.12 Only three Australian jurisdictions make additional or
separate provisions for the distribution of estates of intestate
persons. The provisions in two of these jurisdictions appear
to draw on attitudes and approaches that are more appropriate to the
old Aboriginal protection systems. One commentator has noted that the
effect of the Western Australian and Queensland regimes has
remove control over intestate estates from Indigenous next of kin (as
administrators) and give control to government officials.
Such a removal of control from Indigenous people in the management of their families’ affairs is inappropriate.
Western Australia
9.13 In Western Australia, the property of all people of
Aboriginal descent who die intestate vests in the Public Trustee to be
distributed
according to the State’s intestacy rules. If those
entitled under the general regime cannot be found, distribution is to
made by reference to the Regulations, which, according to the Act,
should, to the extent that it is practicable, “provide for
distribution of the estate in accordance with the Aboriginal customary
law as it applied to the deceased at the time of his death”.
However, the current provisions recognising customary law really only
acknowledge “tribal marriage” and then provide
limited range of relatives who are entitled than even the regime that
applies to the general community allows.
There is no
consideration of a category of customary next of kin any wider than the
spouse, children and parents of the intestate.
9.14 If no valid claim is made within two years of the
intestate’s death provision is made for beneficial distribution
person with a moral claim, or for the estate to be held in trust
by the Aboriginal Affairs Planning Authority to be “used for
benefit of persons of Aboriginal descent”.
defines an Aboriginal person as “a person of Aboriginal descent
only if he is also of the full blood descended from
the original
inhabitants of Australia or more than one fourth of the full
This definition does not accord with the
generally accepted definitions of Aboriginality contained in other
legislation and given
the small size of the estates of many Aboriginal
intestates, such a requirement may prove relatively costly as the blood
of each claimant must be determined.
The Aboriginal person must also not have been married under the
Marriage Act 1961
which must further limit the application of the provisions.
9.15 Queensland has established separate regimes upon intestacy
for both Aboriginal people and Torres Strait Islanders. If an
or Torres Strait Islander dies intestate and it proves
“impracticable to ascertain the person or persons entitled in law
succeed to the estate … or any part of it” the chief
executive of the Aboriginal and Islander Affairs Corporation may
determine “which person or persons shall be entitled to so
succeed or whether any person is so entitled”.
distribution is entirely at the chief executive’s discretion and,
although he or she may have reference to Indigenous
customary law, the
distribution is not required to accord with any customary practices.
9.16 If the chief executive is unable to determine that any
person is entitled to succeed to the estate or a part of the estate,
property shall “vest in the chief executive who shall apply
the moneys or the proceeds of the sale of any property (less the
expenses (if any) of such sale) for the benefit of
[Aborigines/Islanders] generally” under the schemes whereby the
chief executive
may grant aid to Indigenous persons who apply for it on
such terms as the chief executive may think fit.
Northern Territory
9.17 The Northern Territory provides for a separate regime for
distribution of the intestate estate of an Indigenous person, but only
in relation to an intestate Indigenous person who “has not
entered into a marriage that is a valid marriage under the
Marriage Act 1961
of the Commonwealth”.
This requirement may prove to be too limiting in many cases, especially where marriage under the
Marriage Act 1961
may be entirely incidental to other relationships of kinship of which some individuals may be a part.
9.18 A person who claims to be entitled to take an interest in
an intestate Aboriginal Person’s estate under the customs and
traditions of the community or group to which the Aboriginal intestate
belonged or a professional personal representative (like the
Trustee) may apply to the Court for an order for distribution of the
estate. Such an application must be accompanied by a
distribution of the intestate estate prepared in accordance with the
traditions of the community or group to which the Aboriginal
9.19 An example of the application of such a plan can be found in a recent judgment of the Northern Territory Supreme Court:
[3] The estate comprises cash only in the hands of the Public Trustee amounting to approximately $28,700.
[4] The affidavit evidence of each of three deponents, senior
members of clan groups making out the Jawoyn people, asserts that she
or he is qualified and authorised by Jawoyn tradition to say who is
entitled to take an interest in the estate under the customs
traditions of the Jawoyn. That evidence is consistent in showing that
the intestate was the last member of another clan, that
“grown up” by the late Gerry Mumbin who has three living
children, Kevin, Kathleen and Lisa. Those children, in
classificatory
terms, were the “wives” and “brother-in-law” of
the intestate. As the deceased had no children,
the Mumbin siblings
were his close family. The evidence also shows that Kevin, Kathleen and
Lisa Mumbin succeeded to the non Aboriginal
estate of the intestate in
accordance with the customs and traditions of the Jawoyn and are
entitled in equal shares. A letter to
the Public Trustee from the
Executive Director of the Jawoyn Association confirms that evidence.
[6] The plan of distribution proposes that the estate be
divided into three parts (I assume equal parts) and that one of each
be distributed to Kevin, Kathleen and Lisa Mumbin.
[7] I am satisfied that in all the circumstances it would be
just to order that the estate be distributed in accordance with the
and order accordingly.
9.20 An application must be made within six months after administration
of the intestate estate has been granted. This time may,
however, be
extended by the Court whether or not the six months has expired and
subject to whatever, if any, conditions the Court
thinks fit. No
application will be allowed after the intestate estate has been
lawfully and fully distributed.
9.21 The Court may order that the intestate estate (or in part
thereof) be distributed in a specified manner. In making the order
distribution the Court must take into account the traditions of the
community or group to which the intestate belonged and the
accompanied the application. In any event, the Court will not make any
order for distribution “unless it is satisfied
that to make the
order would, in all the circumstances, be just”.
9.22 The Court may distribute any or all of the intestate
Aboriginal person’s estate, including that which has been
distributed
by the administrator before the administrator has had
notice of an above application. Where the administrator has made a
distribution,
before or after receiving notice of an application, the
Court will not disturb such a distribution as long as it was
for the purposes of providing for the maintenance,
education or advancement in life of a person who was totally or
partially dependent
on the intestate Aboriginal [person] immediately
before his or her death”.
9.23 As with the general provisions, the debts and liabilities
of the estate, the funeral and testamentary expenses, the costs and
expenses of administering the estate and the estate duties, succession
duties and other duties and fees payable in relation to the
not included in the intestate estate of an intestate Aboriginal person.
New Zealand
9.24 New Zealand has established a scheme of entitlement in
relation to Maori freehold land on intestacy. The scheme will apply
the owner of any beneficial interest in Maori freehold land dies
intestate. Distribution is made per stirpes and will go firstly
of the intestate’s issue who survive him or her. If there are
none, then the land will go to the intestate’s siblings
issue of these siblings, if a sibling has not survived the intestate,
but has left issue. Should no such relatives be found
the chain of
title shall be followed and priority granted to “the issue,
living at the deceased’s death, of the person
nearest in the
chain of title to the deceased who has issue living at the
deceased’s death.”
9.25 Should a surviving spouse be left by the intestate, that
spouse is entitled to a life interest, or until remarriage, in the
intestate’s
interest in the land unless a separation order or
separation agreement is in force in respect of the marriage between the
spouse and the intestate. The spouse is entitled to surrender
his or her entitlement.
9.26 Aside from the scheme of entitlement to Maori freehold land
all other property devolves according to the general scheme of
distribution
on intestacy.
A WAY FORWARD?
9.27 Despite the distinctive and important role that kinship and
marriage plays in Aboriginal society, the Queensland Law Reform
Commission,
in 1993, recommended against the recognition of customary
Until extensive work has been done to bring knowledge of customary
law clearly into focus and widespread consultation has been initiated
and brought to fruition, the Commission is of the view that it could be
counter-productive, even misleading, to introduce legislation
present time purporting to affect customary law, or to recognise it, in
the narrow context of intestacy rules.
9.28 The model in operation in the Northern Territory may be an appropriate model. Prue Vines has usefully suggested that:
The first step in legislation should be to extend the kinship group
entitled on intestacy to one matching customary law patterns.
requirement not to have been in a
Marriage Act
marriage is
removed, the Northern Territory model is the best one on offer because
it allows for the recognition of different patterns
of customary law
amongst different groups.
9.29 The Northern Territory regime, in requiring that somebody must
claim to be entitled to a distribution under Indigenous customs
traditions, also allows the possibility that the intestate estates of
some Indigenous people can be distributed according to
the general
rules, which may be the most appropriate response in some circumstances.
Should the Northern Territory scheme for distribution on intestacy according to Indigenous customs and traditions be adopted?
If yes, does it require modification?
If no, should any separate scheme for distribution on intestacy be adopted for Indigenous people?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
. See R F Atherton and P Vines,
Succession: Families, Property and Death: Text and Cases
(2nd ed, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2003) at 32.
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws
(Report 31, 1986) Vol 1 at 227.
. R F Atherton and P Vines,
Succession: Families, Property and Death: Text and Cases
(2nd ed, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2003) at 33; P Vines, “Wills as shields and spears”
[2001] IndigLawB 80
(2001) 5(13)
Indigenous Law Bulletin
. P Vines, “Wills as shields and spears”
[2001] IndigLawB 80
(2001) 5(13)
Indigenous Law Bulletin
. P Vines, “Wills as shields and spears”
[2001] IndigLawB 80
(2001) 5(13)
Indigenous Law Bulletin
Jones v Public Trustee of Queensland
[2004] QCA 269
(2004) 209 ALR 106
at para 20 (McPherson JA).
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws
(Report 31, 1986) Vol 1 at 173.
. P Vines, “Wills as Shields and Spears”
[2001] IndigLawB 80
(2002) 5(13)
Indigenous Law Bulletin
Aboriginal Affairs Planning Authority Act
Regulations 1972
(WA) reg 9(1).
in Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Intestacy Rules
(Working Paper 37, 1992) at 31.
. See para 9.27 below.
. P Sutton, “Aboriginal Customary Marriage – Determination and Definition”
Aboriginal Law Bulletin
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws
(Report 31,1986) Vol 1 at 169.
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 67A.
. See para 3.69 above.
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws
(Report 31, 1986) Vol 1 at 175.
. P Vines, “Wills as shields and spears”
[2001] IndigLawB 80
(2001) 5(13)
Indigenous Law Bulletin
Aboriginal Affairs Planning Authority Act 1972
Aboriginal Affairs Planning Authority Act
Regulations 1972
(WA) reg 9.
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws
(Report 31, 1986) Vol 1 at 228; P Vines, “Wills as shields and spears”
[2001] IndigLawB 80
(2001) 5(13)
Indigenous Law Bulletin
Aboriginal Affairs Planning Authority Act 1972
Aboriginal Affairs Planning Authority Act 1972
. Australian Law Reform Commission,
The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws
(Report 31, 1986) Vol 1 at 229.
Aboriginal Affairs Planning Authority Act
Regulations 1972
(WA) reg 9.
Community Services (Aborigines) Act 1984
Community Services (Torres Strait) Act 1984
Community Services (Aborigines) Act 1984
Community Services (Torres Strait) Act 1984
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 71(1)(a).
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 71B.
Application by the Public Trustee for the Northern Territory
[2000] NTSC 52.
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 71C.
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 71E.
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 71F.
Administration and Probate Act 1969
(NT) s 71A.
Te Ture Whenua Maori Act 1993
(NZ) s 109(1).
Te Ture Whenua Maori Act 1993
(NZ) s 109(2)-(4).
Te Ture Whenua Maori Act 1993
(NZ) s 110(1).
. Queensland Law Reform Commission,
Intestacy Rules
(Report 42, 1993) at 13.
. P Vines, “Wills as shields and spears”
[2001] IndigLawB 80
(2001) 5(13)
Indigenous Law Bulletin
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 26 (2005) - Uniform Succession Laws: Intestacy
10. Miscellaneous provisions
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Survivorship and intestacy
Abolition of courtesy and right of dower
References to statutes of distribution, heirs and next of kin
SURVIVORSHIP AND INTESTACY
10.1 The question of survivorship, as it affects intestacy provisions, arises in two situations:
where the intestate and someone who may be entitled to take on
intestacy have both died (either in the same event or separately) but,
because of the circumstances of the deaths, the order in which they
died is uncertain; and
where a person who is otherwise entitled survives the
intestate but dies within a certain number of days (usually less than a
of the intestate.
The first situation will be dealt with in the National
Committee’s final report on the administration of estates of
persons, and will not be considered further in this Issues
Surviving the intestate by less than a month
s 46(2A)-(3)
10.2 Both South Australia and England provide that when a spouse
or partner does not survive the intestate by more than 28 days, the
estate will be distributed as if the spouse or partner had not survived
the intestate at all.
10.3 Queensland, on the other hand, extends its provisions to
cover all people entitled on intestacy, not just spouses or partners
and states that, if the person does not survive the intestate for a
period of 30 days, the estate will be dealt with as if the person
not survived the intestate.
10.4 The Law Commission of England and Wales used an example to justify such a provision:
a case involving a married couple with no children, who had both
died intestate in a car crash. The husband’s parents were
to proceed on the basis that it was not known which had
survived, on the findings of the inquest without having evidence of a
pathologist
filed in the probate proceedings. However the wife’s
parents were not prepared to do so and therefore the Registrar had to
call for expert evidence which increased the cost of probate without
altering the result. If there had been a survivorship clause
intestacy rules this would not have been necessary.
10.5 Provisions requiring that beneficiaries survive testators by 30
days are common in wills and were originally included in wills
an accumulation of death duties in the case of simultaneous or near
simultaneous deaths.
The National Committee has previously recommended that the law of wills
include a provision to the effect that beneficiaries under
a will must
survive the testator by 30 days unless a contrary intention appears in
There would appear to be no reason why such a provision ought not be included in the law relating to intestacy.
What provision, if any, should be made to deal with situations
where a person otherwise entitled on intestacy dies within a month
the intestate?
Should any provision be limited in application to surviving spouses or partners?
ABOLITION OF COURTESY AND RIGHT OF DOWER
Intestacy Act 1877
Conveyancing and Law of Property Act 1884
Dower Abolition Act 1880
Married Women’s Property Act 1884
Married Women’s Property Act 1952
s 45(1)(b),(c)
10.6 Estate by courtesy (or curtesy) and the right of dower both concern real property.
10.7 Estate by courtesy was a husband’s right to a life
estate in all of his wife’s land on her death. The right was only
exercisable if the wife’s title in the land was capable of being
disposed of by her through her will, if the wife had possession
land before her death, if she had not already disposed of the land and
if no child capable of inheriting the land had been
born to the
10.8 The right of dower was a wife’s right to a life
estate in a third of all her husband’s land (including that which
he had alienated) on his death. This right was, again only exercisable
if the husband’s title in the land was capable of being
of by him through his will and if the husband had possession of the
land before his death. Although the right could still
exercised if a child had been born to the marriage, it could not if the
dower had been “barred”.
10.9 All jurisdictions have abolished courtesy and the right of
dower. The majority have included the abolition in their current
relating to intestacy,
or at least administration of estates.
Others have, however, abolished dower and courtesy in other statutes.
There would appear to be no reason why a provision abolishing courtesy
and the right of dower should be included in any future legislative
provisions.
Should the abolition of courtesy and right of dower be retained in any future legislative provisions relating to intestacy?
REFERENCES TO STATUTES OF DISTRIBUTION, HEIRS AND NEXT OF KIN
10.10 Since the Statutes of Distribution have been replaced by
the current provisions relating to intestacy, some jurisdictions
that references made to any statutes of distribution in
instruments made
inter vivos
or in a will shall be construed as
references to the current intestacy rules; and references in such an
instrument or will to an
heir or heir at law or next of kin of a person
shall be construed, unless the context otherwise requires, as referring
to the persons
who would take beneficially on the intestacy of that
person under the current provisions.
10.11 Lee suggests that this is one of a number of construction provisions in the
Succession Act 1981
(Qld) “designed to remedy comparatively common problems arising from inappropriate use of terminology in wills”.
Is there a need to retain provisions for the construction of references to:
any statutes of distribution;
an heir or heir at law; or
next of kin?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 46(2A) and s 46(3).
Succession Act 1981
. England and Wales, Law Commission,
Family Law: Distribution on Intestacy
(Report 187, 1989) at 14.
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Succession Laws: The Law of Wills
(Report 85, 1998) at para 6.45.
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Succession Laws: The Law of Wills
(Report 85, 1998) at para 6.47.
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Administration and Probate Act 1969
Administration Act 1903
Administration of Estates Act 1925
(Eng) s 45(1)(c) and (d).
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Probate and Administration Act 1898
Intestacy Act 1877
(Qld) s 28;
Conveyancing and Law of Property Act 1884
Dower Abolition Act 1880
Married Women’s Property Act 1884
(Vic) s 25;
Married Women’s Property Act 1952
(NZ) s 4. On the effect of a repeal of a provision repealing the right of dower, see
Marshall v Smith
[1907] HCA 33
(1907) 4 CLR 1617
; and in Queensland, see
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
whereby a repeal of the Act will not revive the interests.
Succession Act 1981
Administration and Probate Act 1958
Administration Act 1969
(NZ) s 80(1) (but not including “heir” or “heir at law”); and
Administration of Estates Act 1925
s 50(1) (but not including “heir” or “heir at
law”). See the discussion on such provisions in Queensland
Reform Commission,
The Law Relating to Succession
(Report 22, 1978) at 24.
. W A Lee and A A Preece,
Lee’s Manual of Queensland Succession Law
(5th edition, LBC Information Services, 2001) at 173; see also 225 and 230.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 26 (2005) - Uniform Succession Laws: Intestacy
Table of cases
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
(2000) 26 Fam LR 317...5.16
Bird v Lockey
(1716) 2 Vern 743; 23 ER 1086......3.52
Blackborough v Davis
(1701) P Wms 41
24 ER 285...3.26
Cornwall, In re
(1910) 13 WAR 40......8.6
Full Board of the Guardianship and Administration Board, Re
(2003) 27 WAR 475......1.1
Goodman’s Trusts, In re
(1881) 17 ChD 266......6.7
Hughes, Estate of
(1985) 38 SASR 5......5.29
Jones v Public Trustee of Queensland
(2004) 209 ALR 106...9.4
K, Re the Estate of the Late
(1996) 5 Tas R 365......5.19
Laspitis v Laspitis
[2001] NSWSC 749......4.9
Leach (deceased), Re
[1985] 2 All ER 754......5.6
Marshall v Smith
(1907) 4 CLR 1617......10.9
Maxwell v Wettenhall
[1722] EngR 24
(1722) 2 P Wms 26
; 24 ER 628...3.52
Mentney v Petty
(1722) Prec Ch 593 at 594;
at 266...2.3
Milanovic, Re
[1973] Qd R 205......3.6
Mortensen v State of New South Wales
(NSW Court of Appeal, 40544/1990, 12 December 1991, unreported)......7.2
O’Malley (dec’d), Re
[1981] Qd R 202......5.6
Public Trustee for the Northern Territory, Application by
[2000] NTSC 52...9.19
Rex v Skinner
[1972] 1 NSWLR 307......2.19
Robinson v Collins
[1975] 1 All ER 321......4.22,4.23
Scott (deceased), Re; Widdows v Friends of the Clergy Corporation
(1975) 1 WLR 1260......2.17
Simmons (deceased), In the Estate of
(1990) 56 SASR 1...2.19
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 26 (2005) - Uniform Succession Laws: Intestacy
Table of legislation
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
Commonwealth
Family Law Act 1975
s 60H...5.13
-s 69T...5.3
Marriage Act 1961...3.2,9.7,9.14,9.17,9.28
Part 5A...3.2
Social Security Act 1991
Div 2...2.21
s 9(4)...2.21
New South Wales
Adoption Act 2000
Conveyancing Act 1919...4.43
s 153(1)(b)...1.34
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979...4.43
Married Persons (Equality of Status) Act 1996
s 4(1)...3.19
Property (Relationships) Act 1984
s 4(1)...3.12
s 4(2)...3.13
Status of Children Act 1996
s 5(1)...5.2
s 9(2)...5.17
-s 13...5.3
s 14(1)(a)...5.13
Strata Schemes (Freehold Development) Act 1973...4.43
Strata Schemes (Leasehold Development) Act 1986...4.43
Valuers Act 2003...4.21
Wills, Probate and Administration (Amendment) Act 1977...8.6
Probate and Administration Act 1898
s 32G...3.3
s 32G(1)...3.74
s 52...10.9
s 61A(2)...3.37-3.39,3.44,3.45,
s 61B(1)...1.21,1.27
s 61B(2)...3.22
s 61B(3)(a)...3.36
s 61B(3)(b)...3.45
s 61B(3)(c)...3.58
s 61B(3A)...3.65
s 61B(3A)(a)...3.66
s 61B(3A)(b)...3.68
s 61B(3B)...3.15
s 61B(5)...5.35
s 61B(6)(a) and (b)...6.5,6.11
s 61B(6)(d) and (e)...6.5,6.16
s 61B(7)...7.1
s 61B(8)...7.6
s 61B(9)...3.19
s 61B(10)...3.44
s 61B(12)...3.52
s 61B(13)...4.13
s 61C(1)...5.37
s 61C(1)(b)...5.38
s 61C(2)...5.39
s 61C(3)...6.11,6.16,6.27
s 61D(1)...4.8,4.11
s 61E(1)...4.21
s 61E(3)...4.22
s 61E(3)(a)...4.20
s 61F(1)...1.21
s 61F(3)...1.23
s 84A...3.52
Sch 4 cl 2(1)...4.25,4.29
Sch 4 cl 2(2)...4.33
Sch 4 cl 2(3)...4.18
Sch 4 cl 3(1)...4.43
Sch 4 cl 3(1)(b)...4.28
Sch 4 cl 3(2)...4.41
Sch 4 cl 3(3)...4.35
Sch 4 cl 3(4)...4.37
Sch 4 cl 4...4.45
Sch 4 cl 5...4.48
Sch 4 cl 6...4.31
Sch 4 cl 7(2)...4.39
Probate and Administration Regulation 2003
cl 5(2)...3.45
cl 6(2)...3.52
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
s 20...10.9
s 32DA(2)...3.13
s 32DA(5)(a)...3.12
Adoption of Children Act 1964
s 28(1)...5.2
Community Services (Aborigines) Act 1984
s 169...7.5
s 173(1)...9.15
s 173(4)...7.5
Community Services (Torres Strait) Act 1984
s 179...7.5
s 183(1)...9.15
s 183(4)...7.5
Intestacy Act 1877
s 28...10.9
Property Law Act 1974
s 15...3.19
s 20(3)(a)...7.1
Status of Children Act 1978
s 3(1)...5.2
s 15(2)...5.13
s 18A...5.3
s 18A(2)...5.17
s 18B-s 18E...5.3
s 40 and s 40A...5.10
Succession Act 1867
s 34(2)...1.24
Succession Act 1981
Part 5...1.14
s 5AA...3.3
s 5AA(1)(b)...3.12
s 34(1)...1.26
s 34(2)...6.4
s 34A...3.37
s 34A(1)...3.37
s 34A(2)...3.39
s 34A(3)(b)...3.44
and (2)...4.5
s 34B(3)...4.7
s 34B(4)...4.20
s 35(2)...10.2
s 36...3.61
s 36(1)(a)...3.62
s 36(1)(b)...3.63
s 36(1)(c)...3.64
s 37(1)(a)...6.9
s 37(1)(c)...6.15
s 37(2)(a)...6.9
s 37(2)(b)...6.15
s 38...1.22
s 39...10.10
s 39A(1)(a)...4.3
s 39A(1)(b)...4.8
s 39A(2)...4.11
s 39A(3)...4.26
s 39A(3)(b)...4.27
s 39A(4)...4.29
s 39A(5)...4.18
s 39A(7)...4.33
s 39B...4.41
s 39C(4)...4.12
s 39C(5)...4.39
s 39D(3)...4.35
s 39D(4)...4.36
s 52(1)(d)...1.22
s 52(1)(e)...3.52
s 52(1A)...3.52
It 1(1)...3.22
It 2...3.45
It 2(1)(a)...3.36,3.45
It 2(1)(b)(ii)...3.57
It 2(2)(a)...3.36,3.45
It 2(2)(b)(ii)...3.57
It 2...5.35
Succession Acts Amendment Act 1968...8.6
Succession Amendment Act 1997...5.32
Trustee Companies Act 1968
s 29(1)...2.16
Valuation of Land Act 1944
Valuers Registration Act 1992...4.21
South Australia
Administration and Probate Act 1919
s 46(3)...10.9
s 72B(1)...1.11
,3.36,3.37,
s 72B(2)...6.4
s 72C(1)...1.14
s 72C(2)...1.35
s 72E...10.2
s 72F...1.29
s 72F(b)...3.43
s 72G(a)...3.22
s 72G(b)...3.58
s 72G(b)(i)(B)...3.45
s 72G(e)...7.1
s 72H(1)...3.36
s 72H(2)...3.69
s 72H(3)...3.72
s 72J(a)...5.35
s 72J(b)...6.11
s 72J(b)(iv)...6.11
s 72J(d)...6.16
s 72J(d)(iv)...5.29
s 72K(1)...8.22
s 72K(1)(a)...8.10
s 72K(1)(b)...8.19
s 72K(1)(d)...8.10
s 72K(2)...8.14
s 72L...4.11
s 72L(1)...4.3
s 72L(2)...4.26
s 72L(2)(b)...4.27
s 72L(3)...4.25
s 72L(4)...4.12
s 72L(5)...4.39
s 72M...4.38
Adoption Act 1988
Family Relationships Act 1975
s 6(1)...5.2
s 10d...5.3
s 11...3.76
s 11(1)...3.14
s 11(2)...3.17
Law of Property Act 1936
s 93...3.19
Administration and Probate Act 1935
s 3(1)...1.11
s 33...1.37
s 33(4)...1.30
s 44...1.14
s 44(2)(b)...3.22
s 44(3)...3.45
s 44(3)(a)...3.58
s 44(3A)...3.14
s 44(3A)(a)...3.66
s 44(3A)(b)...3.68
s 44(3B)...3.14
s 44(4)...8.19
s 44(6)...5.35
s 44(7)...6.21
s 44(7)(a)...6.4
s 44(7)(c)...6.4
s 44(8)...3.19
s 44(9)...3.3
s 45(2)...7.6
s 46(1)...5.37
s 46(1)(a)...2.9
s 46(1)(b)...2.10
s 46(1)(c)...8.9
s 46(1)(d)...2.15
s 46(3)...2.8
,6.11,6.16,6.27
s 47(a)...1.19
s 47(b)...1.23
Adoption Act 1988
Conveyancing and Law of Property Act 1884
s 89...10.9
Married Women’s Property Act 1935
s 3(1)...3.19
Relationships Act 2003
s 4(1)...3.12
Status of Children Act 1974
Part 3...5.3
s 3(1)...5.2
s 5(2)(b)...5.17
-s 8C...5.3
s 10C(1)...5.13
Testator’s Family Maintenance Act 1912
s 2(1) and s 3A...5.10
Administration and Probate Act 1958
s 3(1)...3.3
,3.12,3.14,3.16,3.68
s 3(3)...3.13
s 5(1)...1.11
s 37A(1)...4.8
s 37A(2)...4.11
,4.12,4.20,4.22
s 37A(3)...4.26
s 37A(4)...4.27
s 37A(5)...4.25
s 37A(6)...4.19
s 37A(7)...4.12
s 37A(9)(a)...4.39
s 37A(9)(b)...4.31
and (11)...4.6,4.47
s 38...1.30
s 51(1)...3.22
s 51(2)...3.45
s 51(2)(a)...3.36
s 51(2)(c)(ii)...3.52
s 51(2)(c)(iii)...3.58
s 51A(1)...3.65
,3.66,3.70,3.71
s 52...1.19
-(ea)...5.35
s 52(1)(f)...6.9
,6.10,6.18,6.20
s 52(1)(f)(i)...8.9
s 52(1)(f)(iii)...6.20
s 52(1)(f)(vi)...5.30
s 52(1)(f)(vii)...6.4
s 52(1)(f)(viii)...3.19
s 53(a)...1.19
s 53(b)...1.23
s 54...2.12
s 56...10.10
s 58(3)...7.6
Adoption Act 1984
s 53(1)...5.2
Dower Abolition Act 1880 (Vic)...10.9
Infertility Treatment Act 1995
s 8 and s 12...5.23
Marriage Act 1958
s 156(1)(a)...3.19
s 157...3.19
Married Women’s Property Act 1884
s 25...10.9
Penalty Interest Rates Act 1983
Property Law Act 1958
s 275(2)...3.13
Status of Children Act 1974
Part 2...5.3
s 7(1)(b)...5.5
s 10C(2)...5.13
Western Australia
Aboriginal Affairs Planning Authority Act 1972
s 33...9.14
s 35(2)...9.13
s 35(3)...9.14
Aboriginal Affairs Planning Authority Act
Regulations 1972
reg 9...9.13,9.14
reg 9(1)...9.7
Administration Act 1903
s 10...1.36
s 10(1)...1.27
s 12A...5.2
s 12A(2)...5.5
s 12B...6.4
s 13(1)...1.18
s 13(2)...1.21
Table It 1...3.24,3.36
Table It 2...3.45
Table It 2(b)...3.45,3.58
Table It 3...3.24
Table It 3(b)...3.45
Table It 4...3.23
Table It 6 and It 7...5.35
Table It 8...6.9
Table It 10...6.15
Table It 11...7.1
s 14(2)(a)...3.36
s 14(3a)...6.9
s 14(4)...3.52
s 15...3.12
s 15(1)...3.14
s 15(2)...3.70
s 15(2)(a)...3.70
s 15(3)...3.65
s 15(4)...3.74
s 16...10.9
s 17...2.12
Sch 4 cl 1(1)...4.11,4.12
Sch 4 cl 1(1)(b)...4.3,4.5,4.8
Sch 4 cl 1(2)...4.42
Sch 4 cl 1(4)...4.6,4.46
Sch 4 cl 2...4.41
Sch 4 cl 3...4.28
Sch 4 cl 4(1)...4.25,4.29
Sch 4 cl 4(2)...4.33
Sch 4 cl 4(3)...4.18
Sch 4 cl 5...4.20,4.21
Sch 4 cl 6(2)...4.35
Sch 4 cl 7(1)...4.39
Sch 4 cl 7(2)...4.12
Sch 4 cl 8(1)...4.32
Sch 4 cl 8(2)...4.31
Administration Act
Amendment Act 1976
Adoption Act 1994
Artificial Conception Act 1985
s 6A...5.14
Escheat (Procedure) Act 1940
Family Court Act 1997
Interpretation Act 1984
s 13A(1)...3.77
s 13A(2)...3.13
s 13A(3)(a)...3.12
s 13A(3)(b)...3.77
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1941
Australian Capital Territory
Administration and Probate Act 1929
s 5(1)...1.28
s 41...1.37
s 44(1)...1.11
,3.3,3.12,3.14,3.16,3.36-3.38,3.68
s 44(2)(a)...3.19
s 44(2)(b)...6.4
s 45...1.14
s 45(1)(a)...3.70
s 45(1)(b)...3.65
s 45A(1)(a)...3.70
s 45A(1)(b)...3.66
s 46(1)...2.8
s 46(2)...2.9
s 46(3)...2.10
s 48...10.9
s 49(2)...3.43
s 49A...3.36
s 49BA(1)...8.10
s 49BA(1)(a)...8.11
s 49BA(2)...8.14
s 49BA(4)...8.12
s 49C(1)(a)...6.11
s 49C(1)(c)...6.16
s 49CA...7.3
s 49D(1)...8.20
s 49D(3)...8.19
s 49D(3)(b)...8.20
s 49F...4.6
s 49G...4.11
s 49G(1)...4.3
and (3)...4.28
s 49G(4)...4.25
s 49G(5)...4.33
s 49G(6)...4.18
s 49H...4.18
s 49J...4.42
s 49K...4.41
s 49L(1)...4.35
and (4)...4.36
s 49M...4.39
s 49N(1)...4.32
s 49N(2)...4.31
s 50...1.37
It 1...3.22
It 2(2)(a)...3.45
It 2(2)(b)...3.52
It 2(2)(c)...3.57
It 2...5.35
Adoption Act 1993
Family Provision Act 1969
s 11...5.13
Legislation Act 2001
s 169(2)...3.12
Married Persons’ Property Act 1986
s 3(1)...3.19
Parentage Act 2004
-s 11...5.3
s 11(4)...5.14
s 38(2)...5.2
Northern Territory
Administration and Probate Act 1969
s 6(1)...1.28
s 61(1)...1.11,3.36-3.38
s 61(2)(a)...3.19
s 61(2)(b)...6.4
s 62...1.18,1.28
s 63(1)...2.8
s 63(2)...2.9
s 63(3)...2.10
s 65...10.9
s 66(1)...7.1
s 66(2)...3.24,3.43
s 67(1)...3.24,3.36
s 67(2)...3.24,3.36
s 67A...9.10
s 68(3)...8.10
s 68(3)(a)...8.11
s 68(3)(b) and (d)...8.10
s 68(4)...8.14
s 69(1)(a)...6.11
s 69(1)(c)...6.16
s 69(2)...6.11,6.16
s 70(3) and (4)...8.19,8.20
s 70(6)...8.21
s 71(1)(a)...9.17
s 71A...9.23
s 71B...9.18
s 71C...9.20
s 71E...9.21
s 71F...9.22
s 72(1)...4.5
s 73(1)...4.3,4.8,4.11,4.14
s 73(2)...4.28
s 73(4)...4.25,4.29
s 73(5)...4.33
s 73(6)...4.18
s 74...4.18,4.20
s 75...4.42
s 76...4.41
s 77(1)...4.35
s 77(2)...4.37
s 77(3) and (4)...4.36
s 78...4.39
s 79(1)...4.32
s 79(2)...4.31
s 80...1.36
Sch 6 Pt 1 It 2...3.45
Sch 6 Pt 1 It 2(1)...3.45
Sch 6 Pt 1 It 2(1)(b)(ii)...3.57
Sch 6 Pt 1 It 3...3.23,3.45
Sch 6 Pt 1 It 3(1)...3.45
Sch 6 Pt 2...3.12,3.14
Sch 6 Pt 3...3.12,3.73
Sch 6 Pt 3 It 1...3.68
Sch 6 Pt 3 It 1(a)...3.65,3.66
Sch 6 Pt 4 It 2...5.35
Sch 6 Pt 4 It 4...7.1
Adoption of Children Act 1994
De Facto Relationships Act 1991
s 3A...3.13
s 3A(1)...3.77
s 3A(3)(a)...3.12
s 3A(3)(c)...3.77
Family Provision Act 1970
Interpretation Act 1978
s 19A(1)...3.4
Law of Property Act
Married Persons (Equality of Status) Act 1989
s 3(1)...3.19
Status of Children Act 1978
Part 3A...5.3
s 4A(2)...5.17
s 5D...5.13
s 5DA...5.14
-s 9B...5.3
Trustee Act 1893
s 75...1.12
Valuation of Land Act 1963
New Zealand
Administration Act 1969
s 2(1)...1.11,3.12,3.36-3.38,3.44
s 27(1)...1.35
s 39(2)(b)...3.52
s 77 It 1...3.36,3.44,3.45,3.52
s 77 It 2...3.44,3.45,3.52,3.58
s 77 It 3...3.23,3.36,3.44,3.45,3.52
s 77 It 5...5.35
s 77 It 6...6.4,6.11
s 77 It 7...6.4,6.13,6.16
s 77 It 8...7.1,7.6
s 77C...3.69,3.74
s 78...1.20
s 78(1)...2.8
s 78(1)(a)...2.95.37,5.38,5.39
s 78(1)(b)...2.10
s 78(1)(c)...2.15
s 78(2)...2.9
s 78(3)...6.11,6.16,6.27
s 79...1.20,8.20
s 79(2)...8.19
s 79(2)-(4)...1.20
s 79(2)(b)...8.20
s 80(1)...10.10
s 81...2.20
Adoption Act 1955
s 16(2)...5.2
Family Protection Act 1955
Married Women’s Property Act 1952
Property (Relationships) Act 1976
s 2D(1)...3.12
s 2D(2)...3.13
Status of Children Act 1969
s 3(1)...5.2
s 5(1)...5.3,5.17
s 7(1)(a)...5.3
s 7(1)(b)...5.3,5.5
s 8(1)...5.3
s 8(3)...5.3
s 18...5.13
s 18(1)(c)...5.13
Te Ture Whenua Maori Act 1993
s 109(1)...9.24
s 109(2)-(4)...9.25
s 110(1)...9.26
United Kingdom
22 & 23 Charles II c 10 (Statute of Distributions of 1670)...3.57,6.1
s 5-7...2.1
1 James II c 17
11 George IV & 1 William IV c 40 (Executors Act of 1830)...1.24
3 & 4 William IV c 106 (Inheritance Act of 1833)
Administration of Estates Act 1925
s 33(4)...1.30
s 41...1.36
s 41(3)...4.18,4.20,4.21
s 45(1)(c)...10.9
s 45(1)(d)...7.1,10.9
s 46(1)(i) Table It 1...3.23
s 46(1)(i) Table It 2...3.36,3.45,3.52
s 46(1)(i) Table It 3...3.24,3.45,3.52
s 46(1)(iii) and (iv)...5.35
s 46(1)(v)...6.5,6.11,6.16
s 46(1)(vi)...7.1,7.6
s 46(2A)...10.2
s 46(3)...10.2
s 47...2.8,2.9
s 47(1)(i)...5.37-5.39
s 47(1)(ii)...2.10
s 47(1)(iv)...2.15
s 47(3)...6.11,6.16,6.27
s 49(1)...1.21
s 49(1)(b)...1.23
s 50(1)...10.10
s 55(1)...1.11
s 55(1)(x)...3.36-3.38
s 55(2)...5.17
Adoption Act 1976
Family Law Reform Act 1987
s 1(1)...5.2
Human Fertilisation and Embryology (Deceased Fathers) Act 2003
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990
s 28(2)(b)...5.13
Intestates’ Estates Act 1952
Sch 2 para 1...4.12
Sch 2 para 1(1)...4.3,4.8,4.11
Sch 2 para 1(2)...4.42
Sch 2 para 2...4.41
Sch 2 para 3(1)(a)...4.28
Sch 2 para 3(1)(c)...4.25,4.29
Sch 2 para 3(2)...4.18,4.33
Sch 2 para 4(1)...4.35
Sch 2 para 4(4) and (5)...4.36
Sch 2 para 5(1)...4.39
Sch 2 para 5(2)...4.12
Sch 2 para 6(1)...4.32
Sch 2 para 6(2)...4.31
Sch 2 para 7(1)...4.6,4.46
Law of Property Act 1925
s 37...3.19
Law Reform (Succession) Act 1995...8.6
National Committee for Uniform Succession Laws
Family Provision Bill 2004
cl 3(1)...3.18
cl 6(2)...5.10
cl 7...7.10
cl 7(1)...5.10
cl 11(2)(j)...7.10
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 26 (2005) - Uniform Succession Laws: Intestacy
Bibliography
Updates and background for this project (Digest)
ATHERTON, R F and VINES, P,
Succession: Families, Property and Death: Text and Cases
(2nd ed, LexisNexis Butterworths, Australia, 2003)
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws
(Report 31, 1986)
BLACKSTONE, W,
Commentaries on the Laws of England
(9th ed, 1783)
CERTOMA, G L,
The Law of Succession in New South Wales
(3rd ed, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1997)
CERTOMA, G L, “Intestacy in New South Wales: The 1977 Statutory Amendments” (1979) 53
Australian Law Journal
CLARK, D, “En ventre sa frigidaire: Zygotes as children”
Alternative Law Journal
CRAGO, N, “The Rights of An Intestate’s Surviving Spouse to the Matrimonial Home” (2000) 29
Western Australian Law Review
ENGLAND and WALES, Law Commission,
Family Law: Distribution on Intestacy
(Report 187, 1989)
HARDINGHAM, I J, NEAVE, M A and FORD, H A J,
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand.
(2nd ed, Law Book Company, Sydney, 1989)
Administration of the Estates of Deceased Persons
(3rd ed, 1948)
LAW REFORM COMMISSION OF TASMANIA,
Report on Succession Rights on Intestacy
(Report 43, 1985)
LAW REFORM COMMISSION OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA,
Report on Distribution on Intestacy
(Project No 34, Part 1, 1973)
LAW REFORM COMMITTEE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
Relating to the Reform of the Law on Intestacy and Wills
(Report 28, 1974)
The Elements of Roman Law
(4th ed, Sweet and Maxwell, London, 1956)
LEE, W A and PREECE, A A,
Lee’s Manual of Queensland Succession Law
(5th edition, LBC Information Services, 2001)
LEE, W A, “Queensland Intestacy Rules 1968” (1970) 7
University of Queensland Law Journal
MACKIE, K, “Stepchildren and Succession” (1997) 16
University of Tasmania Law Review
MASON K and HANDLER, L G,
Wills Probate and Administration Service
(Butterworths, Looseleaf)
NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR UNIFORM SUCCESSION LAWS,
Family Provision: Supplementary Report to the Standing Committee of Attorneys General
(Queensland Law Reform Commission, Report 58, 2004)
NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR UNIFORM SUCCESSION LAWS,
Report to the Standing Committee of Attorneys General on Family Provision
(Queensland Law Reform Commission, Miscellaneous Paper 28, 1997)
NEW SOUTH WALES DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH,
Review of the
Human Tissue Act 1983
- Discussion Paper: Assisted Reproductive Technologies
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Artificial Conception: Human Artificial Insemination
(Report 49, 1986)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Uniform Succession Laws: Administration of Estates of Deceased Persons
(DP 42, 1999)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Uniform Succession Laws: Administration of Estates of Deceased Persons
(DP 42, 1999)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Uniform Succession Laws: The Law of Wills
(Report 85, 1998)
ONTARIO LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Human Artificial Reproduction and Related Matters
(Report, 1985)
QUEENSLAND LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Administration of Estates of Deceased Persons
(Discussion Paper, MP 37, 1999)
QUEENSLAND LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Intestacy Rules
(Report 42, 1993)
QUEENSLAND LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Intestacy Rules
(Working Paper 37, 1992)
QUEENSLAND LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
The Law Relating to Succession
(Report 22, 1978)
SUTTON, P, “Aboriginal Customary Marriage – Determination and Definition”
Aboriginal Law Bulletin
THOMAS, J A C,
Textbook of Roman Law
(North Holland Publishing Co, Amsterdam, 1976)
The Law of Executors and Administrators
(3rd ed, J Butterworth and Son, London, 1814)
UNITED KINGDOM, Department of Health and Social Security,
Report of the Committee of Inquiry into Human Fertilisation and Embryology
(Cmnd 9314, 1984)
VINES, P, “Wills as shields and spears”
[2001] IndigLawB 80
(2001) 5(13)
Indigenous Law Bulletin
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Table of legislation
Table of cases
Bibliography
Table of contents
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter