URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ACTCLRC/1997/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:28:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Peaceful assemblies [1997] ACTCLRC 12
Peaceful assemblies
Terms of Reference
Participants
Body of Report
Introduction and background
The Context of the Reference
The Current Law in the ACT
The Need for Legislative Reform
Recognising the Right of Assembly - Peaceful Assemblies Act
Other Recommendations
Annexure - Provisions Regulating Assemblies in the ACT
Bibliography
Transmission
Community Law Reform Committee of the Australian Capital
To the Honourable Gary Humphries, MLA,
Attorney-General for the Australian Capital Territory
Peaceful assemblies
Dear Attorney-General
This report examines the laws and practice operating in the Australian
Capital Territory relating to public assemblies.
The Committee makes this report pursuant to a reference to the Committee.
Mr Ken Crispin QC
Chairperson
Terms of Reference
I, TERENCE CONNOLLY, Attorney General of the Australian Capital Territory,
HAVING REGARD TO the need to strike a balance acceptable
to the contemporary
community between:
the right to freedom of assembly (Article 21 of the
International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
the right to make use of public places;
the need to prevent inappropriate behaviour in public places in order
to maintain the right to the safe use and enjoyment of public
streets and
other public places; and
individual responsibility for behaviour in public.
the following matter to the Community Law Reform Committee
as provided for in the
Constitution
of that Committee:
the law relating to behaviour in public places and the
right of freedom of public assembly
AND TO REPORT
on desirable changes to the existing law and practice
to more effectively balance these competing rights and interests.
IN MAKING ITS REVIEW AND REPORT
the Committee may wish to consider:
police powers and responsibilities in dealing with the public;
whether the right to safe use and enjoyment of public places of particular
groups requires particular protection; and
recent reforms of Queensland law to give legislative recognition to
a right of freedom of public assembly in that State.
Signed this thirteenth day of January 1993
TERENCE CONNOLLY
ATTORNEY GENERAL
Participants
The Committee
Chairperson
Justice Terence Higgins (until December 1996)
Mr Ken Crispin QC (from January 1997)
Deputy Chairpersons
Professor Braithwaite
Ms Jennifer Kitchin (until July 1996)
Chief Magistrate Mr Ron Cahill (until July 1996)
Committee Members
Mr Roderick Campbell (until July 1996)
Ms Katherine Cummins (until December 1996)
Mr Peter Dawson (until July 1996)
Mr Rainer Frisch (until July 1996)
Mr Peter Hohnen (to December 1995, from November 1996)
Mr David Hughes (from November 1996)
Ms Vivienne Joice (until 2/1996)
Ms Jennifer Kitchin
Ms Veronica Laletin (until July 1996)
Ms Annmarie Lumsden (until July 1996)
Mr Graeme Lunney (until July 1996)
Ms Heather McGregor (until December 1996)
Mr Nick Seddon (until July 1996)
Mr Peter Sutherland (until July 1996)
Ms Alice Tay (until July 1996)
Professor Roman Tomasic (until July 1996)
Sub-Committee in Charge of Reference
Mr Roderick Campbell
Mr Peter Dawson
Ms Veronica Laletin
Mr Graeme Lunney
Mr Peter Sutherland
Research Officers:
Ms Mary Davis (until April 1997)
Ms Nicola Hoobin (June - September 1993)
Mr Tony Whiting (January - August 1995)
Peaceful Assemblies
Report 12: September 1997
Community Law Reform Committee
This report was tabled in the ACT
Legislative Assembly on 25/9/97 by the Attorney-General, Mr Gary Humphries.
This report reflects the law as at July 1997
Introduction and background
1. The issue of the management of assemblies is a perennially relevant
one in the Australian Capital Territory (ACT). As the home
of both the Federal
Parliament and the Legislative Assembly of the ACT, Canberra frequently
attracts many individuals, institutions
and other organisations that wish
to influence or change government policy on particular issues. Lobbyists,
industry representatives,
foreign embassies, unions and demonstrators play
important roles in influencing the decision-making processes of government.
2. The vast majority of protests and demonstrations are peaceful and
are organised so as to cause the minimum of disruption to the
wider community.
Occasionally, however, the ACT experiences protests and demonstrations that
are disruptive. These activities are
regulated by the Australian Federal
Police at the expense of the ACT Government.
3. Peaceful assemblies and related activities of individuals and organisations
in the ACT are subject to ACT and Commonwealth law.
Identifying the applicable
law will involve identifying whether the land involved is Territory Land or
National Land. It will
also be necessary to know if the land is, despite not
being National Land, occupied by the Commonwealth. Finally, it will be necessary
to know whether the assembly is of such a character or in such a location that
it attracts the operation of a Commonwealth
or ACT law with specific application.
For example, a protest in the vicinity of an embassy may fall under the jurisdiction
of the ACT (such as the
Traffic Act 1937
). However, when it crosses an
invisible jurisdictional line and moves toward Embassy property its participants
may be subject
to the quite different laws of the Commonwealth, such as the
Diplomatic Privileges and Immunities Act 1967
. Determining which
laws apply to land with different legal designations, and even which law might
apply as circumstances change,
presents a problem for both participants and
law enforcement agencies in the ACT. As the policy objectives of the ACT and
Commonwealth
Governments and the legislation that gives effect to these objectives
is not always consistent knowing which law applies can be
of crucial relevance
to the participants and law enforcement agencies.
4. The overlapping responsibilities of Territory and Commonwealth law-
makers is only one of the factors making it difficult for participants
law enforcement agencies in a peaceful assembly to determine their rights
and obligations. Another factor is that the law relating
to peaceful assemblies
has tended to be developed not in accordance with consistent policy but
on an ad hoc basis, to deal with specific
circumstances as they arose.
5. As a result of a number of particularly controversial protests and activities,
the former ACT Attorney-General requested that the Committee examine the law
relating to behaviour in public places and the
right of peaceful assembly. This
report, which is the result of community consultation and research, review and
by the Committee, concentrates on the Peaceful Assemblies aspect
of the Reference given to the Committee by the Attorney-General.
A second report,
to be released later, will discuss principles relating to the regulation of
street offences.
6. The Committee recognises that there will inevitably be differences
in approach to demonstrations by the Commonwealth and ACT, given
the differences
in focus and responsibility. Commonwealth concerns are of a national and
international nature, such as the safeguarding
of the Federal Parliament
and the observance of international responsibilities concerning the protection
of the persons, property
and dignity of diplomatic personnel. The ACT's
interests are of a more domestic character, including local policing and
services issues. Ultimately, the Committee hopes that the ACT
and Commonwealth governments are able to agree on a coherent approach
peaceful assemblies in the ACT.
7. The Committee was hopeful that a coherent approach could be developed
by means of the concurrent reviews into the law relating
to assemblies being
conducted by this Committee and the Commonwealth Joint Standing Committee
of Inquiry on the National Capital
and External Territories in 1995. In
April 1995 the Hon Brian Howe MP, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Housing and Regional
Development, referred the following matter to the Joint
Standing Committee:
"the right to legitimately protest or demonstrate on National Land
and in the Parliamentary Zone in particular."
8. Commonwealth laws regulating protest on National Land and in the Parliamentary
Zone are part of the patchwork of laws that make
up the law in the ACT in
relation to assemblies. The ACT Government cannot amend them. The concurrent
work of the Federal and ACT
Committees presented an important opportunity
to develop a homogeneous package of laws governing assemblies within the
9. In August 1995, the ACT Government and the Community Law Reform Committee
made separate submissions to Joint Standing Committee's
inquiry. The submission
of the ACT Government emphasised the need for a `cooperative approach to
protests and demonstrations' to
enable the setting of `consistent and clear
parameters and guidelines'. The issue of who should bear the cost of policing
demonstrations
10. The Joint Standing Committee was dissolved at the dissolution of
the Federal Parliament on Monday 29 January 1996, prior to the
Federal Election. It had not completed its report. The unfinished inquiry
was referred to the reconvened Joint Standing
Committee on the National
Capital and External Territories on 19 August 1996. The Committee's Report
A Right to Protest -
was published in May 1997. With the exception
of the Committee's not favouring a non-compulsory notification system, but
strengthening of existing informal arrangements its recommendations
are consistent with those made in this Report.
Scope of this Report
11. The term `assembly' has a wide import, including any gathering together
of people. Questions concerning recognition of the
right of peaceful assembly
tend to arise only in relation to demonstrations and protest or action meetings.
The Committee focussed its attention on assemblies
for the purpose of protest and the like in this report.
The Context of the Reference
12. The issue of the right of peaceful assembly in the ACT is topical.
A number of incidents have aroused discussion and debate about
of any right of assembly. They have also raised questions about the regulation
of peaceful assemblies and balancing of
rights of participants and rights
of other members of the Canberra community. This chapter will attempt to
canvass these incidents,
and to give an indication of the political and
social context in which the Committee has arrived at its recommendations.
13. At the time that the Committee was engaged in public consultation for this
reference, it was proposed to the ACT Legislative
Assembly that the ACT adopt
a Bill of Rights, including a right of assembly.
It now seems unlikely that such a Bill will be enacted. The Committee is of
the opinion that the unlikelihood that the Bill
of Rights Bill will be passed
into law in the near future strengthens the case for legislative intervention
in the area of
peaceful assemblies.
Public Assemblies in the ACT
14. Protesters have converged on Canberra since its establishment as
the National Capital. Large protests, such as those concerning
conscription,
apartheid, aboriginal rights and employment issues have been staged in Canberra
in an attempt to draw the attention
of Federal governments to those matters.
15. For the purpose of examining the operation of the law concerning
public assemblies in the ACT, the Committee has focussed its
attention on
a number of protests that have occurred in Canberra during the last decade
and a half. The Committee did not, however,
consider the violent protests
that occurred in front of Parliament House in August 1996. At the time of
writing, the debate about
the protests was heated and often lacking in objectivity.
The Committee was not in a position to be able to analyse the events free
from the influence of the emotions the protests aroused. The Committee notes
that the Joint Standing Committee on the National Capital
and External Territories
took account of this protest in making its recommendations.
Anzac Day Protests
16. One of the more controversial protests to have taken place in the
ACT occurred in 1981. People seeking to draw attention to women
war planned to march on Anzac Day. The Canberra community was divided as
to whether the protest should have been allowed.
editorial argued that the protest should have been allowed, given
that the right to protest was a democratic right for which people
in the wars. The Returned Services League thought that the protest had the
potential to disrupt the dignity and sanctity
of the Anzac Day ceremonies.
17. Following consideration of the matter by the then Federal Minister
for the Capital Territory (Mr Michael Hodgman MP) the Traffic
was amended four days before Anzac Day. The new provisions of the Traffic
(a) provided the police with the power to direct a person not to take
part in an Anzac Day parade if there were reasonable grounds
that the person was going to disturb or disrupt the parade; and
(b) created offences of disturbing or disrupting, or behaving in a manner
likely to disturb or disrupt, a parade or ceremony at the
War Memorial,
and of engaging in conduct which is offensive or insulting, or likely to
give offence or cause insult to a person taking
part in a parade or ceremony.
18. During the march, sixty-four people were arrested and charged with a total
of seventy-three offences. Of the seventy-three
charges laid against the marchers,
sixty-seven were for breaches of the new provisions of the Traffic Ordinance.
The Government
repealed the new provisions less than one year later, on 25 March
1982, replacing it with the
Public Assemblies Ordinance 1982
The Labor Government repealed that Ordinance following its election in 1983.
The Summernats
19. Although not strictly within the scope of this Report the Committee
considers lessons can be learned from the evolution of the
Street Machine
Summer National car event (`Summernats'). Summernats is held annually between
Christmas and New Year. The event takes
place at the Exhibition Park in
Canberra complex in Mitchell. In 1995 it attracted approximately 1,800 entrants
and approximately
89,000 spectators. It provides a significant boost to
the ACT's economy, estimated to amount to at least $8 million per year.
20. In previous years, the sheer size of the show (and its public social
activities) caused a number of policing problems for the
ACT. The event
caused significant community concern over policing and the behaviour of
entrants, spectators and other individuals.
21. A consultative approach has brought about a positive change. Over
the past few years the Australian Federal Police and a number
of ACT government
agencies have made arrangements before the event to minimise the disruption
that had characterised the event in
previous years. An inter-agency committee
was established, involving the Australian Federal Police, Summernats organisers,
Public Service officers responsible for parking operations, parks
and conservation, urban services, and waste management. Marshals
and alcohol-free
zones also appear to have reduced the number of incidents involving assault
and a breakdown in order. The gatherings
since 1994 were notable for their
lack of alcohol-induced violence and dangerous driving in public. Pre-Summernats
arrangements between
the Australian Federal Police and organisers appear
to have solved many of the problems blamed on the event, yet Summernats
popular and viable.
22. AIDEX `91 (the Australian International Defence Equipment Exhibition) was
held in Canberra in November 1991, contrary to the
wishes of the then ACT Government.
It was a forum in which Australian and overseas firms exhibited military products
to representatives of governments interested
in viewing or purchasing those
23. More than 1,000 people protested against the sale of military products
outside the AIDEX venue, many of those coming from outside
the ACT. Approximately
400 Australian Federal Police officers policed the demonstrations. The police
were often faced with hostility
24. The initial approach of the Australian Federal Police officers at
the demonstration was that generally shown to protesters in
demonstrations
in the ACT - that of tolerance and a minimum use of force. The then Assistant
Commissioner, Mr Peter Dawson, described
this approach:
"The Police objective for the AIDEX was to `preserve the peace'.
The strategy was to employ `soft' preventative justice measures,
than punitive measures. This means a reasonable toleration of infringement
of the law and the exercise of our common law bounden
duty to preserve the
peace would apply rather than apply `hard' law enforcement measures under
such criminal provisions as the Public
Order (Protection of Persons and
Property) Act. It was our preference to secure a Magistrates Order binding
a `peace breaker' over
to keep the peace rather than charge a person with
the criminal offence of obstruct, assault, damage etc".
25. At a later stage of the demonstration, the police made arrests for behaviour
previously ignored or tolerated.
This change
in approach may have been in response to the number of injuries being sustained
by police officers.
26. A number of violent clashes between the police and demonstrators resulted
in many protesters and police officers being injured.
Police arrested more than
200 protesters, many for an `imminent' breach of the peace. Other arrests were
for alleged offences,
particularly that of obstruction. The Commonwealth Ombudsman
investigated almost 170 complaints about inappropriate police behaviour.
were capable of determination.
27. The ACT community was left with a bill estimated to be in the vicinity
of $300,000 as a result of the protest. Costs included
police charges, overtime,
medical costs, compensation claims, property damage and other damage.
Protest Against the Dili Massacre
28. In November 1991, 124 white crosses were placed outside the Indonesian
Embassy. The crosses were a symbolic protest against the
killing of a number
of East Timorese people by members of the Indonesian military during an
incident in Dili, the capital of East
29. In January 1992, the Federal Government made, as a matter of urgency, a
regulation under
Diplomatic Privileges and Immunities Act 1967
regulation enabled the Minister to authorise the removal of an object from public
land within 100 metres of a diplomatic
residence or mission.
day that the regulation came into effect, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Trade signed a certificate for the removal
of the crosses. The regulation was
made notwithstanding the objections of the ACT Government. The Federal Court
later upheld
the legal validity of the regulation, but expressed considerable
doubt over the plausibility of its rationale.
In discussing whether the act of placing the
crosses outside the embassy could be said to have impaired the dignity of the
Embassy, Justice Robert French noted that
"[T]he sending State takes the receiving State as it finds it. If it finds
it with a well established tradition of free expression,
including public comment
on matters of domestic and international politics, it cannot invoke ... Art
22(2) [of the Vienna Convention
on Diplomatic Relations] ... against manifestations
of that tradition. And beyond the particular circumstances of the domestic
such activity is an expression of the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of speech and assembly accepted in a number
of international conventions ...
it is difficult to see how the lawful placement of a reproachful and dignified
symbol on public
land in the vicinity of a mission would amount to a disturbance
of its peace or an impairment of its dignity or an attack upon
the dignity of
its officers".
Loggers' Protest
30. Between 30 January and 3 February 1995, pro-logging demonstrators
surrounded (but not by police definition, blockaded) Parliament
House, causing
great inconvenience to thousands of people: politicians, parliamentary employees,
tradespeople and tourists alike.
The costs to the community, particularly
in terms of police resources, were considerable. Traffic and parking laws
were openly flouted
but with no official intervention. On at least one occasion,
thousands of demonstrators blocked all three lanes of Commonwealth Avenue,
causing huge traffic jams. Again there was no official action. The level
of official tolerance was very high.
31. This tolerance was the result, it seems, of a deliberate political
decision. Backed by their powers under the
Parliamentary Precincts Act
, the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President
of the Senate apparently made it known that the pro-logging demonstration
should be permitted to continue unimpeded. The Australian Federal Police
had no real trouble with this `directive' because the demonstration
basically peaceful and Parliament, while significantly inconvenienced, was
not being blockaded. The presiding officers had no
authority to allow the
demonstrators to do as they wished well away from Parliament House. The
road-blocking march to Civic was outside
their `jurisdiction'. The ACT Government,
it seems, kept out of the issue. It follows that the broad tolerance shown
to the demonstrators
came about largely because of a conscious decision
taken by the Australian Federal Police.
Protests Against French Nuclear Testing
32. In July 1995, a group of about 300 Canberrans protested outside the French
embassy against the decision of the French Government
to recommence nuclear
testing at Muroroa Atoll, French territory close to Tahiti. Although a number
of protesters passed a
barricade across the road, contrary to police requests
not to do so, the only arrests were of people who tried to run toward the
building and who damaged property. As a matter of law, all those who had left
the barricade could have been arrested,
at least for obstruction of a police
officer in the course of his or her duty.
The protest eventually dissipated without serious
Some General Comments
33. The protests examined above illustrate that consideration of whether there
should be a right of peaceful assembly involves
a difficult balancing of interests.
It is well recognised that the ability to assemble to make known grievances
to governments,
legislatures and bureaucrats is an important element of a democratic
system of government. It has been said that the response
of a government to
a peaceful protest is a good test of the value it really places on its commitment
to human rights.
However, it has also been
noted that assemblies can be
"high-pitched, brainless and brutal, spreading fear in minority communities,
intimidating workers and clogging up traffic. More
than any other freedom it
comes at a price, and a price moreover which Governments are increasingly reluctant
34. With a small number of notable exceptions, most of the assemblies of protest
that have occurred in the ACT, and Australia,
in recent years have been non-violent.
One writer has noted, however, that an aura of actual or potential violence
accompanies
much media presentation and popular perception of protest.
The existence of this perception has tended to result in the taking of a `law
and order' approach to assemblies in many jurisdictions.
35. The ban on street marches in Queensland which commenced in 1977 was
an extreme reaction to certain protests that had occurred
immediately prior
to the imposition of the ban. If the purpose of the ban was to maintain
law and order, that expectation was not
realised. One writer has noted that:
`Not only did the ban interfere needlessly with the right or liberty of people
to assemble ... and protest publicly; it also threatened
law and order rather
than preserving it; it disrupted traffic flow rather than facilitating it. The
march ban was not only
morally objectionable; it was stupid."
36. The way in which police approach assemblies appears to be one important
determinant of whether an assembly remains peaceful
or is marred by violence.
It has been noted that when crowds are met with
physical force by the police, the frequency of riots or the extent of violence
associated with them tends to increase.
the other hand, it has been demonstrated that a handful of police can succeed
in peacefully dispersing a crowd.
37. In the ACT, the police have generally handled protests with tolerance
and restraint. However, what if the demonstrations referred
to previously
had concerned an issue of particular sensitivity to the Government - such
as Australia's recognition of Indonesian
sovereignty in East Timor? Or had
involved an organ of government (rather than the Government itself), like
the Family Court, or
had involved another Government (for example, the Tasmanian
Government's attitude to homosexuality)? Or had nothing directly to do
Australia at all (such as the Serbian bombardment of Bosnia)? Where might
the line have been drawn? If tolerance is to be shown
in demonstrations
against the Federal Government, should it be extended to any peaceful demonstration
on any issue? Should the decision
on whether a particular group should be
treated leniently or harshly be left more or less entirely to politicians
or officers of
the Australian Federal Police?
38. One might well ask the extent to which, in the context of `federal'
demonstrations, any of this is the business of the ACT. Strictly
it is none of its business. Is it conceivable, however, that an impatient
ACT Government might have sought to order the
Australian Federal Police
to break up the pro-logging `blockade', without consulting parliamentary
officials or even against their
wishes? Might police have ignored events
in the immediate vicinity of Parliament House, but taken action against
those blocking Commonwealth
Avenue? On the other hand, might an ACT Government
direct the Australian Federal Police not to take action against demonstrators
in the vicinity of Parliament House, despite the wishes of the Federal Government
or the parliamentary presiding officers? What sort
of dilemma would the
Australian Federal Police be faced with in such circumstances, given its
ultimate federal responsibility but
its dual federal and `local' policing
roles? How much flexibility and freedom does the Australian Federal Police
really have and
how might it be exercised on any given occasion?
39. To a large extent, these are really matters of public policy and
probably should not be the subject of legislation. They do, however,
a problem peculiar to the ACT: the fact that there is a Commonwealth-ACT
`jurisdictional' line, wherever it may be. The
`line' may be defined in
terms of the Parliamentary Precincts legislation or `the Seat of Government',
as referred to in the Australian
Constitution
and other legislation, but
this concept has never been defined. As the East Timorese `crosses' demonstration
outside the Indonesian
Embassy showed, the Federal and ACT Governments are
not always in agreement on public assembly issues.
The Current Law in the ACT
40. Assembly in the ACT is governed by a substantial number of ACT and
federal laws, as well as the common law. It is also influenced
by international
law. Neither statute nor common law expressly recognises a `right' of peaceful
assembly. In practice, there may
appear to be such a right, up to a point
at least, because of the generally benign attitude of government and police
to demonstrations,
pickets and other organised gatherings. The state of
the law does not support this appearance.
41. The ability to lawfully assemble in the ACT is limited by numerous provisions
of Commonwealth and ACT law. These include laws
relating to traffic, trespass,
noise, public places, parliamentary precincts, diplomatic premises and public
meetings, to name
but a few. It has been noted that `in general Australian law
puts greater emphasis on preserving public order and traffic flow
than on protecting
the right of public assembly'.
Peaceful Assemblies in the Common Law
42. Common law is the set of rules developed by the courts over time,
on a case by case basis. The state of the common law must be
through the examination of the records of judgments contained in law reports.
Tennyson described the common law as:
"That codeless myriad of precedent,
That wilderness of single instances ..."
43. The legislature can modify common law by the passing of statutes.
44. The common law has not developed a general statement of principle on which
the courts may rely to protect a right of peaceful
assembly. In
, Hewart LCJ said that the law `does not recognise any special right
of public meeting for political or other purposes'.
It has been observed that when `the choice has
been between upholding "law and order" and protecting the rights of
individuals,
history shows that most judges choose the former'.
45. The conventional wisdom concerning the development of the common
law is that judges may extend existing law but may not create
new rights.
The common law is developed from rules that pre-date our democratic society
and its social concern for human rights and
therefore has had no basis from
which rights can be evolved. This has meant the common law generally expresses
the right of assembly
in negative terms. That is, the law states what are
unlawful assemblies, but is silent as to what are lawful assemblies. This
has been described as follows:
"The right of public meeting, as commonly understood, consists in nothing
more than the conglomerate rights of many individuals
to be in a particular
place of public resort at the same time. So long as those persons do not offend
private rights of property
so as to commit a trespass, or conduct themselves
in a manner obnoxious to the private or public enjoyment of property so as to
commit a nuisance, or bring themselves into conflict with the law relating to
unlawful and riotous assembly, and so on, there
is no general principle of law
which denies to them the right to remain in that place. There is not so much
a right to assemble
in a public place as an immunity from removal so long as
public or private rights are not violated or threatened".
46. In a paper produced in 1985, the Human Rights Commission commented that
the so-called `right' of assembly in the ACT could
be `more closely defined
as a "freedom"'.
Gaze and Jones
note that the `absence of positive protection means that an assembly can be
restrained, for example, on the
ground that it constitutes a nuisance, in exactly
the same way as any other nuisance or obstruction of the highway, with no weight
being given to its special character as the exercise of a fundamental right'.
47. The High Court has recently signalled that the strict approach of the common
law in Australia toward acknowledging the existence
of internationally recognised
human rights should be amended. Justice Brennan, in his leading judgment in
Mabo v Queensland (No. 2
, indicated that there were two reasons
for this. Firstly, he stated that a rule of common law cannot `command unquestioning
adherence' if it `seriously offends the values of justice and human rights'.
It must be determined whether such a rule is an
essential doctrine of our legal
system. If not, it may be subject to overruling.
Secondly, Justice Brennan noted that whilst the common law does not necessarily
conform with international law, international
law is a `legitimate and important
influence on the development of the common law, especially when international
law declares
the existence of universal human rights'.
Common Law Offences
48. The common law developed a number of offences that had a direct bearing
on the extent of the right of assembly. These were
unlawful assembly, riot and
rout. These offences do not apply in the ACT due to the operation of s. 25
Public Order (Protection of Persons and Property) Act 1971
which provides that these offences `will not have effect' in a Territory or
a Commonwealth place. If the Public Order
(Protection of Persons and Property)
Act is repealed, the common law offences may resume their application in the
In the interim, they are included here
for general information purposes.
49. The common law has also developed a number of more general offences
that have particular relevance to participation in an assembly.
offence to commit an affray and to obstruct a police officer in the execution
of his or her duty.
Unlawful Assembly
50. At common law, an assembly is an `unlawful assembly' if the following elements
are present: three or more persons with intent
to commit a crime of violence,
or carry out any common purpose, whether lawful or unlawful, in such a way as
to cause a reasonable
person to apprehend a breach of the peace. What constitutes
a breach of the peace is discussed below.
51. The offence of riot is committed if the following elements are present:
an assembly for a common purpose, an intention of the
participants to assist
each other by force or violence, and a display of force or violence which is
sufficient to put a reasonable
person in fear.
52. A rout is a disturbance of the peace by persons who assemble together
with an intention to do something that, if executed, will
amount to a riot
and who make a move toward the execution of their common purpose but do
not complete it. The offence of rout is
an intermediate offence between
the offences of participation in an unlawful assembly and riot.
53. An affray is committed when one or more persons, either by fighting or
by the display of force, act in such a manner that persons
of reasonable firmness
might be frightened.
Obstruction of a Police Officer in the Execution
of his or her Duty
54. The common law offence of obstruction of a police officer in the execution
of his or her duty has been restated by
Australian Federal
Police Act 1979
33 A police officer
is obstructed in the execution of his or her duty when performance of that duty
is made more difficult.
The duties of a police
officer arise by the operation of statute and common law. Those duties include
a general duty to enforce
the law, to detect and prevent crime and bring the
offender to justice, to prevent harm to persons and property and to preserve
evidence, although the list is open.
The courts have found, in the context of assemblies,
that police officers can be obstructed in the execution of two duties: the
to prevent a breach of the peace and the duty to protect a mission from intrusion
and damage.
55. The English case of
Duncan v Jones
is cited as support for the view that a police officer is obstructed in
his or her duty to prevent breach of the peace if the police
officer, having
reasonable grounds to apprehend a breach of the peace by others in response
to a lawful activity, issued an
instruction (eg that the lawful activity be
ceased) with a view to preserving the peace and that instruction was ignored.
56. The decision in
Duncan v Jones
has been criticised. Flick described
the powers conferred on the police by the decision as `exceptional', arguing
greatly restrict the reasonable exercise of the right of assembly.
The decision enables the police not only to take all steps
that they consider
necessary to preserve the peace, but also to charge with obstruction any demonstrator
who fails to comply
with their instructions.
Brown submitted that
Duncan v Jones
be rejected by Australian courts in favour of the approach taken in Ireland,
that a meeting should not be interfered
with by police unless this is the only
way of preventing the breach of the peace.
57. The Supreme Court of the ACT, in
Forbutt v Blake
declined to follow
Duncan v Jones
. Connor ACJ said:
"It is to be observed that the penalty for the offence of obstructing
the police, if tried on indictment, is imprisonment for two
I am quite unable to attribute an intention to the
legislature to expose a person to such a penalty for disobeying a police order
to cease a lawful activity in circumstances where the only relevant police duty
is to prevent a breach of the peace by other
citizens against him".
58. Therefore, the current position in the ACT seems to be that a person
who fails to cease a lawful activity cannot be arrested for
obstructing
a police officer in the execution of his or her duty to prevent a breach
of the peace, although this is far from certain.
59. The law relating to obstruction of a police officer in his or her duty
to protect a mission from intrusion and damage is somewhat
clearer. This duty
arises from the application of article 22(2) of the
Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations
Diplomatic Privileges and
Immunities Act 1967
. It has been held that the police officer must have
a justifiable fear that there will be an attempted intrusion into premises
a mission without approval or permission and possible damage to mission premises.
In these circumstances, a failure by a
protester to move on request by a police
officer amounts to an obstruction.
Public Nuisance
60. Public nuisance is a substantial and unreasonable interference, by act
or omission, with the exercise of a public right, such
as a right to use a public
61. Obstruction is the nuisance most likely to be caused by a public assembly.
Obstruction that is substantial and unreasonable
is more likely to be found
to have occurred on a public road than in a large open place, because on a highway
there exists
a right of passage that has been regarded as paramount.
The common law concerning public meetings on a highway is stated in
v Magistrates of Edinburgh
, in which Lord Dunedin said:
"the primary and overruling object for which streets exist is passage.
The streets are public for passage, and there is no such
thing as a right in
the public to hold meetings as such in the streets. ... That does not necessarily
mean that anyone is doing
an illegal act if he is not at the moment passing
along. It is quite clear that citizens may meet in the streets and may stop
and speak to each other. The whole thing is a question of degree ..."
Common Law Powers of Preventative Justice
62. The common law also provides the police and the courts with a number
of powers of prevention and control that are capable of being
used to regulate
assemblies. These powers enable the police to take pro-active measures when
they foresee the likelihood of a disturbance
during an assembly. These include:
(a) police powers to prevent a breach of the peace;
(b) the court's capacity to bind-over a person to keep the peace; and
(c) the use of the injunction as a control.
Preventing a Breach of the Peace
63. It is difficult to determine what constitutes a breach of the peace because
the cases have not defined the term with any real
precision. One definition
can be found in
Watkins J said:
"there is a breach of the peace whenever harm is actually done or is likely
to be done to a person or in his presence to his property
or a person is in
fear of being so harmed through an assault, an affray, a riot, an unlawful assembly
or other disturbance".
64. Clearly, the notion of breach of the peace includes riots, routs,
affrays, fights and unlawful assembly. It probably also includes
of force to the person, verbal disorderliness if a police officer reasonably
believes a person to be on the point of committing,
or if a person is actually
committing, an act of violence (so that swearing and quarrelling is not
enough), and inflammatory words
where there is danger of resulting violence
from a third party.
65. The court in
expressed the view that police can
disperse an otherwise lawful assembly if:
"a breach of the peace is committed in the presence of the person making
the arrest, or (2) the arrester reasonably believes that
such a breach will
be committed in the immediate future by the person arrested although he has
not yet committed any breach,
or (3) where a breach has been committed and it
is believed that a renewal of it is threatened".
66. Therefore, the police have the power to take action even before a
breach of the peace has occurred. That action can include the
of the assembly if the officer believes that there is no other way to prevent
a breach of the peace. The only check on
police power to pro-actively disperse
an otherwise lawful assembly is the need for reasonable grounds for the
apprehension that a
breach of the peace is imminent.
67. The Supreme Court of the ACT, in
Forbutt v Blake,
the concept of reasonableness. It stated that:
"a mere statement by a constable that he anticipated a breach of the peace
is not enough to justify his taking action to prevent
it; the facts must be
such that he could reasonably anticipate not a remote, but a real, possibility
of a breach of the peace..."
68. The Issues Paper released for this reference noted that a person arrested
for breach of the peace was not given the protection
normally accorded to an
arrested person by the
Bail Act 1992
Amendments made in 1994 to the
make some provision for people arrested for a breach of the peace.
Binding Over
69. At common law, criminal courts (usually magistrates' courts) have the power
to `bind over' a person to keep the peace, so as
to prevent future breaches
of the peace by the person bound over or others. The origins of this jurisdiction
are uncertain,
but its continued application in the ACT was accepted by the
Supreme Court of the ACT in
Forbutt v Blake
In that case, Connor
ACJ said that `a binding over order may be available against a person who has
not committed any offence
in circumstances where the consequence of his lawful
conduct is likely to produce a breach of the peace in other persons'.
70. `Binding over' involves a court requiring a person, who has been brought
before it, to give a written undertaking or bond that
he or she will keep the
peace for a specified period of time. A person will generally not be bound over
unless his or her past
conduct provides the magistrate with the grounds to believe
that his or her future conduct should be regulated to some extent.
A magistrate
is unable to attach other conditions to a binding over order.
A refusal to sign an undertaking to keep the peace can be punished by a term
of imprisonment. A breaking of the undertaking
may result in the person forfeiting
a certain sum of money (the surety) to the Territory. What constitutes a breach
of an undertaking
to keep the peace is not clear. It is probable, however, that
the types of conduct that justifies the making of a binding-over
order can be
grounds for forfeiture of the surety.
71. Binding over orders have been used in a number of situations relevant to
assemblies. These include obstruction of the highway,
obstruction of the police
in the execution of their duty, threatening, abusive or insulting words and
behaviour, and provoking
a breach of the peace.
72. Binding over, as a measure of preventative justice, has been justified
on the basis that preventative justice is preferable
to punishing justice.
Courts have cited a Latin maxim to the effect
that the welfare of the people is the paramount law.
Therefore, it is sometimes necessary that individual liberty be sacrificed or
abridged for the public good.
73. A number of criticisms have been levelled at binding over orders. An order
binding a person to keep the peace can be hard to
challenge on appeal, because
the discretion given to magistrates in the exercise of the jurisdiction is very
wide. It has been
held that appeal courts should interfere only in strong and
clear cases of misuse of magisterial authority.
Magistrates are able, by way of binding over, to control
behaviour that is not criminal and deal with offences that they would
have no jurisdiction to try.
There is no
limit on the amount of money that a person must agree to forfeit if he or she
breaks an undertaking to keep the
This is because the limitation on the sentencing jurisdiction of the Magistrates
Court applies only to common law offences
and certain statutory offences.
74. Roger A. Brown has stated that
"from the point of view of justice, binding over is a most objectionable
procedure. It subjects a man to the threat of fine or
imprisonment upon somebody's
"reasonable" prediction of future events. ... In effect the power
subjects the defendant to double
punishment if he breaches the order and commits
an offence, a situation to be avoided by any system of justice".
75. The practical short-comings in the use of binding over orders to control
assemblies were demonstrated at AIDEX `91. Many protesters
were arrested on
the basis of a reasonable apprehension that a breach of the peace was imminent.
The intention of the police
was to have those protesters bound over to keep
the peace until after AIDEX. However, Chief Magistrate Ron Cahill held that
the police had to satisfy the court that the actions of each individual arrested
gave rise to an apprehension that a breach of
the peace would occur. It was
not sufficient to claim that the crowd as a whole was likely to cause a breach
of the peace.
The confusion inherent in large
assemblies would make it difficult for police to pursue individuals for breach
of the peace.
Therefore, the power to prevent a breach of the peace will generally
not be a power available to the police to control assemblies.
76. As other recommendations contained in this report will make clear,
the preferred approach of the Committee is to enact positive
of principle as legislation, rather than to leave the legal position of
protesters to be determined by means of the subjective
judgments of police
and the obscure common law.
Injunctions
77. A court may grant an injunction in order to forbid the commission,
the repetition, or the continuance of an unlawful act. Acts
contrary to
an injunction render the offender liable to contempt of court proceedings.
78. A court can grant an injunction in two circumstances that are relevant
to this discussion. Firstly, a court may grant an injunction,
called an interlocutory
injunction, during the course of existing legal proceedings (ie after a writ
has been issued) to prevent
an unlawful act after the person who wants the injunction
has issued a writ. In this instance, the role of the injunction is to
the status quo until the court hears the matter. The person wanting the court
to grant an injunction must satisfy
the court that he or she may suffer irreparable
loss if an injunction was not granted before the matter is heard by the court.
An injunction is unlikely to be granted if the payment of monetary damages would
be an adequate remedy. It will also not be
granted if the court is of the opinion
that the person has no real prospect of being able to prove to the court that
she has a right recognised by law and that right is under threat of being
infringed. A court will also not grant an injunction
if the court considers
that the claim is frivolous or vexatious. A court will only grant an interlocutory
injunction if such
a grant is favoured by the balance of convenience. It has
been suggested that where the injunction would prevent public protest,
law rights of freedom of speech and association are matters to be considered
by the court in determining whether an
injunction should be granted.
79. A court can also grant a permanent injunction. It will only do so
if the person asking the court to grant an injunction can show
she has a right recognised by law and that there is a threat that the right
will be infringed. The court would usually
only grant a permanent injunction
after a full hearing involving both parties.
80. The use of injunctions to prevent demonstrations and assemblies is quite
rare, perhaps because of the number of legal hurdles
that must be cleared by
those seeking the injunction. One case in which an injunction may have been
granted by the Supreme
Court of New South Wales is
University of Sydney v
Greenland and Others.
That case involved
a student demonstration and sit in at the University. It was alleged that part
of a university building
was occupied, property was damaged and university officers
and members of staff were obstructed in the performance of their duties.
Street said:
"...If the allegations are established, and there is any threat to repeat
this unlawful conduct, they (ie. the defendants) can
expect to be restrained
by injunction from so doing. This Court will not hesitate to lend its aid, in
appropriate cases, to
the protection and enforcement of the rule of law in this
community".
Assemblies in Statute
81. Although the police can employ a range of common law powers to regulate
assemblies, those powers are seen as being uncertain,
inaccessible and lacking
in definition. O'Neill and Handley suggest that for this reason, there is a
greater reliance on statutory
powers to control assemblies. However, they note
that `Parliament's tendency to change or create new legislation as the need
arises has also meant that much of this legislation is of an "ad hoc"
nature, rather than the product of a comprehensive review'.
The lack of cohesiveness is accentuated in the
ACT because the laws relating to assemblies were made by a number of different
law-making bodies.
82. Assemblies are regulated by a number of different types of legislative
instrument in the ACT. Relevant provisions can be found
in Acts, Regulations
and Ordinances.
83. An Act applying in the ACT can either have been passed by the ACT
Legislative Assembly, for the ACT alone, or by the Parliament
of the Commonwealth,
for the whole of Australia.
84. Regulations are made pursuant to power delegated by an ACT or Commonwealth
Act to a Minister of the Crown. The scope of the Act
in which the power
is delegated determines the type of regulation that can be made. In reality,
regulations are developed by Departments
of the ACT Government or Federal
Government, depending on whether the parent Act is an enactment of the ACT
Legislative Assembly
or of Federal Parliament.
85. Ordinances were made for the ACT after the formation of the Territory
and prior to self-government.
They were prepared
by Commonwealth Departments for the signature of the Governor-General. In
1989, most Ordinances were transferred
into the jurisdiction of the ACT
legislature and styled as Acts. The ACT Legislative Assembly can amend or
repeal these laws in the
same manner as it can its own enactments. A significant
number of Ordinances were not reclassified, and therefore remain under the
public assemblies.
Legislation of the ACT
ACT Legislative Power
86. There are more than twenty laws, over half of which are Commonwealth laws,
which directly impact upon the right to assemble
within the ACT. Still more
have an incidental impact. This very fact highlights one of the problems raised
by the reference,
namely, the inability of the ACT to legislate in areas covered
by federal law. This is because any ACT law that is inconsistent
with a Commonwealth
law will be of no effect to the extent of the inconsistency.
It needs to be continually emphasised that any
recommendations made by the Committee, and any legislative initiatives subsequently
taken by the ACT Government, will always be subject to existing (and future)
federal laws.
87. The High Court considered the limits of the legal authority of the ACT
legislature in its ruling in
Svikart v Stewart
In that decision, the High Court confirmed that all ACT laws apply throughout
the Territory, including in Commonwealth places,
as long as they are not inconsistent
with federal law. The High Court is yet to determine the scope of ACT legal
with regard to the `Seat of Government'. This is relevant to this
discussion because the
Constitution
provides that Federal Parliament has exclusive
power to legislate with respect to whatever part of the ACT actually houses
the `Seat of Government'. As the High Court said in
Svikart v Stewart
the Seat of Government is not the entire ACT.
88. Further clarification of the scope of ACT legal authority was provided
Parliamentary Privileges Act 1987
which states
that the laws of the ACT, including those which regulate assemblies, will
operate in Parliament House and the Parliamentary
89. It can be supposed that the ACT could, subject to the important proviso
concerning inconsistency, legislate to sanction or control
assemblies anywhere
in the Territory. Of course, any such legislation could not override the
Unlawful Assemblies Ordinance 1937
of the Commonwealth, nor could
it prevail over regulations made under
Public Order (Protection of Persons
and Property) Act 1971
. Any ACT legislation that purported to have that
effect would, if challenged, be struck down by the courts, to the extent
was inconsistent with federal law.
Relevant ACT Acts, Ordinances and Regulations
90. Following is a brief precis of the provisions in ACT law that regulate
assemblies. Many of these provisions are general in application,
the potential to have an enormous effect on how an assembly can be held.
All provisions discussed in this chapter are set
out in full at the end
of this report.
Crimes Act 1900
91. Section 482 of the
provides a penalty of $1000 or imprisonment
for six months for a person who disrupts, or threatens to disrupt, a public
meeting held
at any premises. The section also provides that a person presiding
at a public meeting may ask police to remove a person who disrupts,
likely to disrupt, that public meeting.
92. Section 546A provides that a person shall not in, near, or within
the view or hearing of a person in, a public place behave in
indecent, offensive or insulting manner. The operation of a provision similar
to s. 546A in the context of a public assembly
was considered by the
ACT Supreme Court in
Ball v McIntyre
That case involved a student
who, during the course of an anti-Vietnam War demonstration, climbed the
statue of King George V outside
the old Parliament House and hung a placard
off it. The Supreme Court held that the behaviour would not have been offensive
`reasonable' person, who would:
"doubtless think that the climbing on a pedestal and placing the
placard on the statue was rather foolish and a misguided method of
protest, that it offended against the canons of good taste, that it was
in that sense improper conduct, but I do not believe
that the reasonable
man seeing such conduct to be truly political conduct, would have his feelings
wounded or anger, resentment,
disgust or outrage roused".
Crimes (Offences Against the Government) Act 1989
93. Section 19 of this Act provides for a miscellany of offences that
could be committed in the context of a public assembly. The
Act makes it
an offence to trespass without reasonable excuse on government property,
to `engage in unreasonable obstruction' of
government premises, to behave
in an offensive or disorderly manner in or on those premises, or to refuse
to leave those premises
when directed to do so by someone with the authority
to make such a direction.
Electoral Act 1992
Section 302
Electoral Act
is expressed in similar terms to
s. 482 of the
. However, it also provides that a person removed
by the police from a meeting at the request of the chairperson of the meeting
not, without reasonable excuse, return to the meeting without the
authority of the chairperson. The penalties provided by s. 302
from those in s. 482 of the
. A penalty of $500 is attached
to the offence of disrupting an electoral meeting; a penalty of $1,000 for
returning to a meeting.
Public Parks Regulations
95. Regulation 21, which was made in accordance with the regulation-making
power granted by the
Public Parks Act 1928
, prohibits the holding
of, or participation in, any public assembly or meeting, or preaching or
addressing such a meeting, in a public
park, without permission from the
Minister or the Trustees of the park. The Committee notes that there are
no Trustees of any public
park in the ACT, and no provision in the Public
Parks Act for their appointment. Meetings can therefore only be held in
park with the permission of the responsible Minister, currently
the Minister for Urban Services.
Roads and Public Places Act 1937
96. The Act deals with such things as damage to, or interference with,
`public places', alignment marks, lamp posts, gutters, footpaths
Territory property, as well the exhibition of advertising signs and notices.
Theatres and Public Halls Act 1927
97. Section 16 of the Theatres and Public Halls Act gives the Minister
power to restrict by regulation the classes of entertainment
and meetings
that may be held on licensed premises. Section 26 enables the Minister to
ban a particular public entertainment or meeting
`in the public interest'.
Section 27 prohibits public entertainment or meetings on Christmas Day and
Good Friday, unless authorised
by the Minister.
Trespass on Territory Lands Act 1972
98. Section 4(2) of the Act prohibits trespassing on certain appropriately
sign-posted Territory property within the ACT. It also
makes it an offence
to `trespass or enter' `any garden, plantation or afforestation area or
unleased Territory Land or land occupied
by the Territory'.
Traffic Act 1937
99. This Act regulates how people should behave on public streets to enable
the free and safe passage of all people and vehicles.
Its provisions, particularly
those relating to obstruction of traffic, have been used to regulate assemblies
and marches. For
example, in 1968 sixty-seven people were convicted of an offence
against s. 21 of this Act for `sitting-in' outside the Canberra
of the Prime Minister to protest against conscription.
Unlawful Assemblies Ordinance 1937
100. A number of the provisions in this Ordinance had their genesis in
the seventeenth century, in the
Tumultuous Petitioning Act 1661
Section 3(2) of the Ordinance purports to prohibit any assembly of
twenty or more people within ninety metres of Parliament House
that involves
the airing of grievances, the discussion of `public affairs', or the presentation
of petitions.
101. As discussed above
24 , Ordinances
are provisions that were enacted by the Commonwealth for the ACT prior to self-government
that, although on
ACT statute books, have remained under Commonwealth legislative
Legislation of the Commonwealth
Commonwealth Legislative Power in the ACT
102. Section 122 of the Commonwealth
Constitution
gives the Commonwealth
the power to make laws for the Territories. Prior to self-government of
the ACT, the Commonwealth used this
Constitutional power to enact legislation
that applied throughout the ACT to regulate assemblies. The
Assemblies Ordinance 1937
is an example of such legislation. The Commonwealth
also used the power given by s. 122 to apply to the ACT as a whole
legislation
that only applied to Commonwealth property (eg Commonwealth
offices) in the States. The
Public Order (Protection of Persons and Property)
is an example of this type of Act.
103. Notwithstanding the granting of self-government to the ACT, the
Commonwealth continues to have significant power to make laws
for the ACT
and to prevent the ACT Legislative Assembly from making effective laws on
a subject matter. This power has three bases.
Firstly, as Commonwealth legislation
prevails over inconsistent legislative provisions of the ACT, the Commonwealth
could impose
its will on the ACT, if it chose, by enacting a law contrary
to the ACT provision. Secondly, s. 35 of the
Australian Capital Territory
(Self-Government ) Act
enables the Governor-General to disallow
any enactment of the ACT Legislative Assembly six months after the enactment
was made. The
Governor-General would generally do this on advice from the
Commonwealth Government. Thirdly, as has been demonstrated in relation
the debate concerning euthanasia, the Commonwealth Parliament has the ability
to amend the `constitution' of the ACT, the Australian
Capital Territory
(Self-Government ) Act (a Commonwealth enactment) to remove the power to
make laws concerning a certain matter
from the ACT Legislative Assembly.
104. In addition, the Commonwealth continues to administer a large amount
of land within the ACT. This land is known as either `National
`Commonwealth' land or premises. This land is treated as having a different
legal status to land administered by the ACT
Government.
105. National Land is designated such by the Minister for Territories in the
Commonwealth Gazette.
National Land is either
land required for the special purpose of Canberra as the National Capital, such
as land for parliamentary
use, diplomatic missions, National Capital sites such
as the National Botanic Gardens, or is land required for other Commonwealth
purposes, such as CSIRO sites, defence land and the Canberra airport.
106. Whilst the concept of National Land is essentially a land planning
concept, the Commonwealth nevertheless maintains a law making
presence in
those areas. The
National Land Ordinance 1989
applies a number of
Ordinances, as in force at the time of self-government to National Land.
For example, the
Trespass on Commonwealth Land Ordinance 1932
is in nearly identical terms to the
Trespass on Territory
Land Act 1932
has an application in relation to National Land. The Ordinance applies
to National Land and the Act applies to Territory Land. The
Federal Parliament
and Executive have exercised their legislative power in relation to protests
in the vicinity of diplomatic missions,
even when the ACT Government has
raised objections. In 1995, the Joint Standing Committee on the National
Capital and External Territories
asserted its jurisdiction to examine the
laws relating to demonstrations and protest in the ACT on the basis of the
Commonwealth
presence on National land.
107. The Commonwealth also occasionally makes laws relating specifically to
`Commonwealth' land or premises. For example, s. 12
Public Order
(Protection of Persons and Property) Act 1971
creates additional offences
that can be committed on Commonwealth premises. Commonwealth premises are `premises,
a State or in a Territory, occupied by the Commonwealth or by a public
authority under the Commonwealth'.
Implied Constitutional Right of Freedom of Communication
108. The Commonwealth
Constitution
does not, by its terms, provide any protection
for a right of peaceful assembly or for any related rights. In 1992, the High
Court was prepared to imply rights which it saw as indispensable to the system
of government envisaged by the framers of the
Constitution
Capital Television Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
Political Broadcasts Case
the High Court found
in the Commonwealth
Constitution
an implied freedom of communication on matters
of a broadly political nature. This was based on the premise that the
Constitution
establishes and maintains a system of representative democracy in Australia
that cannot be sustained unless there is a broad
freedom of political discussion.
The freedom to communicate on a political level, said the majority of the High
fundamental to Australian democracy. Mason CJ said:
"The fundamental importance, indeed the essentiality, of freedom
of communication, including freedom to criticise government action,
system of modern representative government has been recognised by courts
in many jurisdictions. They include Australia...
Freedom of communication in the sense just discussed is so indispensable
to the efficacy of the system of representative democracy
for which the
Constitution
makes provision that it is necessarily implied in the making
of that provision...
[T]he implied freedom of communication extends to all matters of public
affairs and political discussion, notwithstanding that a particular
at a given time might appear to have a primary or immediate connection with
the affairs of a State, a local authority or a
territory and little or no
connection with Commonwealth affairs".
109. The decision of the majority of the High Court, in the Political Broadcasts
Case was affirmed and extended, again by a majority
of the High Court, in
Theophanous
v The Herald and Weekly Times Ltd and Another
Stephens and Others
v Western Australian Newspapers Ltd
110. However, it now seems that the High Court, after the departures of Chief
Justice Mason and Justice Deane, is less willing
to imply rights from doctrines
underlying the
Constitution
McGinty v Western Australia
, in which it was asserted that a system of representative
democracy requires that each vote should have an equal value, the majority
the High Court stated that implications can only be drawn from the text or structure
Constitution
, and not from sources extrinsic to it. As Justice McHugh
"Underlying or overarching doctrines may explain or illuminate the meaning
of the text or structure of the
Constitution
but such doctrines are not independent
sources of powers, authorities, immunities and obligations conferred by the
Constitution
111. Chief Justice Brennan noted that a submission that a right is `implied
Constitution
is not advanced by an appeal to the principle of representative
democracy if reference to the text and structure of the
Constitution
reveal an implication of that kind'.
112. Most recently the High Court has handed down its decisions in
v Australian Broadcasting Commission
Levy v Victoria
concerned alleged defamatory broadcasts, Levy dealt with the validity of the
Wildlife (Game) (Hunting Season) Regulations.
The Regulations restricted access
to areas of the State where duck- hunting was taking place to persons who held
a valid game
113. In handing down its decision in Lange the Court took the opportunity
to clarify its earlier decisions in this area. Most importantly
it observed
that two questions need to be answered to decide if a law is invalid on
account of the implications in favour of freedom
of communication that can
be drawn from the
Constitution
"First, does the law effectively burden freedom of communication
effect? Second, if the law effectively burdens that freedom, is the law
reasonably appropriate and adapted to serve a legitimate
end the fulfilment
of which is compatible with the maintenance of the constitutionally prescribed
system of representative and responsible
government ... If the first question
is answered `yes" and the second `no', the law is invalid."
Applying this test it decided that although defamation laws did burden
freedom of communication about political and government matters
the constitutionally
prescribed system of government does not require, and would be adversely
affected by, an unqualified freedom
to publish defamatory matter damaging
the reputations of individuals involved in government or politics.
114. Levy is much more relevant to the matters dealt with in this reference.
Levy had been charged with being present in the proscribed
area without
a licence. He is a well known anti duck- hunting campaigner. He argued that
the restriction on his access to the area
deprived him of an opportunity
to communicate with the public. For example, it deprived him of the opportunity
to be publicly seen,
especially on television, to be protesting. The Court
accepted that as the freedom provided by the
Constitution
was a freedom
of communication non-verbal means of communication were as worthy of the
freedom as verbal ones. It also accepted the
Regulation did impose limitations
on communication. That is, it accepted the answer to the first question
posed above would be `yes'.
However, it was concluded the Regulations were
valid as being reasonably appropriate to the protection of life and limb.
In particular
notice was taken of the perceived need to keep protesters
and shooters apart in the interests of safety. That is the answer to the
second question posed above was also `yes'. Accordingly, the Regulation
was not invalidated on account of transgressing the freedom.
115. Given the Court's acceptance that non-verbal means of communication
are protected by the freedom any law applying in the ACT
that restricts
the ability of persons to assemble to communicate with respect to public
affairs would, if its validity were challenged,
need to be scrutinised to
ensure its restrictions are compatible with the constitutionally prescribed
system of representative and
responsible government. There is no reason
for thinking that only laws that contribute to the safety of persons would
pass this test.
For example, it would seem likely that laws dealing with
obstruction of public places would pass the test. The Committee is of the
view there would be few, if any, laws applying in the ACT that would be
found invalid under this test.
Relevant Commonwealth Legislation
116. The Commonwealth has made a number of Acts that apply in the ACT
and have the potential to be used to regulate assemblies.
Approved Defence Projects Protection Act 1947
prohibits a wide range of activities that could prevent, hinder
or obstruct the carrying out of an `approved defence project'.
The Act defines
an `approved defence project' to mean `any work or undertaking for the testing
of long range weapons which
is approved by the Minister by notice in the Gazette
as an immediate defence project ...'.
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
makes it an
offence to obstruct or hinder, or aid, incite or assist another person to obstruct
or hinder an officer of the
Australian Federal Police in the execution of his
or her duty. This provision restates the common law offence of obstruction.
The common law continues to be of assistance in determining how
be applied.
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
Section 347
of this Act, similarly to s. 482 of the
Electoral Act 1992
Referendum (Machinery Provisions) Act 1984
, prohibits
disorderly behaviour at a political meeting held during an election period.
It enables the chairperson of such a meeting
to direct an officer to remove
a person who, in the opinion of the chairperson, is preventing the transaction
of the business for
which the meeting is being held.
Crimes Act 1914
120. The Commonwealth
includes a number of provisions which
are of relevance to assemblies.
121. Section 7A creates the offence of inciting or urging the commission of
offences against Commonwealth law. Roger A. Brown suggested
that this provision
could be used in concert with the provisions of the
Public Order (Protection
of Persons and Property) Act 1971
, especially those relating to demonstrations
outside embassies, to arrest organisers of assemblies and thereby severely restrict
demonstrations.
122. Section 30K prohibits, among other things, the obstruction or hindering
of the provision of any public service by means of threat
or intimidation
of any kind. A picket outside a government office (such as an office of
the Department of Social Security or a Taxation
Office) could arguably be
obstruction by means of intimidation.
123. Section 76 contains yet another prohibition against obstructing,
resisting, hindering, using of violence against, threatening
or intimidating
a Commonwealth officer, including an officer of the Australian Federal Police,
in the course of his or her duty.
Diplomatic Privileges and Immunities Act 1967
of this Act provides that a number of articles of the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations have the force of law in Australia.
22(2) of the Vienna Convention is relevant in this context in that it requires
Australia to take all appropriate steps
to protect the premises of a foreign
mission against `any intrusion or damage and to prevent any disturbance of the
the Mission or impairment of its dignity'. The Australian Federal Police
has been held to have a resultant duty to provide that
protection.
As discussed above, obstructing a police officer in that duty is an offence
at common law and under the
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
Industrial Relations Act 1988
Section 162
of this Act has a limited application to assemblies
for the purpose of boycotts, prohibiting those intended to bring advantage
a person or union in relation to industrial matters. The prohibition,
prima facie, includes picketing. However, s. 162A provides
an exemption
for `peaceful picketing'. This is defined as action outside premises that
involve the communication of information to
people wishing to enter or leave
the premises or persuading them not to enter or leave, as long as the conduct
does not involve obstruction,
molestation or intimidation.
National Parks and Wildlife Regulations
126. Regulation 25 generally prohibits organising or attending a public
gathering of more than fifteen persons in a national park
or reserve. It
does make provision for a gathering with a permit and a gathering of traditional
Aboriginal owners. This legislation
applies in the ACT in the Namadgi National
Parliament Act 1974
127. This Act provides, among other things, that no structure is to be
erected within the area of land within the Parliamentary zone,
unless approved
by resolution of the Houses of the Parliament (s. 5).
Parliamentary Precincts Act 1988
128. This Act defines `parliamentary precincts' and also contains amendments
Parliament Act 1974
, which defines `parliamentary zone'.
Parliamentary Precincts Act
states that the precincts are under the
control and management of the Presiding Officers of the Commonwealth Parliament
Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President of the Senate).
The Presiding Officers are able to take any action they
consider necessary for
the control and management of the precincts. This apparently includes a power
to use reasonable force
to move and remove people from the precincts, but not
to arrest or detain people.
The Presiding
Officers have released guidelines for the conduct of demonstrations in the parliamentary
precincts. The guidelines
prescribe an `authorised protest area' and establish
rules to which protesters must adhere. Failure to abide by rules in the guidelines
is not an offence, but may result in police intervention.
Public Order (Protection of Persons and Property) Act 1971
129. Many of the provisions of this Act provide specifically for the
regulation of assemblies and of behaviour likely to take place
in the context
of an assembly. The Act applies to all assemblies within the ACT, not just
assemblies concerning Commonwealth interests.
130. The Act empowers police to disperse an assembly of twelve or more people
if any officer, of at least the rank of sergeant,
reasonably apprehends that
it will lead to violence or the damage of property.
Failure to disperse within fifteen minutes following an order to disperse is
an offence, unless the participant has a reasonable
If a direction has been given and the crowd has failed to disperse or if unlawful
violence or damage is occurring, the Act
gives any person the right to use reasonable
force to disperse the assembly.
131. The Act also states that it is an offence to participate in an assembly
if there is a reasonable apprehension that violence
or property damage will
take place, even if that violence or damage has not yet occurred.
Sections 9 and 10 of the Act create other criminal
offences, including unreasonable obstruction (which need not have been intentional,
but merely negligent) and the possession and use of weapons, missiles or noxious
or repulsive substances or objects. Section
11 makes trespass on any premises
in the ACT a criminal offence, and also creates the additional offences of obstruction
trespassing, offensive or disorderly behaviour whilst trespassing and
refusal to leave.
Section 11 is substantially reproduced in s. 12
in relation to Commonwealth premises. Sections 11 and 12 are designed to deal
with `sit-in' protests.
132. The Act also contains specific provisions concerning assemblies
in relation to diplomatic and consular premises. These provisions
are similar
to but more extensive than those relating to assemblies held elsewhere in
the ACT. Section 18 prohibits assaulting a
protected person, harassing or
unreasonably interfering with a protected person, behaving in an offensive,
threatening or insulting
manner towards a protected person and unreasonably
obstructing a protected person. The acts specified in s. 18 need not
be done intentionally
because negligent commission seems also to be an offence.
133. Section 19 prohibits the possession and use of a weapon, missile
or destructive, noxious or repulsive object or substance. Section
an offence of trespass and related offences of obstruction, disorderly behaviour
and refusing to leave.
134. The breadth of the protection given to diplomatic personnel has
been criticised. These provisions could enable repression of
all means of
protest on international issues. Roger A. Brown is of the opinion that `the
protected person seems to be overprotected'
"Diplomatic premises are now inviolable both to words and opinions
as well as physical intrusion: acts outside protected premises
with by section 18 and those inside by section 20, which covers the trespass
situation."
135. Campbell and Whitmore agree, noting that `it is difficult to see how any
sort of public meeting or demonstration can be held
outside an embassy or consulate,
or indeed in the vicinity of a protected person'.
136. Many offences under the Act can be prosecuted only with the consent of
the Director of Public Prosecutions.
contends that
"this provision seems to recognise that the very width of the Act may
frequently cover situations in which no conduct warranting
its application has
occurred. For instance, three persons going to the theatre probably constitute
an assembly, and if one
of them throws a stone he has committed an offence against
section 10(1)(b) and is liable to the severe penalties provided thereby."
Referendum (Machinery Provisions) Act 1984
Section 134
creates similar offences to those created by s. 482
Crimes Act 1900
Electoral Act
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
concerning the disruption or threat to disrupt a meeting. It also requires
that the chairperson direct a person disrupting a meeting
to leave before
requesting a police officer to remove that person.
Trade Practices Act 1974
138. Section 45D of the Act prohibits pickets that amount to secondary boycotts
that would have, or would be likely to have, the
effect, of substantially lessening
competition. In
Australasian Meat Industry Employees' Union v Mudginberri
Station Pty Ltd
, an injunction was granted
to prevent the Australasian Meat Industry Employees' Union taking picketing
action. The union was
subsequently fined for breaching the order, and when the
fines were not paid, the court ordered that the assets of the union be
International Law
139. International law specifically recognises the right of public assembly
in Article 21 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights
1966 (ICCPR). Article 21 states:
"The right of peaceful assembly shall be recognised. No restrictions
may be placed on the exercise of this right other than those
conformity with the law and which are necessary in a democratic society
in the interests of national security or public
safety, public order (`order
public'), the protection of public health or morals or the protection of
the rights and freedoms of
140. Australia ratified the ICCPR on 13 August 1980, thereby undertaking to
ensure `to all individuals within its territory and
subject to its jurisdiction
the rights recognised in the present covenant'.
The attitude of Australian law to international covenants is therefore an important
issue in any discussion of the right of
peaceful assemblies within the ACT.
141. International covenants do not become part of Australian law, and therefore
cannot create legally binding rights and obligations,
unless and until they
are incorporated in municipal legislation.
However, the High Court in the case of
Minister of State for Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs v Ah Hin Teoh
case') suggested that an international covenant may create some right of redress
if an administrative decision is
made which is contrary to the terms of the
covenant. Chief Justice Mason and Justice Deane, said:
"... ratification by Australia of an international convention is not to
be dismissed as a merely platitudinous or ineffectual act
... Rather, ratification
of a convention is a positive statement by the executive government of this
country to the world and
to the Australian people that the executive government
and its agencies will act in accordance with the convention. That positive
is an adequate foundation for a legitimate expectation, absent statutory or
executive indications to the contrary,
that administrative decision-makers will
act in conformity with the convention ..."
142. Australia's signing of the ICCPR may therefore have created a legitimate
expectation in Australians that they have the right
to organise or participate
in a peaceful assembly that comes within the terms of the Covenant.
143. Two legal difficulties arise in attempting to apply Teoh's case
in the context of assemblies. The first of these is whether a
decision of
a police officer to act in a way that allegedly infringes a right of peaceful
assembly can be classified as an administrative
decision. Such a classification
may be necessary because the High Court in Teoh's case addressed itself
only to administrative decisions.
Secondly, Chief Justice Mason and Justice
Deane stated that a legitimate expectation could not arise as a result of
Australia being
a signatory to a convention if there are `statutory or executive
indications to the contrary' to that expectation. As discussed above,
are a number of laws that indicate that there should be no legitimate expectation
of a right to peacefully protest. A practical
difficulty also arises in
that a later judicial review of a decision of a police officer is of little
assistance to a person prevented
from taking part in a particular protest.
144. The principle enunciated in Teoh's case has been the subject of
discussion at meetings of Australia's State and Federal Attorneys-General.
It appears that the decision is regarded unfavourably in various jurisdictions,
and may be bypassed by the enactment of legislation.
The Administrative
Decisions (Effect of International Instruments) Bill was introduced into
the Federal Parliament on 28 June 1995.
The explanatory Memorandum of the
legislation states that its purpose is to eliminate any expectation that
might exist that administrative
decisions, whether at the Commonwealth,
State or Territory level, will be made in conformity with provisions of
ratified but unimplemented
treaties. The Bill was passed by the House of
Representatives but not by the Senate when Parliament was dissolved on 29
January 1996
for the Federal election and therefore lapsed. It must therefore
be reintroduced and redebated by the two Houses if it is to become
This has not occurred at the time of writing.
145. Even if Teoh's case cannot be applied to support the creation of a legitimate
expectation in a protester of a right to peacefully
assemble, the case does
affirm that international law has another relevance. The High Court has accepted
that a statute is
to be interpreted and applied, as far as its language permits,
so that it is conformity with the established rules of international
Therefore, if the language of a statute can be interpreted in a way that is
consistent with the terms of an international instrument
to which Australia
is a signatory, then that interpretation should be favoured.
The Need for Legislative Reform
146. It has become abundantly clear to the Committee that the law is
difficult to locate and, when located, is confusing, lacking
in consistency
and sometimes archaic or redundant. The state of the law causes real problems
for protesters in determining what are
their legal rights and responsibilities,
and for the police in deciding what approach they are entitled and obliged
to take in controlling
assemblies.
147. Many of the submissions to the Committee stressed the need for clear legislative
principles, which would be easier to apply,
easier to publicise and more certain.
The suggestion in the Issues Paper that the law relating to assemblies should
be consolidated
received some support in
the submissions to the Committee, on the grounds that it would increase public
awareness of the law
and enhance access to the law. One submission suggested
that the law relating to assemblies should be as `user friendly' as possible.
The Australian Federal Police have strongly emphasised the paramount need for
a workable law regulating protests and demonstrations
rather than a common law
regime that does not clearly define as to how it should be applied.
148. Responses from the community were critical of the wide discretionary nature
of existing police powers of the Australian Federal
Police. The extent to which
citizens are able to enjoy their right to assemble and, indeed, any rights and
interests in conflict
with the right to assemble, is determined by how police
officers exercise their discretion. In principle, it is preferable for
to be stated clearly, and enshrine principles that can be enforced consistently.
The law should not leave difficult
policy decisions about how to reconcile the
exercise of different and perhaps conflicting rights to the police officers
Such a legal approach exposes
the police to criticism such as that made by Justice Wright of the Supreme Court
of Tasmania
R v Commissioner of Police;
ex parte North Broken Hill Ltd
"There is little, if any, room in cases of the present nature for policy
decision by the Commissioner [of Police] or his officers
except as to the vigour
and formal consequences of their intervention. The Commissioner's policy to
refrain from breaking a
picket line cannot be supported, in my opinion. Equally,
I do not see the police as having much discretion about whether they
will not intervene when a specific offence such as an assault, or a breach of
the peace occurs. ... [A police officer]
cannot allow a desire to avoid violence
to deflect him from enforcing the law if it is being continuously flouted in
his presence."
149. The Committee wishes to emphasise its view that the Australian Federal
Police have handled most assemblies within the ACT with
reasonable prudence
and restraint. Assistant Commissioner Peter Dawson (as he then was) described
the basis of this approach, and
some of the quandaries raised by it:
"Our task is to exercise our duty impartially, reasonably as best we can
and with discretion. We must ensure that in trying to
keep the peace and preserve
the legitimate rights of all, we do not, through our own `hard line' actions
trigger a bigger confrontation
than that which already exists. To that end,
we apply a long held strategy of selective law enforcement. This means we exercise
discretion on those that break the law sufficient for them to make their political
point. Indeed, we strive to facilitate such
forms of protest by prior arrangement
with protest organisers on the clear understanding that they will desist as
agreed. ...
Selective law enforcement has enabled us, on nearly every occasion
except AIDEX, to diffuse potentially violent situations."
and further
"The primary responsibility of police is to preserve the peace first and
foremost. They also have responsibility to enforce the
law. The two don't sit
comfortably together. There's got to be a balance struck, and that balance is
what we tried to exercise
150. It is this `soft line' approach to the handling of assemblies that
has resulted in the people of the ACT having a de facto, if
not a legal,
right to assemble and protest. However, the Committee believes that the
complexity and lack of coherency in the present
laws governing assemblies
is sufficient reason for their reform. The Committee recommends that this
reform have two components: the
enactment of a comprehensive Act dealing
with peaceful assemblies, and the repeal or limitation of application of
a number of provisions
that are not consistent with the recognition of a
right of peaceful assembly in the 1990s. The following chapters discuss
the recommendations of the Committee.
Recommendation:
The Committee recommends the law relating to public
assemblies should be reformed. The reform should have two components. First
enactment of a comprehensive Act dealing with peaceful assemblies. This
Act should be along the lines outlined in the remainder of
this Report.
Second the repeal or limitation of application of a number of provisions
that are not consistent with the recognition
of a right of peaceful assembly
in the 1990s.
Recognising the Right of Assembly
- Peaceful Assemblies Act
Recognising the Right of Assembly
151. Peaceful assemblies have in history been important means of social change,
driving the introduction of freedoms now regarded
as fundamental in most democracies.
Therefore, it is hardly surprising that the ability to peacefully assemble has
been described as being a right fundamental
in democratic societies.
152. Many writers, and a number of submissions to the Committee, argue that
peaceful assemblies provide the only real means open
to those without political
or economic power to express a political point of view. They argue that other
means of influencing
political opinion either favour members of privileged groups
(eg rising through corporations or professions, lobbying)
or are insufficient (eg voting, access to a
local member and availability of a free press)
The political impact of an assembly is heightened by the broad reach of the
"The right of public assembly has traditionally been regarded as analogous
to the right of free speech, and a touchstone of the
respect given to other
civil liberties within a society. In these days of a mass media, it holds an
even greater significance
since the main way for groups within the community
to gain the attention of the media and therefore the public is by `creating'
news events by holding rallies and marches".
153. The great majority of submissions to the Committee called for the
statutory recognition of a right of peaceful assembly. A number
of submissions
referred to the ratification by Australia of the ICCPR and called for Australian
its provisions by enacting suitable
legislation. These submissions suggested that formal recognition of the
right of assembly would
enable a better balancing of this right with other
rights and interests that arise in the context of an assembly in a public
The legal treatment of participants in an assembly would not be subject
to the discretion of the police or the courts.
154. The submissions that did not support the statutory recognition of
the right generally put forward the view that the needs of
participants
in peaceful assemblies are sufficiently protected by the law as it currently
155. The purpose of formal recognition of rights, such as the right of
peaceful assembly, has been described as being
"to withdraw certain subjects from the vicissitudes of political controversy,
to place them beyond the reach of majorities and
officials and to establish
them as legal principles to be applied by the courts."
156. The Committee agrees that the legal protection of the right of peaceful
assembly is of primary importance and recommends that
the right of peaceful
assembly should be formally recognised in the ACT.
Means of Recognising the Right of Assembly
157. There are a number of means by which a right can be recognised within
law. These include common law development of a right
by the courts, the passage
of a Bill of Rights that would provide recognition for a number of rights, and
the enactment of
specific legislation to recognise a single right. The development
of the implied freedom of communication by the High Court
30 is an example of a court developed right. A `Bill of Rights' was added to
the United States
Constitution
by the first ten amendments. The
Discrimination
(ACT) provides a right of equality of treatment in a variety of
contexts, such as at work, in education, in the provision of accommodation,
regardless of a person's attributes such as marital status, race, personal conviction,
impairment or age.
158. Submissions were fairly equally divided as to whether recognition
of the right of peaceful assembly should be given through a
standard legislative
instrument, or through a Bill of Rights. A number of submissions felt that
the right would be best recognised
through the means of a Bill of Rights,
because such a Bill would provide a comprehensive guide to ACT citizens
of their recognised
civil and political rights. Other submissions felt that
recognition in an Act specifically dealing with peaceful assemblies would
be most appropriate. One submission put forward the pragmatic view that
recognition of the right in legislation was preferable because
the passage
of such an Act is more likely than the enactment of Bill of Rights.
159. As discussed above
1315 , the courts
have not to date developed a positive right of peaceful assembly. The doctrine
of precedent may make it difficult
for them to do so. In any event, the development
of fundamental rights by the courts has been criticised:
"Certainly there are reasons for believing that court-based articulations
of fundamental rights will tend to be both conservative
and biased towards a
negative idea of human rights, while a political process is more open to a more
progressive and positive
160. The Committee does not recommend the enactment of a Bill of Rights
including the right of assembly. It believes that the enactment
of Rights is a matter for the Government and would not question the decision
by the Attorney-General not to pursue the
matter further.
161. The Committee recommends that a right of peaceful assembly be recognised
in a new Peaceful Assemblies Act. It recommends that
a provision similar
in content to the first two subsections of
Assembly Act 1992
(Qld) be included in the proposed Act. Those subsections
provide that:
A person has the right to assemble peacefully with
others in a public place.
The right is subject only to such restrictions as are necessary
and reasonable in a democratic society in the interests of-
(a) public safety; or
(b) public order; or
(c) the protection of the rights and freedoms of other persons."
162. Recognition of the right of peaceful assembly should underlie all
of the provisions of the proposed Act. To emphasise that such
recognition
forms the basis of the legislation, the objects of the proposed Act should
be expressed in the following terms:
The objects of this Act are:
(a) to recognise the right of peaceful assembly in accordance with Article
21 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
(b) in conformity with Article 21, to ensure, to the greatest extent
that is practicable, that persons in the Territory enjoy the
participate in peaceful assemblies, subject only to such restrictions as
are demonstrably necessary in the interests of
public order and safety or
to protect the rights and freedoms of other persons.
Legislative Responses - ACT and Queensland
163. Legislative recognition of the right of peaceful assembly was provided
Public Assemblies Ordinance 1982
(ACT) and is provided by
Peaceful Assemblies Act 1992
(Qld). The Committee has carefully
examined these legislative instruments in developing its recommendations.
The Committee considers
that a description of the legislation would provide
a useful background to its further recommendations.
Public Assemblies Ordinance 1982
164. The Federal Government made the Public Assemblies Ordinance in response
to the controversy aroused by amendments to the Traffic
Ordinance made in 1981.
The then ACT House of Assembly opposed the introduction of the Public Assemblies
Ordinance, although it did recognise the need
for consolidated legislation dealing
with public assemblies in the ACT. The Ordinance was repealed in 1983.
165. The Ordinance recognised a general right of peaceful assembly as set out
in the ICCPR.
The Ordinance established
notification provisions whereby organisers of public assemblies could notify
the Commissioner of
the Australian Federal Police of the intention to hold an
assembly. Notification was not compulsory - participation in a non-notified
assembly was lawful - but participants in a notified assembly received immunity
from certain offences relating to obstruction
of traffic.
166. To notify the Commissioner of a proposed assembly, the organisers were
required to serve a notice containing certain details
of the assembly in accordance
with the Ordinance.
If notification was
made not less than seven days prior to the date of the proposed assembly, the
Commissioner had the following
(a) authorising the assembly without conditions;
(b) authorising the assembly subject to terms or conditions;
(c) opposing the assembly, if he or she was of the view that the assembly was
not in the public interest;
(d) obtaining an order from the Supreme Court to prohibit the holding of an
assembly, after considering representations of the
organisers.
167. If the Commissioner informed the organisers that he or she opposed the
assembly, the assembly was not authorised and the participants
did not receive
the benefit of immunity. If the Commissioner did not, within three days of the
notification, inform the assembly
organisers that he or she opposed the holding
of the assembly, the assembly was presumed to be authorised.
168. If terms and conditions were imposed by the Commissioner and were not
varied or set aside by a court, the participants in
an assembly were required
to observe those conditions or risk losing immunity.
169. Where notice was given to the Commissioner less than seven days prior
to the assembly and the Commissioner had not informed
the organisers of his
or her approval, or had informed the organisers that he or she opposed the assembly,
the organisers were
required to apply to the court for authorisation of the
assembly in order that the participants obtained the benefit of immunity.
170. The Ordinance contained additional provisions that applied to public assemblies
held on occasions that were of such significance
that their solemnity needed
to be preserved. The Ordinance specified Anzac Day and Canberra Day as two such
occasions, but
enabled the Minister to declare in the Gazette other days of
special significance.
The organiser of
a specified assembly (eg an Anzac Day march) could seek the Commissioner's approval
to limit participation
to particular persons or classes of persons.
Notification to the Commissioner of an intention to hold such an assembly had
to be concurrently published in the newspaper.
171. Any person liable to be excluded from the assembly could apply to the
Commissioner to be allowed to march.
Commissioner could oppose participation only if he or she felt that it would
not be in the public interest, having considered
the matters specified by the
Ordinance, including any objections of the organisers.
The Commissioner could, however, set terms and conditions on such participation.
A person who was refused permission to participate
within a limited participation assembly who attempted to participate and refused
to obey a direction to leave from a senior police officer was subject to a fine.
172. The Ordinance also provided that it was an offence to engage in conduct
that caused or provoked or was intended to cause or
provoke a breach of the
The Peaceful Assemblies Act 1992 (Qld)
173. A number of submissions to the Committee expressed the view that
the Peaceful Assemblies Act (Qld) would provide an appropriate
the development of ACT legislation concerning peaceful assemblies. Some
submissions did state, however, that this Act imposes
unrealistic requirements
on those who wish to assemble.
174. The Peaceful Assemblies Act explicitly recognises the right to assemble
in a public place, the only law of its kind in Australia.
It gives the participants
in an authorised public assembly considerable immunity from prosecution for
offences involving obstruction
of a public place. The right is subject only
to restrictions that are 'necessary and reasonable in a democratic society in
the interests of public safety, public order and the protection of the rights
and freedoms of other persons'. The rights protected
include the rights of members
of the public to enjoy the natural environment and the rights of persons to
carry on business.
Peaceful Assembly Act
establishes a process for the notification
of proposed assemblies. The Act emphasises the need for organisers and the
police or local
council to use negotiation to reach a mutually satisfactory
agreement regarding the holding of an assembly.
176. The first step of this process is the notification of the police and/or
the local city council of the intention of a group
to hold a public assembly.
The 'assembly notice' must be in writing and provide certain information about
the proposed assembly.
177. The police and/or city council must then decide whether they approve
of the assembly or whether they have concerns as to the
nature of the assembly
(a) the safety of persons would be likely to placed in jeopardy; or
(b) serious public disorder would be likely to happen; or
(c) the rights or freedoms of persons would be likely to be excessively interfered
178. The Commissioner or local council is not entitled to unilaterally refuse
authorisation of an assembly, but must apply to the
Magistrates Court for an
order if there are concerns. Prior to a court hearing, both parties must go
to mediation. If the parties
reach no agreement, they may apply to have the
matter determined by the Magistrates Court.
A magistrate or two justices of the peace could then determine the application.
Each party to the application must bear its
own costs regardless of the outcome.
179. It is lawful to participate in an assembly which has not been notified
or which has not been authorised by the Commissioner,
local council or court.
However, persons taking part in the assembly will not benefit from immunity
from certain street offences.
180. The full process (from notification to a possible court hearing) must
be completed within five business days of the lodgement
with the Police Commissioner
of the written notification of a proposed assembly. If the notification is not
lodged at least
five days prior to the date of the proposed assembly, the organiser
may apply to a Magistrates Court for authorisation,
if written approval has not been received from
the relevant authority
. As in other applications
to the court, a mediation session must be engaged in prior to a court hearing.
Balancing the Right of Peaceful Assembly and
Competing Rights
181. The majority of the submissions that addressed the issue of the
comparative weight to be given to the right of peaceful assembly
and competing
rights felt that the right of peaceful assembly should be a qualified right.
The exercise of the right should be balanced
with other important rights
and interests of the community. These interests might include; the interests
of personal safety and the
protection of property. There was some divergence
in views as to the extent of the qualifications to which exercise of the
should be subject. One submission suggested that `inconvenience to
the public [should be] kept to a minimum', whilst another stated
right to conduct a public assembly should remain a superior right' and that
any restriction of the right should require
`full and justified reasoning'.
182. The Committee is of the view that the right of peaceful assembly
should not be superior to other rights to the extent that assembly
participants
are able to severely and unreasonably restrict the rights of others. It
believes that cooperation and negotiation are
the keys to ensuring that
the right of peaceful assembly is balanced with the rights of others in
the community.
183. The success of Summernats in recent years has amply illustrated
that a cooperative approach to the organisation of assemblies
can effectively
enable the balancing of the rights of both the participants and the general
populace. In that instance, prior discussion
and negotiation between the
organisers and relevant government agencies has transformed an event that
was perceived as being `lawless'
to a successful, relatively incident-free
meeting of enthusiasts.
Notification of Assemblies
184. In order for negotiation to take place, the relevant agencies must
have prior awareness of a proposed assembly. The Committee
therefore believes
that it is in the interests of participants, police, other government agencies
and the public that the organisers
of assemblies be encouraged to notify
their intentions in advance.
185. Apart from the creation of an atmosphere of cooperation, notification
would enable the Australian Federal Police and relevant
government agencies
to deploy resources to respond with necessary services. The Australian Federal
Police would be better able to
determine how it may best balance and protect
the rights and interests, including that of safety, of protesters and other
the public area. The Department of Urban Services would have notice
to provide barricades, re-route emergency vehicles, turn off
automatic sprinklers,
provide rubbish collection, supply electricity and water, maintain toilets
and so forth. The Committee notes
that the Department of Urban Services
already provides such services to participants in sizeable public assemblies.
However, many
organisers do not realise that it is possible to notify the
Department, through Government Shopfronts, and receive such services
charge. The Department of Urban Services recognises that it is in the interests
of the ACT Government to provide certain
services rather than have protesters
find other means.
186. The Committee recommends that a voluntary system of notification be enacted
in the proposed Peaceful Assemblies Act. It does
not support a mandatory system
or a system requiring an assembly organiser to seek a licence to hold an assembly,
for a number
of reasons. Firstly, the right of peaceful assembly should not
have a lower priority than ease of policing. This is especially
the case given
that information about a proposed assembly not voluntarily given to police could
be found in other ways, such
as through monitoring the press. Secondly, it is
suggested that the majority of assembly organisers voluntarily approach the
police in any case, seeing it as in their interest to do so.
Thirdly, a mandatory system would discourage spontaneous demonstrations concerning
issues of immediate importance. Most importantly,
the imposition of a requirement
to notify of all proposed assemblies would undermine the force of a declaration
of the existence
of a right of peaceful assembly.
187. This cooperative approach should work both ways. It was pointed
out to the Committee that a system of notification will not work
Government does not announce significant dates in advance. Such dates might
include when a representative of another nation
will be visiting. Lack of
such knowledge does not enable organisers to plan ahead, including for notification.
Failure to provide
information of this sort also creates an atmosphere of
distrust that does not encourage protest organisers to assist government
An Incentive to Notify - Immunity from the Application
of Certain Laws
188. The Committee believes that organisers of assemblies should be offered
an incentive, apart from the obvious advantages of
establishing a cooperative
relationship with police and government agencies, to notify of an impending
assembly. To this end,
the Committee recommends that when assembly organisers
have notified the police of an intended assembly, and a participant has
substantially in accordance with the terms of that notification and any subsequent
agreement between organisers and
5759 , or any court imposed conditions
66 , that participant should enjoy `immunity' from a certain, limited range
of ACT laws. This immunity should have two limbs.
189. Firstly, a participant in a notified assembly should not, merely because
of that participation, incur any civil or criminal
liability because of the
obstruction of a person or vehicle in a public street or a public place. This
immunity should apply
to the common law of obstruction and all provisions in
ACT legislation relating to obstruction, including those relating to obstruction
of an official in the course of his or her duty. The Committee recognises that
this recommendation will create a legal dichotomy
between the liability of assembly
participants according to whether ACT or Commonwealth law is applicable, because
an immunity
provision in ACT law cannot operate with regard to a Commonwealth
In theory, this could result in an
assembly participant being immune from arrest for a breach of s. 19 of
Crimes (Offences Against the Government) Act 1989
(ACT) for obstructing
ACT government premises, but subject the arrest by virtue of s. 76 of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cwth) for the similar obstruction of Commonwealth government
premises. The Committee hopes that officers of the Australian Federal
would exercise their discretion to treat similar behaviour in a like manner,
whether or not it enjoys formal immunity
by virtue of the proposed Peaceful
Assemblies Act.
190. Secondly, a participant in a notified assembly should be deemed
by the proposed Peaceful Assemblies Act to be not in breach of
or threatening a breach of the peace, or behaving in a manner likely to
provoke a breach of the peace. This report will
refer to these provisions
as the `immunity provisions'.
191. The Committee recommends that immunity provisions apply to assembly
participants on an individual basis. A participant observing
notification
conditions should not lose the benefit of the immunity provisions because
other participants are not observing those
conditions. Only those participants
acting outside of those conditions should lose immunity and be subject to
the full force of the
law. The police should be able to deal with those
participants on an individual basis rather than penalising the assembly
for the transgressions of the few.
192. The immunity provisions recommended by the Committee would reflect
in the law what is in fact occurring in the ACT. Police, as
an exercise
of discretion, generally do not arrest assembly participants for marching
on public roads, occupying public places or
engaging in other peaceful behaviour
which is strictly in breach of the laws of obstruction or breach of the
peace. This situation
should continue with regard to assemblies which are
not notified. Statutory provision for that tolerance provides protesters
officers of the Australian Federal Police with certainty as to application
of the law, a certainty which application of police discretion,
laudable, does not provide.
Mechanics of Notification
Receipt of Notification
193. The Committee considers that notification of an intended assembly
should be given to one of the agencies most likely to be required
services to an assembly: the Department of Urban Services and the Australian
Federal Police.
194. The advantage of the Department of Urban Services receiving the
notification is its administrative nature. A person considering
an assembly would not be induced by the nature and purpose of the organisation
to think that he or she is being required
to `seek permission' or approval
for the holding of the assembly. However, the administrative organisation
and physical location
of the Department of Urban Services, and the fact
that it operates only during public service hours, could result in service
notification being difficult.
195. The Committee was initially concerned that assembly organisers would
be of the impression that the process of notification was
one of `seeking
permission' if notification was to be given to the Australian Federal Police.
The Committee has become aware that
many assembly organisers currently approach
the Australian Federal Police to informally notify the police of an intended
The Committee is reluctant to alter a system which apparently
operates satisfactorily. The Committee also recognises that any negotiations
with organisers as to the nature of the proposed assembly would be done
by Australian Federal Police officers rather than by the
bureaucrats of
the Department of Urban Services. A relationship of cooperation should therefore
be established between the organisers
and the police. A further important
factor is the ease of access to the police. The Australian Federal Police
has stations throughout
the ACT which are open at all times, so that notification,
even in person, would not present any problems.
196. The Committee recommends, therefore, that should assembly organisers
wish to notify a proposed assembly, notification should
be given to the
Australian Federal Police (ACT Region), at any police station within the
197. The Committee recommends that the obligation of providing advice
to other agencies requiring information about a proposed assembly
the Department of Urban Services) rest with the Australian Federal Police.
The Committee recognises that the Australian
Federal Police currently provides
such advice and would wish that provision of information to continue.
Notification Forms
198. The Committee recommends that the notification of an assembly for
the purposes of the proposed Act be in writing. A form should
be prepared,
to be entitled `Notification of Intention to Hold an Assembly' to assist
assembly organisers to provide the required
information. The Committee recommends
that notification forms be available for distribution at all police stations
and ACT Government
Shopfronts. The notification forms should require the
furnishing of the following particulars:
(a) the name(s), address(es) and telephone contact number(s) of the organiser
or organisers of the assembly;
(b) name(s) and address(es) of the organisation or organisations on whose
behalf notice is being served;
(c) name and address of person by whom notice is given;
(d) the date or dates of the assembly;
(e) the time and place at which it is expected that persons will assemble
to participate in the assembly and the time and place at
which it is expected
that the assembly will disband;
(f) any proposed route, stopping points and duration of halts;
(g) the expected number of participants;
(h) the purpose of the assembly; and
(i) a description of any sound amplification equipment to be used.
199. The form should also contain a space in which any agreement between the
organisers and the police can be noted, as will be
discussed below.
The reverse of the form should contain information
concerning the rights and responsibilities of participants, the role of the
Australian Federal Police, including the facilitative role, and other information
of use to assembly organisers and participants.
200. Service of the completed notification form could be effected in
whatever manner the organisers see fit, so long as it arrives
at a police
station at least three full days prior to the assembly. The Committee believes
that three days is the minimum period
in which necessary preparation for
an assembly, in terms of fulfilling the requirements of the Act, could be
201. Subject to any subsequent court order, the Committee recommends
that the act of notifying the Australian Federal Police of the
assembly by the service of the completed `Notification of Intention to Hold
an Assembly' form, be sufficient to invoke the
`immunity provisions' of
Provision of Incorrect Information
202. The creation of a cooperative relationship between assembly organisers
and the Australian Federal Police and government agencies
depends on the
provision of accurate information by the person completing the notification
form. The deliberate provision of incorrect
information could result in
the deployment of unnecessary and perhaps expensive resources.
Section 90B
Crimes Act 1914
(Cwth) provides:
"A person who:
(a) in a document that, under a law of a Territory, is, or is required
to be, produced or furnished to, or filed or lodged with,
a Commonwealth
knowingly makes a false statement shall be guilty of an offence. Penalty:
Imprisonment for 2 years."
204. A `Commonwealth officer' is defined by
to include a public
servant of the ACT and a member, staff member or special member of the Australian
Federal Police.
205. The Committee was unanimously of the view that a prison term is
not an appropriate penalty for an offence of knowingly providing
false information
in a document the provision of which is voluntary. A significant minority
of the Committee felt that no penalty
at all should attach to the provision
of false and misleading information in this case. The Committee is of the
view that the appropriate
penalty for the knowing provision of information
which is false and misleading is the imposition of a fine.
206. The Committee therefore recommends that the ACT Government advise
the Commonwealth that, in its opinion,
should not apply to notification made according to the proposed
Peaceful Assemblies Act. If the
is amended accordingly, the proposed
Peaceful Assemblies Act should be amended to provide for the penalty of
a fine for the knowing
provision of false and misleading information in
a notification form.
207. The Committee wishes to emphasis that, in order to attract any penalty,
the provision of false information about a proposed assembly
to the police
must be an act of a deliberate nature. The provision of false information
in the mistaken belief of its truth, or even
recklessly as to its truth,
would not attract the fine.
Role of the Australian Federal Police
208. The Committee recommends that an assembly be considered to be `notified'
for the purposes of the proposed Peaceful Assemblies
Act from the time at
which the Australian Federal Police receive the `Notification of Intention
to Hold an Assembly' form. Therefore,
if no further action is taken by the
Assistant Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police (ACT Region), each
participant in that
assembly would enjoy the benefit of the immunity provisions
so long as that participant substantially observed the terms of the notification
209. If the Assistant Commissioner, or his or her delegate, has concerns
the police and assembly organisers would take place to enable a mutually
acceptable compromise to be reached. For example,
assembly organisers and
police may agree to additional terms of notification which must be observed
by assembly participants if they
are to remain within the scope of the notification
and therefore retain their immunity. These might include an agreement to
a procession to one side of the road or to limit the duration of
an assembly in a public place.
210. The Committee recommends that a written record of any agreement
reached during negotiations be prepared for the signature of
an assembly
organiser and the Assistant Commissioner or his or her delegate. The `Notification
of Intention to Hold an Assembly'
form should contain a section in which
any agreement between the Australian Federal Police and assembly organisers
can be recorded
and signed.
211. In the event of such a compromise, and the Committee is confident
that an agreement could be reached in the vast majority of
cases, the enjoyment
of the immunity provisions by an assembly participant would depend upon
his or her observation of the terms
of the amended notification form.
212. The Committee does not recommend that there be a requirement for
a formal mediation process involving the organisers of a proposed
and a delegate of the Assistant Commissioner or a representative of the
Attorney-General. It is sceptical of the usefulness
of the mediation process
where attendance is not voluntary. It also notes that the purpose of some
assemblies is to demonstrate defiance,
a state of mind which would not augur
well for the success of a mediation process. On a more practical level,
it does not believe
that a process of mediation could be successfully concluded
within the often necessarily short time between the planning and holding
of an assembly.
213. If an agreement is not reached and the Assistant Commissioner considers
that the immunity provisions should not apply to the
assembly as originally
notified, the Committee envisages that the Assistant Commissioner would
inform the Attorney-General of his
or her concern. The Attorney-General,
at his or her discretion, would be able to take formal action, outlined
below, to seek the
denial of the benefits of the immunity provisions to
assembly participants. If the Assistant Commissioner does not notify the
Attorney-General
of his or her concerns, or if the Attorney-General refuses
to take the matter further, the Committee recommends that assembly participants
retain the benefits of the immunity provisions, subject to substantial compliance
with the original notification or as agreed with
the Australian Federal
A Power to Prohibit or Control Assemblies?
214. The recommendations of the Committee proceed from the assumption
that all peaceful assemblies are lawful. The Committee is of
the view that,
in most instances, all persons should be entitled to exercise their right
to assemble without interference from the
police, government agencies or
the Government itself. This would include the enjoyment of the benefits
of the immunity provisions
in the proposed Peaceful Assemblies Act.
215. Therefore, the Committee can see no justification for a power to
ban or limit an assembly beyond the extent to which organisers
voluntarily
agree. Participation in an assembly should not be an offence, even when
there is a perceived potential for disorder.
Therefore, the Committee recommends
that there be no power, under the proposed Peaceful Assemblies Act, to prohibit
an assembly.
216. The Committee is of the view that the police will be able to control
adequately those assembly participants who are behaving
lawlessly by having
access to the full scope of ACT law, including those laws relating to obstruction
and breach of the peace. The
Committee therefore recommends that a notified
assembly be subject only to denial of the benefits of the immunity provisions,
to the imposition of conditions which must be observed by assembly participants
if they are to retain immunity.
With Whom Should a Power of Determination Rest?
217. Whether the participants in a proposed assembly retain the benefits
of the immunity provision, and the nature of any conditions
imposed on the
retention of immunity, are important determinants of the weight given to
their right of peaceful assembly in relation
to competing interests. Where
the power of determination lies will inevitably influence how the decision
is made. Three main options
emerge from the literature, the Public Assemblies
Ordinance (ACT) and Peaceful Assemblies Act (Qld), namely, the Assistant
Commissioner
of the Australian Federal Police, a political decision-maker,
or a court.
Assistant Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police
218. The Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police was given the
power by the Public Assemblies Ordinance to determine whether
the participants
in an assembly should benefit from immunity from the laws relating to obstruction.
By informing organisers that
he or she opposed an assembly, the Commissioner
could deny authorised status, and thus immunity, to an assembly.
219. There are two advantages in giving the power of determination to the senior
officer of the Australian Federal Police (ACT
Region). Firstly, it enables decision-making
on the basis of the coal-face knowledge of the police. Secondly, it capitalises
on the demonstrated ability of the Australian Federal Police (ACT Region) to
facilitate rather than repress assemblies. A disadvantage
of such an approach
is the greater likelihood that the right of assembly will be unacceptably limited,
because a conscientious
Commissioner would be inclined to refuse immunity to
an assembly if there was any foreseeable risk of a breach of the peace
particularly given the criticism of the exercise of police discretion in the
context of public assemblies by the Supreme Court
of Tasmania in
R v Commissioner
of Police; ex p North Broken Hill
220. The Committee is of the view that the Assistant Commissioner should
not be given the task of determining whether or not an assembly
should receive
the benefit of the application of the immunity provisions, either unconditionally
or subject to conditions.
A political decision-maker
221. Whitmore, in his article discussing means of balancing the right of assembly
and competing rights, proposed that the decision
should be made by a committee
of three politicians: the Minister (in the ACT, the Attorney-General would appear
to be the relevant
Minister), a member of the Government and an opposition member.
He suggests that this political committee could seek information
from the police
and other sources as it sees fit.
222. The advantage of such an approach is that politicians are ultimately
accountable, through the ballot box, for their decisions.
They are also
able to make decisions on the basis of all information known to government.
There are a number of disadvantages of
such an approach. Firstly, the decisions
of politicians are frequently the focus of assemblies so that the examination
of a proposed
assembly may not be seen as being impartial. A political committee
may lack awareness of `coal-face' issues. A three-person political
would be cumbersome, may be difficult to convene and could easily be divided.
The Committee, as will be discussed below,
is of the view that the Attorney-General
does have an important role to play in determining whether or not assemblies
should enjoy
immunity, but does not believe that the Attorney-General should
have the final decision-making power in these cases.
223. The Peaceful Assemblies Act (Qld) requires a Magistrate, or two Justices
of the Peace, to determine whether an assembly should
have the advantage of
immunity from certain laws if the police or city council has concerns about
an impending assembly that
cannot be resolved through mediation. Similarly,
Fisse and Jones propose a notification system in which immunity can be withheld
only by order of a court (they suggest the Intermediate Court of South Australia,
which has no equivalent in the ACT).
advantages of such an approach are the standing and independence of the court.
On the other hand, Whitmore was of the view
that a judge may not be competent
to make political decisions of this nature in times of public dissension.
Fisse and Jones suggest that a possible inability of the courts to make a determination
in the short time available could be
overcome by enabling hearings to be held
in chambers.
224. The Committee recommends that the decision about whether an assembly
should be denied the benefit of the immunity provisions
or whether conditions
should be imposed (rather than agreed) on retention of immunity be a matter
for an independent court. It is
of the view that the Magistrates Court would
be the most appropriate forum because the issue is of a municipal nature,
is able to hear matters expeditiously (outside of normal working
hours if necessary), and there is available a ready avenue of appeal
a decision of a Magistrate (a hearing by one Supreme Court judge).
225. The Magistrates Court cannot exercise its jurisdiction to determine
a matter unless the matter is brought before it by a petitioner
with standing.
This raises the issue of who should have standing to apply to the court
to determine that an assembly should not have
the advantage of immunity.
226. The Committee does not support the creation of a general right in
persons `affected' by the proposed assembly to seek a court
order to remove
the benefit of immunity from assembly participants. Such a general right
would shift the balance too far from those
seeking to exercise their lawful
right. For example, if a rally was planned for Garema Place, every shopkeeper
in the vicinity could
claim to be `affected'. So might any number of shoppers.
If a march was planned using Commonwealth Avenue, a huge number of ACT motorists
and bus or taxi passengers could claim to be `affected'. If a pro-abortion
rally was planned, every Right to Life supporter could
make the claim. And
so the list might go on. Even if the test was `directly affected', the list
of potential objectors could be significant.
Nor would it be fair to limit
`affected' to those who might be economically affected. A person's social,
cultural or religious `interests'
might, to them, be every bit as important
as another person's economic interests. The Committee believes if the presumption
favour of a right to assemble, there should not be a general, or even
a restricted general, right to interfere.
227. The Committee recommends that only the ACT Government Minister with
portfolio responsibility for policing, the Attorney-General,
has the standing
to apply to the court for an order in relation to an assembly. The Attorney-General
would be represented, in practice,
by the ACT Government Solicitor. The
Committee takes this view for a number of reasons. The Attorney-General
can make a decision
whether or not to make an application to the court in
the light of all information known to the Government. An application would
be on behalf of the ACT community at large rather than on the basis of a
personal or localised interest. Finally, the Committee believes
decision to seek such an order should be a political decision, made by a
publicly accountable politician.
228. Various enactments currently provide for and regulate the institution
of proceedings by the Attorney-General.
229. An action which is similar in nature to that proposed by the Committee
is the common law action known as `relator' proceedings.
Relator proceedings
are generally proceedings in the public interest that are instituted by
the Attorney-General, either in his own
name or the name of the individual
who brought the matter to his attention. A relator action can be used to
compel the performance
of a public duty, to restrain interference with a
public right or to abate a public nuisance. Because of the public interest
of the proceedings, the Attorney-General is a necessary party. If
the Attorney-General refuses to institute relator proceedings,
the individual
has no remedy.
Crown Proceedings Act 1992
provides for proceedings in
which the Territory is a party. It does not, however, affect
"any law, custom or procedure under which the Attorney-General is entitled
or liable to sue, or be sued, or intervene in proceedings,
on behalf of the
Crown, on the relation, or on behalf of, any other person or persons or in any
other capacity or for any other
231. ACT legislation therefore recognises that the Attorney-General can
be a party to a proceeding, but does not currently provide
for a power in
the Attorney-General to institute proceedings as proposed by the Committee
in this report. Therefore, the proposed
Peaceful Assemblies Act will need
to provide:
(a) for proceedings to be instituted, on the direction of the Attorney-General,
by the ACT Government Solicitor in the name of the
Attorney-General; and
(b) for the ACT Government Solicitor to appear on behalf of the Attorney-General
in proceedings and to receive any process to be served
in proceedings.
232. Because the Committee has recommended that the Magistrates Court
have jurisdiction to hear these matters, s. 22 of the
Magistrates
Court (Civil Jurisdiction) Act 1982
will regulate the procedure in relation
to an application by the ACT Government Solicitor on behalf of the Attorney-General.
and procedural matters are otherwise regulated by other provisions
Magistrates Court (Civil Jurisdiction) Act 1982
233. Because of the limited time in which the court has to hear an application
by the Attorney-General to deny immunity to an assembly,
provision will
need to be made in the proposed Peaceful Assemblies Act for ex-parte interim
orders and the abridgment of the time
limits specified in s. 206 of
the Magistrates Court (Civil Jurisdiction) Act relating to the filing and
service of any affidavits
to be used in proceedings.
234. The Committee recommends that the Attorney-General not exercise
his discretion to take a matter to court until informal negotiation
taken place, or has been attempted, with the organisers of a proposed assembly.
This negotiation would normally take place between
the organisers and the
delegate of the Assistant Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police.
The Attorney-General may consider
suggesting to the organisers that negotiation
take place between the organisers and, perhaps, a representative of the
Attorney-General
if negotiations have not previously taken place or have
not been successful.
Orders of the Court
235. The Committee recommends that the Attorney-General be able to apply
to the Magistrates Court for one of two possible orders.
(a) the imposition of conditions on the participants of an assembly
if they are to retain immunity; and
(b) the denial of the benefits of the immunity provisions to assembly
participants, despite the notification of the assembly.
236. The Committee views denial of immunity to assembly participants
as a last resort, to be used only if the assembly would unreasonably
upon the rights of others and if it is not possible to reach a compromise
that would sufficiently diminish the risk posed
by the assembly. In the
first instance, therefore, the court should attempt to enable an assembly
to proceed subject to conditions
that the court feels would adequately balance
the right of peaceful assembly with the interests of the Canberra community.
should be able to vary the `Notification of Intention to Hold
an Assembly' by the inclusion of conditions determined by the court.
237. The court, in considering whether to impose conditions, should have
regard to the following matters:
(a) the objects of the Act, and in particular, the right of peaceful
(b) the likelihood that if the assembly was held as notified:
(i) serious public disorder would be occasioned;
(ii) the safety of any person would be placed in jeopardy;
(iii) damage to property would be occasioned; or
(iv) the assembly would cause an obstruction that would, in the circumstances,
be of unreasonable size or duration.
238. The Committee recommends that the conditions imposed by the court
should be sufficient to alleviate these concerns, but should
the fundamental nature of the assembly. The participants in that assembly
would have the benefit of immunity if they conformed
to the conditions imposed
by the court, in addition to the terms of the original notification or as
agreed by the organisers and
the Australian Federal Police.
239. The Committee is of the view that the Magistrate should consider
whether assembly participants should be denied immunity only
if the imposition
of conditions would not alleviate the risk of public disorder, either because
of the nature of the assembly or
because assembly organisers refuse to accept
the imposition of conditions. The Committee recommends that in determining
an application
from the Attorney-General for denial of `immunity' to participants
of an assembly, the court shall consider whether it would not
public interest for the assembly to which the application relates to retain
the benefits of the immunity provisions.
240. In determining whether it would not be in the public interest for
the immunity provisions to apply to an assembly, the Committee
that the Act require the court to have regard to:
(a) the objects of the Act, and in particular, the right of peaceful
(b) the likelihood that if the assembly, with the benefit of immunity,
(i) serious public disorder would be occasioned;
(ii) the safety of any person would be placed in jeopardy;
(iii) damage to property would be occasioned; or
(iv) the assembly would cause an obstruction that would, in the
circumstances, be of unreasonable size or duration.
241. The Committee recommends that the court be able to take into account
any unreasonable failure of assembly organisers to reach
a compromise through
negotiation with the Australian Federal Police or a representative of the
Attorney-General, as the case may
242. The subject of costs in the Magistrate Court is dealt with by s. 22(9)
Magistrates Court (Civil Jurisdiction) Act 1982
, which provides
"Each party to proceedings on an application shall, unless the court
otherwise orders, bear his or her own costs in the proceedings,
the court makes an order for the payment of costs in such proceedings, the
court shall direct the scale on which those
costs are to be paid by any
243. The Committee is of the view that the organisers of an assembly
should generally not be required to pay the costs of a court
hearing brought
by the Attorney-General to deny immunity to participants of a notified assembly.
In particular the Committee recommends
(a) when the Attorney-General applies to the court to deny the participants
in an assembly the benefits of the immunity provisions
or impose conditions
which must be observed in order to retain immunity; and
(b) the Magistrate determines that the assembly should not be denied
immunity and that conditions should not be imposed; and
(c) the court is satisfied that it is appropriate to do so in all the
circumstances of the case;
the organiser should be awarded any costs of representation that are
reasonably incurred, or any part of those costs that is determined
244. The Committee is of the view that costs should not generally be
awarded to the Attorney-General unless the original notification
was vexatious
or frivolous. In such a case, the Committee recommends that the court should
be able, in its discretion, to award costs
against the organiser.
245. Consequently, the Committee recommends that the proposed Peaceful
Assemblies Act specify that s. 22(9) of the
Magistrates Court (Civil
not apply to applications made by the Attorney-General
under the proposed Act.
Protecting the Right of Assembly
246. Persons who are exercising their right of peaceful assembly should
not be subject to disruptions that are tantamount to the thwarting
right. The European Commission of Human Rights held that the right of peaceful
"must include the right to protection against counter-demonstrators, because
it is only in this way that its effective exercise
can be secured to social
groups wishing to demonstrate for certain principles in highly controversial
247. In exercising one's freedom of speech a person may, in the process,
restrict another's freedom of speech, or another's freedom
to listen to
political and other addresses. Neither freedom is absolute, although it
might be argued that a person addressing a public
meeting, and those who
have attended to listen, have a right to address or listen which ought not
unreasonably be restricted. At
the end of the day, those persons' rights
might need to prevail of those of the heckler.
248. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the proposed Peaceful Assemblies
Act provide a prohibition against serious disruption
of peaceful assemblies.
It recommends the creation of an offence of interfering `seriously and unreasonably'
with an assembly. This
offence should not be available in circumstances
where the interference amounts only to a strident debate rather than a deliberate
attempt to prevent the continuation of the meeting. It should be a summary
offence punishable by a fine. The provision should stipulate
that it does
not apply to officers of the Australian Federal Police taking action to
preserve the peace. The Committee does not believe
a sentence of imprisonment
should be an option for this type of offence. If the disruption is so serious
that a prison term might
be regarded as appropriate, it is likely that the
criminal law would have been breached.
Other Recommendations
249. This chapter contains the recommendations of the Committee concerning
current laws in force in the ACT that regulate assemblies.
250. The Committee notes the support expressed in a number of submissions to
the Committee for consolidation of the law relating
to assemblies to enhance
its accessibility and minimise confusion.
41 Campbell and Whitmore, in their important work on human rights in Australia,
stated that a real need, albeit a frequently
overlooked need, in this area is
simplification of legislation. They noted that it is undesirable that legislation
with a fundamental right should be scattered through the statute books.
In this respect they supported the approach of the
Public Order (Protection
of Persons and Property) Act 1971
251. Consolidation of the law would be highly desirable. However, the
miscellany of laws which incidentally regulate assemblies in
the ACT, and
the application of a broad range of Commonwealth laws that the ACT Government
cannot amend or repeal, makes such an
outcome impracticable. The Committee's
recommendations in this chapter are therefore designed to achieve some homogeneity
laws relating to public assemblies. The amendments recommended by
the Committee would, it believes, reduce the conflict between laws
to address specific situations and isolated incidents, thereby removing
much of the confusion which currently exists concerning
legal rights and
responsibilities in this area.
ACT Provisions - Recommendations
Crimes Act 1900
252. The purpose of s. 482 of the
is to prevent disruption
of meetings held `in premises'. To this end, the provision created offences
of disrupting or threatening
to disrupt a meeting and a power of the chairperson
of a meeting to request the police to move on those who disrupt a meeting.
253. In the light of its recommendations for the creation of an offence
of disrupting a meeting within the proposed Peaceful Assemblies
Committee is of the view that the offence within s. 482 of the
are superfluous and should therefore be repealed.
254. As to the second limb of the provision, the Committee accepts that
the chairperson or convenor of a meeting has every right to
call police
if the meeting is being unreasonably disrupted. Police, in turn, are entitled
to suggest to the hecklers that they might
desist or curtail their interruptions.
The Committee does not, however, think that police should be given a general
`move-on' power
to remove hecklers at the request of the chairperson.
255. Summary offences, such as those created by s. 546A of the
, are the offences most frequently employed to regulate assemblies.
They are relatively quick and easy to process
and, being general offences, fall within the regular experience of police officers.
The very generality of the offences can be a real disadvantage to assembly participants
convicted of breaches of them. It has
been noted that:
"Perhaps the worst feature of our present law is to be found in the bewildering
array of petty criminal offences which can be called
into play by the police
in dealing with persons involved in public meetings and processions - offensive
behaviour, indecent
language, unseemly words, vagrancy, loitering, assaulting
police, obstructing police, trespass, affray and so on. None of these
has anything to do with the issues arising out of illegal demonstrations. But
participants, even unwitting and unwilling
participants, may be charged and
convicted. Thereafter they have a criminal record which gives no indication
of the real offence
committed".
256. The Committee is of the view that s. 546A of the
should not be used to unreasonably impede participation in an otherwise
lawful assembly. It notes that behaviour that is riotous,
indecent, offensive
or insulting in some contexts may not reasonably be seen in that light in
the context of an assembly whose purpose
is to make a political point.
Recommendation:
The Committee recommends that s. 482 of the
should be repealed.
The Committee recommends that s. 546A should be applied sparingly
in the case of otherwise lawful assemblies, so an not to unreasonably
the exercise of the right of peaceful assembly. The Committee would wish
to see provision made for such application in legislation.
Crimes (Offences Against the Government) Act 1989
257. Section 19 of the Act provides for a miscellany of offences on ACT
government property.
258. The Committee has no serious problem with provisions relating to
trespass, offensive or disorderly conduct and a refusal to leave
premises. These should remain criminal offences. The occupier of any premises
has a right to quiet enjoyment of that property.
The law cannot sanction
interference with that right to enable protesters to make a political point,
a point which may be more appropriately
made outside of the premises.
259. Whether the application of the provision relating to `unreasonable
obstruction' to public assemblies is not as indisputable.
What is reasonable
and unreasonable is a subjective matter. A picket line that encircles the
ACT Legislative Assembly, but which
leaves a gap a metre wide for staff
and Members to enter, may appear `reasonable' to the picketers and `unreasonable'
260. The Committee envisages that the obstruction aspect of s. 19 will
not apply when the proposed immunity provisions are applicable.
when assembly participants are subject to the full scope of the provision,
the Committee believes the word `unreasonable'
should be interpreted as
widely and liberally as possible. It should not be interpreted according
to the views of those being inconvenienced.
A picket that forces staff to
walk 200 metres out of their way should not usually be regarded as unreasonable.
One that required
them to park two or three kilometres from their place
of work might well be seen as unreasonable. One that seriously restricted
to a public hospital might be regarded as unreasonable by definition.
In the absence of any suggestion that the term has consistently
been construed
narrowly by the courts, the Committee is of the view that the provision
should be retained in its current form.
Recommendation
: The Committee recommends that s. 19 of the Crimes
(Offences Against the Government) Act should be retained, subject to the
interpretation of the term `unreasonable obstruction'.
Electoral Act 1992
Section 302
Electoral Act
is similar in its terms to s. 482
and will, like s. 482, be superseded by the provision
concerning the serious disruption of meetings recommended by the Committee
to be included in the proposed Peaceful Assemblies Act. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that s. 302 be repealed.
Recommendation:
The Committee recommends that
should be repealed.
National Land Ordinance 1989
National Land Ordinance 1989
applies the provisions of
a number of Ordinances that were in force immediately prior to self- government
to National Land. The Ordinances
are in much the same terms as a number
of Acts that are the subject of recommendations.
Recommendation:
The Committee recommends that the ACT Government
approach the Commonwealth with a request that it give consideration to amending
Ordinances that apply to National Land as a result of the operation
National Land Ordinance 1989
consistently with the Committee's
recommendations.
Public Parks Regulations
263. Regulation 21 prohibits the attendance at, involvement in, or holding
of, any assembly or meeting in a public park without permission
of the Minister.
264. The provision seems incompatible with modern notions of freedom
of assembly and speech. It is certainly incompatible with the
recommendations
of this Committee. The residents of the ACT should be free to preach to
or address whoever cares to listen to them,
and to listen to whoever wants
to address them. If they do not like what is being said, they can walk away.
If a speaker in Glebe
Park on Sunday afternoon shatters the otherwise peaceful
air with the aid of loudspeaker, to the annoyance of the general populace,
there should be other ways of dealing with the matter. Neither the speaker,
nor the willing audience, should face criminal sanction.
Recommendation
: The Committee recommends that s. 21 be repealed.
Roads and Public Places Act 1937
265. The Act deals with such things as damage to, or interference with,
`public places', alignment marks, and advertising notices.
266. Of relevance to assemblies is the prohibition in s. 12 against
exhibiting any notice on Territory property or in any adjoining
public place
without permission. Whilst the Committee can appreciate the need for a provision
which prevents, for example, government
offices being covered with advertising
posters, it is of the view that behaviour such as displaying a political
slogan, message or
`notice' on land outside Parliament House, or in a park
opposite a federal government department should not be criminal. If `exhibiting'
is interpreted widely, the simple act of holding up a placard could be construed
as being contrary to the Act.
267. The Committee is of the view that s. 12 should apply only to
permanent or semi-permanent fixtures, or the permanent affixing
of a notice
to Territory government property.
Recommendation
: The Committee recommends that the Federal Government
be asked to amend
Roads and Public Places Act 1937
so that it applies only to permanent or semi-permanent fixtures and signs
on Territory occupied property.
Theatres and Public Halls Act 1927
Theatres and Public Halls Act 1927
applies not only to
meetings, but also to other entertainment. The Committee has confined its
discussion of this Act to the meetings
269. Section 16 of the Act gives the Minister power to restrict by regulation
the classes of meetings that may be held on licensed
premises. Under s. 26,
the Minister may also ban a particular meeting `in the public interest'.
The Committee has difficulty conceiving
of a class of meeting that should
not be allowed on licensed premises, or any premises that are not already
dealt with by specific
legislation. It is also of the view that this provision,
as far as it applies to peaceful meetings, would be in conflict with the
presumption of the proposed Peaceful Assemblies Act that peaceful assemblies
should not be at risk of being banned. The Committee
recommends that s. 16,
at least to the extent that it applies to assemblies, be repealed.
270. Section 27 of the Act prohibits public entertainment or meetings
on Christmas Day and Good Friday, unless authorised by the Minister.
Committee cannot see how such a prohibition can be justified in a secular
and multi-cultural society. Public Assemblies held
on these days should
be subject to the same regulatory regime as assemblies held at all other
times. The Committee therefore recommends
that s. 27, at least to the
extent that it applies to assemblies, be repealed.
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that ss. 16 and
27 of the Theatres and Public Halls Act should be repealed, at least to
the extent that they
apply to assemblies.
Traffic Act 1937
271. The concern of s. 21 of the Traffic Act is the free passage
of people and vehicles `upon a public street'.
272. The Committee accepts that, in the normal course of events, such a provision
is necessary. However, as the Committee recommends
elsewhere, participants in
a notified assembly should generally enjoy immunity from all obstruction provisions
in ACT legislation,
including s. 21.
53 The Committee also believes that participants
in peaceful assemblies that have not been notified should have a de facto immunity
from prosecution. As discussed elsewhere in this report, the Committee believes
that participants in `non-notified' assemblies
should not be discriminated against
when it comes to applying s. 21.
As well, the Committee believes that s. 21 of the Traffic Act should refer
specifically to the relevant provisions in the
proposed Peaceful Assemblies
Act to make it clear that s. 21 is to be construed, whenever possible,
in liberal terms in accord
with the purpose of the Peaceful Assemblies Act.
Recommendation
: The Committee recommends that s. 21 should refer
specifically to the relevant provisions in the proposed Peaceful Assemblies
to make it clear that s. 21 is to be construed, whenever possible,
in liberal terms in accord with the purpose of the Peaceful Assemblies
Trespass on Territory Lands Act 1972
273. Section 4(2) of the Act prohibits trespassing on certain appropriately
sign-posted Territory property within the ACT. It also
makes it an offence
to `trespass or enter' `any garden, plantation or afforestation area or
unleased Territory Land or land occupied
by the Territory'. The Committee
cannot understand why it should be an offence to enter such land in the
course of a assembly (or
at any other time).
Recommendation
: The Committee recommends that the offence of trespassing
or any garden, plantation or afforestation area or unleased Territory Land
or land occupied by the Territory should be repealed, at least to the extent
that it applies to peaceful assemblies.
Unlawful Assemblies Ordinance 1937
274. This Ordinance appears to have its origins in a 180 year-old English law
designed to control sedition. There have apparently
been no prosecutions under
this Ordinance since at least 1971, if ever. The prohibition in s. 3(2)
against any political assembly
close to Parliament House is unacceptable in
this day and age. The Committee is of the view that the only controls required
are those to ensure that members of Parliament are not molested or obstructed
in their access to Parliament House.
have adequate powers to prevent these actions and to deal with other breaches
of the law in the vicinity of Parliament
Recommendation
: Given the powers of the Presiding Officers provided
Parliamentary Precincts Act
, and the outmoded nature of the Unlawful
Assemblies Ordinance, the Committee recommends that the ACT Government request
the Federal
Government to take steps to have at least s. 3(2) of the
Ordinance repealed.
Commonwealth Legislation - Recommendations
Approved Defence Projects Act 1947
275. Provisions in this Act enable the protection of certain long range
weapon tests from obstruction or hindrance. The Committee
is of the view
that it is very unlikely that this legislation will be utilised in the ACT.
It therefore makes no recommendation as
to its continued application.
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
Australian Federal Police Act
creates further
summary offences that are frequently used to control behaviour in the context
of assemblies. The comments made above
with respect to s. 546A of the
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) are equally applicable to this section.
277. The Committee is of the view that this provision should not be applied
so as to unreasonably impede participation in an otherwise
lawful assembly.
In particular, the Committee hopes that participants in a notified assembly
would not be subject to arrest for obstruction
by virtue of
the immunity provisions of the proposed Peaceful Assemblies Act would be
applicable with regard to obstruction provisions in ACT
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that s. 64
should be applied sparingly in the case of otherwise lawful assemblies,
so as not to unreasonably
impede the exercise of the right of peaceful assembly.
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
Section 347
Commonwealth Electoral Act
Electoral Act
(ACT) and s. 482 of the
(ACT), is designed
to prevent disorderly and disruptive behaviour at certain types of meeting.
The Committee has recommended the
replacement of the ACT provisions with
a single provision in the proposed Peaceful Assemblies Act to ensure that
all assemblies to
which ACT law apply will be treated similarly. Meetings
held for Commonwealth purposes are beyond the scope of this reference, and
the Committee feels that it should not make recommendations about what is
a Commonwealth matter. If the recommendations of the Committee
Electoral Act
are adopted, the situation may arise
in which meetings of a similar nature may be treated differently according
to whether the subjects
with which they are dealing are of an ACT or Commonwealth
Crimes Act 1914
279. Section 7A does not relate specifically to public assemblies, but
provides for the general offence of inciting or urging the
commission of
offences against the laws of the Commonwealth, including those laws relating
directly to assemblies. It may therefore
have direct application to organisers
of assemblies. The Committee is of the view that this provision should not
be used to unreasonably
impede the organisation of a peaceful assembly.
280. The Committee would hope that
, which prohibits the obstruction
or hindering of the provision of any public service by means of threat or
intimidation of any kind,
would not be used to break up a picket, of which
the essence is intimidation. This is particularly the case given the recognition
of the validity of pickets for industrial purposes by the
Industrial Relations
. It would be ludicrous if, for example, employees of the Department
of Social Security could picket their office for industrial reasons
members of the general public could not.
281. The Committee believes that the prohibition against obstructing,
resisting, hindering, using of violence against, threatening
or intimidating
a Commonwealth officer provided by
of this Act should not be
used to unreasonably impede participation in a peaceful assembly.
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that the ACT Government
advise the Commonwealth that, in its opinion, sections 7A,
Crimes Act 1914
should not be used to subvert the right of assembly
of those wishing to protest within the ACT.
Diplomatic Privileges and Immunities Act 1967
282. There is no doubt that Federal Parliament ought to have the power
to pass laws to protect diplomatic persons and premises. International
obliges it to do so. How that power is used on particular occasions may
be another matter, but it is one over which the ACT has
no legislative authority.
The ACT Government made its views forcefully known concerning the protest
against the Dili massacre outside
of the Indonesian Embassy. There was nothing
more it could do. Other than exhorting the Federal Government not to lightly
the fundamental rights of ACT residents and others subservient to
the perceived sensitivities of a foreign power, there is nothing
this Committee
can do about the matter. It would be a matter of great concern if the Commonwealth
sought to invoke the Act to control
demonstrations against visiting foreign
dignitaries in a more general way.
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that the ACT Government
advise the Commonwealth that in its opinion it should not use its powers
Act to generally limit the right of ACT residents and persons
present in the ACT to demonstrate peacefully against foreign countries
their representatives.
Industrial Relations Act 1988
Section 162
is directed at assemblies of a very specific industrial
nature. The Committee makes no recommendation concerning this provision.
National Parks and Wildlife Regulations
284. The Committee recognises that the prohibition of meetings of 15
persons or more in a National Park by regulation 25 has a purpose
overrides the right of assembly, namely the protection of precious environmental
resources. Therefore, the Committee makes
no recommendation concerning this
Parliament Act 1974
Parliament Act
relates specifically to the Parliamentary Zone
which is, generally speaking, of the sole and legitimate concern of the
Federal Government.
The Committee therefore makes no recommendation concerning
the application of this Act.
Parliamentary Precincts Act 1988
286. Similarly to the
Parliament Act
, this Act is solely concerned with
the area immediately surrounding Parliament House. The Committee has no
concerns regarding the
operation of this Act.
Public Order (Protection of Persons and Property) Act 1971
287. Provisions of this Act apply to assemblies on or near Commonwealth
and diplomatic premises, the premises of international organisations
to assemblies in the ACT generally. The Act, among other things, empowers
police to disperse an assembly of twelve or more people
if any officer of
at least the rank of sergeant reasonably believes it will lead to violence
or the damage of property.
288. The general offence provisions in this Act are very similar in nature
to the test laid down in
for what behaviour will constitute
an actual or apprehended breach of the peace.
19 Theoretically, then, the police in the ACT have a power of arrest that would
cover the same behaviour as the common law
power to prevent a breach of the
peace without the uncertainties of the common law. It must be queried why such
an apparently
broad power has apparently not been used.
289. The Committee does not believe this legislation should be capable
of being used to disperse any assembly in the ACT. Assemblies
of a purely
`local' flavour should be the concern of ACT authorities and not regulated
by federal law.
290. The best way to achieve this might be to limit the scope of the
Act to assemblies occurring on Commonwealth land. Commonwealth
authorities
might argue that the scope be extended to include `National land'. This
would give the Commonwealth power to control
assemblies on the Lake foreshores,
on major Canberra roads, and other places of shared Commonwealth-ACT interest.
While it might
be acceptable that the Commonwealth has power to control
assemblies within the parliamentary triangle, the Committee does not believe
that power should extend to other areas of National land. After all, many
demonstrations that take place in the ACT involve marches
on major thoroughfares,
such as Commonwealth Avenue, which is `National land'.
Recommendation
: The Committee recommends that the ACT Government
takes up this matter with the Federal Government with a view to limiting
Public Order (Protection of Persons and Property) Act
to Commonwealth land and the bare minimum of National land.
Referendum (Machinery Provisions) Act 1984
291. The Committee has recommended the replacement of similar provisions
in the Crimes Act (ACT) and
Electoral Act
(ACT) with a provision in the
proposed Peaceful Assemblies Act. It acknowledges that the regulation of
meetings dealing solely with
Federal issues by
Commonwealth
Electoral Act
of this Act is a matter of Federal rather
than ACT interest.
Trade Practices Act 1974
292. The prohibition of pickets amounting to secondary boycotts is a
specialist matter of Commonwealth interest, and the Committee
has no recommendation
293. This reference touches on the rights and interests of every Canberran
and every Australian. Canberra is unique in Australia in
that it is the
location of government at both national and local levels. As the national
capital, Canberra is the site of many demonstrations
concerning national
and international issues. The ACT Legislative Assembly is the focus of protests
of the ACT concerning assemblies is therefore
not only of local interest, but of national interest as well.
294. The Committee has formed the view during the course of this reference
that the law of the ACT concerning assemblies does not
adequately reflect
this community's views about the rights of assembly participants. The rights
and obligations of participants are
not clear. It does not provide clear
guidance to law enforcement officials as the how to deal with assemblies.
295. The Committee has sought to recommend reforms that more adequately
balance the rights of assembly participants and other members
of the community
than is presently the case. The Issues Paper produced for this reference
pointed out that the lack of legal recognition
given to the right of assembly
has meant that other recognised rights and interests, such as a right to
freedom of traffic flow on
public streets, have been given de facto
priority in some cases. The Committee agrees with this assessment. To address
this imbalance,
the Committee has recommended that the right of assembly
be recognised in a new Peaceful Assemblies Act. That recognition would not
cause the right to be paramount. Rather, it would sit alongside other recognised
rights and interests.
296. The Australian Federal Police, the Attorney-General and the Magistrates
Court will have the responsibility of balancing competing
rights in the
interest of the Canberra community. The way in which the rights should be
balanced will be determined according to
legislative guidelines which ensure
that proper weight is given to the right of peaceful assembly.
297. The Committee is confident that the enactment of a Peaceful Assemblies
Act and the repeal of a number of the diverse range of
provisions discussed
in this report will help to clarify the law in this area. It is hoped that
thereby assembly participants may
become better aware of their rights and
responsibilities and that the Australian Federal Police are more easily
able to ensure that
the rights of participants and other members of the
Canberra community are protected.
Annexure - Provisions Regulating Assemblies in
ACT Provisions
CRIMES ACT 1900
Misbehaviour at public meetings
A person shall not, in any premises in which a public
meeting is being held, behave in a manner that disrupts, or is likely to
the meeting.
Penalty: $1,000 or imprisonment for 6 months.
Where a person presiding at any public meeting reasonably
believes that another person in the premises in which the meeting is being
held is behaving in a manner that is disrupting, or is likely to disrupt,
the meeting, the person so presiding may request any member
of the police
force who is present to remove the other person and the member of the police
force may remove that other person accordingly.
Offensive behaviour
A person shall not in, near, or within the view or hearing
of a person in, a public place behave in a riotous, indecent, offensive
or insulting manner.
Penalty: $1,000.
CRIMES (OFFENCES AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT) ACT 1989
Additional offences on Territory premises
A person who, without reasonable excuse, trespasses on
government premises is guilty of an offence punishable, on conviction, by
fine not exceeding $100 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 1 month,
A person who--
(a) engages in unreasonable obstruction in relation to the passage of
persons or vehicles into, out of, or on government premises,
or otherwise
in relation to the use of government premises;
(b) being in or on government premises, behaves in an offensive or disorderly
(c) being in or on government premises, refuses or neglects, without
reasonable excuse, to leave those premises on being directed
to do so by
a police officer or by a person authorised in writing by a Minister or the
Territory authority occupying the premises
to give directions for the purposes
of this section;
is guilty of an offence punishable, on conviction, by a fine not exceeding
$250 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 3 months,
ELECTORAL ACT 1992
Disruption of election meetings
A person shall not, without reasonable excuse, disrupt
an election meeting.
Penalty: $500.
The chairperson of an election meeting may request
police officer to remove from the meeting any person who, in the opinion
of the chairperson, is disrupting the meeting.
Upon a request from the chairperson under subsection (2),
a police officer may take reasonable action to remove from the meeting the
person disrupting the meeting.
A person who is the subject of a request referred to in subsection
(2) shall not, without reasonable excuse, return to the meeting
the authority of the chairperson after leaving it or being removed from
Penalty: $1,000.
In this section--
"election meeting"
means a lawful public meeting held
during a pre-election period in association with the relevant election.
PUBLIC PARKS REGULATIONS
Unauthorised meetings prohibited
A person shall not, without the permission in writing of the
Minister or the Trustees (proof whereof shall lie upon him), hold or
part in any public assembly or meeting of any kind, or preach at or address
any such public assembly or meeting in a Public
ROADS AND PUBLIC PLACES ACT 1937
Damage to or interference with public places and property thereon
Any person who--
(a) wilfully or negligently damages or suffers or causes damage to be
done to; or
(b) without the permission in writing of the Minister or a Roads and
Public Places Officer (proof whereof shall lie upon the person
interferes with,
any public place or any kerbstone, watertable, gutter, footpath or other
work thereon or any fence, post, lamp, lamp post, structure
or other property
of the Territory in any public place, shall be guilty of an offence, punishable
on conviction by a fine not exceeding
50 penalty units, or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 6 months, or both fine and imprisonment.
Alignment marks etc.
Any person who, without lawful authority, pulls down, pulls
up, destroys or damages any alignment or boundary mark, or any stone,
board, public notice or other erection in or on any public place shall be
guilty of an offence, punishable on conviction by
a fine not exceeding 30
penalty units.
Exhibition of advertisements or notices
Any person who, without the permission of the Minister or
a Roads and Public Places Officer, exhibits, by any means whatsoever, upon
any property of the Territory in or adjoining any public place, any advertisement
or notice shall be guilty of an offence, punishable
on conviction by a fine
not exceeding 10 penalty units.
THEATRES AND PUBLIC HALLS ACT 1927
Classes of entertainment and meeting which may be held in licensed
The regulations may prescribe, or, in the absence of regulations
in that behalf, the Minister may determine, the classes of public
entertainment
or public meeting which may be held in any licensed building or class of
licensed building.
Where the Minister is satisfied that the holding, in any licensed
building, of a public entertainment or public meeting not included
classes of public entertainment or public meeting which may be held in that
building or the class of building to which it
belongs, would not endanger
the safety of the public, the Minister may, on payment by any person of
a fee of Two dollars for each
time the entertainment or meeting is permitted
to be held in pursuance of the licence, grant to that person a licence to
public entertainment or public meeting in that licensed building.
Where the regulations prescribe, or the Minister determines,
the classes of public entertainment or public meeting which may be held
in any licensed building or class of licensed building, a person shall not,
except in pursuance of a licence granted under this section,
hold in any
licensed building any public entertainment or public meeting of a class
other than that so prescribed or determined for
that building or the class
of building to which it belongs.
Penalty: One hundred dollars for every day during which any such public
entertainment or public meeting is so held.
Any person who, being the owner of a licensed building--
(a) lets the building for the holding of a public entertainment or public
meeting other than one which may be held therein in pursuance
of this section;
(b) receives rent in respect of the building for any day on which any
such entertainment or meeting is held in the building; or
(c) knowingly permits the building to be used for any such entertainment
or meeting,
shall be guilty of an offence.
Penalty: One hundred dollars.
Prohibition or regulation of entertainments and meetings
The Minister, whenever he is of opinion that it is in
the public interest so to do, may, notwithstanding the terms of any licence
issued under this Act, prohibit or regulate the holding of any public entertainment
or public meeting.
Any person who holds any public entertainment or public meeting
contrary to any such prohibition, or contrary to any conditions imposed
by the Minister in pursuance of the last preceding subsection, shall be
guilty of an offence.
Penalty: Forty dollars.
This section does not apply in relation to an authorised public
assembly within the meaning of the
Public Assemblies Act 1982
Public entertainments and meetings not to be held on certain days
If a public entertainment or public meeting is held on,
Christmas Day or Good Friday, the person so holding the public entertainment
or public meeting and the owner of any theatre, public hall or other building
or structure (if any) in which the entertainment or
meeting is held shall
be guilty of an offence.
Penalty: Two hundred dollars.
The last preceding subsection does not apply to any public
entertainment or public meeting the holding of which is authorised in writing
by the Minister.
TRAFFIC ACT 1937
Traffic not to be obstructed
Any person who, upon a public street--
(a) negligently or wilfully obstructs, hinders or prevents the free passage
of any person, vehicle, motor vehicle or animal,
shall be guilty of an offence.
TRESPASS ON TERRITORY LANDS ACT 1932
Trespass on Territory Lands
The Minister may cause to be placed on unleased Territory
Land or land occupied by the Territory a notice prohibiting trespass on
A person who, without reasonable excuse, trespasses or enters
(a) unleased Territory Land or land occupied by the Territory--
(i) as to which any notice is posted thereon prohibiting trespass; or
(ii) which is in the City Area and is delineated on any of the subdivisional
plans held by the Territory, and has thereon a dwelling-house;
(b) any garden, plantation or afforestation area or unleased Territory
Land or land occupied by the Territory;
is guilty of an offence punishable, on conviction, by a fine not exceeding
5 penalty units.
UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES ORDINANCE 1937
An Ordinance in relation to Unlawful Assemblies
Short title
This Ordinance may be cited as the
Unlawful Assemblies Ordinance
Unlawful assemblies
It shall not be lawful for any number of persons exceeding
twenty to meet or be assembled in the open air for any unlawful purpose
at any place within the distance of 90 metres from any part of the building
known as Parliament House, Canberra, and any person (not
being an officer
of the Commonwealth acting in the discharge of the duties of his office)
who is present at any such meeting or assembly
shall be guilty of an offence.
Penalty: Two hundred dollars or imprisonment for six months.
For the purposes of the last preceding subsection, persons
shall be deemed to have met, or to be assembled, for an unlawful purpose,
if they meet or assemble for the purpose of doing anything unlawful, or
for the purpose or on the pretext of making known their grievances,
or discussing
public affairs, or considering, preparing or presenting any petition, memorial,
complaint, remonstrance, declaration
or other address to His Majesty, or
to the Governor-General, or to both Houses or either House of the Parliament,
or to any Minister
or Officer of the Commonwealth, for the repeal or enactment
of any law, or for the alteration of matters of State.
Any member of the Police Force of the Territory, or any
officer thereto authorised in writing by the President of the Senate, the
Speaker of the House of Representatives, or the Minister may arrest without
warrant any person who appears to him to have been guilty
of an offence
against the provisions of the last preceding section.
Any person who wilfully obstructs or resists any such member
or officer while acting or attempting to act in pursuance of the last
subsection shall be guilty of an offence.
Penalty: Two hundred dollars or imprisonment for six months.
Commonwealth Legislation
APPROVED DEFENCE PROJECTS PROTECTION ACT 1947
Prevention, &c., of carrying out of defence projects.
Any person who-
(a) without reasonable cause or excuse-
(i) by boycott or threat of boycott of any person, property, work or
undertaking prevents, hinders or obstructs, or endeavours to
prevent, hinder
or obstruct, the carrying out of an approved defence project;
(ii) publishes any declaration of a boycott or threat of a boycott by
means of which the carrying out of an approved defence project
is prevented,
hindered or obstructed or is sought to be prevented, hindered or obstructed;
(iii) by speech or writing, advocates or encourages the prevention, hindrance
or obstruction of the carrying out of an approved defence
project; or
(b) by violence or threat of violence to person or property or by other
unlawful means, prevents, hinders or obstructs, or endeavours
to prevent,
hinder or obstruct, the carrying out of an approved defence project, shall
be guilty of an offence.
An offence against this section may be prosecuted summarily
or upon indictment, but an offender shall not be punished more than once
in respect of the same offence.
The punishment for an offence against this section shall be-
(a) if the offence is prosecuted summarily-a fine of not more than One
thousand dollars or imprisonment for not more than six months;
(b) if the offence is prosecuted upon indictment-a fine of not more than
Ten thousand dollars or imprisonment for not more than twelve
A prosecution for an offence against this section shall not
be instituted except by the Attorney-General or with the consent of the
Attorney-General or of a person thereto authorised in writing by the Attorney-General.
AUSTRALIAN FEDERAL POLICE ACT 1979
Assault etc.
A person shall not assault, resist, obstruct or hinder,
or aid, incite, or assist any other person to assault, resist, obstruct
hinder, a member in the execution of his duty.
(a) on conviction on indictment-imprisonment for 2 years; or
(b) on summary conviction-$2,000 or imprisonment for 12 months, or both.
The court convicting a person of an offence against subsection
(1) may, in addition to the penalty provided by that subsection, order
offender to pay such compensation as the court thinks fit for any damage
or injury caused by the offender to the uniform, clothing
or accoutrements
of the member concerned or for any medical or other expenses incurred in
the consequence of personal injury sustained
by him by reason of the offence.
COMMONWEALTH ELECTORAL ACT 1918
Disorderly behaviour at meeting
Any person who, at any public meeting to which this section
applies, acts in a disorderly manner for the purpose of preventing the
transaction
of the business for which the meeting is held shall be guilty of an offence
against this Act. Penalty: $500.
This section applies to any lawful public political meeting
held in relation to any election of members of the Parliament between
date of the issue of the writ for the election and the date of the return
of the writ.
The chairperson of any meeting to which this section applies
may direct a member of the Australian Federal Police or of the police
of a State or Territory to remove from the room or building in which the
meeting is being held any person who, in the opinion
of the chairperson,
is preventing the transaction of the business for which the meeting is held,
and thereupon the member may take
such steps as are necessary for the removal
of the person from the room or building.
Any person:
(a) who has been removed from a room or building in accordance with a
direction given under subsection (3); or
(b) whose removal from a room or building has been directed under subsection
(3) and who has left that room or building; and who,
without the authority
of the chairperson (proof whereof shall lie upon that person) returns to
that room or building while the meeting
is in progress, shall be guilty
of an offence. Penalty for contravention of this subsection: $1,000 or imprisonment
for 6 months,
CRIMES ACT 1914
Inciting to or urging the commission of offences
If any person:
(a) incites to, urges, aids or encourages; or
(b) prints or publishes any writing which incites to, urges, aids or
encourages;
the commission of offences against any law of the Commonwealth or the
carrying on of any operations for or by the commission of such
he shall be guilty of an offence.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 12 months.
Obstructing or hindering the performance of services.
Whoever, by violence to the person or property of another
person, or by spoken or written threat or intimidation of any kind to whomsoever
directed, or, without reasonable cause or excuse, by boycott or threat of
boycott of person or property-
(a) obstructs or hinders the provision of any public service by the Commonwealth
or by any Department or public authority under the
Commonwealth;
(b) compels or induces any person employed in or in connection with the
provision of any public service by the Commonwealth or by
any Department
or public authority under the Commonwealth to surrender or depart from his
employment;
(c) prevents any person from offering or accepting employment in or in
connection with the provision of any public service by the
Commonwealth
or by any Department or public authority under the Commonwealth;
(d) obstructs or hinders the transport of goods or the conveyance of
passengers in trade or commerce with other countries or among
the States;
(e) compels or induces any person employed in or in connection with the
transport of goods or the conveyance of passengers in trade
or commerce
with other countries or among the States to surrender or depart from his
employment; or
(f) prevents any person from offering or accepting employment in or in
connection with the transport of goods or the conveyance of
passengers in
trade or commerce with other countries or among the States,
shall be guilty of an offence.
Penalty: Imprisonment for one year.
Obstructing etc. public officers
A person must not intentionally and knowingly obstruct,
resist, hinder, use violence against, threaten or intimidate:
(a) a Commonwealth officer who is carrying out, or attempting to carry
out, a function or duty of such and officer; or
(b) a person who is exercising a power, or carrying out a function or
(i) under a law of the Commonwealth; or
(ii) on behalf of the Commonwealth or a public authority under the Commonwealth;
or who is attempting to exercise such a power or carry out such a function
[Includes an officer of the Australian Federal Police.]
DIPLOMATIC PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES ACT 1967
Vienna Convention On Diplomatic Relations to have force of law
Subject to this section, the provisions of Articles 1,
22 to 24 (inclusive) and 27 to 40 (inclusive) of the Convention have the
of law in Australia and in every Territory of the Commonwealth.
[Art 22(2) of the Vienna Conventions provides that "The receiving
state is under a special duty to take all appropriate steps to protect
premises of the Mission against any intrusion or damage and to prevent any
disturbance of the peace of the Mission or impairment
of its dignity."]
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS ACT 1988
This section applies if a person (the "first person")
and another person (the "second person"), in concert, engage in
conduct the
ultimate purpose of which is to protect or advance the interests
of a person or trade union in relation to industrial matters.
For the purposes of this section, the first person and the
second person, by so engaging in the conduct, are to be regarded as taking
part in a boycott if, and only if:
(a) the conduct hinders or prevents a third person from trading with
a fourth person; and
(b) neither the first nor the second person is an employee of the fourth
person; and
(c) the conduct is in support of a claim made or intended to be made
on the fourth person about an industrial matter; and
(d) an immediate and substantial purpose of the conduct is to cause substantial
loss or damage to the business of the fourth person,
and the conduct has
or is likely to have that effect.
A person must not take part in a boycott if either the third
person or the fourth person is a constitutional corporation.
A person is not regarded as taking part in a boycott by engaging
in conduct the ultimate purpose of which is substantially related
(a) the remuneration, conditions of employment, hours of work or working
conditions of that person or of another person employed by
an employer of
that person; or
(b) an employer of that person having terminated, or taken action to
terminate, the employment of that person or of another person
employed by
that employer.
A person may be regarded as taking part in a boycott by engaging
in particular conduct in concert with another person even though,
of subsection (4), the other person is not regarded as taking part in a
boycott by engaging in that conduct.
If the following persons:
(a) an organisation or organisations of employees, or an officer or officers
of such an organisation, or both such an organisation
or organisations and
such an officer or officers; and
(b) an employee, or 2 or more employees who are employed by the one employer;
engage in conduct, in concert with each other (and not in concert with
anyone else), none of them is regarded as taking part in a
boycott by engaging
in that conduct if the ultimate purpose of the conduct is substantially
related to:
(c) the remuneration, conditions of employment, hours of work or working
conditions of the employee, or of any of the employees, referred
to in paragraph(b);
(d) the employer of the employee, or of the employees, referred to in
paragraph (b) having terminated, or taken action to terminate,
the employment
of any of his or her employees.
This section does not apply if:
(a) the fourth person has freely agreed to the conduct; or
(b) the conduct was specifically authorised or approved by or under an
award, an award or order of a State industrial authority, or
a law of the
Commonwealth or of a State or Territory; or
(c) the conduct was in contemplation or furtherance of claims against
the fourth person that directly affected the persons who engaged
conduct; or
(d) the conduct was in support of industrial action engaged in by, and
was in contemplation or furtherance of claims about industrial
matters that
directly affected, persons:
(i) who were employed by the same employer as persons who engaged in
the conduct or, if the employer of those persons was a body corporate,
a related body corporate; or
(ii) who had been so employed but whose employment had been terminated.
For the purposes of paragraph (7) (d), the question whether
2 bodies corporate are related to each other is to be determined in the
same way as for the purposes of the Corporations Law.
This section does not apply to conduct if:
(a) the following persons:
(i) one or more persons ("the members"); and
(ii) one or more persons each of whom is:
(A) a trade union of which at least one of the members is a member; or
(B) an officer of such a trade union;
engage in the conduct, in concert with each other (and not in concert
with anyone else); and
(b) because of paragraph (7) (c) or (d), this section would not apply
to the conduct if it had been engaged in only by the members.
Exemption of peaceful picketing
Section 162
does not apply to conduct consisting only of
persons being present outside particular premises or a particular place
for one or more
of these purposes:
(a) obtaining information from, or communicating information to, people
wishing to enter or leave the premises or place;
(b) persuading people not to enter or leave the premises or place;
if the conduct does not involve any obstruction, molestation or intimidation
of any of those people.
NATIONAL PARKS AND WILDLIFE REGULATIONS
Public gatherings
A person must not organise or attend a public gathering
of more than 15 persons in a park or reserve.
Subregulation (1) does not apply:
(a) in an emergency; or
(b) to a gathering that is, or involves, an activity in respect of which
the person:
(i) has been granted a permit for the purposes of this regulation; or
(ii) has been granted a permit under regulation 70 for the purposes of
a provision of these Regulations other than this regulation;
(c) to an activity referred to in a plan of management for the park or
reserve, or a part of the park or reserve, in which the gathering
place or is to take place, as being envisaged by, or consistent with, the
plan of management; or
(d) to a gathering in which the traditional Aboriginal owners (if any)
of the park or reserve, or the part of the park or reserve,
where the gathering
is taking place or is to take place, are participating or are to participate;
(e) to a gathering taking place, or to take place, on land occupied under
a lease or licence granted by the Director.
Penalty: $500.
Subject to subregulation 70 (2) ("permit for an activity"),
the Director must grant a permit referred to in subparagraph (2) (b)
(a) the activity in relation to which the application for the permit
relates is approved in writing by the Board (if any) for the
park or reserve,
or the part of the park or reserve, where the gathering is to take place;
(b) the activity would not result in the capacity of:
(i) a parking area; or
(ii) fireplace or toilet facilities provided by the Director;
being exceeded; and
(c) grant of the permit would not result in 2 or more permits being granted
in respect of the same place and the same period.
PARLIAMENT ACT 1974
Parliamentary control of erection of buildings or other work within
Parliamentary zone
No building or other work is to be erected on land within
the Parliamentary zone unless:
(a) if the land is within the precincts as defined by
subsection 3
Parliamentary Precincts Act 1988
- the President of the Senate and
the Speaker of the House of Representatives jointly have; or
(b) in any other case - the Minister has;
caused a proposal for the erection of the building or work to be laid
before each House of the Parliament and the proposal has been
approved by
resolution of each House.
Subsection (1) does not prevent carrying out of work by way
of maintenance or repair of buildings or works situated on land within
Parliamentary zone, or by way of alterations to those buildings or works.
Subsection (1) does not apply to buildings and works which
have reached the documentation stage by 1 December 1974.
PARLIAMENTARY PRECINCTS ACT 1988
Control and Management of Precincts
The precincts are under the control and management of the
Presiding Officers.
The Presiding Officers may, subject to any order of either
house, take any action they consider necessary for the control and management
of the precincts.
In respect of the Ministerial Wing in Parliament House, the
powers and functions given to the Presiding Officers by subsections (1)
and (2) are subject to any limitations and conditions agreed between the
Presiding Officers and the Minister.
PUBLIC ORDER (PROTECTION OF PERSONS AND PROPERTY) ACT 1971
An Act relating to the Preservation of Public Order in Certain Territories
and in respect of Commonwealth Premises, the Premises of
certain Federal
Courts and Tribunals and the Premises and Personnel of Diplomatic and Special
Missions, Consular Posts, Designated
Overseas Missions and International
Organisations.
Part I - Preliminary
Short title
This Act may be cited as the Public Order (Protection of Persons
and Property) Act 1971.
Commencement
. This Act shall come into operation on the day on which it receives
the Royal Assent.
Interpretation
In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears:
means an assembly of not less than three
persons who are assembled for a common purpose, whether or not other persons
are assembled
with them and whether the assembly is at a particular place
or moving, and includes the conduct in connection with that common purpose
of all or any of the persons in the assembly;
"Commonwealth premises"
means premises, whether in a
State or in a Territory, occupied by the Commonwealth or by a public authority
under the Commonwealth;
"constable"
means a member of the Australian Federal
Police or of the Police Force of a State or Territory;
"consular post"
means a consulate-general, consulate,
vice-consulate or consular agency established in Australia by another country
with the consent
of the Government of Australia;
"designated overseas mission"
has the same meaning as
Overseas Missions (Privileges and Immunities) Act 1995
"diplomatic mission"
means a permanent diplomatic mission
accredited to Australia by another country;
"frisk search"
means a search of a person conducted
by quickly running the hands over the person's outer clothing.
"international organisation"
means an international
governmental organisation of which Australia is a member, and includes an
agency of such an organisation;
"Police Force"
means the Australian Federal Police or
the Police Force of a State or Territory;
means any land, building or part of a building;
"prescribed staff member"
, in relation to a designated
overseas mission, means a member of the staff (including the head) of the
designated overseas mission
who is specified in regulations made for the
purposes of this definition;
Note: A person may be prescribed by name, by reference to the holding
of a specified office or position or by reference to membership
of a specified
"protected person"
means a person who is:
(a) a member of the diplomatic staff (including the head) of a diplomatic
mission or special mission;
(b) a member of the staff (including the head) of a consular post who
is entrusted with the exercise of consular functions;
(ba) a prescribed staff member of a designated overseas mission;
(c) a high officer of an international organisation; or
(d) a representative of a member of an international organisation at
a meeting of, or under the auspices of, the organisation;
but does not include a person who is an Australian citizen or is permanently
resident in Australia;
"protected premises"
means premises, whether in a State
or in a Territory:
(a) occupied for the purposes of:
(i) a diplomatic mission;
(ii) a special mission; or
(iii) a consular post;
(b) formerly occupied for purposes referred to in paragraph (a), being
premises to which Article 45 of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
or Article 27 of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations applies;
(ba) occupied for the purposes of a designated overseas mission;
(c) occupied by an international organisation, or used for the purposes
of a meeting of, or under the auspices of, an international
organisation;
(d) used as the residence of, or otherwise for the private accommodation
of, a protected person; or
(e) formerly used as the residence of, or otherwise for the private accommodation
of, the head of a diplomatic mission, being premises
to which Article 45
of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations applies;
"protective service officer"
has the same meaning as
Australian Protective Service Act 1987
"public authority under the Commonwealth"
means an authority
or body (not being an incorporated company or association) constituted by
or under a law of the Commonwealth or
of a Territory;
"screening search"
means a search of a person conducted
by equipment designed to carry out such a search without touching the person.
"special mission"
means a temporary mission which is
sent to Australia by the government of another country with the consent
of the government of Australia;
includes the Northern Territory;
"Territory"
, except in
subsection 25
(2), means:
(a) the Australian Capital Territory; or
(b) the Jervis Bay Territory; or
(c) the Territory of Christmas Island; or
(d) the Territory of Cocos (Keeling) Islands;
"unreasonable obstruction"
means an act or thing done
by a person that constitutes, or contributes to, an obstruction of, or interference
with, the exercise
or enjoyment by other persons of their lawful rights
or privileges (including rights of passage along the public streets) where,
having regard to all the circumstances of the obstruction or interference,
including its place, time, duration and nature, it constitutes
an unreasonable
obstruction or interference, and
"unreasonably obstructs"
has a corresponding meaning.
References in this Act to a member of the Australian Federal
Police shall be read as including references to a special member of
Australian Federal Police.
The Governor-General may make regulations for the purposes
of the definition of "prescribed staff member" in subsection (1).
When assembly is "in relation to" protected premises or
a protected person
For the purposes of this Act, but without limiting the operation
of this Act:
(a) an assembly is in relation to protected premises if persons in the
assembly are on protected premises, or are at a place in the
vicinity of
protected premises by reason of the fact that that place is in the vicinity
of those protected premises; and
(b) an assembly is in relation to a protected person if persons in the
assembly are at a place by reason of the fact that a protected
present at or in the vicinity of that place.
Part II - Provisions Applying In Commonwealth Territories And On Commonwealth
Assemblies involving violence or apprehension of violence
Where persons taking part in an assembly that is in a Territory
or is wholly or partly on Commonwealth premises conduct themselves,
Territory or on the Commonwealth premises, in a way that gives rise to a
reasonable apprehension that the assembly will be
carried on in a manner
involving unlawful physical violence to persons or unlawful damage to property,
each of those persons is guilty
of an offence, punishable on conviction
by a fine of not more than 20 penalty units.
A person who, in a Territory or on Commonwealth premises,
while taking part in an assembly, wilfully and without lawful excuse, does
an act or thing by way of physical violence to another person or damage
to property is guilty of an offence, punishable on conviction
by imprisonment
for not more than 12 months.
Causing actual bodily harm or damage to property
A person who, in a Territory or on Commonwealth premises, while
taking part in an assembly, wilfully and without lawful excuse causes:
(a) actual bodily harm to another person; or
(b) damage, to an extent exceeding $1,500, to property;
is guilty of an indictable offence, punishable on conviction by imprisonment,
in the case of causing actual bodily harm, for a term
not exceeding five
years or, in the case of causing damage to property, for a term not exceeding
three years.
Dispersal of certain assemblies
Where there is an assembly consisting of not less than
twelve persons in a Territory and:
(a) persons taking part in the assembly have conducted themselves in
a way that has caused a member of a Police Force of the rank
of Sergeant
or above reasonably to apprehend that the assembly will be carried on in
a manner involving unlawful physical violence
to persons or unlawful damage
to property; or
(b) the assembly is being carried on in a manner involving such unlawful
violence or damage;
a member of a Police Force of the rank of Sergeant or above may give
a direction under this section.
A direction under this section shall be given orally and in
such a manner as to be likely to be audible to the persons constituting
the assembly, or to as many of them as practicable, and shall be in accordance
with the following form or to the like effect:
In pursuance of the Public Order (Protection of Persons and Property)
Act of the Commonwealth of Australia, I [
name of police officer
being a Sergeant [
or higher rank, as the case may be
of Police Force
], direct all persons taking part in this assembly to
disperse forthwith. Persons who fail to disperse may render themselves liable
to the penalties provided by the Act.
(a) a direction is given under this section; and
(b) the assembly, to the number of not less than twelve persons, continues
after the expiration of fifteen minutes from the time of
the direction;
each of those persons who has, without reasonable excuse, failed to comply
with the direction is guilty of an offence, punishable
on conviction by
imprisonment for not more than 6 months.
For the purpose of:
(a) dispersing an assembly in respect of which a direction has been given
under this section; or
(b) dispersing or suppressing an assembly to which paragraph (1)(b) applies
(whether or not a direction has been given under this
section in respect
of the assembly);
it is lawful for a person to use such force as he believes, on reasonable
grounds, to be necessary for that purpose and is reasonably
proportioned
to the danger which he believes, on reasonable grounds, is to be apprehended
from the continuance of the assembly.
Unreasonable obstruction
A person who, in a Territory or on Commonwealth premises, while
taking part in an assembly, engages in unreasonable obstruction is
of an offence, punishable on conviction by a fine of not more than 20 penalty
Weapons, missiles etc.
A person who, in a Territory or on Commonwealth premises,
while taking part in an assembly and without lawful excuse:
(a) has in his or her possession a weapon, a missile or a destructive,
noxious or repulsive object or substance;
(b) discharges or uses a weapon or throws a missile;
(c) throws, releases or deposits a destructive, noxious or repulsive
object or substance; or
(d) throws, releases, deposits or deals with an object or substance in
a manner likely to cause injury to persons or damage to property;
is guilty of an offence.
An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction:
(a) in respect of an offence arising under paragraph (1)(a) - by a fine
of not more than 20 penalty units; or
(b) in any other case - by imprisonment for not more than 6 months.
Additional offences on premises in a Territory
A person who, without reasonable excuse, trespasses on
premises in a Territory is guilty of an offence, punishable on conviction
by a fine of not more than 10 penalty units.
A person who:
(a) engages in unreasonable obstruction in relation to the passage of
persons or vehicles into, out of, or on premises in a Territory,
or otherwise
in relation to the use of premises in a Territory;
(b) while trespassing on premises in a Territory, behaves in an offensive
or disorderly manner; or
(c) being in or on premises in a Territory, refuses or neglects, without
reasonable excuse, to leave those premises on being directed
to do so by
the occupier or a person acting with the authority of the occupier;
is guilty of an offence, punishable on conviction by a fine of not more
than 20 penalty units.
Notwithstanding section 23, the consent of the Director of
Public Prosecutions, or of a person, or of a person included in a class
of persons, authorised by the Director of Public Prosecutions for the purposes
of subsection (2) of that section, is not required
for the institution of
proceedings for the prosecution of an offence against this section.
This section is not intended to exclude or limit the concurrent
operation of any law of the Australian Capital Territory.
In this section,
does not include
Commonwealth premises.
Additional offences on Commonwealth premises
A person who, without reasonable excuse, trespasses on
Commonwealth premises is guilty of an offence, punishable on conviction
a fine of not more than 10 penalty units.
A person who:
(a) engages in unreasonable obstruction in relation to the passage of
persons or vehicles into, out of, or on Commonwealth premises,
or otherwise
in relation to the use of Commonwealth premises;
(b) being in or on Commonwealth premises, behaves in an offensive or
disorderly manner; or
(c) being in or on Commonwealth premises, refuses or neglects, without
reasonable excuse, to leave those premises on being directed
to do so by
a constable, by a protective service officer, or by a person authorised
in writing by a Minister or the public authority
under the Commonwealth
occupying the premises to give directions for the purposes of this section;
is guilty of an offence, punishable on conviction by a fine of not more
than 20 penalty units.
In proceedings arising out of this Part:
(a) a certificate in writing given by an authorised person certifying
as to any matter relevant to establishing that particular premises
or were at a particular time, Commonwealth premises is evidence of the matter
so certified; and
(b) a writing purporting to be such a certificate shall, unless the contrary
is proved, be deemed to be such a certificate and to
have been duly given.
In this section,
"authorised person"
a person in respect of whom there is in force for the time being a delegation
of any power under
section 139
Lands Acquisition Act 1989
- Provisions Relating To Premises Of Certain Federal Courts
And Tribunals
[Part Omitted]
- Provisions Relating To Diplomatic And Consular Premises
And Personnel, Designated Overseas Missions And International Organisations
Relation of Part to international law
The provisions of this Part, except in so far as they apply
in relation to designated overseas missions, are intended to assist in
effect, on the part of Australia, to the special duty imposed by international
law on a state that receives a diplomatic or
special mission, or consents
to the establishment of a consular post, to take appropriate steps to protect
the premises of the mission
or post against intrusion or damage, to prevent
any attack on the persons, freedom or dignity of the personnel of the mission
post and to prevent disturbance of the peace, or impairment of the dignity,
of the mission or post.
Assemblies involving violence or apprehension of violence
Where persons taking part in an assembly that is in relation
to protected premises or a protected person conduct themselves in a
that gives rise to a reasonable apprehension that the assembly will be carried
on in a manner involving unlawful physical violence
to persons or unlawful
damage to property, each of those persons is guilty of an offence, punishable
on conviction by a fine of not
more than 20 penalty units.
A person who, while taking part in an assembly that is in
relation to protected premises or a protected person and without lawful
excuse, does an act or thing by way of physical violence to another person
or damage to property is guilty of an offence, punishable
on conviction
by imprisonment for not more than 12 months.
Causing actual bodily harm or damage to property
A person who, while taking part in an assembly that is in
relation to protected premises or to a protected person, wilfully and without
lawful excuse causes:
(a) actual bodily harm to another person; or
(b) damage, to an extent exceeding $1,500, to property;
is guilty of an indictable offence, punishable on conviction by imprisonment,
in the case of causing actual bodily harm, for a term
not exceeding five
years or, in the case of causing damage to property, for a term not exceeding
three years.
Dispersal of certain assemblies
Where an assembly consisting of not less than twelve persons
taking place in relation to protected premises or to a protected person
(a) persons taking part in the assembly have conducted themselves in
a way that has caused a member of a Police Force of the rank
of Sergeant
or above reasonably to apprehend that the assembly will be carried on in
a manner involving:
(i) unlawful physical violence to persons or unlawful damage to property;
(ii) offences against
(b) the assembly is being carried on in a manner involving such unlawful
violence or damage, or such offences;
a member of a Police Force of the rank of Sergeant or above may give
a direction under this section.
A direction under this section shall be given orally and in
such a manner as to be likely to be audible to the persons constituting
the assembly, or to as many of them as practicable, and shall be in accordance
with the following form or to the like effect:
In pursuance of the Public Order (Protection of Persons and Property)
Act of the Commonwealth of Australia, I [
name of police officer
being a Sergeant
[or higher rank, as the case may be
of Police Force
], direct all persons taking part in this assembly to
disperse forthwith. Persons who fail to disperse may render themselves liable
to the penalties provided by the Act.
(a) a direction is given under this section; and
(b) the assembly, to the number of not less than twelve persons, continues
after the expiration of fifteen minutes from the time of
the direction;
each of those persons who has, without reasonable excuse, failed to comply
with the direction is guilty of an offence, punishable
on conviction by
imprisonment for not more than 6 months.
For the purpose of:
(a) dispersing an assembly in respect of which a direction has been given
under this section; or
(b) dispersing or suppressing an assembly to which paragraph (1)(b) applies
by reason of its being carried on in a manner involving
unlawful violence
or damage (whether or not a direction has been given under this section
in respect of the assembly);
it is lawful for a person to use such force as he or she believes, on
reasonable grounds, to be necessary for that purpose and is
reasonably proportioned
to the danger which he or she believes, on reasonable grounds, is to be
apprehended from the continuance
of the assembly.
Obstruction, assault etc.
A person who:
(a) assaults a protected person;
(b) harasses a protected person or otherwise unreasonably interferes
with the free and safe discharge of the duties of a protected
(c) behaves in an offensive, threatening or insulting manner towards
a protected person; or
(d) unreasonably obstructs a protected person;
is guilty of an offence, punishable on conviction by a fine of not more
than 20 penalty units.
Weapons, missiles etc.
A person who, while taking part in an assembly that is
in relation to protected premises or to a protected person, without lawful
(a) has in his or her possession a weapon, a missile or a destructive,
noxious or repulsive object or substance;
(b) discharges or uses a weapon or throws a missile;
(c) throws, releases or deposits a destructive, noxious or repulsive
object or substance; or
(d) throws, releases, deposits or deals with an object or substance in
a manner likely to cause injury to persons or damage to property;
is guilty of an offence.
An offence against subsection (1) is punishable on conviction:
(a) in respect of an offence arising under paragraph (1)(a) - by a fine
of not more than 20 penalty units; or
(b) in any other case - by imprisonment for not more than 6 months.
Additional offences in relation to protected premises
A person who, without reasonable excuse, trespasses on
protected premises is guilty of an offence, punishable on conviction by
fine of not more than 10 penalty units.
A person who:
(a) engages in unreasonable obstruction in relation to the passage of
persons or vehicles into, out of or on protected premises, or
in relation to the use of protected premises;
(b) while trespassing on protected premises, behaves in an offensive
or disorderly manner; or
(c) being in or on protected premises, refuses or neglects, without reasonable
excuse, to leave those premises on being directed to
do so by a constable,
by a protective service officer, by a protected person residing or performing
duties on the premises, or by
a person acting in accordance with authority
conferred on him or her by such a protected person;
is guilty of an offence, punishable on conviction by a fine of not more
than 20 penalty units.
In proceedings arising out of this Part, evidence that
persons taking part in an assembly were at a place in the vicinity of protected
premises, or were at a place at which, or in the vicinity of which, a protected
person was present, is evidence that those persons
were at that place by
reason of the fact that it was in the vicinity of the protected premises,
or by reason of the fact that the
protected person was present at or in
the vicinity of that place, as the case may be.
In proceedings arising out of this Part:
(a) a certificate in writing given by the Secretary to the Department
of Foreign Affairs, or by an officer of that Department authorised
by the Secretary to give such certificates, certifying as to any matter
relevant to establishing that:
(i) particular premises are, or were at a particular time, protected
premises; or
(ii) a particular person is, or was at a particular time, a protected
is evidence of the matter so certified; and
(b) a writing purporting to be such a certificate shall, unless the contrary
is proved, be taken to be such a certificate and to have
been duly given.
Part IV - General
A constable may, without warrant, arrest a person for an offence
against this Act if the constable has reasonable ground to believe
the person has committed that offence and that:
(a) proceedings against the person by summons would not be effective;
(b) the arrest is necessary in order to prevent persistence by the person
in, or repetition by the person of, conduct of the kind
constituting the
offence, or the commission by the person of other offences against this
Prosecutions
Offences against this Act, other than an offence against
section 7 or section 16, are punishable on summary conviction.
Proceedings for:
(a) the commitment of a person for trial on indictment for an offence
against this Act; or
(b) the summary prosecution of an offence against this Act;
shall be instituted only with the consent in writing of the Director
of Public Prosecutions, or of a person, or of a person included
of persons, authorised by the Director of Public Prosecutions, by writing,
to give such consents.
Notwithstanding that a consent has not been given in relation
to an offence in accordance with subsection (2):
(a) a person may be charged with an offence against this Act;
(b) a warrant for the arrest of a person for such an offence may be issued;
(c) a person may be arrested for such an offence; and
(d) a person charged with such an offence may be remanded in custody
or on bail;
but no further step in proceedings of a kind referred to in that subsection
shall be taken in relation to the offence until such a
consent has been
Nothing in subsection (2) prevents the discharge of the accused
if proceedings are not continued within a reasonable time.
Particulars to be furnished in respect of certain offences
Where a person charged with an offence against this Act
punishable on summary conviction has requested the informant to furnish
that person further particulars of the conduct the subject of the charge,
the court shall not proceed with the hearing of the charge
until reasonable
particulars of that conduct have been furnished to the person charged, and
may accordingly adjourn the proceedings
from time to time.
If reasonable particulars of the conduct the subject of the
charge are not furnished within a reasonable time, the court may dismiss
the charge.
Where, at the hearing of a charge for an offence to which
this section applies, evidence is given for the prosecution of conduct
would constitute such an offence but that conduct is different from the
conduct of which particulars have been given to the
person charged upon
a request under this section, the court may, on the application of the person
charged and if it is of opinion
that that person was misled by those particulars,
adjourn the hearing upon such terms as it thinks fit.
Exclusion of certain other laws
After the commencement of this Act, the common law with
respect to the offences of taking part in an unlawful assembly, a rout or
(a) does not have effect in a Territory; and
(b) does not have effect in a place that is a Commonwealth place within
the meaning of the
Commonwealth Places (Application of Laws) Act 1970
(including a place that becomes such a place after the commencement of this
Act), whether by virtue of that Act or otherwise.
An enactment specified in the Schedule to this Act, to the
extent that it was, immediately before the commencement of this Act, in
force in a Territory or, whether by virtue of the
Commonwealth Places
(Application of Laws) Act 1970
or otherwise, in a place that is a Commonwealth
place within the meaning of that Act, is repealed, and none of those enactments
by virtue of that Act or otherwise, in force in a place that becomes
a Commonwealth place, within the meaning of that Act, after
that commencement.
In subsection (2),
"Territory"
Australian Capital Territory, the Jervis Bay Territory or the Northern Territory.
It is the intention of this Act that the provisions of this
Act that apply in relation to assemblies in a State that are:
(a) on Commonwealth premises that are not a Commonwealth place within
the meaning of the
Commonwealth Places (Application of Laws) Act 1970
(b) in relation to protected premises or to a protected person;
shall so apply to the exclusion of the common law with respect to the
offences of taking part in an unlawful assembly, a rout or a
riot and to
the exclusion of the enactments specified in the Schedule to this Act.
Except as provided by this section, nothing in this Act is
intended to exclude the operation of a law of a State or Territory, whether
made before or after the commencement of this Act, to the extent that that
law is capable of operating concurrently with the express
provisions of
A reference in the Schedule to a particular enactment shall
be read as including a reference to that enactment as amended at any
and to any enactment in substitution for that enactment.
REFERENDUM (MACHINERY PROVISIONS) ACT 1984
Misconduct at public meeting
This section applies to any lawful public meeting held
in relation to a referendum during the referendum period.
Any person who, at any public meeting to which this section
applies, acts in a disorderly manner for the purpose of preventing the
transaction
of the business for which the meeting is held is guilty of an offence.
Penalty: $500.
The chairperson of a meeting to which this section applies:
(a) may direct a person who, in the opinion of the chairperson, is preventing
the transaction of the business for which the meeting
is being held, to
leave the place in which the meeting is being held; and
(b) if the person fails or refuses to leave the place in which the meeting
is being held, may direct a constable to remove the person
from that place;
and the constable may thereupon take such steps as are necessary to remove
the person.
A person who:
(a) has left a place in which a meeting to which this section applies
is being held in accordance with a direction given under paragraph
(b) has been removed from a place in which a meeting to which this section
applies is being held in accordance with a direction given
under paragraph
shall not, without the permission of the chairperson of the meeting,
Penalty for a contravention of subsection (4): $1,000 or imprisonment
for 6 months, or both.
TRADE PRACTICES ACT 1974
Subject to subsection (2), a person must not, in concert
with a second person, engage in conduct that hinders or prevents the supply
of goods or services by a third person to a fourth person, or the acquisition
of goods or services by a third person from a fourth
person, if:
(a) the third person is, and the fourth person is not, a corporation
(i) the conduct would have or be likely to have the effect of causing
a substantial lessening of competition in any market in which
person supplies or acquires goods or services; and
(ii) the conduct is engaged in for the purpose, and would have or be
likely to have the effect, of causing a substantial lessening
of competition
in any market in which the fourth person acquires goods or services; or
(b) the fourth person is a corporation and the conduct is engaged in
for the purpose, and would have or be likely to have the effect,
a substantial lessening of competition in any market in which the fourth
person supplies or acquires goods or services.
In determining whether a contravention of subsection (1) has
been committed, boycott conduct within the meaning of Division 7 of
Industrial Relations Act 1988
is to be disregarded.
This section does not affect the operation of any other provision
of this Part.
Bibliography
ACT Government, CLRC IP No. 10,
Public Assemblies and Street Offences
Publications and Public Communications, Canberra, 1994.
Peter Bailey,
Human Rights: Australia in an International Context
Butterworths, Sydney, 1990.
Roger Bird,
Osborn's Concise Law Dictionary
(7th edition), Sweet
& Maxwell, London, 1983.
Enid Campbell and Harry Whitmore,
Freedom in Australia
University Press, Sydney, 1973.
Electoral and Administrative Review Commission,
Report on Review of
Public Assembly Law
, Electoral and Administrative Review Commission,
Brisbane, 1991.
G.E. Fitzgerald QC,
Report of a Commission of Inquiry into Possible
Illegal Activities and Associated Police Misconduct,
Commission of Inquiry,
Brisbane, 1989.
Geoffrey A. Flick,
Civil Liberties in Australia
, The Law Book
Company, Sydney, 1981.
Friends of the Hearings,
Piecing it Together - Hearing the Stories
of AIDEX `91
, Penniless Publications, Canberra, 1995.
Beth Gaze and Melinda Jones,
Law, Liberty and Australian Democracy
The Law Book Company, Sydney, 1990.
Andrew Hiller,
Public Order and the Law
, The Law Book Company
Limited, Sydney, 1983.
Human Rights Commission,
The Right of Peaceful Assembly in the ACT
Occasional Paper No. 8, AGPS, Canberra, 1985.
Office of the Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Ombudsman's Report of Investigations
into Complaints Arising from Demonstrations held at AIDEX, November 1991
Office of the Commonwealth Ombudsman, September 1993.
Nick O'Neill and Robin Handley,
Retreat from Injustice. Human Rights
in Australian Law
, The Federation Press, Sydney, 1994.
Geoffrey Robertson QC,
Freedom, the Individual and the Law
ed.), Penguin Books, London, 1993.
A.T.H. Smith,
Offences Against Public Order: Including the Public
Order Act 1986
, Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1987
S. Smith and D. Shaw,
Law of Meetings
(5th ed.), MacDonald and
Evans, Plymouth, 1979.
David Williams,
Keeping the Peace. The Police and Public Order
Hutchinson of London, London, 1963.
William Birtles, `The Common Law Power of the Police to Control Public
Modern Law Review
, vol. 36, 1973, pp. 587-99.
Frank Brennan, `Avoiding Too Much Order with Too Little Law: Reflections
on the Queensland Experience', in Human Rights Commission
, The Right
of Peaceful Protest Seminar
, Australian Government Publishing Service,
Canberra, 1986, pp. 275-295
Roger A. Brown, `
"And Hast Thou Slain the Jabberwock?" The
Law Relating to Demonstrations in the A.C.T
.', Federal Law Review, vol.
6, 1974, pp. 107-49.
Tom D. Campbell, `Democracy, Human Rights, and Positive Law',
, volume 16, 1994, pp. 195-212
D.K. Ferguson, `Policing Protests', in Human Rights Commission
Right of Peaceful Protest Seminar
, Australian Government Publishing
Service, Canberra, 1986, pp. 219-227.
W.B. Fisse and J.B. Jones, `Demonstrations: Some Proposals for Law Reform',
The Australian Law Journal
, Volume 45, October, 1971, pp. 593 - 616.
Robin Handley, `Keeping People Away from Parliament',
Legal Service
, February 1987, pp. 25-27.
Robin and Jane Handley, `The Nature of Protest: Survey of the Sydney
Morning Herald and The Sun Herald for 1983', in Human Rights
The Right of Peaceful Protest Seminar
, Australian Government Publishing
Service, Canberra, 1986, pp. 383-402
A. Hiller, `Law and Order under the Public Order Act 1971',
The Australian
Law Journal
, Vol 47, 1973, pp. 251-62.
Brian Martin, `Protest in a Liberal Democracy', in Human Rights Commission
The Right of Peaceful Protest Seminar
, Australian Government Publishing
Service, Canberra, 1986, pp. 93-117.
H. Whitmore, `Demonstrations in a Crowded World',
8, 1981, pp. 17 - 21.
Paul R. Wilson, `The Media and Political Protest' in Human Rights Commission
The Right of Peaceful Protest Seminar
, Australian Government Publishing
Service, Canberra, 1986, pp. 75-92.
Australasian Meat Industry Employees' Union v Mudginberri Station
[1986] HCA 46
(1986) 60 ALJR 608.
Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
[1992] HCA 45
Ball v McIntyre
(1966) 9 FLR 237.
Duncan v Jones
[1936] 1 KB 218.
Forbutt v Blake
[1981] 51 FLR 465.
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Commission
[1997] HCA 25
Levy v Victoria
unreported High Court 31 July 1997
Mabo v Queensland
(1992) 175 CLR 1.
M'ara v Magistrates of Edinburgh
[1913] ScotCS CSIH_1
[1913] SC 1059.
McGinty v Western Australia
[1996] HCA 48
(1996) 70 ALJR 200.
Minister of State for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Ah Hin Teoh
[1995] HCA 20
(1995) 128 ALR 353.
R v Commissioner of Police; ex parte North Broken Hill Ltd
1 Tas R 99.
[1982] QB 416.
Stephens and Others v Western Australian Newspapers Ltd
[1994] HCA 45
182 CLR 211.
Svikart v Stewart
[1994] HCA 62
(1994) 181 CLR 548.
Theophanous v The Herald and Weekly Times Ltd and Another
[1994] HCA 46
182 CLR 104.
University of Sydney v Greenland and Others
[1970] 2 NSWR 350.
An example of this was the
protest following the Dili massacre, held on ACT land outside the Indonesian
Embassy, where the views
of the ACT government and the Commonwealth differed
quite markedly. Crosses were erected on ACT land with tacit ACT Government
support, yet the Commonwealth legislated for their removal.
These include the protest outside the
Indonesian embassy following the Dili massacre, the AIDEX arms fair, and the
`Summernats'
- the annual streetcar event in Canberra.
Human Rights Commission,
The Right of
Peaceful Assembly in the ACT
, Occasional Paper No. 8, AGPS, Canberra, 1985,
In December 1994, the then ACT
Attorney-General, Mr Terry Connolly MLA, tabled an Exposure Draft for a Bill of
Rights Bill in the
Legislative Assembly. The Bill recognised a number of
`fundamental freedoms'. The Bill proclaimed that `the rights and freedoms
out in this Act apply generally and are subject only to any reasonable limits
prescribed by law that are demonstrably justifiable
in a free and democratic
Discussed below, at p.47.
An excellent account of the events
surrounding AIDEX may be found in Friends of the Hearings,
Together - Hearing the Stories of AIDEX `91
, Penniless Publications,
Canberra, 1995.
Ibid, p. 330.
Office of the Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Ombudsman's Report of Investigations into Complaints Arising from
Demonstrations held at AIDEX, November 1991
Peter Clack, `Police chief vows to get
Canberra Times
, 28 November 1991, p. 1.
Office of the Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Ombudsman's Report Of Investigations Into Complaints Arising From
Demonstrations Held At AIDEX, November 1991
, Office of the Commonwealth
Ombudsman, September 1993, p. 3.
Peter Clack, `ACT to foot bill for
$300,000 protest damage',
The Canberra Times
, 30 November 1991, p. 1.
Diplomatic Privileges and Immunities (Amendment) Regulations
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade
[1992] FCA 566
(1992) 37 FCR 298.
Ibid, p. 326.
Australian Federal Police Act
Peter Bailey,
Human Rights: Australia
in an International Context
, Butterworths, Sydney, 1990, p. 299.
Geoffrey Robertson QC,
Freedom, the
Individual and the Law
(7th ed.), Penguin Books, London, 1993, p. 65.
Brian Martin, `Protest in a Liberal
Democracy', in Human Rights Commission (ed)
, The Right of Peaceful Protest
, Australian Government Publishing Service, Canberra, 1986, pp.
93-117, at p. 95.
Frank Brennan, `Avoiding Too Much Order
with Too Little Law: Reflections on the Queensland Experience', in Human Rights
, The Right of Peaceful Protest Seminar
, Australian
Government Publishing Service, Canberra, 1986, pp. 275-95, at p. 278.
Other important determinants, such as
crowd dynamics and the influence of alcohol, are unpredictable and the subject
prior control. It is arguable that these factors, rather than any
policing inadequacy, were causal influences of the violence of
the protests in
front of Parliament House in August 1996.
W.B. Fisse and J.B. Jones, `Demonstrations:
Some Proposals for Law Reform',
The Australian Law Journal
, Volume 45,
October, 1971, pp. 593-616, p. 613.
Enid Campbell and Harry Whitmore,
Freedom in Australia
, Sydney University Press, Sydney, 1973, p. 178.
Beth Gaze and Melinda Jones,
Liberty and Australian Democracy
, The Law Book Company, Sydney, 1990, p.
Alfred, Lord Tennyson,
, published 1864, quoted in Nick O'Neill and Robin Handley,
from Injustice. Human Rights in Australian Law
, The Federation Press,
Sydney, 1994, p. 86.
[1936] 1 KB 218, at 222.
Nick O'Neill and Robin Handley, op cit,
S. Smith and D. Shaw,
(5th ed.), MacDonald and Evans, Plymouth, 1979, p. 16.
Human Rights Commission, op cit, p. 6.
Beth Gaze and Melinda Jones, op cit, p.
(1992) 175 CLR 1.
Ibid, p. 30.
Ibid, p. 42.
The repeal of an enactment altering the
common law raises a presumption that the common law displaced by the enactment
is intended
to be revived. The presumption can be rebutted if it is apparent
that the legislature intended that the common law not be revived:
and Others v Smith
(1907) LCR 1617
, 1634-35, per Barton J.
Anderson v A-G (NSW)
(1987) 10 NSWLR
Geoffrey A. Flick,
Civil Liberties in
, The Law Book Company, Sydney, 1981, p. 105.
Plunkett v Kroemer
[1934] SAStRp 25
[1934] SASR
A.T.H. Smith,
Offences Against Public
Order: Including the Public Order Act 1986
, Sweet & Maxwell, London,
1987, p. 168.
[1936] 1 KB 218.
Geoffrey A. Flick, op cit, p. 112.
Roger A. Brown, op cit, p. 119.
(1981) 51 FLR 465.
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
(1981) 51 FLR 465
Wright v McQualter
(1970) 17 FLR
Nick O'Neill and Robin Handley, op cit,
p. 199; Roger A. Brown, op cit, pp. 111-12.
Ibid, p. 111.
M'Ara v Magistrates of Edinburgh
[1913] ScotCS CSIH_1
[1913] SC 1059
[1982] QB 416.
Ibid, p. 427.
Ibid, p. 426.
Forbutt v. Blake
[1981] 51 FLR 465
Bail (Amendment) Act 1994
of 1994). (However, see the discussion in CLRC 15.)
[1981] 51 FLR 465.
Ibid, p. 476.
R. Wright; Ex parte Klar
Nick O'Neill and Robin Handley, op cit,
David Williams,
Keeping the Peace.
The Police and Public Order
, Hutchinson of London, London, 1963, p. 89.
`Salus populi est suprema lex'.
Lansbury v Riley
[1914] 3 KB 229
at 234, per Avory J.
David Williams, op cit, p. 90.
Ibid, pp. 112-13.
Human Rights Commission, op cit, p. 54.
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT), s. 477.
Roger A. Brown, op cit, p. 113.
Rod Campbell, `Police learn that mass
arrests are rarely the way to deal with protests',
The Canberra Times,
28 November 1991, p. 4.
Meriton Units Pty Ltd v Rule
[1983] Australian Current Law Digest 342.
[1970] 2 NSWR 350.
Ibid, p. 351.
Nick O'Neill and Robin Handley, op cit,
Australian Capital Territory
(Self-Government) Act 1988
It should be noted that if an ACT law
is capable, at least to some extent, of operating concurrently with a
Commonwealth law, it
is taken to be consistent with that law to that extent.
[1994] HCA 62
(1994) 181 CLR 548.
The legislation referred to in this section
is not exhaustive. Provisions exist in ACT and Commonwealth legislation
applicable in
the ACT, that can be used to regulate certain public assemblies.
One such ACT Act that contains an assemblies provision is the
Cremation Act
. The provision is aimed at penalising `inappropriate' meetings and
related behaviour at cremations. A similar provision can be
found in the
Canberra Public
Cemeteries Regulations
Section 231
Customs Act
(Cwth) prohibits assemblies for the purpose of committing certain
customs-related offences. There are also a large number of general
that could conceivably be used to regulate assemblies. Most notable are those
relating to obstruction of certain officers
in the course of their duties.
Examples are s. 108 of the
Agents Act 1968
Australian Wool Corporation Act 1991
(1966) 9 FLR 237.
Ibid at p. 244.
Nick O'Neill and Robin Handley, op cit,
Ibid, p. 139.
Australian Capital Territory (Planning
and Land Management) ACT 1988
Public Order (Protection of Persons
and Property) Act 1971
[1992] HCA 45
(1992) 177 CLR 106.
Ibid at p. 140.
Ibid at p. 142.
[1994] HCA 46
(1994) 182 CLR 104.
[1994] HCA 45
(1994) 182 CLR 211.
[1996] HCA 48
(1996) 70 ALJR 200.
Ibid at p. 240.
Ibid at p. 205.
[1997] HCA 25
Unreported 31 July 1997
See the discussion of the common law
offence of obstruction above, at p. .
Roger A. Brown, op cit, p. 137.
Wright v. McQualter
Joint Standing Committee on the National
Capital and External Territories,
The Right to Protest or Demonstrate on
National Land. Background Information
, Joint Standing Committee on the
National Capital and External Territories, 1995, p. 11.
Note the wide definition given by s. 4 to `premises', being
any land, building or part of a building.
Andrew Hiller,
Public Order and the
, The Law Book Company, 1983, p. 121.
Roger A. Brown, op cit, p. 137.
Enid Campbell and Harry Whitmore, op
cit, p. 126.
Roger A. Brown, op cit, p. 138.
[1986] HCA 46
(1986) 60 ALJR 608.
International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights
, Article 2.1.
Dietrich v R
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292
[1995] HCA 20
(1995) 128 ALR 353.
Ibid, p. 363.
Polites v Commonwealth
[1945] HCA 3
, 68-9; reaffirmed in
Minister of State for Immigration and Ethnic
Affairs v Ah Hin Teoh
[1995] HCA 20
(1995) 128 ALR 353
Minister of State for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs v Ah Hin Teoh
,op cit, at 362.
ACT Government, CLRC IP No. 10,
Assemblies and Street Offences
, Publications and Public Communications,
Canberra, 1994, p. 13.
Nick O'Neill and Robin Handley, op cit,
R. v Commissioner of Police; ex p
North Broken Hill Ltd
(1992) 1 Tas R 99
Assistant Commissioner Peter Dawson,
quoted in Friends of the Hearings, op cit, pp. 338-9.
Ibid, p. 414.
Brian Martin, op cit. p. 109; Peter
Bailey, op cit, p. 299.
R. Burnett, `The Right of Peaceful
Protest in International Law', in Human Rights Commission (ed),
The Right of
Peaceful Protest Seminar
, Australian Government Publishing Service,
Canberra, 1986, pp. 243-73, at p. 245.
Brian Martin, op cit, p. 98.
Frank Brennan, op cit , p. 284.
G.E. Fitzgerald QC,
Report of a
Commission of Inquiry into Possible Illegal Activities and Associated Police
Misconduct, Commission of Inquiry
, Brisbane, 1989, p. 143.
Per Jackson J in
West Virginia Board
of Education v. Barnette
[1943] USSC 130
(1943) 319 US 624
, at 638, quoted in Roger A.
Brown, op cit, p. 147.
See discussion at p. .
See discussion at pp. -.
Tom D. Campbell, `Democracy, Human
Rights, and Positive Law',
Sydney Law Review
, vol 16, 1994, pp. 195-212,
See discussion at p 5.
s. 8(1)(a).
s. 8(1)(b).
s. 4, s. 9.
s. 8(2)(b).
Nick O'Neill and Robin Handley, op cit,
See discussion at pp. -.
See discussion at p. .
An immunity provision would be
inconsistent with the Commonwealth provision for liability, and would therefore
be invalid:
Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988
See discussion at p. .
H. Whitmore, op cit, p. 20.
Ibid, pp. - .
Ibid, p. 21.
W.B. Fisse and J. B. Jones, op cit, at
pp. 593, 596.
H. Whitmore, op cit, p. 20.
W.B. Fisse and J.B Jones, op cit, p.
"Plattform rzte fr das
Leben" v Austria 10126/82, Eur Comm HR, transcript p. 16, quoted in Nick
O'Neill and Robin Handley, op
cit, p. 177.
See discussion at p. .
Enid Campbell and Harry Whitmore, op cit, pp. 178-9.
Beth Gaze and Melinda Jones, op cit, p.
H. Whitmore, op cit, p. 19.
See discussion at p. .
See discussion at p. .
Robin Handley, `Keeping People Away
from Parliament',
Legal Service Bulletin
, February 1987, pp. 25-7, at p.
See discussion at p. .
Public Assemblies Act 1982
was repealed in
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter