URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ALRCIP/2011/40.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:33:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
National Classification Scheme Review [2011] ALRCIP 40
PDF version
is also available for viewing and download.
National Classification Scheme Review (IP 40)
Terms of Reference
List of Questions
National Classification Scheme Review
The Inquiry
The current classification system
Designing a regulatory framework
Classification categories and criteria
Reform of the cooperative scheme
Other issues
National Classification Scheme Review (IP 40)
This Issues Paper was released on 20 May 2011
Submissions to close 15 July 2011.
Make a submission
The Issues Paper
National Classification Scheme Review
has been developed in response to the request from the Attorney-General of Australia, the Hon. Robert McClelland MP, to the ALRC
to inquire and report on the framework for the classification of media content in Australia, based on the
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act
, state and territory
enforcement legislation, and the
Broadcasting Services Act
. The Terms of Reference for the inquiry were released on 24 March, and can be accessed here
http://www.alrc.gov.au/inquiries/classification/terms-reference
The Issues Paper provides an overview of the current classification system, and an assessment of its strengths and weaknesses. It
discusses the important distinctions to be made between censorship and classification, and issues concerning what should be classified
and who should do the classifying, in the context of rapid change in the media industries and media consumption patterns in a converging
technological environment. It also discusses various options for revising the regulatory framework, including direct government regulation,
co-regulation with industry, and industry self-regulation.
In releasing the Issues Paper, the ALRC is seeking wide community input into reform of the classification system, with the aim of
advising on a regulatory framework that:
is consistent across media industries, platforms, and devices
meets community expectations and is readily understood by the public
enables Australians to have ready access to a diverse range of forms of information and entertainment content across media platforms
ensures that appropriate safeguards exist to restrict the availability of inappropriate content, particularly for children
minimises the costs and regulatory burdens of compliance, and promotes competition and innovation
is enforceable and promotes public trust in the regulatory system.
The ALRC Review is occurring alongside other public consultations and reviews covering matters related to the National Classification
Scheme. These include the Convergence Review examining Australia's communications and media legislation, and the Department of Broadband,
Communications and the Digital Economy (DBCDE) review of measures to increase accountability and transparency for Refused Classification
Terms of Reference
Having regard to:
it being twenty years since the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) was last given a reference relating to Censorship and Classification
the rapid pace of technological change in media available to, and consumed by, the Australian community
the needs of the community in this evolving technological environment
the need to improve classification information available to the community and enhance public understanding of the content that is
the desirability of a strong content and distribution industry in Australia, and minimising the regulatory burden
the impact of media on children and the increased exposure of children to a wider variety of media including television, music and
advertising as well as films and computer games
the size of the industries that generate potentially classifiable content and potential for growth
a communications convergence review, and
a statutory review of Schedule 7 of the
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
and other sections relevant to the classification of content
I refer to the ALRC for inquiry and report pursuant to
subsection 20(1)
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
, matters relating to the extent to which the
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995
(the Classification Act), State and Territory Enforcement legislation, Schedules 5 and 7 of the
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
, and the Intergovernmental Agreement on Censorship and related laws continue to provide an effective framework for the classification
of media content in Australia.
Given the likelihood of concurrent Commonwealth reviews covering related matters as outlined above, the Commission will refer relevant
issues to those reviews where it would be appropriate to do so. It will likewise accept referral from other reviews that fall within
these terms of reference. Such referrals will be agreed between the relevant reviewers.
1. In performing its functions in relation to this reference, the Commission will consider:
1. relevant existing Commonwealth, State and Territory laws and practices
2. classification schemes in other jurisdictions
3. the classification categories contained in the Classification Act, National Classification Code and Classification Guidelines
4. any relevant constitutional issues, and
5. any other related matter.
2. The Commission will identify and consult with relevant stakeholders, including the community and industry, through widespread
public consultation. Other stakeholders include the Commonwealth Attorney-General's Department, the Department of Broadband, Communications
and the Digital Economy, the Australian Communications and Media Authority, the Classification Board and Classification Review
Board as well as the States and Territories.
3. The Commission is to report by 30 January 2012.
List of Questions
Approach to the Inquiry
Question 1.
In this Inquiry, should the ALRC focus on developing a new framework for classification, or improving key elements of the existing
Why classify and regulate content?
Question 2.
What should be the primary objectives of a national classification scheme?
What content should be classified and regulated?
Question 3.
Should the technology or platform used to access content affect whether content should be classified, and, if so, why?
Question 4.
Should some content only be required to be classified if the content has been the subject of a complaint?
Question 5.
Should the potential impact of content affect whether it should be classified? Should content designed for children be classified
across all media?
Question 6.
Should the size or market position of particular content producers and distributors, or the potential mass market reach of the material,
affect whether content should be classified?
Question 7.
Should some artworks be required to be classified before exhibition for the purpose of restricting access or providing consumer
Question 8.
Should music and other sound recordings (such as audio books) be classified or regulated in the same way as other content?
Question 9.
Should the potential size and composition of the audience affect whether content should be classified?
Question 10.
Should the fact that content is accessed in public or at home affect whether it should be classified?
Question 11.
In addition to the factors considered above, what other factors should influence whether content should be classified?
How should access to content be controlled?
Question 12.
What are the most effective methods of controlling access to online content, access to which would be restricted under the National
Classification Scheme?
Question 13.
How can children's access to potentially inappropriate content be better controlled online?
Question 14.
How can access to restricted offline content, such as sexually explicit magazines, be better controlled?
Question 15.
When should content be required to display classification markings, warnings or consumer advice?
Who should classify and regulate content?
Question 16.
What should be the respective roles of government agencies, industry bodies and users in the regulation of content?
Question 17.
Would co-regulatory models under which industry itself is responsible for classifying content, and government works with industry
on a suitable code, be more effective and practical than current arrangements?
Question 18.
What content, if any, should industry classify because the likely classification is obvious and straightforward?
Classification fees
Question 19.
In what circumstances should the Government subsidise the classification of content? For example, should the classification of small
independent films be subsidised?
Classification categories and criteria
Question 20.
Are the existing classification categories understood in the community? Which classification categories, if any, cause confusion?
Question 21.
Is there a need for new classification categories and, if so, what are they? Should any existing classification categories be removed
Question 22.
How can classification markings, criteria and guidelines be made more consistent across different types of content in order to recognise
greater convergence between media formats?
Question 23.
Should the classification criteria in the
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995
(Cth), National Classification Code, Guidelines for the Classification of Publications and Guidelines for the Classification of
Films and Computer Games be consolidated?
Refused Classification (RC) category
Question 24.
Access to what content, if any, should be entirely prohibited online?
Question 25.
Does the current scope of the Refused Classification (RC) category reflect the content that should be prohibited online?
Reform of the cooperative scheme
Question 26.
Is consistency of state and territory classification laws important, and, if so, how should it be promoted?
Question 27.
If the current Commonwealth, state and territory cooperative scheme for classification should be replaced, what legislative scheme
should be introduced?
Question 28.
Should the states refer powers to the Commonwealth to enable the introduction of legislation establishing a new framework for the
classification of media content in Australia?
Other issues
Question 29.
In what other ways might the framework for the classification of media content in Australia be improved?
National Classification Scheme Review
In this section:
The Inquiry
The current classification system
Designing a regulatory framework
Classification categories and criteria
Reform of the cooperative scheme
Other issues
The Inquiry
1. On 24 March 2011, the Attorney-General of Australia, the Hon Robert McClelland MP, asked the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC)
to inquire into and report on the framework for the classification of media content in Australia. The ALRC was asked to conduct widespread
public consultation across the community and industry and to provide its final Report by 30 January 2012.
Issues Paper
2. This Issues Paper has been released to form a basis for consultation. The paper is intended to encourage informed community participation
in the Inquiry by providing some background information and highlighting the issues so far identified by the ALRC as relevant. The
Issues Paper may be downloaded free of charge from the ALRC's website,
www.alrc.gov.au
3. The Issues Paper will be followed by the publication of a Discussion Paper later in 2011. The Discussion Paper will contain a more
detailed treatment of the issues, and will indicate the ALRC's current thinking in the form of specific proposals for reform. The
ALRC will then seek further submissions and undertake a further round of national consultations in relation to these proposals before
preparing its final Report by 30 January 2012.
Request for submissions
4. The ALRC invites individuals and organisations to make submissions in response to specific questions, or to any of the background
material and analysis provided.
5. There is no specified format for submissions, although the questions provided in this document are intended to provide guidance
for respondents. The ALRC welcomes submissions, which may be made in writing, by email or using the ALRC's online submission form.
Submissions made using the online submission form are preferred. Generally, submissions will be published on the ALRC website, unless
marked confidential. In the absence of a clear indication that a submission is intended to be confidential, the ALRC will treat the
submission as non-confidential.
Submissions using the ALRC's online submission form can be made at:
http://www.alrc.gov.au/inquiries/classification/respond-issues-papers
In order to inform the content of the Discussion Paper, submissions addressing the questions in this Issues Paper should reach the
ALRC by 15 July 2011.
Other inquiries
6. There are several recent and concurrent public consultations and reviews covering matters related to the ALRC Inquiry. Recent consultations
and reviews include:
the Attorney-General's Department's public consultation on an R 18+ classification for computer games;
the Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy (DBCDE) review of measures to increase accountability and transparency
for Refused Classification (RC) material.
7. Current inquiries relevant to the ALRC Inquiry include:
The Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee inquiry into the Australian film and literature classification scheme
(due to report 30 June 2011).
The House of Representatives Standing Committee on Social Policy and Legal Affairs inquiry into the regulation of billboard and outdoor
advertising.
The Convergence Review examining Australia's communications and media legislation and advising the Government on potential amendments
to keep this regulatory framework effective and appropriate for the new environment (due to report in the first quarter of 2012).
The Convergence Review incorporates a statutory review of the operation of sch 7 of the
Broadcasting Services Act
(Cth) and whether the schedule should be amended or repealed.
Approach to the Inquiry
8. The potential scope of the Inquiry is broad. In addition to considering the classification of publications, films and computer
games under the
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995
Classification Act
), the ALRC will also examine schs 5 and 7 of the
Broadcasting Services Act
and the need for a classification framework that accommodates online content.
9. To ensure that the work of related recent and current inquiries is not duplicated and that the Inquiry is completed on time, it
is important to identify from the outset the matters on which the Inquiry should focus.
10. The ALRC will focus on developing recommendations for a new or reformed classification system, rather than on detailed evaluation
of the existing system. Criticism of, and support for, aspects of the existing system are documented extensively in the literature
and in submissions to recent and current inquiries.
11. The focus of the ALRC-as indicated by the Terms of Reference-will be on the framework for classifying content given the existing
classification categories. Therefore, any consideration by the ALRC of the specific content that should be permitted or prohibited
under each of the classification categories will necessarily be at a high level of generality, to complement broader research or
consultation on prevailing community standards.
12. Finally, the ALRC does not intend to duplicate the Government's extensive consideration of a system for mandatory filtering of
online content. However, the Inquiry will consider how a national classification scheme could operate better in the online environment.
13. The ALRC is interested in comment on the general approach it should take to the Inquiry.
Question 1.
In this Inquiry, should the ALRC focus on developing a new framework for classification, or improving key elements of the existing
See Australian Government Attorney-General's Department,
Final Report on the Public Consultation on the Possible Introduction of an R18+ Classification for Computer Games
Department of Broadband Communications and the Digital Economy,
Mandatory Internet Service Provider (ISP) Filtering: Measures to Increase Accountability and Transparency for Refused Classification
Material (Consultation Paper)
See Department of Broadband Communications and the Digital Economy,
Convergence Review Framing Paper
As required by
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
(Cth) sch 7,
The current classification system
14. The current framework for the classification of media content in Australia is based on the Commonwealth
Classification Act
and complementary state and territory legislation. Online content is primarily regulated under schs 5 and 7 of the
Broadcasting Services Act
These regulatory regimes are summarised below.
National Classification Scheme
15. The National Classification Scheme (NCS) was established following recommendations made by the ALRC in its 1991 report,
Censorship Procedure
(ALRC Report 55). The report recommended establishing a legislative framework that would enable the Commonwealth, states and territories
to take a national approach to classification.
16. The NCS is an example of a Commonwealth-state cooperative scheme. The legislative framework is based on the
Classification Act
and complementary state and territory legislation (state and territory enforcement legislation).
It is underpinned by the Intergovernmental Agreement on Censorship (IGA). The IGA provides that Australian Government, State and
Territory Censorship Ministers must consider and approve certain changes to the Scheme, including amendments to the National Classification
Code and classification guidelines.
17. Under the NCS, the Classification Board, an independent statutory body, classifies certain publications, films (including videos
and DVDs), and computer games.
The Classification Review Board, also an independent statutory body, can review original classification decisions in certain circumstances
and provide a fresh classification decision.
Classification Act
provides for a range of classifications for each of the three media formats. Material must be classified in accordance with the National
Classification Code and Classification Guidelines-both agreed to by the Commonwealth and the states.
19. State and territory enforcement legislation, among other things:
prohibits the sale, distribution and advertising of unclassified material; and
restricts the sale, distribution and advertising of classified material in various ways.
20. To comply with state and territory laws, producers of classifiable products are expected to submit products for classification;
retailers and other distributors of classified products must enforce relevant point-of-sale age restrictions and adhere to advertising
and display requirements; and individuals must ensure that certain restricted material is not accessible to minors. Enforcement of
these classification laws is the responsibility of states and territories.
21. In addition, the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service (Customs) identifies and confiscates objectionable material'
at the border. The definitions of objectionable material' in the
Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulations 1956
Customs (Prohibited Exports) Regulations 1958
(Cth) substantially mirror the definition of RC material in the National Classification Code. These regulations are intended to prevent
the import and export of material that would be classified RC.
Online content
Broadcasting Services Act
establishes a co-regulatory scheme for regulating online content and content provided by mobile carriers. Schedule 5 of the
Broadcasting Services Act
sets out provisions in relation to internet content hosted outside Australia, and sch 7 does so in relation to content services,
including some content available on the internet and mobile services hosted in or provided from Australia. Broadly, the scheme constrains
internet service providers (ISPs) and content service providers of online content.
23. Under the scheme, the Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA) investigates complaints about online content that the
complainant believes to be prohibited content' or potential prohibited content' with reference to the National Classification Code.
24. Schedule 7 defines prohibited or potentially prohibited content. Generally, prohibited content is content that has been classified
by the Classification Board as X 18+ or RC and, in some cases, content classified R 18+ or MA 15+ where the content is not subject
to a restricted access system'. Content is potential prohibited content if the content has not been classified by the Classification
Board but, if it were to be classified, there is a substantial likelihood that it would be prohibited content. The Classification
Board will classify online content on receipt of an application for classification.
25. ACMA must investigate all complaints that are not frivolous, vexatious, made in bad faith, or made to undermine the effective
administration of the schedules. It may also investigate on its own initiative.
26. The action ACMA must take depends, among other things, on where the content appears to be located. Where prohibited content is
hosted in Australia, ACMA must issue a final notice to the content service provider seeking removal of the content, the link, or
service or placement behind a restricted access system, depending on the nature and classification category of the content. ACMA
must issue an interim notice for Australian-hosted potential prohibited content and apply to the Classification Board for classification
of the content. Content hosts must undertake the action required by the notice by 6pm the next business day, and financial penalties
apply for failing to comply with a notice. Where Australian-hosted prohibited or potential prohibited content is also considered
to be sufficiently serious, ACMA must notify law enforcement agencies.
27. Where prohibited or potential prohibited content is hosted outside Australia, ACMA notifies filter software makers accredited
by the internet industry in accordance with the code of practice in place under sch 5. The filters are made available by internet
service providers to their customers for free or on a cost recovery basis. Where prohibited or potential prohibited content hosted
overseas is also considered to be sufficiently serious, ACMA notifies the member hotline in the country where the content appears
to be hosted. Where no member hotline exists, ACMA notifies the Australian Federal Police for action through Interpol.
Strengths and weaknesses of the current system
28. Commentators have characterised the current classification system as having a number of important strengths and weaknesses. Some
of these are discussed briefly below.
29. Compared to the pre-1995 scheme's complex network' of laws-under which classifying one film might have involved 13 pieces of legislation
in various jurisdictions-the current classification system is widely acknowledged as an improvement.
Each year, the Classification Board makes thousands of decisions within prescribed time limits.
Few decisions attract controversy, and commentators have suggested that distributors generally have realistic expectations about
eventual classifications.
30. The Classification Board and the Classification Review Board are independent statutory bodies, operating apart from government,
industry and each other. This formal independence has been described as one of the system's very important features'.
31. The current classification system is well-known and widely understood by the public. In a 2005 survey, virtually all respondents
were familiar with the classification system for film and video, and the vast majority believed that classification symbols were
32. It has been argued that the co-regulatory system based on industry codes of practice has worked reasonably well in relation to
broadcast television in particular. In 2009-10, ACMA received 194 complaints and finalised 39 investigations into classification
matters for broadcasting content.
This figure has remained relatively static, suggesting that the bulk of viewer concerns about program classification matters are
suitably dealt with by the broadcasters themselves, and that this framework has reduced the costs of regulatory compliance since
its introduction almost 20 years ago. The question of whether such co-regulatory models provide guidance for other industries, particularly
in the fast-changing digital content sectors, will be a matter considered in this inquiry.
33. Technological developments have altered the media landscape and challenged many of the underlying assumptions of, and justifications
for, content regulation.
In Australia today, 72% of households have broadband connections, and it is estimated that this penetration rate will reach close
to 90% by 2014. It is also estimated that 3.5 million Australians will be mobile internet subscribers by 2014.
Against this background regulators face an enormous amount of internet content, much of which is more mutable, housed outside Australia,
and less amenable to border-based regulation than offline content.
34. The structure of media delivery has also changed. With the influence of media convergence, content is now available across platforms
and devices that previously had distinct functions.
Media convergence dramatically alters the practical implementation of classification principles, as news, information and entertainment
services are increasingly accessed across multiple platforms.
35. For example, new devices allow for private viewing of media that once would have been available only in public stores or venues
and which, in some instances, decrease the need to protect others from unsolicited material. Conversely, in other situations it is
harder to protect consumers-an individual's age, for example, is more difficult to authenticate online, undermining the effective
implementation of age-based restrictions.
36. These broad shifts in the media landscape have manifested themselves in practical weaknesses in the classification system. The
regulatory status of new types of media, such as mobile phone games and apps',
has been ambiguous and uncertain.
Despite frequent discussion about the need to treat similar content consistently across media platforms, there are numerous inconsistencies-for
example, the same online content is treated differently depending on where it is hosted, and RC material can be accessed online by
those seeking it.
37. Inconsistent or ineffective compliance and enforcement has also emerged as a significant issue across media contexts. Controlling
access to, and enforcing penalties for, online material poses significant challenges.
Other issues concern offline material, including distribution of unclassified or incorrectly marked material, distributors not complying
with call-in notices,
the resources required to investigate and prosecute breaches, and inconsistent enforcement provisions.
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
(Cth) schs 5, 7.
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Enforcement Act 1995
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) (Enforcement) Act 1995
Classification of Publications Act 1991
Classification of Films Act 1991
Classification of Computer Games and Images Act 1995
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Enforcement Act 1996
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Enforcement Act 1995
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) (Enforcement) Act 1995
Classification of Publications, Films and Computer Games Act 1985
Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania and the Northern Territory also have concurrent classification powers.
G Griffith,
Censorship in Australia: Regulating the Internet and Other Recent Developments-Briefing Paper No 4/02
2002 New Parliamentary Library Research Service; D McDonald, Sense and Censorbility' (Paper presented at Currency House Arts &
Public Life Breakfast, Sydney, 2007); Australian Law Reform Commission,
Censorship Procedure
, Report 55 (1990), [1.11].
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee-Parliament of Australia,
Estimates: Transcript of Public Hearing
18 October 2010, 10-11 (D McDonald) (6,468 decisions made in financial year immediately preceding review, all of which were made within
the statutory time frame).
See, eg, J McGowan, Classified Material' (2007) 22
Law Society Journal
See D Hume and G Williams, Australian Censorship Policy and the Advocacy of Terrorism'
[2009] SydLawRw 15
Sydney Law Review
, 386. See also M Ramaraj Dunstan, Australia's National Classification System for Publications, Films and Computer Games: Its Operation
and Potential Susceptibility to Political Influence in Classification Decisions'
[2009] FedLawRw 5
Federal Law Review
(describing current system as superior to ones of the past', but discussing ways in which political influence still exists).
Office of Film and Literature Classification,
Classification Study
(2005), 6, 17, 32.
Australian Communication and Media Authority,
Overview of the Australian Communications and Media Authority's interaction with the National Classification
Scheme, paper prepared for the ALRC, May 2011.
See, eg, V Scott and C Fankhauser, It's Different on the Internet: Regulating Online Content' (2010)
Internet Law Bulletin
200, 200; H Coonan, Reforming Australia's Media Legislation to Meet the Challenge of a Multi-Media Revolution'
[2007] UNSWLawJl 13
University of New South Wales Law Journal
, 233; Interactive Games and Entertainment Association,
Submission to Parliament of Australia Senate Legal and Constitutional References Committee Inquiry into the Australian Film and Literature
Classification Scheme
, 4 March 2011.
PriceWaterhouseCoopers,
Global Entertainment and Media Outlook 2010-2014
http://www.pwc.com/gx/en/global-entertainment-media-outlook
at 11 May 2011.
See Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy,
Convergence Questions and Answers
http://www.dbcde.gov.au/digital_economy/convergence_review/questions_and_answers
at 21 April 2011.
See generally L Lessig, The Law of the Horse: What Cyberlaw Might Teach'
Harvard Law Review
(an early articulation of the ways in which the internet altered the regulatory paradigm, with particular discussion of age-based
zoning' laws).
An app' refers to computer software designed for performance of a specific task. While it has typically referred to applications
related to documents (eg, graphics or accounting software), the term is increasingly used to refer to small items downloadable onto
handheld devices such as mobile phones and tablet computers that have a myriad of purposes, from productivity tools to games to news
and information.
Attorney-General's Department,
Submission to Parliament of Australia Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee Inquiry into the Australian Film
and Literature Classification Scheme,
4 March 2011, 15; Interactive Games and Entertainment Association,
Submission to Parliament of Australia Senate and Legal Constitutional Committee Inquiry into the Australian Film and Literature Classification
, 4 March 2011.
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee-Parliament of Australia,
Estimates: Transcript of Public Hearing
18 October 2010, 11 (D McDonald).
See, eg, Attorney-General's Department,
Submission to Parliament of Australia Senate and Legal Constitutional Committee Inquiry into the Australian Film and Literature Classification
4 March 2011, 14.
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee-Parliament of Australia,
Estimates: Transcript of Public Hearing
18 October 2010, 11, 14 (D McDonald); Attorney-General's Department,
Submission to Parliament of Australia Senate Legal and Constitutional References Committee Inquiry into the Australian Film and Literature
Classification Scheme
, 4 March 2011, 6.
Designing a regulatory framework
Regulatory models
38. The regulatory form is a central concept in establishing a framework for classification of media content. Regulatory forms can
be placed on a continuum of government oversight ranging from self-regulation, through quasi-regulation and co-regulation, to direct
government regulation.
Self-regulation
is generally characterised by industry-formulated rules and codes of conduct, with industry solely responsible for enforcement.
Quasi-regulation
describes those arrangements where government influences businesses to comply, but which do not form part of explicit government
regulation.
Co-regulation
typically refers to situations where industry develops and administers its own arrangements, but government provides legislative
backing to enable the arrangements to be enforced.
Direct government regulation
comprises primary and subordinate legislation. It is the most commonly used form of regulation.
39. Current regulation of media content in Australia takes several different regulatory forms. For example, audio material is currently
self-regulated under the
Recorded Music Labelling Code of Practice
There is no legislation and individual record companies are responsible for labelling recordings under a code that outlines labelling
provisions and establishes a complaints-handling mechanism.
40. An example of quasi-regulation is the agreement by Telstra, Optus and Primus to filter voluntarily a list of child abuse URLs
compiled and maintained by ACMA. This arrangement was entered into against the background of the Australian Government's proposed
system for mandatory ISP-level filtering of URLs.
41. As discussed above, a co-regulatory scheme for online content is established under the
Broadcasting Services Act
. This scheme allows for and encourages industry development of codes of practice for ISPs and content service providers of online
and mobile content. The matters that must be dealt with in the codes are specified in the legislation. For example, sch 5 of the
Broadcasting Services Act
provides that a code or industry standard must deal with, among other things, giving customers information about the availability,
use and appropriate application of internet content filtering software.
42. Regulation of radio and television content is also co-regulatory. Industry groups have developed codes under
Broadcasting Services Act
in consultation with ACMA. Most aspects of program content are governed by these codes, which include the
Commercial Television Industry Code of Practice
Commercial Radio Australia Code of Practice and Guidelines
. ACMA only registers industry codes of practice once it is satisfied that broadcasters have undertaken public consultation and
the codes are endorsed by the majority of broadcasters in the relevant sector and contain appropriate community safeguards. Once
implemented, ACMA monitors these codes and deals with unresolved complaints made under them. The industry codes of practice require
consumer complaints to be forwarded to the relevant broadcaster in the first instance.
43. Direct government regulation applies to the classification of publications, films and computer games under the
Classification Act
. For example, state and territory classification laws provide that films must usually be classified before they can be legally
sold and exhibited. Classification decisions are made by the Classification Board in accordance with criteria set out in the
Classification Act,
the National Classification Code and Classification Guidelines.
Factors in determining regulatory forms
44. The Australian Government
Best Practice Regulation Handbook
states that direct government regulation should be considered when, among other things: the problem is high-risk, of high impact
or significance; the community requires the certainty provided by legal sanctions; and there is a systemic compliance problem with
a history of intractable disputes and repeated or flagrant breaches of fair trading principles, with no possibility of effective
45. On the other hand, self-regulation-or by extension, more co-regulation-may be a feasible option if: there is no strong public
interest concern, in particular no major public health and safety concerns; the problem is a low-risk event, of low impact or significance;
and the problem can be fixed by the market itself-for example, if there are market incentives for individuals and groups to develop
and comply with self-regulatory arrangements.
46. Practical factors may also favour more self- or co-regulation if the time, effort or cost of government regulation outweighs
its benefits.
47. An overarching issue for this Inquiry is assessing an appropriate regulatory form or forms for a content classification scheme.
Questions include whether direct government regulation remains an appropriate and effective model for classifying publications,
films and computer games; what regulatory model is most appropriate and effective for online material; and what the relationship
should be between the regulatory models. These fundamental questions underpin much of the following discussion.
48. Evaluating and developing a framework for classification laws in Australia in a changed media landscape may be approached from
first principles by asking four broad questions:
Why classify and regulate content?
What content should be classified and regulated?
How should access to content be controlled?
Who should classify and regulate content?
49. These questions, all of which are closely related, will be considered in the following sections. The answers will assist the
ALRC to evaluate and develop options for reform of the classification system.
Why classify and regulate content?
50. Regulating and classifying content may be seen to have three key purposes:
providing advice to consumers to help inform their viewing choices, including warning them of material they might find offensive;
protecting children from harmful or disturbing content; and
restricting all Australians from accessing certain types of content.
51. The purpose of providing advice to consumers is reflected in the more recent preference, in policy discourse, for the term classification'
rather than censorship'-though any classification scheme is likely to also involve some censorship. Gareth Griffith has observed:
Prima facie
classification implies that nothing is banned only restricted if necessary. Classification has certainly a more neutral flavour
than the more pejorative term censorship ... Whereas censorship is suggestive of public order and idea of the public good, classification
is associated with the facilitation of informed choice in a community of diverse standards.
52. These purposes are currently reflected in the National Classification Code, which provides that classification decisions are
to give effect, as far as possible, to the following principles:
(a) adults should be able to read, hear and see what they want;
(b) minors should be protected from material likely to harm or disturb them;
(c) everyone should be protected from exposure to unsolicited material that they find offensive;
(d) the need to take account of community concerns about:
(i) depictions that condone or incite violence, particularly sexual violence; and
(ii) the portrayal of persons in a demeaning manner.
53. The Convergence Review committee has suggested that policy objectives suitable for a converging media environment should include
communications and media services available to Australians should reflect community standards and the views and expectations of the
Australian public; and
Australians should have access to the broadest possible range of content across platforms and services.
Broadcasting Services Act
itself contains similar objectives including, for example, ensuring that broadcasters and internet service and content providers
respect community standards' in relation to content, while promoting the availability of a diverse range of broadcasting and datacasting
Question 2.
What should be the primary objectives of a national classification scheme?
What content should be classified and regulated?
55. Determining what should be classified might be expected to follow from the primary purposes of regulating content, discussed
above. If the purpose of classification is to give Australians information about content they might choose to view, hear or play,
and to protect people from harmful or distressing material, then this might suggest that most content should be classified-and
certainly as much potentially harmful content as possible. However, even if it were thought useful for everything to be classified-to
provide Australians with as much information as possible-this is unlikely to be practically possible or cost-effective. Excessive
regulation might also place an unreasonable cost burden on industry, and be particularly disadvantageous to sole traders and small-to-medium
enterprises who form the backbone of an emergent digital media content sector.
56. Therefore, any new or reformed classification scheme must select which types of content should be classified or regulated. There
are a number of possible ways of thinking about content for the purpose of deciding which content should be classified. The following
highlights some ways in which content may be differentiated for these purposes. Some of the distinguishing features in the table
are built into the current classification scheme. It is important to note that the criteria listed below are not mutually exclusive,
nor is it likely that one criterion will usefully determine what should be classified. Instead, a number of overlapping criteria
are likely to help determine what should be classified.
Distinguishing features of content
physical properties of content
still image / moving image
text / image
interactive / non-interactive
sound / visual
purpose of content
literature / popular
fictional /
education / entertainment
music / other audio (eg spoken books)
pornography / art
tools (navigation app) / games (drinking app)
media and technology platform
mobile phone
computer/laptop/tablet
portable storage device (eg USB drive)
broadcast television
narrowcast or subscription television
whether part of content has already been classified
extras' on DVDs
abridged content
reproductions
whether substantially similar content has already been classified
serial issues of sexually explicit magazines
2D and 3D films
extra content, such as levels, of computer games
likely audience
size (of audience)
familiarity and awareness of the likely content
likely classification
likely to be X 18+
likely to be MA 15+ or higher
complaints to industry
complaints to ACMA
complaints to Classification Board
what is done with the content
distributed
demonstrated
showed to a minor
distributors
major distributors
user-generated
not-for-profit
feature length film
simple' games (Tetris, chess)
complex games (Grand Theft Auto)
market penetration
available online
screened at film festivals
public or private
cinema films
mobile phone games
57. Some of these important distinguishing features of content will be the focus of the following discussion about what should be
classified. However, a number of other issues also bear on the question of what should be classified, including:
who should be responsible for classification
-if an independent body, such as the Classification Board or a government entity, is required to classify all content that should
be classified, then what must be classified may depend on what is practically possible or cost-effective for such a body. If industry
had a greater role in classification, it might be possible to regulate more content.
cost of classifying material
-the more regulation, the greater the likely cost to industry and to the public. The high cost of classifying and regulating certain
content might call for increased industry involvement in classification or for some content to be excluded completely from the
regulatory regime. There is also a need for cost-effective solutions for the large number of start-up businesses, sole traders and
small-to-medium enterprises engaged in the emergent digital content industries.
with classification laws
-if compliance with some classification laws depends on active enforcement, and enforcement resources are better directed elsewhere,
it may be important to craft classification laws that do not require high levels of enforcement.
Media and technology platforms
58. The growth, diversity and convergence of media technologies has arguably undermined the distinctions between media that underpin
the current classification scheme. Currently, similar content may be subject to different regulatory requirements, classification
processes and rules, depending on the medium, technology, platform or storage device used to access and deliver the content. For
example, the same film may be subject to different regulation, or subject to classification or not, depending on whether it is shown
in a cinema, sold or rented as a DVD, accessed through the internet, broadcast on television or narrowcast on subscription television.
59. Another media-based distinction built into the NCS is the distinction between film-media and print-media. Each has separate guidelines
and although most films must be classified to be sold, only some publications need to be classified (sexually explicit magazines,
for the most part).
60. Some argue that the media used to deliver content is irrelevant to the question of whether the content should be classified.
A child will be no less distressed watching a violent film downloaded from the internet than they would be watching the same film
hired from a DVD store. Therefore, it is argued, if films on DVD must be classified, then so too should films delivered on the
61. However, the same factors might be used to argue for less regulation. If it is impossible or prohibitively costly to regulate
content delivered by one medium (eg, the internet), then it may be argued that the content should also not be regulated when delivered
on other media (eg, DVDs). The argument for consistency or parity could therefore lead to less regulation-and less information
62. As noted above, many factors arguably undermine the effect of existing Australian state and territory classification laws, including
the sheer quantity of content that may be delivered via new media, the speed with which it is released, and the fact that much
content is user-generated' or produced by small entities throughout the world. The nature of media consumers has also changed,
from passive recipients of media content to active co-creators in a more participatory media culture, as seen with multi-player
online games, blogs, citizen journalism and social media sites such as
63. The growth and convergence of media technology may suggest that the type of media on which content is delivered should not determine
whether the content should be classified.
Question 3.
Should the technology or platform used to access content affect whether content should be classified, and, if so, why?
64. Another way of distinguishing content for the purpose of deciding whether it needs to be classified is whether the content has
been the subject of a complaint-for example, to ACMA, the Classification Board, the police or other enforcement bodies-or has been
otherwise singled out by regulators.
65. The classification of online content is now largely a complaints-based system: online content will often only be classified if
someone has lodged a complaint with ACMA and if ACMA decides the content requires classification. Submittable publications, films
and computer games, on the other hand, must usually be classified whether or not anyone has complained about their content (although
the Director of the Classification Board may, upon receiving a complaint about unclassified offline content, issue a notice requiring
the relevant person to submit the content for classification).
66. Complaints-based regulation may only result in a very small proportion of content being classified, and the number of complaints
is unlikely to capture all relevant content.
Regulators may struggle to handle the number of complaints about online content. Further, an effective complaints-based system requires
high public awareness and public confidence in decision-makers.
67. However, it may be a useful way to target the most extreme and offensive content, without placing too high a regulatory burden
on industry or government regulatory authorities.
Question 4.
Should some content only be required to be classified if the content has been the subject of a complaint?
Impact level and children's content
68. The need to protect children from harmful or distressing content, and to warn all consumers about potentially distressing content,
might suggest that it is more important to regulate higher-level content. This is reflected in the current regulation of online
content, which targets material that is or would be restricted offline, and in government proposals to introduce ISP-level filtering
of content classified RC. It may be that some content does not need to be classified at all, because it is likely to have no impact,
or a negligible impact, on any viewer.
69. On the other hand many parents and guardians rely on classification information to guide their choice of entertainment for young
children. For these individuals, the differences between lower-level content-for example, the impact of a film classified G (very
mild) and a film classified PG (mild)-may be more important.
Question 5.
Should the potential impact of content affect whether it should be classified? Should content designed for children be classified
across all media?
Content from certain producers and distributors
70. Classification laws could also be directed at content distributed by companies and corporations and exclude content distributed
by individuals, such as user-generated content'. Large organisations and companies, such as the major distributors of publications,
films and computer games, may have the resources to ensure their material is classified and, under a new scheme, may also be able
to employ their own classifiers for some content.
71. Regulation targeting major distributors may mean that most of the content that has traditionally been classified and regulated
in Australia would continue to be. This content generally has the largest potential audience, and the Australian community may
particularly value and expect classification of mainstream' content.
Question 6.
Should the size or market position of particular content producers and distributors, or the potential mass market reach of the material,
affect whether content should be classified?
Other criteria for determining what should be classified
72. There are many other ways of determining what content should be classified. Another way of thinking about this question is to
ask what type of content should
need to be classified. Explicit exemptions are made for some types of film, computer game and publication under the existing NCS.
Other types of content (eg, artworks) have generally been understood to be outside the scheme, though there has been recent debate
73. Whether content must be classified now also partly depends on what is
with the content. Possessing an unclassified film is usually not illegal under state and territory classification laws, but selling
and exhibiting an unclassified film generally is.
74. The criteria used to determine what should be classified may overlap, and it is unlikely that any one criterion will be sufficient
to determine what should be classified. The ALRC welcomes any further comments or suggestions on what content should be regulated.
Question 7.
Should some artworks be required to be classified before exhibition for the purpose of restricting access or providing consumer advice?
Question 8.
Should music and other sound recordings (such as audio books) be classified or regulated in the same way as other content?
Question 9.
Should the potential size and composition of the audience affect whether content should be classified?
Question 10.
Should the fact that content is accessed in public or at home affect whether it should be classified?
Question 11.
In addition to the factors considered above, what other factors should influence whether content should be classified?
How should access to content be controlled?
75. Methods of giving information about, and controlling access to, content may include the following:
prohibiting the possession of certain content (eg, owning a film containing child abuse; downloading RC material);
blocking or filtering certain online content;
prohibiting or restricting the sale, demonstration, public exhibition, broadcasting of certain content (eg, sale of unclassified
material and RC films);
prohibiting the creation of certain content (eg, making a film containing child abuse; uploading RC material);
prohibiting making certain content publicly available;
prohibiting the importation of certain content;
restricting access-online and/or offline-to adults;
requiring certain content to display special markings, warnings or consumer advice; and
requiring certain content to be sold only in opaque plastic.
76. These and other methods of giving information about and controlling access to content are not mutually exclusive-some content
might need to be subject to multiple forms of regulation. For example, laws may prohibit the sale of RC content, and ISPs may be
required to filter that same content. Also, it is unlikely that any one form of regulation will be suitable for all types of content.
Some content may be regulated in some ways, other content in other ways, and some content might not need to be regulated at all.
77. Regulating online content has proved difficult. Obstacles to effective regulation of online content include:
the quantity of online content
-for example, with over one trillion unique URLs on the web, compiling a comprehensive list of prohibited sites is considered a
common weakness in systems meant to filter online material.
It has also been estimated that there were 500,000 apps available for downloading to mobile phones in early 2011.
the content is dynamic or mutable
-much online content changes constantly, making it difficult to establish what precisely should be classified or regulated.
the number of persons producing content
-a largely discrete and identifiable group of bodies distribute magazines, films and computer games offline, but millions of users
produce content online.
content is produced and hosted all over the world
-even if a scheme effectively regulates content hosted in Australia, the practical effect will be limited due to the vast volume
of unrestricted content hosted overseas'.
difficulty of determining age and of restricting content to adults
-a shop-owner can refuse to sell a violent film to a ten-year-old; it is more difficult to verify age accurately and efficiently
78. There are also difficulties with regulating offline content. Although most films and computer games offered for sale in cinemas
and retail outlets have been classified and carry the appropriate classification markings, compliance with laws restricting the
sale of adult content is low. Unclassified and X 18+ films are sold illegally throughout Australia, and many sexually explicit
magazines are not classified or carry incorrect classification markings. Such breaches of classification laws draw particular criticism
when minors are exposed to or able to access adult content.
Question 12.
What are the most effective methods of controlling access to online content, access to which would be restricted under the National
Classification Scheme?
Question 13.
How can children's access to potentially inappropriate content be better controlled online?
Question 14.
How can access to restricted offline content, such as sexually explicit magazines, be better controlled?
Question 15.
When should content be required to display classification markings, warnings or consumer advice?
Who should classify and regulate content?
79. Closely related to the question of what content should be classified is the question of who should classify the content. This
Inquiry will consider who currently classifies or examines such content and whether there are more effective ways to assess content,
especially given its changing nature and increasing volume.
80. This question concerns allocating responsibility to an independent body or bodies, to government, to industry, or to a combination
of these. The answer to this question may vary with content and will depend on the regulatory model chosen. Some options (variations
of which could be combined) include:
a government agency or independent board classifying all content that must be classified;
a government agency or independent board classifying all content that must be classified, but relying on industry assessments or
recommendations for some or all content;
industry classifying all content that must be classified using statutory guidelines and trained and approved assessors;
industry classifying all content under an industry-developed, but government approved, code of practice, with decisions subject to
review and audit by a government agency or independent board;
a government agency or independent board classifying some content, and industry classifying other content, with industry decisions
subject to review and audit by government agencies; and
individual organisations implementing their own measures for assessing material and dealing with inappropriate content-for example,
the online video service
allows users to flag videos which are then reviewed by
specialist content reviewers and removed if they violate the company's community guidelines.
81. Even where industry takes the leading role in classifying content, a government agency or other independent body may be involved
in responding to complaints, managing consumer information and awareness, providing training, conducting compliance audits and
other regulatory activities.
82. Before considering the roles of government and industry under the current classification scheme, it is useful to outline some
of the important considerations relevant in deciding who should classify content.
Organisational factors
independence and the perception of independence
-government agencies may be more independent and are likely to be seen as more independent than industry classifiers. Industry may
sometimes have an interest in giving their content a lower classification than is appropriate.
experience and expertise
-trained and experienced classifiers may be more likely to make reliable classification decisions. Government or independently established
bodies with committed, fulltime classifiers may be better placed to ensure classifiers have adequate experience and proper training.
consistent decision-making
-decisions made by the one body are more likely to be consistent. Such a body would also have built-in checks and safeguards, such
as the ability of classifiers to discuss approaches with fellow classifiers.
cost efficiency
-industry may be able to classify its own content more efficiently and at a lower cost than a government or other independent body.
-industry may have the capacity to make quicker decisions particularly if each industry sector or individual company is responsible
for its content. That is, the volume of classification work is spread over multiple classifiers in multiple organisations.
international reach-
industry, for example mobile telecommunications providers, may manage content assessment across jurisdictions more efficiently than
nationally-based classifiers and content regulators.
The nature of the content to be classified
straightforward and uncontentious
-it may be unnecessary and burdensome for such material to be classified by a government or independent body, for example, simple'
computer games such as Tetris, Snake and Chess that are almost certain to be classified G.
sexually explicit material
-most films that would be classified X 18+ and most submittable publications containing sexual activity and nudity may be reasonably
easy to classify.
content substantially similar to already classified content
-it is not cost efficient or effective to duplicate classification actions. For example, if a government agency or independent entity
has classified the 3D version of a film, then classification of the 2D version is likely to be straightforward.
content that is likely to fall within advisory classifications
-less risk of harm or distress is attached to content that does not require restriction to particular age groups-for example, DVDs
and computer games likely to be classified G, PG and M.
83. The range of schemes already in use under the NCS and in the regulation of other content, as described below, may provide useful
models for the allocation of roles and responsibilities under a new or reformed classification scheme.
Classifiers and assessors under the current scheme
84. All publications, films and computer games that are classified in Australia are classified by the Classification Board and the
Classification Review Board. Online content that is referred under ACMA's complaints-based system is also classified by the Boards.
85. The Classification Board is a full-time board comprised of a Director, a Deputy Director, a Senior Classifier and, at present,
nine other members,
intended to be broadly representative of the community. The Board makes approximately 7,000 classification decisions annually.
86. The Classification Review Board is a part-time board that convenes in response to an application for review. The Classification
Review Board is currently comprised of a Convenor, Deputy Convenor and four other members.
In 2009-10 the Classification Review Board made eight classification decisions.
87. The Director and Convenor determine the procedures of the Boards. The Director decides the constitution of panels for each classification
application. For example, sexually explicit DVDs may be considered by one Board member, while a high profile or controversial public
exhibition film may be viewed by the full Board.
Other government decision-makers
88. Government employees also assess content pursuant to obligations outlined in Commonwealth and state and territory legislation.
For example, the Director of the Classification Board can delegate content assessment to employees of the Attorney-General's Department;
Customs officers intercept prohibited imports and exports; ACMA employees investigate complaints about online content; and some
state and territory law enforcement officers issue notices regarding the likely classification of material for the purpose of prosecutions.
Industry assessors under the current scheme
89. There are also three schemes that allow industry-based assessors to submit reports and make classification and consumer advice
recommendations to the Classification Board when submitting a classification application. The final classification decision rests
with the Board.
90. These schemes provide for the classification of computer games that are likely to be classified G, PG or M; classified or exempt
films for sale or hire that contain additional content (eg, cast interviews, director's commentary, deleted scenes); and television
series sold as films for sale or hire.
Since July 2009, authorised advertising assessors have been able to self-assess the likely classification of an unclassified film
or computer game so that distributors can advertise these products before they are classified by the Classification Board.
91. Assessors under these schemes must complete training approved by the Director of the Board and be authorised by the Director
to provide assessments. While each scheme varies in its detail, they all have eligibility criteria, application conditions, sanctions
and other safeguards to maintain the integrity of classification decisions and deal with misconduct by assessors.
Other industry assessors under codes of practice
92. Some content that falls outside the NCS is subject to classification or assessment by industry under self- or co-regulatory codes
of practice. Under these schemes, for example:
industry classifiers engaged by recording companies assess music recordings for the purpose of labelling products with warnings if
it contains offensive lyrics;
industry classifiers engaged by subscription television channels apply the classification guidelines and markings used by the Classification
Board to classify content;
industry classifiers engaged by commercial television broadcast licensees apply industry-developed classification guidelines and
symbols to classify content; and
industry classifiers (trained content assessors') engaged by mobile and online content service providers apply the guidelines used
by the Classification Board to determine whether a restricted access system is required.
Question 16.
What should be the respective roles of government agencies, industry bodies and users in the regulation of content?
Question 17.
Would co-regulatory models under which industry itself is responsible for classifying content, and government works with industry
on a suitable code, be more effective and practical than current arrangements?
Question 18.
What content, if any, should industry classify because the likely classification is obvious and straightforward?
Classification fees
93. The regulatory model, responsibility for content assessment and the scope of content captured under a new or reformed scheme,
will affect classification costs. Who bears those costs is an important consideration.
94. Direct government regulation requires significant administration to develop policies and procedures, establish standards, support
day-to-day operations, monitor compliance and enforce laws. Greater public expectations of transparency and accountability have
implications for administrative workload. Statutory boards add a further resourcing and remuneration dimension. As such, government
regulation can be costly.
95. The costs of the Boards classifying material, including secretariat support provided by the Attorney-General's Department, are
largely recovered through classification fees charged to industry.
Some public good' activities are partly or fully government funded-for example, a substantial proportion of the cost of reviews.
96. Classification fees are prescribed in the
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Regulations 2005
(Cth). Under the NCS fees are set to recover the costs of classification services.
This is consistent with Australian Government cost recovery guidelines.
97. Fees are calculated according to the length of the material submitted for classification, which in turn drives viewing time and
consequently the resources required to provide a classification decision.
98. Criticisms of the existing classification fee regime include:
fees are prohibitive for smaller, independent film distributors, computer games developers and developers of mobile phone applications,
which may adversely affect the development of Australian creative and digital content industries (considered to be the primary
drivers of content innovation);
fees for classifications under assessor schemes are not substantially lower to reflect that industry takes on a significant part
of the classification process;
fees are not reduced for the classification of products that are substantially the same as already classified products (eg. cinema
films later released on DVD);
fees continue to increase even though classification processes or outcomes have not changed significantly; and
fees should be calculated on a basis other than the length of the material.
99. There is also widespread opposition to the flat fee for reviews of classification decisions. Some industry stakeholders, such
as independent film distributors, consider the high fee a barrier to applying for a review even though there may be legitimate
grounds for seeking a review. Likewise, community interest groups claim that the high fee ostensibly excludes them from the review
100. The NCS does recognise that there are applicants for whom it is difficult to comply with classification requirements due to
classification costs. The
Classification Act
provides for full or partial fee waivers for eligible applicants under specific circumstances-for example, where it is in the public
interest to do so for public health or educational reasons or for a short film from a new filmmaker with limited distribution.
The processing of film festival exemptions is publicly funded, facilitating the screening of hundreds of unclassified festival films
annually. A wide range of other material is also exempt entirely from classification.
Question 19.
In what circumstances should the Government subsidise the classification of content? For example, should the classification of small
independent films be subsidised?
The ALRC's usage of these terms is based on Australian Government,
Best Practice Regulation Handbook
Ibid, 34-35.
Australian Music Retailers Association and Australian Recording Industry Association,
Recorded Music Labelling Code of Practice
See S Conroy (Minister for Broadband Communications and the Digital Economy), Outcome of Consultations on Transparency and Accountability
for ISP Filtering of RC Content' (Press Release, 9 July 2010).
Australian Government,
Best Practice Regulation Handbook
(2010), 35.
G Griffith,
Censorship in Australia: Regulating the Internet and Other Recent Developments-Briefing Paper No 4/02
2002 New Parliamentary Library Research Service, 3.
National Classification Code, cl 1.
Department of Broadband Communications and the Digital Economy,
Convergence Review Framing Paper
(2011), 15-16.
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
See Australian Mobile Telecommunications Association,
Submission to Parliament of Australia Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Reference Committee Inquiry into the Australian Film
and Literature Classification Scheme
4 March 2010. More generally on small-to-medium enterprises in the creative economy, see T Cutler,
Venturous Australia: Building Strength in Innovation
(2008) Department of Innovation, Industry, Science and Research.
See L Bennett Moses, Creating Parallels in the Regulation of Content: Moving from Offline to Online'
[2010] UNSWLawJl 25
University of New South Wales Law Journal
, 594: The desire for similar outcomes for offline and online content regulation is, however, a contested ambition. If similar outcomes
are impossible or can only be achieved with significant costs or negative side effects not encountered offline, then an attempt to
achieve parity of outcome is undesirable'.
Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide
(2006); J Burgess and J Green,
YouTube: Online Video and Participatory Culture
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Enforcement Act 1995
In 2008 there were over 1,000,000,000,000 unique URLs: Google Web Search Infrastructure Team,
We Knew the Web Was Big
http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2008/07/we-knew-web-was-big.html
at 16 May 2011. As of 2009, ACMA's list of prohibited sites contained 1,175 URLs: Senate Environment, Communications and the
Arts Legislation Committee-Parliament of Australia,
Supplementary Estimates: Transcript of Public Hearing
19 October 2009, 127.
Classification (Publications, Film and Computer Games) Act 1995
(Cth) s 5B.
The question of what content should be classified or subject to regulation has been discussed above.
Google Web Search Infrastructure Team,
We Knew the Web Was Big
http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2008/07/we-knew-web-was-big.html
at 16 May 2011; R Deibert et al,
Access Denied: The Practice and Policy of Global Internet Filtering
(2008), 59.
A Beachley, Research-in-Motion,
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee Inquiry into the Australian Film and Literature Classification Scheme:
Transcript of Public Hearing,
25 March 2011, 44.
See Attorney-General's Department,
Submission to Parliament of Australia Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee Inquiry into the Australian Film
and Literature Classification Scheme
4 March 2011, 14.
A Beachley, Research-in-Motion,
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee Inquiry into the Australian Film and Literature Classification Scheme:
Transcript of Public Hearing,
25 March 2011, 44.
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995
Classification Board,
Annual Report 2009-10
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995
Classification Review Board,
Annual Report 2009-10
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995
Classification (Authorised Television Series Assessor Scheme) Determination 2008
Classification (Advertising of Unclassified Films and Computer Games Scheme) Determination 2009
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
(Cth) sch 7, cl 14 definition of restricted access system'. Trained content assessors must complete training approved by the Director
of the Classification Board:
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
(Cth) sch 7, cl 18.
The Commonwealth does not pay fees payable under the
Classification Act
, although it is notionally liable. State and territory law enforcement agencies operate under a quota arrangement that allows for
free classification. Reduced fees are payable if the quota is exceeded in a financial year.
Fees for classification range between $520 for a publication 0-76 pages and $5,090 for a film over 240 minutes long. A flat fee
of $8,000 applies to all applications for review of a classification decision.
The Australian Government cost recovery guidelines are issued by the Department of Finance and De-Regulation.
These criticisms were among those raised in submissions to the Attorney-General's Department made during a public consultation
on proposed new fees in May 2010.
Classification (Waiver of Fees) Principles 2008
Classification categories and criteria
101. Under the NCS the current classifications are:
for publications-Unrestricted; Category 1 restricted; Category 2 restricted; and RC Refused Classification.
for films-G General; PG Parental Guidance; M Mature; MA 15+ Mature Accompanied; R 18+ Restricted; X 18+ Restricted; and RC Refused
Classification.
for computer games-G General; PG Parental Guidance; M Mature; MA 15+ Mature Accompanied; and RC Refused Classification.
102. Some classifications only provide advice or recommendations-it is ultimately a matter for parents and carers to decide whether
their children may view, read or play the item. Other classifications are used to legally restrict access to certain age groups or
adults, or to prohibit material entirely. These restrictions are enforceable under state and territory enforcement legislation which
prescribes offences and penalties for breaches.
103. The Classification Board must also decide consumer advice for films and computer games classified PG and higher.
In relation to unrestricted publications or computer games and films classified G, the Board has discretion to provide consumer advice
if it is deemed necessary.
104. Under the
Broadcasting Services Act
, there are categories of online content defined as prohibited content' and potential prohibited content', which parallel the legally
restricted classification categories under the
Classification Act
105. Publications, films and computer games must be classified in accordance with criteria prescribed in the National Classification
Code and Classification Guidelines.
Section 11 of the
Classification Act
prescribes certain matters that must be taken into account in the making of classification decisions and there are also provisions
that direct the Boards to refuse classification to material that advocates terrorist acts.
106. The classification categories have not changed substantially since the establishment of the NCS in 1995.
Though the categories are rarely criticised,
the ALRC is interested in whether they are understood in the community and in the merits of other possible classification categories,
the Children (C), Preschool Children (P) and the Adult Violence (AV) classification categories used by commercial television broadcasters;
the age-based classification categories for films (U, PG, 12A/12, 15, 18, and R18) used by the British Board of Film Classification.
Common classification categories and criteria
107. One potential reform in this area may be the introduction of common classification markings, categories and criteria for all
108. In a convergent media environment, the differences between media (eg, publications and films) are becoming increasingly blurred-particularly
as people move to access traditionally offline content, such as books and magazines, online. Moving images and film footage, for
example, are routinely included on text-based web pages and have been embedded in electronic books.
To some extent, this was recognised in the development of common classification markings, categories and combined classification
guidelines for films and computer games, introduced by the Office of Film and Literature Classification between 2003 and 2005.
109. It may, therefore, no longer make practical sense to have one set of classification markings for publications and another different
set for films and computer games.
Instead, relevant publications might, for example, be classified R 18+ or X 18+ rather than Category 1 Restricted and Category 2
Restricted.
110. A highly converged, media-neutral environment might also lend itself to common classification criteria and guidelines. While
the classification criteria articulated in the National Classification Code and Guidelines are broadly consistent-in expressing similar
principles, community standards and limits on particularly extreme content-there are some differences. For example, impact thresholds
from very mild to high are prescribed for each classification category in the classification guidelines for films and computer games,
but not in the publications guidelines. The criteria under each of the classifiable elements, eg. nudity, sex, violence, themes etc,
are also expressed differently.
111. That the R 18+ classification is not available for one type of media-computer games-is perhaps the most contentious anomaly in
Australia's current classification scheme.
Leaving aside the specific issues concerning the absence of an R 18+ classification for computer games, this inconsistency with classifications
across other media formats has potential implications for classifiers' decision-making processes as content converges. In future,
one entertainment product may contain multiple media elements including text, still images, film sequences, gaming elements, interactivity,
three dimensionality and more.
112. One objection to introducing common classification categories and criteria may be that some media intrinsically has a higher
impact than other media: the moving images in a film, some may argue, have a greater impact than the still images in a magazine,
so films and magazines should be treated differently. However, common classification guidelines might accommodate these concerns
by, for example, referring to the potential for moving images to increase impact. Likewise, rather than have separate guidelines
for computer games, the one set of guidelines might refer to the potential for interactive content to increase impact.
113. Common classification categories and criteria across media might not only simplify and reduce the cost of regulation, it may
also streamline the classification decision-making processes. It might also increase community understanding of the classification
categories, so Australians are able to make more informed decisions about content they choose for themselves and their families.
114. There may also be practical advantages to consolidating classification criteria and guidelines into one instrument or document.
Currently, the Classification Boards and other classification decision-makers must consider matters and criteria in the
Classification Act
, the National Classification Code, the Guidelines for the Classification of Publications, and the Guidelines for the Classification
of Films and Computer Games.
It might assist those undertaking classification activities to refer to one document containing all criteria and matters to be considered.
Similarly, it may provide easier access to classification information and make classification decisions more transparent to the community.
Question 20.
Are the existing classification categories understood in the community? Which classification categories, if any, cause confusion?
Question 21.
Is there a need for new classification categories and, if so, what are they? Should any existing classification categories be removed
Question 22.
How can classification markings, criteria and guidelines be made more consistent across different types of content in order to recognise
greater convergence between media formats?
Question 23.
Should the classification criteria in the
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995
(Cth), National Classification Code, Guidelines for the Classification of Publications and Guidelines for the Classification of Films
and Computer Games be consolidated?
Refused Classification (RC) category
115. The RC classification is the highest classification that can be given to publications, films and computer games in Australia.
In effect, it constitutes the censorship part of classification. The RC classification serves to prohibit-by way of the state and
territory enforcement legislation-certain content from being sold, publicly exhibited or possessed with an intention to sell. However,
it is not illegal to possess most RC material in most parts of Australia. RC content is also one type of prohibited content' under
Broadcasting Services Act
116. The ALRC is primarily considering the RC classification because of its relationship to the Australian Government's proposed mandatory
internet filter. As the Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy, Senator Stephen Conroy has explained, the
Government's mandatory ISP filtering policy is underpinned by the strength of our classification system'.
The Government has described its proposed mandatory ISP filtering scheme as follows:
Overseas hosted content that is classified RC will be included on a list maintained by [ACMA] for the purpose of ISP filtering. This
will be known as the RC content list'. It will be compiled in two ways:
overseas-hosted content that is the subject of a complaint from the public made to ... ACMA and
incorporation of international lists of overseas-hosted child sexual abuse material from highly reputable overseas agencies following
a detailed assessment of the processes used by those agencies to compile their lists.
117. As a result of the Government's public consultation on ways to ensure that the process of placing content on the RC content list
was sufficiently accountable and transparent, it announced a number of measures including that all internet content complaints to
ACMA that are assessed as being potentially RC are to be classified by the Classification Board.
Arguably, the proposed mandatory ISP-level filtering scheme is based upon a desire for parity between offline and online content
regulation.
118. Countries differ as to what content they prohibit-depending on culture, historical content and differences of opinion on where
the balance between freedom of speech and other interests lies'.
In Australia, RC content includes child abuse material such as child pornography, extreme violence including rape, bestiality, the
incitement of a terrorist act, detailed instruction in crime or drug use, and what one commentator has described as live portrayals
of certain sexual fetishes'.
The acts comprising the subject of some of this content-for example, rape-are prohibited by the criminal law. The criminal law recognises
that such acts harm society and by way of an extension, the RC classification could be seen to recognise the harm that may or can
be caused by the dissemination of certain information and images. As one commentator has observed, it is generally accepted that
children are harmed whenever child pornography is created, disseminated and viewed'.
119. In terms of the framework for the classification of media content in Australia, the
Classification Act
provides that publications, films or computer games that advocate the doing of a terrorist act must be classified RC.
However, in all other cases publications, films and computer games are to be classified in accordance with the National Classification
Code and the Classification Guidelines.
120. The National Classification Code assigns the RC classification to publications, films or computer games that:
depict, express or otherwise deal with matters of sex, drug misuse or addiction, crime, cruelty, violence or revolting or abhorrent
phenomena in such a way that they offend against the standards of morality, decency and propriety generally accepted by reasonable
adults to the extent that they should not be classified; or
describe or depict in a way that is likely to cause offence to a reasonable adult, a person who is, or appears to be, a child under
18 (whether the person is engaged in sexual activity or not); or
promote, incite or instruct in matters of crime or violence.
121. In addition, the Code provides that publications that describe sex, drug misuse or addiction, crime, cruelty, violence or revolting
or abhorrent phenomena in such a way that they offend against the standards of morality, decency and propriety generally accepted
by reasonable adults to the extent that they should not be classified' should also be classified RC. Further, the Code provides that
computer games that are unsuitable for a minor to see or play should be classified RC.
122. Some commentators have argued that much of the material deemed RC in Australia would not be refused classification in other Western
democratic liberal countries'.
Criticisms have also been made of the ambiguity of the terms and concepts used in the RC classification
and the potential for scope creep'.
Question 24.
Access to what content, if any, should be entirely prohibited online?
Question 25.
Does the current scope of the Refused Classification (RC) category reflect the content that should be prohibited online?
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
(Cth) sch 7, ss 20,
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995
Before 1995, key changes were marked by the introduction of additional film classifications-the R certificate in 1971, the
X classification in 1984 and the MA classification in 1993. Common classification markings and categories for films and computer
games took effect in 2005.
Classification categories, with the exception of the absence of an R 18+ classification for computer games, do not feature
as an issue in complaints to the Boards, media articles critical of the classification scheme or in comments by Senators during Senate
Estimates hearings.
Commercial Television Code of Practice
See British Board of Film Classification,
BBFC: British Board of Film Classification
http://www.bbfc.co.uk
at 16 May 2011.
A book, for example, may be digitised and converted into an application imbedded with moving images; the application might
then be read and watched from a mobile phone. Is this a film, a computer game or a publication?
The common classification markings were intended to address the outdated nature of the previous determinations in respect
of the marking of emerging technologies which blur the distinction between films and computer games, new storage devices
and current marketing techniques': Explanatory Statement Issued by the Director of the Classification Board,
Classification (Markings for Films and Computer Games) Determination 2005
In the context of the R 18+ classification for computer games issue, Standing Committee of Attorneys-General ministers are
considering a separate set of classification guidelines for computer games which are currently combined with the classification guidelines
The final report of the Australian Government Attorney-General Department's recent review of the R 18+ classification for
computer games is available at
http://www.ag.gov.au/gamesclassification.
The National Classification Code was originally a schedule to the
Classification Act
but is now a separate legislative instrument.
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995
S Conroy (Minister for Broadband Communications and the Digital Economy), Outcome of Consultations on Transparency and Accountability
for ISP Filtering of RC Content' (Press Release, 9 July 2010).
Department of Broadband Communications and the Digital Economy,
Mandatory Internet Service Provider (ISP) Filtering: Measures to Increase Accountability and Transparency for Refused Classification
Material (Consultation Paper)
Department of Broadband Communications and the Digital Economy,
Outcome of Public Consultation on Measures to Increase Accountability and Transparency for Refused Classification Material
L Bennett Moses, Creating Parallels in the Regulation of Content: Moving from Offline to Online'
[2010] UNSWLawJl 25
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Ibid 588. Collette Langos notes that [T]here is a large body of international research on children's distress when they inadvertently
come across online pornography and other unwelcomed content.' See C Langos, Proposed Mandatory Filtering for Internet Service Providers
(ISPs)-A Brief Insight Into How Filtering the Refused Content List May Affect Australian ISPs' (2010) 13
Internet Law Bulletin
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995
National Classification Code, cl 2, item 1; cl 3, item 1; cl 4, item 1.
K Crawford and C Lumby,
The Adaptive Moment: A Fresh Approach to Convergent Media in Australia
For example, see M Ramaraj Dunstan, Australia's National Classification System for Publications, Films and Computer Games:
Its Operation and Potential Susceptibility to Political Influence in Classification Decisions'
[2009] FedLawRw 5
Federal Law Review
That is, expansion of the scope of the filter to material that would not be restricted offline. See L Bennett Moses, Creating
Parallels in the Regulation of Content: Moving from Offline to Online'
[2010] UNSWLawJl 25
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Reform of the cooperative scheme
123. The NCS is an example of a Commonwealth-state cooperative scheme. Under such schemes, each participating jurisdiction promulgates
legislation to facilitate the application of a standard set of legislative provisions in that jurisdiction to regulate a matter
of common concern.
Classification Act
was enacted by the Parliament of Australia to provide for the classification of publications, films and computer games for the ACT,
pursuant to Parliament's power to make laws for the government of a territory (the territories power).
125. However, the Act specifically provides that it is intended to form part of a Commonwealth, state and territory scheme for classification
and the enforcement of classifications and notes that provisions dealing with the consequences of not having material classified
and the enforcement of classification decisions are to be found in complementary laws of the States and Territories'.
126. There are four main types of Commonwealth-state cooperative scheme: referral of power to the Commonwealth; mirror legislation;
complementary law regimes; and a combined scheme.
The NCS is an example of a complementary law regime.
Referral of power
127. Section 51(xxxvii) of the
Constitution
gives the Parliament of Australia power to make laws with respect to matters referred to the Parliament by the Parliament of any
state. The states have referred a number of matters to the Commonwealth, including corporations law and counter-terrorism.
Mirror legislation
128. Mirror legislation refers to a scheme where one jurisdiction enacts a law that is then enacted in similar terms by other jurisdictions.An
example of mirror legislation is the uniform Evidence Acts.
Complementary law regimes
129. Complementary law regimes include complementary applied law' schemes and non-applied law' schemes. A complementary applied law
scheme involves one jurisdiction enacting a law on a topic, which is then applied by other jurisdictions.
A recent example is the Australian Consumer Law contained in the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth). State and territory legislation has been enacted to apply the Australian Consumer Law as a law of each other jurisdiction.
The NCS is characterised as a complementary non-applied' law scheme, discussed further below.
Combined schemes
130. Another model is a combined scheme, combining mirror legislation and applied law approaches. Under this model, some states enact
their own mirror legislation and other states apply Commonwealth law as a law of the state. An example of this approach is the
regulation of gene technology. The
Gene Technology Act 2000
(Cth) extends to matters within the Commonwealth's constitutional power, leaving the states and territories with the option of
either applying the Commonwealth Act or enacting their own legislation. Both options have been adopted by different states.
The current cooperative scheme
131. The NCS is a complementary non-applied' law scheme. That is, the Commonwealth
Classification Act
is not enacted as a law of each other participating jurisdiction. Rather, the states and territories have enacted complementary legislation
that provides for the enforcement of the classification system.
132. This arrangement may be seen as having disadvantages for what is intended to be a national scheme because of the substantial
variations in state and territory (and Commonwealth) enforcement provisions. These variations include, for example:
the ACT and Northern Territory do not prohibit the sale and exhibition of X 18+ films;
Queensland prohibits the sale of Category 1 Restricted and Category 2 Restricted publications;
in New South Wales, Category 1 Restricted publications may be sold in transparent sealed packages, while in Western Australia, they
must be sold in plain, opaque wrappers;
penalties also vary-selling an RC publication in Western Australia can be punished by a $15,000 fine or 18 months imprisonment, but
in Victoria it is $28,668 (240 penalty units) or two years imprisonment; and
Classification Act
itself prohibits the possession or control of Category 1 restricted and Category 2 restricted publications, X 18+ films, and RC
material by persons in prescribed areas of the Northern Territory-offences that do not apply to persons in any other part of Australia.
133. More fundamentally, some states and territories retain powers to classify or re-classify material
-although only the South Australian Classification Council actively does so.
134. While such inconsistencies might be seen as a weakness of the NCS, some jurisdictions may consider it an advantage to be able
to craft jurisdiction-specific enforcement provisions or provide for the review of Commonwealth classifications.
135. Another possible problem with the NCS is that, under the IGA, the Classification Code and guidelines cannot be amended except
with the agreement of Commonwealth, state and territory ministers, and following public consultation.
Reform of the NCS cooperative scheme
136. The ALRC is interested in comment on whether a new framework for the classification of media content in Australia should be
based on the current cooperative scheme, or whether this should be replaced with some other form of scheme.
137. A threshold question concerns the extent to which the Australian Parliament might enact legislation establishing such a framework.
There are several constitutional heads of legislative power that are relevant.
138. Under the communications power,
the Australian Parliament may, and does, regulate online content and broadcasting (television and radio).
The trade and commerce power
grants the Commonwealth legislative power to regulate imported or exported media content including, for example, pornography,
and interstate trade in such content. In combination with other heads of legislative power, such as the corporations powers,
the Australian Parliament may be able to legislate more broadly in relation to classification of media content than is currently
139. Other possible models would involve a referral of state powers to the Commonwealth under s 51(xxxvii) of the
Constitution
. A state referral of powers may be stated to cover all matters relating to the operation of new Commonwealth classification legislation
to the extent that the matter is not otherwise included in the legislative powers of the Parliament of the Australia.
A referral of power by the states would ensure that Commonwealth classification legislation was comprehensive in its coverage and
less vulnerable to constitutional challenge.
140. A further option is a complementary applied law scheme, where Commonwealth legislation, as in force from time to time, would
be applied by the other jurisdictions. Provided that there were effective limits on modification of the legislation-for example,
through a new intergovernmental agreement on classification-this would provide a substantial degree of uniformity.
Question 26.
Is consistency of state and territory classification laws important, and, if so, how should it be promoted?
Question 27.
If the current Commonwealth, state and territory cooperative scheme for classification should be replaced, what legislative scheme
should be introduced?
Question 28.
Should the states refer powers to the Commonwealth to enable the introduction of legislation establishing a new framework for the
classification of media content in Australia?
M Farnan, Commonwealth-State Cooperative Schemes-Issues for Drafters' (Paper presented at 4
Australasian Drafting Conference, Sydney, 3-5 August 2005), 3.
Constitution
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995
M Farnan, Commonwealth-State Cooperative Schemes-Issues for Drafters' (Paper presented at 4
Australasian Drafting Conference, Sydney, 3-5 August 2005).
Corporations Act 2001
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 100.3.
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2008
Evidence Act 2001
Evidence Act 2004
For example, the
Fair Trading Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Act 2010
(NSW) was enacted to amend the
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) so that the Australian Consumer Law became a law of NSW.
For example, NSW has opted for the applied law model while Victoria has adopted mirror legislation:
Gene Technology (New South Wales) Act 2003
Gene Technology Act 2001
For example,
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) (Enforcement) Act 1995
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Enforcement Act 1995
Classification of Publications Act 1991
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Enforcement Act 1996
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995
. These provisions were enacted as part of the Northern Territory National Emergency Response:
Families, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs and Other Legislation Amendment (Northern Territory National Emergency Response
and Other Measures) Act 2007
Classification of Publications Act 1991
Classification of Films Act 1991
(Qld) 25CA;
Classification of Computer Games and Images Act 1995
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Enforcement Act 1995
Classification of Publications, Films and Computer Games Act 1985
In 2008-09, the South Australian Classification Council reviewed the classification of a number of publications, but did not consider
the classification of any films or computer games: South Australian Classification Council,
2008-09 Annual Report
(2009), 4-5.
Agreement Between the Commonwealth of Australia, the States and Territories Relating to a Revised Co-operative Legislative Scheme
for Censorship in Australia 1995
Constitution
For example,
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
(Cth) schs 5, 7.
Constitution
For example,
Customs Act 1901
Constitution
Corporations (Commonwealth Powers) Act 2001
(NSW) and cognate state and territory legislation;
Corporations Act 2001
Other issues
141. The ALRC welcomes comment on any other issues of relevance to its review of the classification system.
Question 29.
In what other ways might the framework for the classification of media content in Australia be improved?
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (707 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter