URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ACTCLRC/1993/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:28:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Mandatory Reporting of Child Abuse [1993] ACTCLRC 7
The Mandatory Reporting of Child Abuse
Definitions of Terms used in this Report
Introduction
Background: The law relating to reporting child abuse in the ACT
Mandatory Reporting in Australia
Mandatory Reporting of Child Abuse
This report reflects ACT law as at November 1993. Committee Reference: CLRC
The ACT established the Community Law Reform Committee in June 1990. The
purpose of the Committee is to:
. help the ACT identify areas in need of reform;
. anticipate emerging social and legal issues; and
. assess the practical impact of various proposals and laws on ACT people.
The Committee's Office and Secretariat are at the third floor GIO Building,
City Walk, Canberra City ACT 2601 (Telephone (06) 2070546
fax (06) 2070538).
This report was tabled in the ACT Legislative Assembly on 16 December 1993.
ISBN 1036-5575
ISBN 1 86331 2021
need for permission being sought. However, acknowledgment
of the source should
Definitions
of Terms used in this Report
"Child Abuse"
includes all forms of physical sexual and emotional abuse
of children and the neglect, maltreatment or exploitation of children.
"The Family Support Model"
is a general term used for a methodology of
intervention which adopts as its highest priority the prevention of abuse and
abuse of children. It is sometimes contrasted with the "Criminal
Model" where highest priority is given to dissuading further abuse
prosecuting an offender.
"Institutional abuse"
is the physical, sexual or emotional abuse of
young people by adult caregivers while the young person is in residential,
institutional
"Mandatory Reporting"
occurs where a person is obliged by law to report
specific forms of child abuse to a government authority where that person
suspects that that abuse has occurred.
"Systems abuse"
is the indirect abuse of children by the lack of
decision making as to their futures, the constant moving of children to new
and no permanency planning being done for the child.
Introduction
1. The task of protecting children in our society is a challenging one for all
of the community. Every society needs a variety of
ways, social, economic,
moral, legal and environmental in which to do this. It is the balance of these
which lies behind many of
the issues surrounding the debate on whether or not
to introduce mandatory reporting of child abuse. The issue of mandatory
is a complex one which has implications for children, families,
workers and the ACT Government. On the basis of our research and
submissions
to the Committee it is apparent that mandatory reporting is not a
straightforward legal solution to child abuse in the
ACT and needs to be
considered carefully. It became obvious at an early stage that the issues of
reporting protocols between government
departments, the response of the system
to reports, the resources available to the system and the services available to
and families before and after reporting were of equal importance to
the legal issues.
2. Currently all people in the ACT are empowered to report instances of child
abuse including physical, sexual or emotional abuse.
A person who makes a
report does not breach professional ethics and does not become liable to civil
or criminal process if the report
is made in good faith and on reasonable
3. However, under this voluntary system of notification of child abuse, no
person is under a positive legal obligation to report
instances of child abuse.
A person who believes that a child has been abused may choose not to report the
matter in the ACT. This
report considers whether it should be compulsory for
certain people to report child abuse.
4. There is great diversity of views in the community about the mandatory
reporting of child abuse. Some people argue for the immediate
introduction of
mandatory reporting of child abuse as a means of protecting children. Other
people oppose its introduction because
it would divert scarce resources away
from programs delivering assistance to families and "at risk" children. It has
been argued
that the notification of child abuse should be left to professional
discretion rather than automatic state intervention. A number
of adolescents
expressed the view that mandatory reporting took away their right to influence
the direction of their life, while
many people argue it is of philosophical
importance to introduce mandatory reporting. The arguments for and against the
introduction
of mandatory reporting are canvassed in detail in a later
of the reference
5. Complex issues requiring law reform are referred to the Community Law Reform
Committee by the Attorney General. The Committee
is an independent body,
ensuring impartial advice to the Government. In this case, the Attorney
General, Terry Connolly circulated
an issues paper which set out the background
to the reference.
6. When the Committee receives a reference, the members of the Committee
examine the reference and determine a general strategy for
ensuring maximum
public consultation. Where appropriate, the Committee establishes a
supervising sub-committee which is responsible
for publicity, research, public
hearings and the preparation of draft recommendations for the Committee. The
supervising sub-committee
is assisted by a senior lawyer from the ACT Law
Reform Unit.
7. In this reference, the Committee established a supervising sub-committee
consisting of Ms Jennifer Kitchin (Director, ACT Barnardos),
Mr Ron Cahill
(Chief Magistrate) and Mr Graeme Lunney (Barrister). This sub-committee met on
more than forty occasions during the
reference to manage the direction of
research, information sessions and public hearings. Mr Peter Quinton, Director
of the Law Reform
Unit, and later Ms Kate Waterhouse, acting Director of the
Unit, assisted the sub-committee. Ms Liesha Host, University of Canberra,
assisted the sub-committee for six months in 1992. Towards the end of the
reference, after a meeting of the full Committee, the
membership of the
sub-committee changed to Professor Duncan Chappell (Director, Australian
Institute of Criminology), Mr Nicholas
Seddon (Reader, Australian National
University) and Ms Jennifer Kitchin. This sub-committee, building on the very
considerable amount
of work of the earlier sub-committee, prepared the majority
report. Mr Graeme Lunney prepared the minority report.
8. There have been some delays in preparing this report due to the difficulties
in accumulating statistics about child abuse notifications
in the ACT over the
last five years. This has led the Committee to recommend that more attention
be given to the collection of statistics
and the centralising of information
regarding child abuse.
9. The Committee took as its starting point the special responsibilities of the
State as enumerated in the United Nation's
Declaration of the Rights of
While this declaration does not specifically cover the issue of
mandatory reporting of child abuse, some of its Articles have bearing
reference, particularly Articles 3, 19 and 39 which are set out below. Article
1. In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private
social welfare institutions, courts of law, administrative
authorities or
legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary
consideration.
2. States Parties undertake to ensure the child such protection and care as is
necessary for his or her well-being, taking into
account the rights and duties
of his or her parents, legal guardians, or other individuals legally
responsible for him or her, and,
to this end, shall take all appropriate
legislative and administrative measures.
3. States Parties shall ensure that the institutions, services and facilities
responsible for the care or protection of children
shall conform with the
standards established by competent authorities, particularly in the areas of
safety, health, in the number
and suitability of their staff, as well as
competent supervision.
Article 19 states:
1. States Parties shall take all appropriate legislative, administrative,
social and educational measures to protect the child from
all forms of physical
or mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect or negligent treatment,
maltreatment or exploitation, including
sexual abuse, while in the care of
parent(s), legal guardian(s) or any other person who has the care of the
2. Such protective measures should, as appropriate, include effective
procedures for the establishment of social programmes to provide
support for the child and for those who have the care of the child, as well as
for other forms of prevention and for identification,
reporting, referral,
investigation, treatment and follow-up of instances of child maltreatment
described heretofore, and, as appropriate,
for judicial involvement.
Article 39 states:
States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to promote physical and
psychological recovery and social reintegration of a
child victim of: any form
of neglect, exploitation, or abuse, torture or any other form of cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment
or punishment, or armed conflicts. Such recovery and
reintegration shall take place in an environment which fosters the health,
self-respect and dignity of the child.
10. In the first stage of the reference, the sub-committee attempted to identify
the needs of the community by talking to people
part of this process, the sub-committee held a series of public meetings to
raise community awareness
and understanding of the issues throughout Canberra
suburbs. The sub-committee also held more formal public hearings on 2/3/92
3/3/92 at the Institute of Criminology. These meetings were widely advertised
The Canberra Times
and other community and occupational newspapers
The Canberra Doctor
). In particular, the sub-committee took
care to ensure that the views of children should be taken into account and actively
sought the views of children in relation to mandatory reporting. During the
term of the reference more than 50 individual meetings
were held with community
groups and members of the community. In addition evidence was taken in confidence
from 45 individuals.
11. In the second stage, the sub-committee attempted to collate relevant
statistical information of a local and comparative nature.
12. The sub-committee then examined the needs disclosed through the analysis of
the health system (and factors contributing to problems
with the system),
philosophical considerations, review of literature, consideration of the target
group, and assessment of community
resources. The sub-committee then developed
and assessed the viability of different models which were designed to 'fix'
problems. Strategies to use in the development and implementation
of these models were developed. The sub-committee considered
processes to
evaluate implemented models.
13. Law reform is not only about the need to change, adapt or create laws. It
also is concerned with the law's accessibility and
presentation. Laws and
documents should not be drafted on the assumption that a trained lawyer will be
available to interpret them.
The Committee advocates the use of plain English
throughout Government and the legal profession. Accordingly, the sub-committee
has placed special emphasis on ensuring that the problems it has identified
will be addressed by legislative and administrative action
which is simple and
understandable. However, it should be acknowledged at the outset that while
the introduction of mandatory reporting
may appear a simple legislative action,
the accompanying administrative action is not simple. A major finding from the
sub-committee's
hearings was the current complexity of, and problems in the
coordination of, the agencies' handling of reports of child abuse.
: The law relating to reporting child abuse in the ACT
14. This section examines the background to changes to the law
concerning the reporting of child abuse and the present law.
15. The protection of children from abuse is a relatively recent concern of the
law. Last century saw the first successful moves
to prohibit the slavery of
children, the use of children as low cost workers in factories and farms and
the payment of children by
way of food rather than cash (called "truck"). This
century saw the establishment of free education, vocational training and a
run child-welfare system.
16. However, while community attitudes continued to undergo a revolution in
thinking about the rights of children to minimum standards
of comfort, succour
and safety, very few changes occurred to this basic legal infrastructure in the
ACT. As late as 1986, young
children were charged with the "criminal" offence
of being neglected and other children and young adults were charged with the
offence of being "uncontrollable".
17. Against this background, in 1981, the Australian Law Reform Commission
(ALRC) made a far reaching and comprehensive report
child welfare in the ACT.
recommended a series of radical reforms designed to divert children from traditional
court-based systems into alternative
systems of family prevention or care. The
ALRC recommended the creation of a statutory officer, namely the Youth Advocate,
to safeguard the legal rights of children and recommended a series of specific
offences to deal with crimes against children (including
neglect and emotional
18. The ALRC in 1981 considered voluntary and mandatory reporting of child
abuse. While the ALRC did not have access to detailed
empirical evidence, it
surmised that child abuse is more common than most people believe. The
Commission concluded:
It is imperative that we do not condemn children to neglect and
indifference. Compulsory reporting makes possible the provision of
protection. Compulsory reporting legislation should be enacted in the ACT.
19. The ALRC had little difficulty in recommending that protection should be
given to people making voluntary reports of child abuse.
However, it was faced
with competing views about introducing mandatory reporting of child abuse. The
ALRC gave the following six
reasons for its conclusion favouring the
introduction of mandatory reporting:
Accompanying increase in reported cases
. It is doubtful whether it
could ever be conclusively proved that compulsory reporting causes more cases
of abuse to come to notice.
On the other hand, neither has the claim that
compulsory reporting legislation deters parents from seeking medical help been
statistically
proven. Clearly, other factors, such as publicity or the
provision of services, may be relevant to any change in the number of cases
reported or in the response of parents. The Commission favours the view that
the introduction of compulsory reporting is likely,
on the evidence, to be
accompanied by a significant increase in reported cases of abuse.
Basis for commitment
. Legislation is an essential element in
establishing a public commitment to the protection of children.
Breaking the chain
. Re-occurrence of abuse following a notification
need not be the result of a retributive reaction on the part of the parent. It
may have been likely to occur in any case in the context of the continuation of
pressures which precipitated the first incident.
At least if notification has
been made there exists a real possibility of prevention through the provision
of supporting services.
Maltreatment is often a continuing activity and even
at the cost of the parents blaming the child the chain should be broken: abuse
can result in serious injury to, and sometimes the death of, the child.
Reluctance overcome
. At present the reluctance of many
professionals to break well-entrenched and long established habits of
professional confidence
and unwillingness to become involved in legal
proceedings, which expose them to professional discipline and criticism by
their peers
and which take them away from their work, may contribute to a
disinclination to report. Legislation would overcome this reluctance
personally involved and would impose a public duty to do so.
Value of sanction
. It is conceded that where compulsory reporting
legislation attaches a sanction for breach of the duty to report, prosecutions
rarely be commenced or be successful. Some jurisdictions have in fact
opted to attach no criminal sanctions, as is the case, for
example, in Ontario.
However, the Commission believes that the existence of the sanction is more
important than its enforcement:
it can purposefully be used to educate, to
direct and to reinforce good intentions rather than to provide a basis for
prosecutions.
The occasional prosecution serves the additional purpose of
alerting professionals to their legal duties.
Paramount consideration
. The need for express child abuse reporting
laws is not avoided by arguments which rest upon any general civic and moral
disclose knowledge of crime and wrongdoing. The purpose of legislation
is to make plain where the duty lies. Furthermore, a compulsory
reporting law
emphasises that the paramount consideration is the safety of the child.
20. In 1986 the Governor-General, on the advice of the Federal Executive
Council, made the
Children's Services Ordinance
1986. This Ordinance,
which is now the
Children's Services Act
, was made as a direct
result of the Australian Law Reform Commission Report on Child Welfare. This
Ordinance included a provision
requiring the mandatory reporting of child
abuse. However, through a process explained below, this provision did not
at the time of the introduction of the 1986 Act in the ACT.
Present Law
21. Despite the enactment of the
Children's Services Act
child abuse in the ACT continues to be dealt with by a number of discrete
laws. This section examines these laws.
22. The common law has always required people to report serious criminal activity
to enforcement authorities.
Failure to report serious criminal activity
is itself a common law offence called
misprision of felony
is guilty of the offence if, knowing that a felony has been committed, he or
she fails to disclose his or her knowledge
to those responsible for the administration
of justice.
23. Because of the uncertainty surrounding the use of the common law, the
Australian Law Reform Commission argued strongly against
reliance on it. There
are considerable practical difficulties in bringing a prosecution for common
law offences and courts
are reluctant to entertain such a prosecution.
In view of these uncertainties, there
are very few prosecutions for common law offences in the ACT.
24. The Committee agrees with the views of the Australian Law Reform Commission
and considers that the common law rules relating
to misprision of felony are
The Committee recommends that the common law rules relating to
misprision of felony be expressly repealed by the ACT and replaced
legislation which is appropriate for the ACT
25. The Committee is not aware of any attempted prosecution against a person
who has failed to report a criminal offence against
a child in the ACT under
these common law provisions.
contains most of the criminal law in
force in the Territory. The Act makes it an offence to aid and abet a criminal
or to be an accessory
to a crime after the crime has been committed. Merely
failing to report child abuse is probably not an offence.
Aiding and abetting
345. A person who aids, abets, counsels or procures, or by act or
omission is in any way directly or indirectly knowingly concerned
in, or party
to, the commission of an offence under a law of the Territory shall be deemed
to have committed that offence and shall
be punishable, on conviction,
accordingly.
Accessory after the fact
346. A person who receives or assists another person who is, to the
knowledge of the first-mentioned person, guilty of an offence
under a law of
the Territory in order to enable that other person to escape punishment or to
dispose of the proceeds of the offence
is guilty of an offence punishable, on
conviction, by:
. if the first-mentioned offence is the crime of murder--imprisonment for
. if the first-mentioned offence is an offence referred to in section 101
--imprisonment for 14 years;
. in any other case--imprisonment for 2 years.
27. The Committee is not aware of any attempted prosecution against a person
who has failed to report a criminal offence against
a child in the ACT under
these provisions.
Services Act 1986
Section 103
Children's Services Act
provision for voluntary and mandatory reporting of child abuse. As noted
above, the provisions relating to the mandatory reporting
of child abuse have
no effect as yet.
Section 105
of the Act provides criminal and civil
protections when a report of child abuse is made under
section 103.
105(1) Where a person in good faith notifies the Community Advocate
as provided by
section 103
(a) the notification shall, for all purposes, be taken not to be a breach of
confidence or of professional etiquette or ethics or
of a rule of professional
(b) no civil or criminal liability is incurred by reason only of the making of
the notification;
(c) subject to sub-sections (2) and (3), the notification is not admissible in
evidence in any proceedings in a court and evidence
of its contents is not so
admissible; and
(d) subject to sub-section (2), a person shall not be compelled in any
proceedings to produce the notification or a copy of, or
extract from, the
notification or to disclose, or give any evidence of, any of the contents of
the notification.
Section 103(1)
of the Act provides that any person may voluntarily report
child abuse.
103.(1) Where a person, on reasonable grounds, suspects that there exist,
have existed or may come into existence with respect
to a child such
circumstances as may make it appropriate that proceedings should be taken with
respect to the child under this Part,
the person may notify the Community
Advocate of those circumstances or may cause the Community Advocate to be so
30. The reference in the section to "
such circumstances as may make
it appropriate that proceedings should be taken with respect to the child under
is a reference to care proceedings under
of the Act.
of the Act takes a very broad approach to what constitutes
child in need of care.
It includes a child who has been physically or
emotionally injured (except by accident) or sexually abused. However,
reporting also extends to children in the following situations:
. where the child's health (including physiological health) has been impaired
or is likely to be impaired by reason of the circumstances
in which the child
is living or found;
. where the child engages in behaviour harmful to the child but the child's
guardians are unable or unwilling to intervene;
. where there is no appropriate person to care for the child;
. where there is a serious incompatibility between the child and the child's
parent or guardian; or
. where the child persistently fails to attend school and the failure is
harmful to the child.
31. Under the Act, any person in the community may make a voluntary report to
the Community Advocate. The Advocate or Family Services
Branch, following
examination of the circumstances, may then bring Court proceedings. The
onerous burden of proving child abuse
does not rest with the person making the
32. During the course of the Committee's consideration of this reference,
concern was expressed by a number of senior health bureaucrats
to the effect
that section 86 of the
Health Services Act
1990 (a secrecy provision)
had the unintended effect of taking away from public health officers (including
community nurses)
the capacity to make a voluntary report or provide certain
other assistance to the Community Advocate or other agency.
The Committee immediately raised this issue
with Health and Family Services officers and notes, with satisfaction, the repeal
of section 86 of the
Health Services Act
1990. However, a number of issues
remain. The Committee is concerned to prevent future legislation unintentionally
diminishing
the ambit of
section 103
Children's Services Act
To avoid this, the Committee supports legislative entrenchment of
section 103
so that it can only be amended expressly. In addition, the Committee believes
that officers within the Department of Health
should be specifically advised
that any impediment to the exercise of their legal right to report under
has been removed.
The Committee recommends that:
section 103
Children's Services Act
should be entrenched in such
a manner that only deliberative legislative action should affect it;
. officers within the Department of Health should be specifically advised
that any impediment to the exercise of their legal right
to report child abuse
section 103
has been removed.
33. Section 103(2) of the Act, which has not been commenced in the ACT,
provides that certain professionals were subject to a legal
duty to report
child abuse.
103(2) Where-
a medical practitioner, dentist, nurse, police officer, teacher or person
employed to counsel children in a school, in the course
of practising his or
her profession or carrying on his or her calling in the Territory;
a person employed in the Department or by the Health Authority whose duties
include matters relating to children's welfare, in
the course of performing
those duties; or
a person providing child care at premises in respect of which licence under
Part VII is in force, in the course of providing that
on reasonable grounds, suspects that a child has suffered physical injury
(otherwise than by accident) or has been sexually abused,
the person shall
notify the Community Advocate accordingly or cause the Community Advocate to be
so notified.
Penalty: $1,000 or imprisonment for 6 months, or both.
34. Section 103(2) is in similar terms to the provision suggested by the
Australian Law Reform Commission. Section 105 (set out
above in para 28)
protects professionals making such a report in good faith from criminal and
civil repercussions.
35. In one important respect, mandatory reporting is much narrower than
voluntary reporting. Mandatory reporting is limited to cases
of non-accidental
physical injury and sexual abuse. Unlike voluntary reporting, it does not
extend to a wide range of other situations
where a child might be in need of
care as prescribed by section 71 of the Act (such as truancy or incompatibility
with parents.)
36. Unlike the law relating to voluntary reporting, the mandatory reporting
provision has never come into operation. There were
a variety of reasons for
never commencing this provision which included the diversity of opinion within
the community about
mandatory reporting.
Consequently, the ACT is in the invidious
position of having a provision on the statute books which, to the casual observer,
appears to be law but which, in reality, has never been commenced and so is
not in force.
of Recommendations
The Committee recommends that the common law rules relating to misprision
of felony be expressly repealed by the ACT and replaced
by legislation which is
appropriate for the ACT
The Committee recommends that:
section 103
Children's Services Act 1986
should be entrenched in
such a manner that only deliberative legislative action should affect it;
. officers within the Department of Health should be specifically advised
that any impediment to the exercise of their legal right
to report child abuse
section 103
has been removed.
Reporting in Australia
37. There are fundamental differences in the laws in different Australian
differences are cause
for concern. While calls for uniform legislation should be considered with
some care, the Committee believes
that there is a demonstrable need for all
Australian jurisdictions to establish standard practices in relation to child
abuse. Special
issues arise in relation to the ACT because of its size and
location within NSW.
The Committee recommends that active steps be taken
to ensure that the States and Territories establish complementary legislation
and practices. The Committee recommends that interstate orders and practices
should be recognised by ACT law to ensure continuity
of protection of children
and consistent treatment of perpetrators when they cross into different
38. The Committee is also concerned that information regarding
child abuse is shared between jurisdictions. The families in which
occurs often move from state to state, and background information about a case
can be very important in making decisions about
a child's welfare.
Committee recommends that active steps be taken to ensure that all Australian
in cases where a child has
moved jurisdictions and there are allegations of abuse.
39. The Committee has also had difficulties in finding comparative Australian
statistics on child abuse. One problem is the differing
definitions between
"substantiated" and "unsubstantiated".
However, in Victoria cases are categorised as "registered" or "unregistered".
The term "registered"
is not equivalent to "substantiated" because it excludes
cases where there is evidence of abuse but harm is considered to be minimal
there is no continuing risk. This would be an important issue to consider in
standardising the collection of statistics.
The Committee recommends the
free exchange of statistics between states and territories, with standardised
procedures for collection
and analysis of statistics. The Committee considers
that the National Child Protection Council would be an appropriate body to
Requirement
to report abuse
40. New South Wales, South Australia, Tasmania, Queensland, Victoria and the
Northern Territory have adopted laws requiring the mandatory
reporting of child
abuse. Western Australia and the ACT are the only Australian jurisdictions
where mandatory reporting has not
been introduced.
41. However, reporting rules between these States are dissimilar and apply to
different professional groups.
State NSW SA Tas Qld Vic* NT
Medical practitioner Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Registered dentists Yes
Registered nurses Yes Yes Yes Yes
Registered psychologists Yes Yes Yes
Pharmaceutical chemists Yes
School principals Yes Yes Yes Yes
School teachers Yes Yes Yes Yes
Registered teachers Yes Yes Yes
School counsellors Yes Yes Yes
School social workers Yes Yes Yes
Kindergarten teachers Yes Yes Yes
Pre-school teachers Yes Yes Yes
Police officers Yes Yes Yes
Probation workers Yes Yes Yes Yes
Social workers Yes Yes Yes Yes
Voluntary welfare workers Yes Yes** Yes
*Victoria is adopting a staged approach to the implementation of mandatory
reporting. Doctors, nurses and police are the first professional
groups to be
required to report.
**If they possess post-secondary qualifications in youth, social or welfare
42. In addition, the Commonwealth has passed legislation which requires
. a Registrar of the Family Court to report an allegation or fear of child
. a member of the Family Court personnel to report when they become aware
of or fear child abuse.
43. These requirements extend to staff of the ACT Magistrate's Court in their
exercise of these Commonwealth functions.
Registers of Abuse
44. New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, the Northern Territory,
Tasmania and Queensland have central registers which hold
information about
notifications of child abuse.
The South Australian, Northern Territory,
Tasmanian, Queensland and Victorian registers hold additional information about
the perpetrator.
Registers are potentially valuable sources of information for
workers involved in intervention, policy makers acting on empirical
information
and Governments considering the need for increasing or reducing financial
resources in this area. However, the maintenance
and use of registers pose
significant organisational and privacy issues.
45. There were a number of people, who in their submissions, requested the
existence of some form of advisory panel/workers who could
provide the
following functions for them;
. an avenue to discuss a situation of possible child abuse which may be a
cause for concern;
. assistance in deciding whether or not to make a formal notification; and
. on line advice on the next step in the reporting process.
The Committee acknowledged the need for workers to have an avenue for "sounding
out" someone on a case, but thought it would only
increase the complexity of
the system to add yet another group of workers. The Committee considered that
this function should be
performed by ACT Family Services Branch but the
"sounding out" process must be able to function without tripping the mandatory
The Committee recommends that Officers of the
Family Services Branch of the ACT's Housing and Community Services Bureau
advisory function for other agencies and individuals who wish to
"sound out" particular cases.
46. The Committee considers that central registers provide an important
function. They enable case workers thoroughly to research
similar cases or
previous instances concerning the same victim or perpetrator. They also
provide a base for the compilation of statistics
and for those conducting
The Committee recommends that, irrespective of any decision
regarding mandatory reporting, a central information register of notifications
of child sexual abuse and serious physical abuse of children be established
with regard being had to access and privacy issues.
The Committee considers that there should be a register of
perpetrators where allegations of abuse have been substantiated.
Committee acknowledges that 'substantiated' as a criterion is a rather vague
concept. It will involve a judgement made by an
investigator based upon the
evidence available to that person, and his or her perception of the
significance and gravity of that
evidence. Decisions on borderline cases will
vary from person to person. The Committee therefore takes the view that a
should be introduced to enable application to be made to the ACT
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)
for removal of the name of an
alleged perpetrator from the Register or for amendment of the Register. The
Committee notes that the
AAT has available to it appropriate procedures for the
protection of privacy of parties and witnesses in proceedings.
48. The Committee considers that perpetrators should remain on the Register
until their death or the removal of their name in accordance
with a decision of
the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. There should also be a separate register
of victims which records all notifications
whether substantiated or not.
Victims should remain on the register until the age of 18.
49. The Committee recognises that 'substantiation' of an allegation of child
abuse should not be equated with conviction for an offence
because of the
different standards of proof involved. Accordingly, the use of the Registers
should be strictly limited to the prevention
and detection of child abuse and
should not be available for general crime prevention purposes.
involved in investigating reports of child
abuse, including the police, should have access to these Registers to assist in
their investigations.
In addition,
agencies who are working directly
with children, such as child welfare services, child care centres, educational
institutions and
should be able to run "checks" on the
perpetrator register for potential employees. All such access must be subject
to appropriate
statutory protection of privacy and to secrecy protections in
Children's Services Act
Access to the Registers will
need to be authorised by a Registrar as outlined below.
Information should also be disclosed to interstate agencies involved in
investigating reports of child abuse, where a family has
moved from the ACT to
interstate.
50. The Registers should comply with the Information Privacy Principles
outlined in the Commonwealth
Committee understands will be re-enacted in complementary ACT
legislation
Principle 11(1) sets limits on the disclosure of personal
information as follows:
A record-keeper who has possession or control of a record that
contains personal information shall not disclose the information to
body or agency (other than the individual concerned) unless:
(a) the individual concerned is reasonably likely to have been aware, or made
aware under Principle 2, that information of that
kind is usually passed to
that person, body or agency
(b) the individual concerned has consented to the disclosure;
(c) the record-keeper believes on reasonable grounds that the disclosure is
necessary to prevent or lessen a serious and imminent
threat to the life or
health of the individual concerned or of another person;
(d) the disclosure is required or authorised by or under law; or
(e) the disclosure is reasonably necessary for the enforcement of the criminal
law or of a law imposing a pecuniary penalty, or
for the protection of the
public revenue.
51. The Committee considers that in order to ensure compliance with the
, legislative provisions regarding the Registers are
desirable, probably by way of amendments to the
Children's Services Act
This will ensure compliance with Principle 11 by falling within the grounds of
paragraph (c). These amendments would :
- establish the Registers;
- outline what information they should contain;
- specify the purposes for which information may be disclosed;
- create the position of Registrar;
- allow disclosure of information from the Registers only with approval from
the Registrar; and
- provide for persons whose names are placed on the Register to have the right
to appeal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
to have their names removed or
the record amended.
It is important that the amendments should specify the purpose for which the
Register may be accessed, and exclude other uses, including
those in paragraphs
(d) and (e) above.
The Committee considers that it would be appropriate for the
Registers to be maintained by the
Executive Director of Family Services
Branch. There should be statutory protection of the Registers and rules
regulating access,
so that disclosure can only be made to those whose duties
include the investigation of child abuse, and child care facilities wishing
perform a "check" on potential employees. The Registrar should have an
overriding discretion to refuse access to the Register
in a particular case if
he or she considers this to be desirable in the interests of the child
53. It is essential that the register itself be secure, to accord with
Principle 4 of the
which states:
A record-keeper who has possession or control of a record that contains
personal information shall ensure:
(a) that the record is protected, by such security safeguards as it is
reasonable in the circumstances to take, against loss, against
unauthorised
access, use, modification or disclosure, and against other misuse; and
(b) that if it is necessary for the record to be given to a person in
connection with the provision of a service to the record-keeper,
reasonably within the power of the record-keeper is done to prevent
unauthorised use or disclosure of information contained
in the record.
These safeguards could also be addressed in guidelines for the storage and
security of information kept on the register.
54. The Committee also notes that it will be necessary to comply with Principle
2 which provides:
(a) a collector collects personal information for inclusion in a record or in
a generally available publication; and
(b) the information is solicited by the collector from the individual
the collector shall take such steps (if any) as are, in the circumstances
reasonable to ensure that, before the information is collected
or, if that is
not practicable, as soon as practicable after the information is collected, the
individual concerned is generally
(c) the purpose for which the information is being collected;
(d) if the collection of the information is authorised or required by or under
law - the fact that the collection of the information
is so authorised or
required; and
(e) any person to whom, or any body or agency to which, it is the collector's
usual practice to disclose personal information of
the kind so collected, and
(if known by the collector) any person to whom, or any body or agency to which,
it is the usual practice
of that first-mentioned person, body or agency to pass
on that information.
55. The Committee has been advised that this principle would be complied with
by sending a notice to people whose names are entered
upon the Registers,
including a statement along the following lines:
"This information is being collected for the administration of incidents
arising from violations involving children's safety. The
source of authority
for the collection of this information is the
Children's Services Act
The information will be recorded and may be disclosed at the discretion of the
Registrar (the Executive Director of the Family Services
Branch). Appeals can
be made to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal for removal of information from
the record or amendment of the
Alternatively, the person could be personally informed and then this could be
noted on a file, ideally with both people signing the
Features of Central Registers
State NSW Vic SA Qld Tas NT
Notifications (unsubstantiated) 2yrs Yes Yes Yes Yes
Notifications (substantiated) 5yrs 1-5yrs Yes Yes Yes Yes
Removed when child >18 Yes
Child's name Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Offender's name Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
South Wales
56. NSW has had mandatory reporting for some professionals since 1987. The
Department of Community Services is responsible for child
protection in NSW.
Crimes (Public Justice) Amendment Act
1990 (NSW) abolished the
common law action of misprision of felony
(along with a number of other
common law offences). The crime was replaced by the statutory offence of
concealing a serious offence
for benefit. The common law is no longer used in
58. The position in NSW concerning accomplices and concealing knowledge is
similar to that noted above in relation to the ACT (as,
indeed, it is in other
Australian jurisdictions). The
Crimes (Public Justice) Amendment Act
1990 introduced the statutory offence of concealing a serious offence for
benefit, as just noted.
Protection Legislation
59. The NSW
Children (Care and Protection) Act
voluntary and mandatory reporting in NSW. The Act is administered by the
Department of Community Services (which is managed
by the Director-General).
60. Section 22(1) of the NSW Act deals with voluntary reporting. It is similar
to section 103(1) of the ACT
Children's Services Act
Act permits any person who forms the belief upon reasonable grounds that a
child who is under the age of 16 years and who has
been, or is in danger of
being, abused or who is a child in need of care, to notify the Director-General
of that belief and the grounds
therefor, either orally or in writing.
61. Section 22(2) provides that medical practitioners must report where the
practitioner suspects that a child who is under the age
of 16 years has been
abused (whether the abuse consisted of sexual assault or any other form of
abuse). Section 22(6) provides that
a person who fails to comply with
subsection (4) is guilty of an offence.
62. Upon being required to report, the medical practitioner must notify the
Director-General of details of identification of the
child and the grounds of
the belief.
63. Section 22(3) provides that prescribed professionals (not a Barrister or
Solicitor) must report where the professional suspects
that a child who is
under the age of 16 years has been sexually assaulted. Section 22(6) provides
that a person who fails to comply
with subsection (4) is guilty of an offence.
Regulations under the Act subsequently included the following professions:
. teachers at schools and pre-schools;
. school counsellors; and
. school social workers
64. Upon being required to report, the professional must provide the
Director-General with details of identification of the child
and the grounds of
the belief.
given to the child
65. Where a report is made, the Director-General may take such action as he
considers appropriate if the child may have been, or
is in danger of being,
abused or is in need of care. Action to be taken may include involvement of
the police.
66. When a report is made, the Department of Community Services assigns the
child a priority rating:
. immediate investigation (where the child is in immediate danger of abuse)
. investigation within 2 days
. investigation within 5 days
given to a person making a report
67. Section 22(8) gives civil and criminal immunity to a person making a
notification to the Director-General and is in similar terms
Children's Services Act
68. Details of the report are entered in a central child abuse register.
Substantiated notifications remain on the register for 5
years or until the
child turns 18 years of age. Unsubstantiated notifications are removed after 2
69. The Queensland
Children's Services Act
1965 deals with child
protection in Queensland. The Act is administered by the Department of Family
Services and Aboriginal and Islander
Affairs. However, this Act makes no
provision for mandatory reporting of child abuse.
70. It is under Queensland's
that medical practitioners
are required to report abuse. Section 76K(1) of that Act provides that:
A medical practitioner who suspects on reasonable grounds the maltreatment or
neglect of a child in such a manner as to subject or
be likely to subject a
child to unnecessary injury, suffering or danger shall, within 24 hours after
first suspecting, notify by
the most expeditious means available to him a
person authorised by the Director-General by regulation to be so notified.
71. Medical practitioners are given specific assistance about procedures to
follow in making a notification.
Practitioners
are given useful advice about avoiding confrontation with parents (on the grounds
that forcing a confession is
generally unhelpful and may make future counselling
extremely difficult). The need to observe general medical training is emphasised.
In particular, practitioners are reminded to:
. take a careful history from the child and carer (or parent);
. perform a thorough physical examination;
. keep careful records including accurate descriptions of any injuries and
verbatim records of a child's statement; and
. notify an authorised person, that is, a representative from the Department of
Health (usually a Doctor), from Family Services or
the Queensland police.
72. Under the Queensland guidelines hospital admission is recommended in
certain situations:
. to undertake further investigations (including the exclusion of organic
. to provide consultative opinions about the child;
. to provide an immediate place of safety; and
. to provide for family assessment and support.
73. Specific guidelines are provided where sexual abuse is suspected. The need
for assessment by a practitioner experienced in such
field is emphasised.
Caution is urged about allowing a child to return into a possible abusive
74. Where a medical practitioner makes a report of a child suspected of being
maltreated or neglected, it may be referred to a small
interdisciplinary team
which co-ordinates further investigation. The Queensland interdisciplinary
teams (called SCAN teams) consist
of a representative of the Department of
Family Services, an authorised medical practitioner (that is, a doctor
authorised by the
Director-General of Health under the
representative of the police. The responsibilities of each team member are
carefully delineated and are considered effective
agents for the development
and implementation of case management plans for children.
The Family Services Department is responsible for:
. initial investigation and crisis intervention;
. ensuring follow-up of the child and family; and
. providing coordinated support services.
The medical practitioner is responsible for:
. medical examinations and assessments;
. specialist medical advice; and
. liaising with the child's general practitioner.
The police officer is responsible for:
. investigation, especially where serious harm has been inflicted on the
. charging the perpetrator criminally; and
. taking protective action in the Children's Court where necessary.
75. Whilst reporting is not mandatory for other professionals nor members of
the community, guidelines have been prepared for reports.
given to a person making a report
76. Medical practitioners are protected against liability under section
. Although there is no specific protection for
voluntary reports under the
Children's Services Act
secrecy provisions of this Act are used to protect the identity of the
informant. The secrecy provisions exempt the identity
of the informant from a
Freedom of Information request but cannot be relied on in criminal
proceedings.
77. Details of the report are entered onto a central child abuse
register, as
well as the outcome of each investigation. All notifications
register indefinitely, although this is being reviewed. The recognised
the recording is the lack of follow
up when an offender goes to Court.
the abuse is substantial details of rs.
\par \par 244.\tab Section 103(2) imposes a reporting
obligation on
those members of the community who are most likely to come across child
abuse in the course of their working life.
Because of their training,
education and experience, they are in an ideal position to correctly
identify an abusive situation. The
obligation to report imposed by
section 103(2) means that they do not have to grapple with the dilemma
of whether or not to report.
\par \par 245.\tab There can be no argument thn is required to be made
to the Secretary of the Department of
Health and Community
Services. It is mandatory to notify where a person
believes on reasonable grounds that a child is in need of protection as
of physical injury or sexual abuse, or the risk of these
(sections 63 and 64).
80. Section 64 sets out the mandated persons. These include:
. medical practitioners, nurses, psychologists
. school teachers and principals
. operators, owners and professional employees of children's services centres,
(including kindergartens)
. social workers, youth workers and welfare workers
. police, parole and probation officers.
81. Victoria intends to introduce a staged process of implementation to allow
professional education to be undertaken. Phase one
which applies to doctors,
nurses and police is now in place. It is hoped that teachers and principals
will be mandated by early
reporting and protection given
82. Voluntary reporting existed under the
Children and Young Persons Act
which contains specific protection from civil liability.
84. The South Australian
Community Welfare Act
Children's Protection and Young Offenders Act
deals with child
protection in South Australia. The Acts are administered by the Department of
Family and Community Service. The
South Australian Police manage prosecutions
and also play a significant role in the education of community groups and
professionals
85. Under section 91(2) of the
Community Welfare Act
reporting of child abuse where there is a reasonable suspicion of the
maltreatment or neglect of a child is mandatory for a range
of professionals,
. medical practitioners, dentists, enrolled nurses, social workers and
pharmacists;
. police and probation officers;
. teachers; and
. voluntary workers providing children's services.
86. Detailed guidelines have been prepared for training both trainers and those
professionals who are in the front line. When a
notification is made to the
Department of Family and Community Service, the notification may be considered
by an interdisciplinary
panel (representing welfare, early childhood health,
police, education and medical fields). The Department has produced detailed
guidelines and educational material for professionals who might be required to
report abuse cases. However there is some concern
that the size of the
interdisciplinary groups may hinder the development and implementation of
effective case management plans.
Reporting and Protection given
87. Section 91(5) extends protection from civil liability to persons acting in
good faith and in compliance with the provisions of
section 91.
88. Details of the report are entered onto a central child abuse register.
Substantiated notifications remain on the register for
5 years or during the
minority of the child. Other notifications are removed after 2 years.
89. The Northern Territory
Community Welfare Act
1983 deals with
child protection in the Northern Territory. The Department of Health and
Community Services is responsible for child
protection in the Northern
90. Mandatory reporting was introduced in the Northern Territory under
sections 13 and 14 of the
Community Welfare Act
13 has the effect of imposing an obligation on police who become aware of child
abuse to report it to the Department of Health
and Community Services. Section
14(1) obliges anyone who believes on reasonable grounds that a child has or is
being abused to report
it to the Department or to the police. There is a
penalty of $500 for breaching this provision. Section 14(2) gives legal
to people who make complaints where they have acted in good faith, and
provides that a report of child abuse shall not be held to
be a breach of
confidence or of professional obligations.
Central Register
91. All government officers in the child protection area are on-line to
the central register. All reports which come in automatically
go on to the
register, as well as the outcome of the investigation of the reports. Only
these government officers have direct access
to the information on the computer
system. The police can make inquiries about particular people and the
Department will give them
that information. No other agency is informed about
what is on the register.
92. The Western Australian
Child Welfare Act
child protection in Western Australia. The Act is administered by the
Department of Community Services.
93. There is no mandatory reporting in Western Australia. Authorities rely
heavily on voluntary reports of neglect or mistreatment.
There are reciprocal
policies and procedures amongst a number of agencies to deal with reports. In
general, abuse confined to family
members is handled by Departmental officers
on a priority system (not unlike that in NSW) while abuse involving outside
persons triggers
police intervention.
94. There is no central register. However, a data collection system is
maintained by the Department of Community Development noting
allegations made and outcomes. The perpetrator's details are included where
the abuse has been substantiated. The information
is held indefinitely.
95. Protection is extended to anyone who reports under the
Child Welfare
96. The Tasmanian
Child Protection Act
deals with child
protection in Tasmania. The Act is administered by the Department of Community
97. Under the
Child Protection Act
reporting of child abuse
where there is a reasonable suspicion of the maltreatment or neglect of a child
is mandatory for a range
of professionals, including:
. medical practitioners, registered nurses and social workers;
. probation officers; and
. teachers.
98. Details of the report are entered onto a central child abuse register. All
notifications remain on the register indefinitely.
Reports and Recommendations on Reporting Child Abuse.
99. There has been much controversy and debate regarding mandatory
reporting of child abuse, and this is reflected in various government
non-government reports. Two key reports in this area have been the Brotherhood
of St Laurence Report and the Victorian Law Reform
Commissions Report. A
comparison of these reports reflects the divergence and polarisation of views
which have also been reflected
in the submissions to the Committee.
Brotherhood
of St Laurence Report
100. The 1988 Brotherhood of St Laurence's Report
Mandatory Reporting and
Child Abuse
suggested that mandatory reporting is not an efficient or
effective means of detecting child abuse.
101. The Report cites United States' and NSW experience with mandatory
reporting showing big increases in notifications with large
unsubstantiation. There was also a big increase in protective services and the
number of children placed inappropriately
in substitute care in the United
States. There is also evidence that poor families are more affected by
mandatory reporting, because
of the links between social and economic status
and physical abuse and neglect.
102. Concerning co-operation by professional groups with mandatory reporting,
the Report states that in the United States, in spite
of mandatory reporting,
there is still substantial under-reporting of child abuse by professionals.
Under-reporting is associated
with the professionals' concern about their
relationship with their clients and their belief that such matters are better
103. The Report comments that two Victorian studies suggest that the
introduction of mandatory reporting may have little impact on
professional
reporting behaviour. One of these studies agrees with a South Australian study
in identifying the factors which discourage
reporting, namely, doubts about the
validity of evidence and fears of further damage to the family. In both
studies, almost half
the respondents had negative perceptions of state
government protective services.
104. The Report concludes that these findings demonstrate that making reporting
mandatory does not guarantee professional co-operation
in reporting child
abuse. It suggests that a more productive way of gaining maximum co-operation
might be an education program which
addresses the following factors:
. clarification of legal immunity provisions;
. explanation of how child protection services work;
. re-assurance that most (reported) cases do not go to court or result in
substitute care; and
. re-assurance that protective intervention has positive outcomes.
Law Reform Commission's Report
105. The VLRC Report
Sexual Offences against Children
(1988) refers to
an independent analysis of the data which does not support the Brotherhood of
St Laurence's claims. In particular
the Commission found:
. a steep increase in notifications in NSW from 1981 which they attributed
mainly to publicity campaigns and training courses for
mandated professionals;
. the unsubstantiated rate of reporting does not increase dramatically (eg in
NSW in 1987 abuse was confirmed in nearly 60% of cases
assessed by Departmental
officers); and
. there was a steep rise in the number of reports from teachers when mandatory
reporting was introduced in NSW in 1987. However,
the substantiation rate
remained constant at about 60%.
106. The Commission concluded that:
. with adequate resources, mandatory reporting is an efficient and effective
mechanism for the detection of child abuse;
. however, mandatory reporting should not be introduced unless adequate
staffing resources and administrative systems are available
to deal with the
expected increase in notifications; and
. targeted education programs are needed in addition to mandatory
107. The different conclusions reached by the Brotherhood of St
Laurence and the Victorian Law Reform Commission Reports is indicative
debate relating to the introduction of mandatory reporting. Submissions made
to the Community Law Reform Committee displayed
a similar variation of
of Recommendations in Chapter 3
The Committee recommends that active steps be taken to ensure that the
states and territories establish complementary legislation
and practices. The
Committee recommends that interstate orders and practices should be recognised
by ACT law to ensure continuity
of protection of children and consistent
treatment of perpetrators when they cross into different
The Committee recommends that active steps be taken to ensure that all
Australian jurisdictions will exchange background information
in cases where a
child has moved jurisdictions and there are allegations of abuse.
The Committee recommends the free exchange of statistics between states
and territories, with standardised procedures for collection
and analysis of
statistics. The Committee considers that the National Child Protection Council
would be an appropriate body to coordinate
The Committee recommends that officers of the Family Services Branch of
the ACT's Housing and Community Services Bureau perform an
advisory function
for other agencies and individuals who wish to "sound out" particular
The Committee recommends that irrespective of any decision regarding
mandatory reporting, a central information register of notifications
abuse be established with regard being had to access and privacy
The Committee considers that there should be a register of perpetrators
where allegations of abuse have been substantiated.
guile and no desire to
impress. They do not embroider the evidence they give and their perceived
'incompetence' is because of the
questions asked. Simple questions leading the
child along the path of the evidence which she or he can give would be enough
the narrative going without any impression of coaching. Thus the
emphasis would be on telling the story rather than upon the answering
questio
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter