URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCDP/1993/32.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:35:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Defamation - Discussion Paper [1993] NSWLRCDP 32
Discussion Paper 32 (1993) - Defamation
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
1. INTRODUCTION
THE COMMISSION'S REFERENCE
The current law in this State
The law in other Australian jurisdictions
Past attempts at reform in Australia
The current reform process
THE COMMISSION'S APPROACH
The focus of the Commission’s work
The purpose of this Discussion Paper
General theme of this Discussion Paper
Outline of contents of this Discussion Paper
2. ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES AND PROCEDURES
INTRODUCTION
Why do we have a law of defamation?
Why don’t defamation actions actually restore reputation?
The problems of the emphasis on damages
Reducing the emphasis on damages
Terminology
VOLUNTARY CORRECTIONS
The position in New South Wales
The position in other Australian jurisdictions
Promoting the use of voluntary corrections
Voluntary corrections in overseas jurisdictions
The Annenberg Proposal
Could a correction defence work in New South Wales?
The special position of replies
Promoting the use of a correction defence: allowing courts to recommend corrections
COURT-ORDERED CORRECTIONS
Rapid correction orders: the best way to satisfy plaintiffs
Correction orders as a remedy at trial
A summary judgment procedure for correction orders ?
DECLARATORY JUDGMENTS
United States proposals for declaratory judgments
A proposal for consideration: two separate remedial regimes
Onus of proof
Should truth be the only defence to a declaratory judgment action?
Costs of proceedings seeking a declaration
Would a declaratory judgment vindicate reputation?
Will declarations be an adequate deterrent?
POSSIBLE PROCEDURAL AND REMEDIAL STRUCTURE
Declaratory judgment procedure
Action for damages
ISSUES ARISING IN CHAPTER 2 - ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES AND PROCEDURES
3. ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION
INTRODUCTION
The benefits of Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) in the defamation context
The problem of ADR in the defamation context
CURRENT ALTERNATIVES TO LITIGATION
Direct negotiation with publishers
Media complaints bodies
Non-media dispute resolution bodies
ISSUES TO BE RESOLVED
Giving mediators a more active role
AN ARBITRATION SYSTEM?
The Libel Dispute Resolution Program
ISSUES ARISING IN CHAPTER 3 - ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION
4. THE ROLES OF JUDGE AND JURY
INTRODUCTION
OPTION ONE: CONDUCT DEFAMATION TRIALS BEFORE JUDGES ALONE
Problems with using juries in defamation trials
Benefits of conducting defamation trials before judges alone
The requirement of using juries in defamation trials
OPTION TWO: RETAIN A LIMITED ROLE FOR JURIES
Can juries assess liability while the judge assesses damages?
The jury’s most important function: assessing what is defamatory
Basing the cause of action on pleaded imputations
OPTION THREE: RETAIN JURIES IN THEIR CURRENT ROLE
Deciding whether imputations are conveyed and are defamatory, as a preliminary step before any other evidence is heard
Hearing opening addresses from both sides at the start of the trial
Controls on the assessment of damages
Do juries make excessive awards of damages?
Should damages be capped?
Other methods of ensuring rational awards
ISSUES ARISING IN CHAPTER 4 - THE ROLES OF JUDGE AND JURY
5. OTHER PROCEDURAL ISSUES
INTRODUCTION
A SHORTER LIMITATION PERIOD FOR DEFAMATION CLAIMS
The current limitation period in Australian jurisdictions
The limitation period in overseas jurisdictions
Arguments in favour of a shorter limitation period for defamation
Arguments against a shorter limitation period for defamation
“STOP WRITS”
The limited effectiveness of stop writs
The prevalence of stop writs
The best solution to the perceived problem of stop writs
EXPRESS POWERS TO STRIKE OUT DEFAMATION ACTIONS
The court’s current powers to strike out actions
Is an express power to strike out defamation proceedings desirable?
FILING AGREED STATEMENTS OF ISSUES AND WITNESSES' STATEMENTS
ISSUES ARISING IN CHAPTER 5 - OTHER PROCEDURAL ISSUES
6. JUSTIFICATION
INTRODUCTION
VERSIONS OF THE DEFENCE IN AUSTRALIAN JURISDICTIONS
Truth alone
Truth and public benefit
The position in New South Wales
SHOULD NEW SOUTH WALES ADOPT A DEFENCE OF TRUTH ALONE?
The compromise in the Defamation Bills 1991
The recommendations of the Legislation Committee
THE COMMISSION'S APPROACH
Reasons for retaining the current justification defences until privacy is examined separately
ONUS OF PROOF
ISSUES ARISING IN CHAPTER 6 - JUSTIFICATION
7. ABSOLUTE PRIVILEGE
STATEMENTS MADE IN THE COURSE OF JUDICIAL OR QUASI-JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS
Statutory modifications
COMMUNICATIONS CONCERNING MATTERS OF STATE
STATEMENTS MADE IN THE COURSE OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS
The scope and meaning of the phrase “proceedings in Parliament”
The scope and meaning of “impeached or questioned in any court or place out of Parliament”
A separate Act dealing with parliamentary papers and proceedings?
ARGUMENTS AGAINST EXTENDING ABSOLUTE PRIVILEGE
Abuse of absolute privilege
Availability of alternative defences
ISSUES RAISED IN CHAPTER SEVEN: ABSOLUTE PRIVILEGE
8. PROTECTED REPORTS
Protected official and public documents
Publication of court notices and official notices
Should the defence of protected report be extended or modified?
ISSUES RAISED IN CHAPTER EIGHT: PROTECTED REPORTS
9. STATUTORY QUALIFIED PRIVILEGE
INTRODUCTION
THE CURRENT POSITION IN NEW SOUTH WALES
The purpose of s 22
How can media defendants gain the protection of s 22?
Should these requirements be relaxed?
PROPOSALS FOR A SPECIFIC MEDIA DEFENCE
The Defamation Bills 1991
The recommendations of the Legislation Committee
A better defence for the media
THE PROTECTION OF JOURNALISTS' SOURCES
The wider issues raised by the question of protecting journalists’ sources
Protecting sources before trial when statutory qualified privilege is raised
Protecting sources at trial
BASING THE LAW OF DEFAMATION ON NEGLIGENCE
The proposal
Assessment of the proposal
ISSUES ARISING IN CHAPTER 9 - STATUTORY QUALIFIED PRIVILEGE
10. THE PUBLIC FIGURE TEST
INTRODUCTION
Elements of the Public Figure Test
The Commission’s provisional view
THE AMERICAN CONTEXT OF THE PUBLIC FIGURE TEST
The birth and growth of the doctrine
The lack of a First Amendment in Australia
Features of United States law balancing the operation of the public figure test
WEIGHING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE PUBLIC FIGURE TEST
The practical operation of United States libel law
WHAT EFFECT WOULD A PUBLIC FIGURE TEST HAVE IN NEW SOUTH WALES?
Would other justifications of the public figure test be persuasive in New South Wales?
IS THE PUBLIC FIGURE TEST NECESSARY?
How are “public figures” treated by the current law?
Alternatives to the public figure test
ISSUES ARISING IN CHAPTER 10 - THE PUBLIC FIGURE TEST
11. INNOCENT PUBLICATION
INTRODUCTION
The Defamation Bill 1992
METHODS OF PROTECTING INNOCENT PUBLISHERS
Option One: Defence of innocent dissemination
Option Two: Liberalising the offer of amends defence
ISSUES ARISING IN CHAPTER 11 - INNOCENT PUBLICATION
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Discussion Paper 32 (1993) - Defamation
Terms of Reference, Participants and Submissions
History of this Reference (Digest)
TERMS OF REFERENCE
On 4 November 1992, the Attorney General, the Hon John P Hannaford MLC, required the Commission to inquire into and report on the
law of defamation in New South Wales, with particular reference to:
(a) the relative roles of the judge and jury;
(b) standards, defences, onus and procedures;
(c) the determination of damages;
(d) non-monetary remedies, including court-ordered correction statements;
(e) alternative or additional techniques of dispute resolution;
(f) the need for the provision of a separate tort of invasion of privacy;
(g) the need for the provision of "shield laws" to protect journalist's sources; and
(h) any related matters.
The Commission should provide drafting instructions for amendment of the Bill and, in doing so, take into consideration such empirical
data relating to defamation matters as may be available and to have particular regard to the proposals of the Standing Committee
of Attorneys General for uniformity of defamation laws in Australia and the Discussion Paper and Report of the Legislation Committee
on the Defamation Bill 1992.
PARTICIPANTS
The Law Reform Commission is constituted by the
Law Reform Commission Act
. For the purpose of this reference, the Chairman, in accordance with the Act, created a Division comprising the following members
of the Commission:
The Hon R M Hope AC CMG QC (until 2 April 1993)
The Hon G J Samuels AC QC (from 3 April 1993)
Professor Michael Chesterman
The Hon Mr Justice J Cripps
The Hon Mr Justice D Hunt
Professor David Weisbrot
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Research and Writing
Mr Benedict Reichel
Ms Fiona Manning
Ms Beverley Caska
Desktop Publishing
Ms Julie Freeman
Ms Suzanna Mishhawi
Cover Design
Ms Stephanie East
Administrative Assistance
Ms Zoya Howes
SUBMISSIONS
The Commission invites submissions on issues relevant to this review, including but not limited to the issues raised in this Discussion
Paper. Submissions and comments must reach the Commission by 29 October 1993. All submissions and inquiries should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
GPO Box 5199
SYDNEY NSW 2001
[DX 1229 SYDNEY]
Phone: (02) 9228 8230
Fax: (02) 9228 8225
There is no special form required for submissions. If it is inconvenient or impractical to make a written submission you may telephone
the Commission and either direct your comments to a Legal Officer over the telephone, or else arrange to make your submission in
If you would like your submission to be treated as confidential, please indicate this in your submission.
Who can make a submission?
Submissions are welcome from individuals and organisations. If you have a particular interest in the law of defamation, the Commission
would like to hear from you. Legal or other special qualifications are not necessary.
Contents of a submission
The Commission is interested in any comments on how the law is operating or how it might be improved. You may wish to address some
or all of the issues raised in this Discussion Paper and/or discuss other related issues that have not been raised but which you
consider relevant. It is not necessary that the submission make specific recommendations for reform. Nor is it necessary for all
submissions to be written specifically for this review. The Commission is also glad to receive copies of submissions to other bodies
inquiring into defamation and related matters.
Comments on any aspect of the law, its operation and its impact will be given careful consideration.
Use of submissions and confidentiality
Submissions made to the Commission may be used in two ways:
Since the Commission’s process of law reform is essentially public, copies of submissions made to the Commission will normally
be made available on request to any person or organisation. However, if you would like all, or part, of your submission to be treated
as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Any request for a copy of a submission marked “confidential”
will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act
In preparing the final Report, the Commission may also find it useful to refer to and make mention of comments submitted in response
to this Discussion Paper. However, if a request for confidentiality is made, it will be respected by the Commission in relation to
the publication of such submissions in a Report.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 32 (1993) - Defamation
1. Introduction
History of this Reference (Digest)
1.1 Defamation law is controversial. Most defamation actions involve media outlets, and thus tend to be widely reported in the media.
News, current affairs and other media coverage tend to focus on a relatively small proportion of the population - politicians, business
people, entertainers and so on. As a result, such people are more likely to be defamed. Occasionally they sue. Because they are famous
their defamation suits are also reported. Consequently, defamation is probably one of the best known non-criminal areas of the law.
1.2 Nevertheless, the intricacies of defamation law are not well understood. Myths abound; only some have a basis in legal or practical
reality. The law is complex and the precise details of its operation can occupy the time of lawyers and courts for weeks. The basic
issues involved are more easily comprehended. Defamation law is our legal system’s attempt to reconcile the mutually incompatible
interests of freedom of speech and protection of reputation. In the modern “information age”, a third interest must also
be recognised - that of the public in receiving accurate information from the mass media.
These are relatively straightforward concepts. In practice, their application and interaction produce a morass of complex questions.
1.3 Many people agree that defamation law should be changed. Few agree on how it should be changed. This state of affairs has generated
a virtual defamation law reform industry in Australia and around the world. It is not surprising that such a vital and controversial
area of law should continue to invite scrutiny. The balance which it strikes between such important competing interests should continue
to be reassessed in the light of contemporary social values.
THE COMMISSION'S REFERENCE
1.4 The New South Wales Law Reform Commission is currently conducting a review of the defamation law of this State. The reference
was received from the Attorney General, the Hon John P Hannaford MLC, on 4 November 1992. The terms of reference are set out at page
(ix) above.
The current law in this State
1.5 The defamation law of New South Wales is unique. It is governed by the
Defamation Act
(NSW), which was passed following the 1971 Report of the New South Wales Law Reform Commission on
That Act repealed the
Defamation Act
1958 (NSW) (an attempt at codification) and provided that the common law was to operate, although substantially modified in some
areas. The Act has now been in operation for some 19 years and has been the subject of extensive judicial interpretation and academic
The law in other Australian jurisdictions
1.6 Perhaps the major problem with defamation law in Australia is its lack of uniformity. All jurisdictions have introduced legislation
to modify or codify the common law, and in no two jurisdictions is the law identical. Victoria and South Australia have the fewest
departures from the common law.
Western Australia is similar, although defences under the
Criminal Code Act
1913 (WA) are available in civil actions.
The Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory have their own statutory alterations of the common law.
Finally Queensland and Tasmania have codified defamation law, with statutes based on the Indian
1.7 The major print and electronic media now publish and broadcast nationally. Reputations are no longer confined to local communities
but extend throughout the country and beyond. The variations in defamation law throughout Australia cause problems for all concerned
- plaintiffs, defendants, lawyers, and the general community.
Past attempts at reform in Australia
Reports in other States
1.8 Reports on defamation law were issued by the Law Reform Committee of South Australia in 1971 and the Law Reform Commission of
Western Australia in 1979.
The latter was produced on a co-operative basis with the Australian Law Reform Commission.
The Australian Law Reform Commission Report
1.9 In 1976, the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) was given two separate references dealing respectively with defamation and
undertook an exhaustive program of research and public consultation. In 1979 it released its Report on
Unfair Publication: Defamation and Privacy
That Report has played a major part in all subsequent debates over defamation law reform in Australia.
The Uniform Bills
1.10 In July 1980, the Standing Committee of Attorneys General (SCAG) began discussing a uniform national defamation law based on
the ALRC Report. An enormous amount of material was submitted to the Standing Committee. Draft Bills were released for public comment
in 1983 and 1984.
The collapse of the uniformity exercise
1.11 None of the recommendations of the ALRC were ever implemented. Agreement could not be reached in such key areas as the defence
of justification and the definition of defamatory matter. Defamation law reform was removed from SCAG’s agenda in May 1985.
The current reform process
Reconsideration by the Standing Committee of Attorneys General
1.12 In March 1990, SCAG considered reinstating defamation law reform as an active project on their agenda. In June 1990, the Attorneys
General of Queensland, Victoria and New South Wales decided to proceed with a review of the law in their respective jurisdictions,
with the ultimate aim of achieving uniformity throughout Australia.
The two Discussion Papers
1.13 A joint Discussion Paper was released by the three Attorneys General in August 1990. The Paper elicited a wide-ranging response
and many submissions were received. A second joint Discussion Paper was released in January 1991. Further submissions were received.
The Defamation Bills 1991
1.14 On 14 November 1991,
Defamation Bills
were introduced in the Parliaments of Queensland, Victoria and New South Wales. Subsequently a draft based on these Bills was tabled
for consideration in the Legislative Assembly of the Australian Capital Territory. Essentially the Bills reproduced the current
Defamation Act
(NSW). There were significant changes in some areas, including justification, qualified privilege, court-recommended corrections
and limitation periods. The Bills were not uniform; for example, in New South Wales damages were to be assessed by the judge, whereas
in Victoria they were to be assessed by the jury.
The New South Wales Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill
1.15 On 14 November 1991, the
Defamation Bill
1991 (NSW) was referred to a Legislation Committee of the Legislative Assembly, chaired by Malcolm Kerr MLA, for a full consideration
of its provisions. The Bill was reintroduced in 1992 and re-referred. The Committee issued a Discussion Paper in May 1992. It received
over 70 written submissions and heard evidence over five days from 16 witnesses. Its final Report was issued in October 1992.
1.16 The major recommendation of the Report is that the Bill should be referred to this Commission for a comprehensive review and
redrafting of its provisions. Subsequently the Commission was given its current reference on defamation. The Report also contains
recommendations on specific issues, such as the defence of justification. It recommends a number of tasks for the Commission. Some
of these were effectively already undertaken by the Legislation Committee itself, such as an extensive review of the qualified privilege
provisions.
The position in other jurisdictions
1.17 The Bill introduced in Queensland in 1991 lapsed when the Parliament was prorogued in early 1992. The Queensland Government remains
receptive to the uniformity initiative and is prepared to consider developments in other States. The Queensland Criminal Code Review
Committee has recommended that defamation should be removed from that criminal statute.
Criminal Code
is expected to be introduced into the Parliament in April 1994. A new
Defamation Act
would have to be compiled by that date.
1.18 The Victorian Government is no longer actively pursuing the uniformity initiative but is prepared to consider developments in
other States.
1.19 The eastern States’
Defamation Bills
were thoroughly examined by the ACT Community Law Reform Committee as part of its ongoing reference on defamation. The ACT Government
remains supportive of the uniformity initiative, and is also awaiting developments.
THE COMMISSION'S APPROACH
The focus of the Commission’s work
1.20 The Commission must concentrate on achieving the best possible defamation law for New South Wales. As outlined above, the lack
of uniformity among the Australian jurisdictions is a major problem in defamation law. The Commission’s terms of reference
indicate that it should have particular regard to the proposals of the Standing Committee of Attorneys General for uniformity of
defamation laws in Australia. The actual achievement of uniformity is beyond our brief and our capacity.
1.21 The Bills introduced in Queensland, Victoria and the ACT were essentially versions of the current New South Wales
Defamation Act
. In this context, the Commission plans to examine ways in which that Act could be improved. Discussions and proposals advanced during
the Commission’s review may lead to a re-examination of the position in other States. This may rejuvenate the uniformity initiative.
The purpose of this Discussion Paper
1.22 The above outline of the current reform process indicates that extensive consultation already has taken place in this area. A
number of discussion papers and reports have generated a wide range of responses. In this context, there could be an argument for
the Commission to proceed directly to its final report, relying on the views already expressed as well as on its own research.
1.23 However, the process of law reform involves both research and consultation. The community should be involved in all law reform
efforts. This is especially so in contentious areas involving vital interests, such as defamation. It is essential that the community
be given an opportunity to comment on any reform proposals in this area.
1.24 The purpose of this Discussion Paper is to identify the major issues upon which the Commission intends to focus. It also indicates
the direction which the Commission proposes to take on those issues, or at least the choices the Commission faces.
The views expressed in this Discussion Paper are not the final recommendations of the Commission. They are made for the purpose of
encouraging comments and suggestions from interested persons and groups. A Report containing our final recommendations to the Attorney
General will be prepared after the Commission has completed its research and consultation program.
General theme of this Discussion Paper
1.26 To some extent, the current reform process was prompted by concern over large awards of damages in defamation cases. The number
of cases in which massive damages are awarded appears to be small.
Nevertheless, when such awards occur, they generate a great deal of media comment. Consequently, there may be a perception that defamation
suits represent an ideal opportunity for plaintiffs to make a fortune.
1.27 It has been argued that successful plaintiffs need to receive significant damages if they are to have their costs covered.
The complexity of defamation law means that costs in a fully litigated suit are substantial. Not all of these will be recovered by
a successful plaintiff.
1.28 Yet damages are not the ideal remedy for the injury suffered by a defamed plaintiff. An award of damages does nothing to restore
a plaintiff’s reputation, unless it is publicised. The injury suffered by a defamed plaintiff is usually non-financial. It
is not even measurable in money terms.
1.29 Thus, one of the general themes of this Discussion Paper is to remove the preoccupation with large awards of damages in defamation
cases, by focusing on the reform of procedures and remedies. These proposals are designed to restore reputation more quickly and
effectively; reduce costs; and reduce the threat to free speech caused by the prospect of excessive damages.
Outline of contents of this Discussion Paper
1.30 This Paper consists of eleven chapters.
outlines the context in which the reference arose, and the Commission’s approach to it.
Chapters 2 to 5
discuss issues of procedure and remedies. They explore various options for reducing costs and delays in defamation litigation.
Chapters 6 to 11
discuss issues of substantive law. These all relate to defences.
The issues discussed in Chapters 2 to 11 are drawn from the Report of the Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992 and the
reform process which preceded it. They also reflect the Commission’s research into reforms which could be beneficial in New
South Wales.
1.31 The contents of Chapters 2 to 11 are as follows.
- Alternative Remedies and Procedures
This chapter explores options for reducing the emphasis on damages in defamation actions. These are:
voluntary corrections of defamatory matter by defendants;
compulsory correction orders; and
declaratory judgments.
- Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR)
This chapter examines the use of ADR in defamation disputes. It focuses on:
the need for ADR;
mediation; and
arbitration.
- The Roles of Judge and Jury
This chapter explores three options for reducing the procedural difficulties caused by using juries in defamation trials. These are:
abolition of juries;
retention of juries only to decide whether published matter is defamatory; and
retention of juries in their current role, but implementing reforms to enable them to perform it more effectively.
- Other Procedural Issues
This chapter examines procedural reforms designed to ensure that defamation actions can restore reputation more effectively. These
providing a shorter limitation period in which defamation suits can be commenced;
giving courts an express power to strike out defamation actions; and
using agreed statements of issues and exchanging witnesses’ statements.
- Justification
This chapter examines whether New South Wales should adopt a defence of truth alone, and explores related issues concerning protection
of privacy.
- Absolute Privilege
This chapter examines the scope of this defence. It focuses on:
bodies to be covered by this defence;
the scope of parliamentary privilege; and
arguments against extending absolute privilege.
- Protected Reports
This chapter examines the scope of this defence, and proposals for making it applicable to reports of a wider range of proceedings.
- Statutory Qualified Privilege
This chapter focuses on the protection available under this defence to the media. It examines:
the current operation of this defence, and proposals for making it more widely available;
proposals for a specific media defence;
the protection of journalist’s sources; and
simplifying the defence, and the tort of defamation in general, by basing it on negligence.
- The Public Figure Test
This chapter examines a form of qualified privilege for statements concerning “public figures” which exists in the United
States of America. It identifies issues relating to:
recent developments in Australian constitutional law;
the operation of the public figure test in its United States context; and
whether the test should be introduced in New South Wales.
- Innocent Publication
This chapter examines ways of protecting distributors and other persons innocently involved in the publication of defamatory matter.
It examines:
the protection currently available at common law and under statute;
a blanket defence for distributors; and
liberalising the current offer of amends defence.
1.32 Each chapter concludes with a brief summary of tentative proposals and major issues on which submissions are sought. It is emphasised
that submissions on
issue raised in this Discussion Paper are most welcome.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. Australia. Law Reform Commission
Unfair Publication: Defamation and Privacy
(Report 11, 1979) at paras 30-33.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
(Report 11, 1971).
. Primarily the
(Vic) and the
West Australian Newspapers v Bridge
[1979] HCA 10
(1979) 141 CLR 535.
Defamation Act
1901 (NSW) and
Defamation (Amendment) Act
1909 (NSW). Northern Territory:
Defamation Act
(which includes the
Defamation Act
1980 (NT) and the
Defamation Amendment Act
1989 (NT)).
Criminal Code Act
1899 (Qld);
Defamation Act
1957 (Tas). For a summary of the intricate differences between the various Australian jurisdictions, see T K Tobin and M G Sexton
Australian Defamation Law and Practice
(looseleaf, Butterworths, Sydney 1991) at paras [1020]-[1065].
. Law Reform Committee of South Australia
Reform of the Law of Libel and Slander
(Report 15, 1971); Law Reform Commission of Western Australia
Report on the Law of Defamation
(Project No. 8, 1979).
. Australia. Law Reform Commission
Unfair Publication: Defamation and Privacy
(Report 11, 1979).
. Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992,
Report on the Defamation Bill 1992
(Legislative Assembly, Parliament of New South Wales, October 1992) (NSW Legislation Committee Report).
. NSW Legislation Committee Report at 76-77.
. Queensland. Criminal Code Review Committee
Final Report of the Criminal Code Review Committee to the Attorney-General
(June 1992) at 13.
. The evidence is explored further in Chapter 4.
. For example, A Henskens
Evidence before NSW Legislation Committee
(19 February 1992) at 19-20.
Discussion Paper 32 (1993) - Defamation
2. Alternative Remedies and Procedures
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
Why do we have a law of defamation?
2.1 The primary purpose of current defamation law is to provide compensation for injury to reputation and feelings. The main issue
discussed in this chapter is whether the purpose ought to be - or at least to include - the actual restoration of reputation. This
is rarely accomplished under the current law.
2.2 The availability of an action for defamation achieves the related purpose of deterring unjustified attacks on reputation, and
so regulating the conduct of the media. The defamation action is not confined to the media context, of course; the tort is designed
to resolve private disputes between two parties, and is hardly an ideal instrument to regulate the communications industry. However,
in practice the majority of defendants are media outlets,
since they are the ones most likely to injure public reputations in their daily activities.
2.3 The defamation action has served different purposes in the past. When heard by ecclesiastical courts in England, slander was regarded
as a religious offence closely related to blasphemy. The purpose of bringing a charge was to protect the soul of the slanderer. As
these courts declined, tort actions for libel and slander were heard by common law courts. In the seventeenth century the crime of
political libel was heard by the Court of Star Chamber, as a means of protecting governments from the power of the printing press.
Later still the awarding of damages for defamation was seen as a means of restoring private honour, substituting for duels which
had been prohibited by law.
2.4 None of these can now be regarded as proper purposes for defamation law. Some modern cases may be characterised as actions to
restore a private sense of honour, but these appear very rare, and the possibility of the return of the duel is, we feel confident,
Why don’t defamation actions actually restore reputation?
2.5 A successful plaintiff in a defamation suit usually receives an award of monetary damages. When actions for libel and slander
were heard in the medieval common law courts, damages were the only remedy available. Injunctions may now be granted to restrain
publication, but this is done very rarely; declarations stating the legal rights of the parties are also available, but do not appear
to be used at all.
2.6 A common criticism of the law of defamation is that the preoccupation with damages as a remedy means that the purpose of restoring
reputation is not achieved. This is hardly a recent criticism, and proposals for alternative remedies have been extensively discussed
in the past. However, criticism of the size of recent awards of damages was one of the prime concerns expressed in the current reform
process, beginning with the Discussion Papers issued by the Attorneys General of Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria. The Commission
expresses no view on the merits of particular cases, but the level of public concern over very large awards makes this an opportune
time to explore once again whether alternative remedies could better serve the interests of plaintiffs, defendants, and the public.
The problems of the emphasis on damages
Inappropriate remedy for wrong suffered
2.7 Reputation is a social concept. A plaintiff’s reputation exists solely in the minds of others. Defaming a plaintiff involves
altering the perception of that person by others. Reputation can only be restored if the perception of the plaintiff by others is
altered again.
2.8 An award of damages is often not publicised at all, and is usually made long after the publication of the defamatory material.
This means that the defamation remains uncontradicted in the public mind. Defamation suits are often settled for a monetary sum,
and such settlements are given even less publicity - in fact a confidential deed is often used, which prohibits the public release
or discussion of the terms of settlement. Genuine plaintiffs who are not seeking a fortune but merely a public correction of the
defamatory slur are forced to ask for damages anyway; if the case cannot be settled, damages are all they will get if successful
at trial. Empirical research in the United States, involving interviews with defamation plaintiffs after suit, has shown that immediately
after the publication of the defamatory matter, most plaintiffs are primarily interested in restoring their reputation. Once the
action has begun, they become more interested in money - possibly to ensure that the time and expense of a long action will be covered;
possibly also to inflict punishment on the defendant (the hostile reaction of media defendants to the plaintiff’s initial approach
is often a major factor in convincing the plaintiff to sue).
2.9 Damages are inappropriate to restore a damaged reputation, and are not even designed to do so. They are awarded to
for damage to reputation, to console the plaintiff, and to provide an official recognition that the imputation made was defamatory
and indefensible.
This latter purpose is referred to as “vindicating” the plaintiff’s reputation. The size of the verdict is important
in determining the extent of the vindication. However, true vindication can only occur if the award is widely publicised. Otherwise
the perception of the plaintiff by the public remains unchanged.
2.10 In this situation, it may be preferable to use other remedies which directly affect the public’s view of the plaintiff.
The Commission wishes to explore whether other remedies may achieve the aims of consoling the plaintiff and recognising the indefensibility
of the published statements, while serving the important purpose of restoring reputation. Damages are all that can be given as compensation
for personal injuries; but they need not be the only available remedy for a defamed plaintiff. An injured reputation actually can
be restored, although perhaps not completely; this is not usually the case with a lost limb.
Chilling effect on free speech
2.11 The prospect of large awards causes self-censorship of speech and writing, both by individuals and media proprietors. Defamation
law is designed to inhibit the publication of indefensible material; but damages unlimited in amount can be used as a form of punishment
for unpopular views. Punitive damages have been abolished in New South Wales, but juries (under the guise of giving aggravated damages)
may still award sums which reflect their primary desire to censure the defendant, rather than to compensate the plaintiff.
Inadequate protection for plaintiffs
2.12 Where the common law recognised that speech was entitled to protection, its only response was to evolve defences which bar damages
and so completely deny the plaintiff any remedy. This means that a plaintiff gets damages or nothing.
Reducing the emphasis on damages
2.13 Recent writing has focussed on three possible alternatives to an award of damages in defamation actions. These are voluntary
corrections, court-ordered corrections, and declaratory judgments. Voluntary corrections are essentially defences available to the
defendant, rather than remedies awarded by the court.
Terminology
2.14 “Correction” is a collective term for retractions, apologies, and replies. Use of this term recognises that the purpose
of all three forms of expression is to correct public misconceptions as to the plaintiff’s reputation, and as to the true facts,
which result from the defendant’s publication of defamatory material.
2.15 A “retraction” may be defined as “a good faith publication of facts, withdrawing and repudiating the prior
defamatory statements”.
If this is accompanied by some expression of contrition, it may be called an “apology”.
2.16 A “reply” is “the publication of the plaintiff’s statement of the facts”. It involves the defendant
granting an opportunity to the plaintiff to put his or her own views forward, without the defendant admitting anything.
2.17 Voluntary corrections may be made available to defendants as a “correction defence”. They are to be distinguished
from “correction orders”, which are compulsory remedies awarded by the court.
VOLUNTARY CORRECTIONS
The position in New South Wales
Effect of published corrections in New South Wales
2.18 A published retraction or even an apology does not affect the substance of a plaintiff’s claim, but may be effective in
reducing damages.
On the other hand failure to apologise - or publication of an inadequate apology - can justify an award of aggravated damages. An
apology may be inadequate if belated, obscurely placed, half-hearted, mean-spirited or contemptuous. Even where the plaintiff has
not asked for an apology, failure to publish one may aggravate damages, if such failure is improper, unjustifiable, or in bad faith.
Offer of amends defence when publication is “innocent”
2.19 Division 8 of
Defamation Act
(NSW) creates a defence where the defendant offers to publish a reasonable correction or apology. This defence is only available
in the circumstances of “innocent publication”, which is where the defendant does not intend the matter to be defamatory,
does not know of circumstances by reason of which the matter is or may be defamatory, and exercises reasonable care in publishing.
The requirements of the defence are quite rigid, and very difficult for defendants to satisfy (see Chapter 11).
The position in other Australian jurisdictions
Defence of apology under Lord Campbell’s Act
2.20 In all other Australian jurisdictions a defence based on s 2 of the
1843 (“Lord Campbell’s Act”) is available. It requires the defendant to prove that the defamatory matter was published
without ill-will or other improper motive, and without gross negligence; and that a “full apology” was published before
the action was commenced or at the earliest opportunity afterwards. In Tasmania, Western Australia and Queensland the defendant must
also pay a sum of money into court by way of amends; in the other jurisdictions, this payment is optional. If the defence is made
out, the defendant’s maximum loss is limited to the amount paid into court.
2.21 The requirements of this defence are complex and cumbersome, and it has been little used.
Promoting the use of voluntary corrections
2.22 It is often suggested that defendants be permitted to rely on a prompt and adequate correction of defamatory imputations as a
defence. Several overseas jurisdictions have enacted such voluntary correction statutes. They are designed to promote the use of
corrections by giving incentives to the defendant to publish them - typically by barring general damages and limiting the plaintiff’s
recovery to actual economic loss.
2.23 These statutes are based on the premise that a prompt and adequate correction should severely restrict any injury to the plaintiff’s
reputation. The perceived benefits are that the public record will be swiftly corrected, or at least that the plaintiff’s views
will be aired. The barring of general damages is a powerful incentive for defendants to publish the correction.
Voluntary corrections in overseas jurisdictions
2.24 Legislation in all Canadian provinces bars the plaintiff from receiving general damages where the defamatory matter was published
in a newspaper or periodical, or broadcast, and the defendant has satisfied the following requirements:
(1) the publication of the defamatory matter was made in good faith;
(2) there was reasonable ground to believe it was for the public benefit;
(3) it did not impute to the plaintiff the commission of a criminal offence;
(4) the publication took place in mistake or misapprehension of the facts;
(5) a “full and fair” retraction
apology was published or broadcast in an equally conspicuous manner as the alleged defamation; and
(6) when the defamation is against a candidate for public office, the retraction and apology was published or broadcast at least five
days before the election.
United States
2.25 Most United States states have retraction statutes, which usually bar or limit general damages if the defendant complies with
a request to retract, or if the plaintiff fails to make such a request. They usually require a specific retraction referring to the
original publication, rather than an explanatory article giving the true facts.
New Zealand
2.26 New Zealand has recently enacted a provision allowing plaintiffs to request a retraction or reply within five days of becoming
aware of the publication of the matter complained of. If granted, the defendant is also to pay the plaintiff costs and compensation
for any actual pecuniary loss. However, the only benefit for the defendant is that publication of a retraction or reply may be taken
into account in mitigation of damages:
Defamation Act
1992 (NZ), s 25, 29.
The Annenberg Proposal
2.27 Drawing on the various correction statutes already enacted, a detailed proposal for a national United States statute has been
advanced by the Libel Reform Project of the Annenberg Washington Program in Communications Policies Studies of Northwestern University.
2.28 The Annenberg Proposal provides that every potential plaintiff must seek a retraction or opportunity to reply before commencing
a defamation action. If an adequate retraction or reply is published within 30 days, no action may be brought. The request must specify
the statements claimed to be false and defamatory and set forth the plaintiff’s version of the facts. The defendant is thus
insulated from litigation; if the plaintiff sues without requesting a correction the claim will be struck out. This goes beyond providing
a defence by imposing an additional procedural step on the plaintiff.
2.29 If a retraction is sought, the defendant can avoid suit only by publishing one, unless the plaintiff agrees to accept the defendant’s
offer of a reply instead. If the plaintiff seeks a reply, publication of a retraction will suffice (because a reply is unnecessary
if the defendant has withdrawn the defamatory statements).
The retraction or reply must be adequate
2.30 The timing, placement and format of the correction are governed by specified requirements. It must be “conspicuous”,
that is, published in substantially the same place and manner as the original defamatory statement, and calculated to reach the same
audience. An equivocal or hypothetical retraction will not suffice. If the plaintiff complains about innuendoes arising from the
matter rather than the actual words used, the defendant’s retraction may simply state that it did not intend to state or imply
the meaning suggested by the plaintiff. In the case of a broadcast, the defendant may insist that a reply does not exceed the length
of the defamatory material, that it be concise and limited to rebuttal of the defamatory statements, and that its form reasonably
accommodate the nature of the medium.
2.31 These requirements cannot prescribe what is fair and just in every case, and some of them are quite vague. However, they do give
guidance to prospective litigants, and encourage early negotiations between the parties, even if these may be unsuccessful.
2.32 If the plaintiff is dissatisfied with the correction, the plaintiff may sue and allege inadequacy. This becomes the first issue
decided by the court. If the correction is held to be adequate, the case ends and costs are awarded to the defendant.
2.33 The aim of the proposal is to avoid litigation and correct any false and defamatory statements as soon as possible. In this respect,
it must be noted that the adequacy of the correction (if disputed) will not be decided until the matter reaches court. However, this
issue could easily be decided by a judge on a summary basis, so delays would not be extensive; and if the correction is held adequate,
the plaintiff must be satisfied with that (although the decision could be appealed) and with the extra publicity for the correction
generated by the court case.
Could a correction defence work in New South Wales?
2.34 Proposals such as these are attractive in their aims and simplicity. Many details would have to be settled before a similar scheme
could be introduced in New South Wales.
Must the plaintiff request a correction before commencing litigation?
2.35 A plaintiff could be precluded from filing a defamation claim at all unless a correction is requested, as in the Annenberg Proposal.
The advantage of this is that the courts need not become involved at all, even to file documents.
2.36 This could be considered unjust to plaintiffs and a denial of access to justice through the courts. The alternative is to make
a correction a defence if published within a specified time of any request by the plaintiff or the serving of a statement of claim,
whichever occurs first.
Documentary requirements
2.37 The plaintiff should be required to identify the publication complained of, the imputations said to arise from it, the plaintiff’s
version of the facts, and a proposed retraction or reply. This could precede or accompany a statement of claim.
When must the correction be printed?
2.38 The amount of time required to consider a correction request is obviously a compromise between two competing interests: the plaintiff’s
desire to correct the defamatory imputation as soon as possible, and the defendant’s desire to investigate the process behind
the publication of the material and decide whether a correction is warranted.
2.39 The Annenberg Proposal gives defendants 30 days to consider a request for a correction. This seems quite long. In the case of
a daily newspaper or current affairs program, a retraction or reply published a month or more after the original defamatory material
already may be too late, and serve only to remind those who have forgotten of the imputations made. There may be cases where the
plaintiff does not seek a retraction or reply for several months; but it seems likely that this would only be where the plaintiff
is unaware of the original defamation. Asking for a retraction or reply would cost little or nothing, so expense would not be a barrier.
A Bill introduced by Congressman Charles Schumer into the United States Congress in 1985 proposed that defendants be allowed ten
days to consider a correction request; this seems closer to a reasonable time period.
2.40 Most Canadian provinces require a plaintiff to give notice in writing before suing newspapers or broadcasters for defamation.
Daily newspapers must be given seven days’ notice; other newspapers and broadcasters must be given 14 days’ notice. This
gives these defendants an opportunity to publish a correction, apology or explanation before suit.
2.41 A time limit of one week should be sufficient to accommodate the competing interests. If a media defendant needs to investigate
facts or ask questions of sources and so on, this time period should be sufficient, given that the relevant questions should have
been asked and the facts properly investigated before the material was published at all. If there has been a simple error on the
defendant’s part, this time period should be sufficient to establish that. The parties could agree on a longer time period
if desired.
Would this time limit make it impossible for certain defendants to use the defence?
2.42 The issue which arises is over the position of publications which are made over a longer time span, such as monthly magazines.
These could be required to purchase an advertisement in the daily media, which obviously makes the defence harder for them to use;
or they could be allowed to rely on a correction in their next issue.
2.43 In the case of books, one possibility is that a single sheet insert could be printed and sent out to the same people to whom
the book was shipped, although how this would reach the attention of readers who buy anonymously from a retailer is unclear. The
sheet could be inserted into the front of the book if the plaintiff complains of defamation before it is widely distributed.
This sometimes happens now, with an erratum notice inserted into the book; also books are sometimes recalled from distributors and
modified or pulped, but this would not affect copies of the publication which already are in private circulation.
2.44 The position of non-media defendants generally is even worse; there will be many cases where they cannot take advantage of a
correction defence at all, such as where allegedly defamatory statements are made at a rally or printed on a pamphlet. Allowing a
longer time period is unlikely to help here, however. One American proposal recognises that the defence can only be available to
those with continued access to the medium in which the original defamatory statement was made. Attempts by other defendants to publish
a correction can only be evidence in mitigation of damages.
2.45 The Commission seeks ideas on how a correction can be made available to all defendants; or whether it is acceptable to make it
available, in practical terms, only to the media (or really only the “mass” media, such as television, radio and daily
newspapers). The mass media do have an important role to play in free society, and allowing them to rely on corrections may help
them to expose corruption and so forth without being too “chilled” by the prospect of excessive awards. However, mass
media publications do more damage to reputation than any other publications.
What incentive is there for the defendant to publish the correction?
Request for correction as a prerequisite to suit:
If a correction must be sought before suit, publication of an adequate correction will insulate the defendant from litigation.
Publication of correction as a defence:
If, instead, a correction is to be a defence, the question is what benefit it will bring to the defendant. The suggestion often
made is that an adequate correction should prevent a plaintiff from recovering general damages; any specific pecuniary loss can still
be recovered. Alternatively, printing a correction could limit general damages to a specified sum. Another suggestion is that a correction
could protect the defendant by requiring proof of some additional element by the plaintiff before general damages can be recovered.
2.48 If any of these possibilities are adopted, it may be necessary for the defendant to also offer to pay the plaintiff’s costs
2.49 The possible benefits which a published correction could bring to a defendant may thus be set out as follows:
Barring of general damages.
Limiting of general damages
The size of the “cap” to be placed on damages obviously requires consideration. A smaller cap provides more incentive
for defendants to publish a correction; a larger cap allows a successful plaintiff to have some prospect of covering legal costs
not payable by the defendant.
Requiring the plaintiff to prove one of the following before general damages can be recovered
Actual malice on the defendant’s part
Defined as knowledge of falsity of the defamatory imputation or reckless disregard as to its truth. This is the standard applied
in the United States under the “public figure test”, discussed in Chapter 10. It requires proof of a subjective and essentially
criminal state of mind of the defendant. This test causes damages to be inflated; but it does make it harder for the plaintiff to
recover damages in the first place, since the plaintiff may not always be able to find the evidence required.
Common law malice on the defendant’s part
This includes ill will, spite and improper motive - see Chapter 10. Very little evidence of common law malice is required before
the issue is left to the jury.
This test thus provides less protection to defendants than an actual malice standard.
Some breach of ethical rules by the defendant
This would impose liability if any sort of malice is shown, but not if mere negligence is shown. This standard was originally suggested
by members of this Commission in a submission to the Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992.
It would require that the plaintiff prove that the actions of the publisher fell substantially short of accepted, proper standards
of journalistic behaviour. The Code of Ethics and Practice for Journalists produced by the Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance
would be relevant for these purposes.
This would catch any form of malice, but also extend to less purposive forms of behaviour, such as “allow[ing] personal interests
to influence them in their professional duties”.
This approach would benefit potential plaintiffs by providing an extra incentive for the media to adopt methods of “good practice”.
It also would benefit media defendants, in that they will be safe from general damages if they adopt good practice methods and print
an adequate correction of any defamatory imputations.
Proving “bad practice” may occasionally require proof of the defendant’s state of mind, such as where the defendant
is alleged not to have “report[ed] and interpret[ed] the news with scrupulous honesty”.
This could import some of the problems caused by the actual malice requirement in the United States: extensive discovery of material
such as reporter’s notes, interference with productive journalistic work, inflation of damages. To varying degrees, these problems
are likely to beset all of possibilities (3)(a), (b) and (c).
A further problem with possibility (3)(c) is that it would be difficult to apply to non-media defendants, emphasising the special
treatment given to media defendants by making a correction defence available.
Negligence on the defendant’s part
Falsity of the defamatory imputation
The problem with possibilities (3)(d) and (e) is that they may not provide sufficient incentive for a defendant to publish a correction.
If a defendant can make a genuine mistake, publish a false statement, retract it, and still be sued for general damages because the
plaintiff need only show carelessness (such as printing an incorrect name) or falsity, there would be little advantage in retracting
in the first place.
When would defendants use a correction defence?
2.50 Corrections are likely to be used where the defamation was basically unintentional or due to carelessness which the defendant
quickly identifies, such as the accidental printing of an incorrect name. They would also be extremely useful where a statement is
capable of being interpreted in various ways, some of them defamatory, where the defendant did not intend to convey those meanings.
2.51 Corrections are currently often informally agreed between the parties anyway. Creating a voluntary correction defence will not
disadvantage genuine plaintiffs (who seek a public correction of the record or the airing of their views), or genuine defendants
(who wish to correct harm done to the plaintiff’s reputation and improve the flow of information to the public). Providing
an incentive to the defendant to publish is likely to increase the use of corrections and save litigation.
2.52 The question is whether there should be some restrictions on the circumstances in which defendants may be permitted to use the
defence. The current defence of “offer of amends” is only available where publication is “innocent”, as discussed
above. The Canadian retraction statutes allow use of the defence only where the original publication was in good faith, reasonably
believed to be for the public benefit, and so forth.
2.53 It may be preferable to allow defendants to use the defence in any circumstances where they are prepared to do so, provided the
published correction is adequate.
Using a published correction as evidence in subsequent litigation
2.54 Currently, publication of apologies or retractions is discouraged by the fact that they may increase damages or deny certain
defences (for example, comment) to the defendant. These problems will not arise under a correction defence which bars or limits general
damages. It may be necessary to provide specifically that a correction is not admissible as evidence against the defendant; but if
the correction is inadequate, damages will be assessed as if no correction was printed.
Effect on the credibility of journalists
2.55 One media concern with retractions is that expressed by individual journalists: the lure of avoiding damages payouts may tempt
media proprietors to print retractions and so harm the journalist’s credibility.
This displays the same concern for individual reputation which defamation law seeks to encourage.
Effect on other possible remedies
2.56 Retraction statutes in overseas jurisdictions, and the Annenberg Proposal, continue to rely on damages as a possible final remedy,
in order to provide an incentive for the defendant to publish a correction. As Professor Fleming puts it, this means “retraction
cannot very well stand on its own two feet”; it “needs the crutch of a continuing threat of damages to be effective”.
This may hamper efforts to shift away from damages as the primary form of final relief. If the primary remedy for defamation is
to be a court-ordered correction anyway, a defendant may prefer not to voluntarily publish a retraction and simply delay the correction
of the public record until the court has heard the case.
The special position of replies
2.57 The Annenberg Proposal provides that in some circumstances a defendant may allow the plaintiff to publish his or her own version
of the facts, rather than withdraw and repudiate the defamatory imputations. A reply may be more appropriate where the defamation
takes the form of a statement of opinion, possibly defensible as comment. In such cases the public interest is in the continued flow
of ideas, rather than having the defendant withdraw its own statement, which effectively stops debate. A reply may be less satisfying
to the plaintiff than the defendant’s own retraction of its defamatory imputations; but it is arguably more effective to restore
reputation than a money payment.
2.58 The benefits of replies are that they provide access to the media for defamed individuals to restore their reputations; they
do not force the media to admit wrongdoing or withdraw its views; they air both sides of the case and allow the public to decide;
and they reduce the chilling prospect of excessive damages.
2.59 In several overseas jurisdictions a “right of reply” has been given to plaintiffs. This is not a voluntary correction
defence along the lines discussed above, but guarantees access to the media for persons unhappy with the way they are portrayed in
it. These rights will be briefly discussed, and then proposals for linking replies to certain other defences (rather then being part
of a separate voluntary correction defence) will be briefly examined.
The right of reply in Europe
2.60 Several European countries provide a statutory right for persons “named” in or “affected” by (not necessarily
defamed by) media publications to have a reply published. These are essentially quite draconian intrusions on freedom of the press.
For example, French law respects the “official truth”, and provides a right for public officials to correct descriptions
of their activities which the public official claims are inaccurate (even if the media disagrees). The German model allows replies
to be used as a weapon against critics and reviewers, and may fill publications with dull and unreadable material. The Swiss model
allows publication of articles to be restrained if the reply statute is not complied with.
2.61 Proposals for a single, uniform right of reply statute in Europe have generally been hedged with so many qualifications as to
make them useless. The Commission does not currently support the introduction of a statutory right of reply along these lines, but
welcomes any submissions on this issue.
Replies as an element in certain defences
2.62 Replies may be very effective to balance the interests of plaintiffs and defendants, and promote the flow of accurate information
to the public, in certain cases. One example is where the parties agree that a reply is more appropriate than a retraction under
a voluntary correction defence, as discussed above.
2.63 Another possibility is making the availability of certain other defences depend on the granting of a reply to the plaintiff.
This avoids the “damages or nothing” problem of current defamation law, providing some redress to the plaintiff while
reducing the threat of large damages posed to the defendant.
2.64 In particular, if the proposed qualified privilege defence for the media (based on s 17(e) of the
Defamation Act
1958 (NSW)) is accepted (see Chapter 9), the ease with which this defence should be made out may make it appropriate for it to be
linked to a reply.
2.65 The media could be required to offer a reply within a set time period after publication in order for the defence to succeed.
Alternatively, offering a reply could be not a mandatory requirement but only evidence of lack of malice (and vice versa). A third
alternative would be to make the defence a “partial” one, so that if it succeeds, no damages are available, but the plaintiff
is awarded a reply as a form of remedy. Both of the latter two alternatives were used in the defence created by cl 25 of the
Defamation Bill
1992 (NSW). Linking replies to the proposed media qualified privilege defence is discussed further in Chapter 9.
Promoting the use of a correction defence: allowing courts to recommend corrections
2.66 Corrections may be more widely used if the plaintiff can seek a recommendation from the court that the defendant publish one.
If the defendant complies, this would bring it the benefits of the correction defence discussed above.
The Defamation Bill 1992
2.67 This Bill contained a new provision (cl 44) designed to promote the use of corrections as an alternative to damages. The concept
and drafting of this provision attracted much criticism. As proposed, a correction or apology could be recommended by the court,
but was neither a defence nor a remedy. However, it would become almost automatic for the plaintiff to seek a correction, because
any damages would otherwise be reduced. Failure to seek an apology, or publish one when requested, is already relevant when assessing
damages; the Bill made no changes to this situation except to provide that court time could be pointlessly consumed in the process.
The New Zealand Defamation Act 1992
2.68 A procedure similar in some ways to that in the Bill has been introduced in New Zealand. A plaintiff may seek a recommendation
from the court that the defendant publish a correction (s 26(1)). The court may include recommendations as to its content, prominence
and time of publication, having regard to context and circumstances of the defamatory publication and the interest of the defendant
in maintaining the style and character of its periodical or program (s 27). The defendant is not bound to publish a correction in
accordance with the court’s recommendation, but there is a powerful incentive to do so - it ends the proceedings and bars any
damages claim (s 26(2)).
The defendant must then pay the plaintiff’s costs on a solicitor and client basis. The “carrot” of barring damages
is accompanied by a “stick”: if the defendant refuses to comply with the court’s recommendation, and the plaintiff
later wins damages, that refusal is considered when assessing damages,
the defendant (subject to the court’s discretion) will have to pay solicitor and client costs to the plaintiff (s 26(3)).
Problems with a court-recommended correction procedure
2.69 The first problem with giving courts power to recommend corrections is that the decision is made at an early stage when evidence
may be incomplete. Against this, it may be argued that defendants should not publish at all unless they have adequate evidence to
support the defamatory imputations; and that the whole aim of any procedural and remedial structure in defamation law should be to
ensure that, where appropriate, reputation is restored and the public record is corrected
2.70 Another problem is that applications for corrections will clog the courts, without providing a final resolution of the dispute
(because the correction is only recommended). In addition, the court’s prestige and standing may be lowered if a correction
is recommended (and possibly published), but the defendant then wins at trial, perhaps because additional evidence is then available.
Alternatively, the court may decline to recommend a correction, a result which may in many cases be widely reported in the media,
discouraging worthy plaintiffs and possibly affecting the jury’s decision at trial.
Alternative dispute resolution
2.71 If corrections are to be only recommended, not ordered, it would be preferable for this to be done by a mediator outside the
court system, as discussed in Chapter 3. This has the advantages of not forcing both parties to reveal their evidence in open court.
If a correction is recommended, this will be known only to the parties and the mediator, and thus the prestige and standing of the
court will not be harmed. The courts will be saved the potential embarrassment of awarding a remedy which is no more than a recommendation
and does not resolve the dispute.
2.72 However, allowing a mediator to recommend a correction would require an expansion of the mediator’s function of assisting
the parties to reach their own solution, as discussed in Chapter 3.
COURT-ORDERED CORRECTIONS
2.73 Apart from being a possible defence, corrections could be a remedy ordered by the court.
Rapid correction orders: the best way to satisfy plaintiffs
2.74 The aim of moving away from damages in defamation actions would ideally be achieved by providing a rapid procedure for achieving
correction of the public record. Corrections are unlikely to satisfy plaintiffs (because they are unlikely to restore reputation)
unless published soon after the defamatory material. A system whereby an application for a correction could be heard and resolved
quickly within days or weeks of publication would adequately protect reputation and render damages unnecessary.
Would such a system intrude on freedom of speech and the press?
2.75 The objection in principle to correction orders is that they intrude on freedom of the press, the right
not to publish
being as important as the right to publish. In particular, newspapers and broadcasters may be forced to print something they do not
believe to be true or print statements they do not agree with. This concern can be allayed by providing, for example, that defendants
may state that the correction is being published pursuant to a court order, and that defendants need not be required to state that
they adopt the court’s findings of fact.
2.76 In any case, it can be argued that a correction would not be ordered until a finding was made that the defendant had published
indefensible defamatory material. This deliberate act causing damage to an innocent plaintiff would justify the view that freedom
of the press is voidable in that particular case.
2.77 It also must be considered whether court-ordered corrections intrude on freedom of speech to a greater extent than the prospect
of large damages. They would certainly be more appropriate to restore reputation.
It may also be argued that compulsory correction orders are necessary to allow access to the media and promote a truly free marketplace
Issues to be resolved with a rapid correction order system
2.78 There are some practical problems with such a system. First, court time, priority and resources would have to be devoted to hearing
these cases quickly.
2.79 Secondly, the evidence available to the court at an early stage may be insufficient to allow a confident decision as to the facts.
Discovery and answer of interrogatories is unlikely to have occurred. Will only affidavit evidence be admitted, and if so, can deponents
be cross-examined? Or must all witnesses be assembled within a short time of publication? Will hearsay evidence be heard, or must
all tests as to admissibility at trial be satisfied?
2.80 Thirdly, what must the plaintiff establish - a prima facie case only, or proof of all elements on the balance of probabilities?
Must the defendant show only a prima facie defence, and if so what happens where the correction order is refused but the defence
subsequently fails at a later full trial?
2.81 The Legislation Committee which examined the Bill was unable to offer solutions to these practical problems.
They must be solved before the desirable goal of providing a quick remedy which restores reputation can be achieved.
Correction orders as a remedy at trial
2.82 A correction order may be a viable alternative to damages at the final trial of the action. Because such an order would be made
a long time after the defamatory publication, it may not be effective to restore reputation. Still, some plaintiffs may feel that
a correction would restore reputation rather than further injure it in their particular case, and so may seek a correction order.
If granted, it should reduce the damages payable.
2.83 In 1979, the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) proposed that correction orders could be gradually employed to reduce the
emphasis on damages. Despite the claim that this idea had “received overwhelming support” and had “been accepted
as fair and workable by all of the major media interests in Australia”,
it proved to be one of the most contentious issues discussed in the drafting of the 1983 and 1984 Uniform Bills.
2.84 The ALRC proposed that judges make correction orders, but that juries should continue to assess damages in those jurisdictions
where they do so now. This could mean that a judge could make a correction order and instruct the jury to consider it when assessing
damages; but the jury could be unimpressed and award massive damages anyway. This problem will not arise if judges make all decisions
as to remedies, as the Commission proposes.
2.85 One problem is that the efficacy of other reforms (such as a correction defence) may require that damages be retained as the
primary final remedy. These reforms should reduce the emphasis on damages, but will not replace damages entirely.
2.86 Media groups have previously suggested that, in some cases, a defendant would prefer to pay damages rather than obey a correction
If this was allowed, the judge would have to give the correction order a monetary value expressed as a sum of damages. Alternatively
(or additionally), the plaintiff could be awarded indemnity costs, in addition to whatever sum of damages the court proposed to award
with the correction order.
A summary judgment procedure for correction orders ?
2.87 In England, Justice Hoffman prepared a Defamation Bill in 1988 which was designed to introduce a summary procedure in defamation
claims. The Bill has not been enacted and was heavily criticised by a Working Group of the Supreme Court Procedure Committee, chaired
by Lord Justice Neill, which issued a Report on Practice and Procedure in Defamation in July 1991. However, in December 1992 the
Lord Chancellor, Lord Mackay, proposed several reforms of defamation law which were based principally on the Neill Report - but included
a summary procedure along the lines suggested by Justice Hoffman. In New South Wales, the Legislation Committee on the Defamation
Bill 1992 also recommended the “introduction of a form of summary procedure, similar to that introduced [sic] in the United
2.88 The Hoffman proposal was that plaintiffs could elect to have their claim heard summarily, that is, by a judge alone and on affidavit
evidence. The remedies available were damages (limited to �5000) and an order for a correction or apology. Defendants could also
apply to have a claim heard summarily, and this would be granted where the judge believed that summary relief would adequately compensate
the plaintiff. A claim for summary relief would not be heard if there was a good arguable defence of justification or fair comment
(which would require witnesses to be heard), or if there was some other reason why the action should go to a full trial. The aim
was to resolve defamation actions as quickly and cheaply as possible.
2.89 The Neill Report objected to judges having the power to compel the publication of anything, as an unjustifiable intrusion upon
free speech. It criticised the idea that judges would be empowered to decide whether statements actually were defamatory (rather
than merely having the capacity to defame), saying this was a proper function for a jury of ordinary people; in some cases, the Bill
would deprive a party of the right to trial by jury without their consent. Judges would have to decide what libels were trivial and
deserving only of summary relief; this would be likely to increase the incidence of appeals. (Many of these concerns expressed by
the Neill Report would have no force if defamation trials were heard by judges alone, as the Commission proposes - see Chapter 4).
Any trivial cases which would fit the proposed criteria are probably settled anyway. The Neill Report preferred a relaxation of the
procedure for the offer of amends defence.
2.90 It must also be questioned whether it is appropriate for money damages to be made available to plaintiffs on the basis of affidavit
evidence alone; although some provision for covering the plaintiff’s costs should be made.
2.91 The Commission would welcome submissions on this procedure. It may be possible to adopt the basic thrust of the proposal in some
form: that defamatory publications should be remedied by rapid publication of a correction, rather than an indeterminate amount of
damages awarded months or years later.
DECLARATORY JUDGMENTS
2.92 Courts already have the power to declare what the legal position is between two parties.
The ALRC proposed specific statutory recognition of a plaintiff’s right to sue for a declaration alone, and proposed that
the terms of any declaratory order actually made (or which would have been made if sought) be considered when assessing damages.
United States proposals for declaratory judgments
2.93 The use of declarations has been supported in the United States in recent years as a way of avoiding the problems in defamation
cases caused by the public figure test. That test causes a concentration on the defendant’s malice, which has prejudiced plaintiffs,
defendants, and the public interest in knowing the truth.
The Annenberg Proposal
2.94 A second aspect of the Annenberg Proposal is that, if a retraction or reply is not granted, a plaintiff may elect to sue for
a declaration that the defamatory statement is false. Truth or falsity is the only issue to be litigated; the defendant’s malice
is irrelevant. No damages are available, but the loser pays the winner’s costs (which is unusual in United States law). This
avoids the necessity of probing the issue of the defendant’s state of mind (as required by the public figure test), which makes
it difficult for a plaintiff to recover damages and inflates them when they are awarded. The action will be resolved far more quickly,
which benefits all involved.
2.95 This should vindicate reputation more effectively, reduce the chilling effect of excessive damages, further the flow of accurate
information to the public, give United States plaintiffs some hope of correcting the public record (they have very little chance
under current United States law), and discourage harassment of defendants by unmeritorious plaintiffs (which can occur when the public
figure test is combined with United States costs rules). These benefits are enough to commend declaratory judgments as a possible
alternative to damages in New South Wales, although we do not have the problems generated by the public figure test.
A proposal for consideration: two separate remedial regimes
2.96 Declarations are attractive as remedies which may restore reputation more effectively and reduce the current emphasis on damages.
A court’s finding for the plaintiff in a defamation action actually helps to rectify the injury suffered - unlike in personal
injury cases where the court’s decision alone does nothing to help the plaintiff.
2.97 The Commission is considering a proposal that plaintiffs be able to choose between two separate remedial regimes, for judicial
declarations and for damages. The differences between them would chiefly involve different rules on (a) the onus of proof of truth/falsity
of any defamatory imputations of fact, and (b) the availability of qualified privilege as a defence. On both of these issues the
damages remedy would pose more difficult challenges to the plaintiff.
2.98 Strategically, an intended outcome of the proposal is that plaintiffs would be tempted in many cases to settle for a declaration.
This outcome could be assisted if mediation or other alternative resolution or “fast-track” procedures were specifically
linked to proceedings for a declaration, and if a declaration were always potentially available as fall-back relief in proceedings
initially claiming damages. Costs rules could also be used to encourage plaintiffs to seek a declaration.
Onus of proof
2.99 Currently in New South Wales law there is no formal presumption of truth or falsity, but the defendant must prove truth if a
defence of justification is pleaded. Either side can adduce evidence of truth or falsity when damages are assessed, even if justification
is not pleaded.
2.100 The proposal under consideration suggests that plaintiffs bear the onus of proving falsity if they wish to recover damages.
Alternatively, pending the creation of separate remedies for invasion of privacy (see Chapter 6), plaintiffs may recover damages
if they prove that the imputation complained of is a statement of fact not made in the public interest.
2.101 On the other hand, if the plaintiff seeks a declaration alone, the onus will be on the defendant to prove truth (and satisfy
the public interest or qualified privilege requirements of that defence). The terms of the declaration could be altered in appropriate
cases. For example, a defendant may present material to the court showing the basis on which certain imputations were made. The court
may then make a declaration, not that the imputations are false, but that the defendant has not been able to prove them; and (where
appropriate) that the defendant’s conduct in publishing was not justifiable in the circumstances. This may suit some plaintiffs
who wish for a defendant to be given adverse publicity. It would also go some way towards correcting the public record and restoring
the plaintiff’s reputation.
2.102 There may be other cases where the truth cannot ultimately be known - for example, the litigation between General Westmoreland
and CBS News, which amounted to a replay of the policy arguments surrounding the Vietnam War and an attempt to show why the American
troops were unsuccessful.
In such a case, any declaratory order could reflect the impossibility of discovering the truth.
2.103 Where the plaintiff cannot prove the falsity of a defamatory imputation of fact, but the defendant cannot prove truth either
- so that the status of the imputation is “not proven” - the plaintiff may be entitled to a judicial declaration to this
effect (“the defendant has been unable to substantiate...”), but not to any damages. On the other hand, where (a) the
prove the falsity of a factual imputation, and publication in circumstances likely to damage the plaintiff’s reputation, and
(b) no other of the standard defences is established, the plaintiff would be entitled to damages and, if sought, a declaration as
well. The granting and publicising of a declaration would suitably reduce the amount of damages awarded.
2.104 This would bring a damages claim in defamation closer than under present law to the normal specifications of a tort, with the
onus on the plaintiff, as in other torts, to prove most vital elements (see Chapter 6). The declaration remedy remains available
for unsubstantiated defamatory allegations of fact, or comments which are not honest, or defamatory matter in protected reports which
are not published in good faith. But the onus on crucial matters is more evenly parcelled out between the parties.
Should truth be the only defence to a declaratory judgment action?
2.105 Under the Annenberg and similar United States proposals, truth or falsity is the only issue to be litigated in a declaratory
judgment action. If truth is the only defence, this may offer a remedy (and costs, possibly on an indemnity basis - see paragraph
2.110) to a plaintiff where a defence such as qualified privilege would result in a verdict for the defendant in a damages action.
Some commentators have argued that a declaratory judgment action should recognise other defences besides truth, especially absolute
privilege. Others suggest that qualified privilege defences need not be recognised, since they protect less important social interests
than absolute privilege, and plaintiffs should be given the opportunity to correct the record in a declaratory judgment action. The
position of comment as a defence is interesting, because it is designed to protect speech which is essentially incapable of being
true or false.
2.106 Absolute privilege would have to be recognised, because otherwise it would be possible to sue for a declaration that what was
said by a Member of Parliament in the House or by a Royal Commissioner was false, and expose such persons to a costs order. This
is considered an unacceptable intrusion on the workings of such important institutions.
2.107 The recognition of the defences of protected reports (
Defamation Act
Division 5) and official notices (Division 6) raises problems. If these defences are not recognised, it may result in one court declaring
that what was said in proceedings before another court (and fairly reported) was false. Similarly, documents published under the
authority of a parliamentary body could be declared to contain false statements. On the other hand, the more defences which are recognised,
the less attractive a declaratory judgment remedy becomes to plaintiffs.
2.108 As stated above, the declaratory judgment remedy in the United States is designed to avoid the problems created by the focus
on malice under the public figure test. The Constitutional privileges conferred by the public figure test are not recognised when
a declaratory judgment is sought. Even if all other defences were still recognised, this would benefit United States plaintiffs enormously
(and defendants as well). It may be that in New South Wales, where the problems of the public figure test do not exist, the benefits
to be gained by a declaratory judgment procedure are limited.
2.109 A declaratory judgment action is designed to be fair to both sides: plaintiffs give up the chance of damages; defendants give
up some defences, concentrating on contesting truth. It seems that the only defences which could be sensibly eliminated in a declaratory
judgment action in New South Wales would be the qualified privilege defences. This will certainly give a remedy where a damages action
would leave a plaintiff with nothing, but without forcing the defendant to pay damages; both sides benefit from a quicker and cheaper
trial; and the flow of accurate information to the public is improved.
Costs of proceedings seeking a declaration
2.110 One key argument in favour of retaining damages in defamation actions is that they are necessary if a successful plaintiff
is to have the costs of the action covered. A costs order made against a defendant will usually leave the plaintiff substantially
out of pocket, because not all of the plaintiff’s solicitor/client costs will be recoverable on taxation. To compensate plaintiffs
for losing the prospect of damages, it may be necessary to provide that the successful plaintiff in a declaratory judgment action
be awarded more generous costs than the usual party and party scale - perhaps solicitor/client or even indemnity costs.
These costs should not be excessive anyway, since the proceedings should be considerably faster than a standard defamation trial.
The knowledge that no damages are available will ensure that the parties concentrate on the issues.
Would a declaratory judgment vindicate reputation?
2.111 It may be argued that a declaratory judgment is not likely to be publicised as widely as the original defamatory statement,
which may have been quite sensational. In this case, a plaintiff’s reputation is unlikely to be fully restored. One argument
in favour of large awards of damages is that they increase the publicity given to the result of the case (although this also serves
to re-publicise the original defamatory material).
2.112 It may be argued that a defendant’s competitors would be eager to report any judicial finding adverse to the defendant.
The excessive concentration of ownership of the Australian media means that perhaps there is not as much competition as there should
be. The introduction of new technologies may counter, to some extent, the decline of the print media. However, it seems likely that
existing media proprietors will feature heavily in the ownership pattern of new forms of media, such as satellite television.
2.113 One possibility is to empower the courts to order that the defendant publish the finding of falsity made against it. This may
be thought to intrude too far into freedom of the press. However, it is noted that even in the United States, no ruling has been
made that the First Amendment invalidates such an order, although it does require that a plaintiff prove falsity before this order
could be granted.
It may be preferable for a judge to order that the defendant, if not willing to publish the court’s finding, should pay to
the plaintiff the cost of running a sufficiently prominent advertisement in a rival publication; details of those costs could be
provided to the court. In appropriate cases it may be reasonable for the plaintiff to engage an advertising agency to draft and place
the advertisement (to ensure it has the maximum impact); these costs could also be borne by the defendant.
2.114 One problem area is finding a method of framing a declaration so that it does not simply further publicise the imputation.
A prominent advertisement stating “There is no truth in the rumour that X is a thief” may not have the effect desired
by the plaintiff, even if this finding is stated to be the considered verdict of a court after hearing the evidence (rather than
simply an insincere or impudent “retraction” out of the defendant’s mouth).
Faster vindication of reputation
2.115 A declaratory judgment action should be heard and resolved much faster than current defamation trials. The remedial structure
under consideration would function far more effectively if judges alone heard defamation actions, as discussed in Chapter 4. Alternatively,
juries could be retained only to decide whether the pleaded imputations are conveyed and are defamatory, with the judge alone deciding
all questions of defences and remedies.
Will declarations be an adequate deterrent?
2.116 As discussed above, the possibility of defamation suits encourages the media to carefully research and check stories. It is
arguable that removing damages from the calculation will lead to greater media carelessness and reduce the protection given to reputation.
2.117 When assessing the deterrent role of damages, it is necessary to distinguish between the purpose of awards in individual cases
and the effect of having damages as an available remedy. Since punitive damages were abolished in 1974, damages in New South Wales
defamation cases have only the functions of consoling the plaintiff and recognising the indefensibility of the defamatory imputations.
However, the possibility that damages may be awarded is designed to deter the publication of indefensible defamatory material.
2.118 It is arguable that damages are necessary to keep irresponsible publishers in line. Giving plaintiffs the option to sue for
damages should retain this deterrent effect; but this will also hamper efforts to shift away from damages as the appropriate form
of final relief. The threat of damages may not keep irresponsible publishers in line anyway, because they have calculated that the
profits from their conduct will outweigh any likely recovery by the plaintiff.
2.119 A defendant’s concern for its own reputation and credibility should ensure that regular declarations that it publishes
false material will have a significant deterrent effect. This will apply both to individual journalists and particular publications.
If a plaintiff can sue for a declaration of falsity, defendants will probably lose many cases they would win if the plaintiff was
seeking damages (because qualified privilege defences will be unavailable); they will have to pay to publicise their own carelessness;
and cover most or all of the plaintiff’s costs. This is likely to be a powerful deterrent.
2.120 Damages will, of course, still be available for any specific pecuniary loss which results from the defamation.
POSSIBLE PROCEDURAL AND REMEDIAL STRUCTURE
2.121 It may be possible to combine several of the above remedies in a workable structure which better serves the interests of the
parties and the public. The following is one example of such a structure, although there are numerous possible variants.
2.122 The plaintiff could choose to seek either a declaration alone, or damages and (if desired) a declaration as well. A declaration
alone would be much easier to obtain: the defendant would have the onus of proving truth, and the qualified privilege defences would
not be available. Nor would the defence of offer of amends, as the only effect of this defence is to bar any award of damages.
2.123 If damages are sought, the plaintiff would have the onus of proving that the imputations were false (or not related to a matter
of public interest), and that they were published in circumstances likely to result in harm to the plaintiff’s reputation.
The qualified privilege defences would be available - including, if accepted, the proposed media qualified privilege defence (which
would usually require the defendant to offer to the plaintiff an opportunity to reply, because this would be strong evidence of good
faith). A correction defence would also be available, to bar general damages or limit them to a specified sum. The defence of offer
of amends would be available (see Chapter 11 for possible reforms designed to make that defence easier to use). If desired, the plaintiff
could seek a correction order; if granted, it would reduce the damages payable.
2.124 In some cases the plaintiff may fail to satisfy the requirements for an award of damages - for example, by being unable to
prove falsity. In such cases, the plaintiff may be able to satisfy the less onerous requirements for a declaratory judgment. A declaration
could then be made; however, the plaintiff (being only partially successful in the action) would receive a reduced costs award.
Declaratory judgment procedure
Requirements.
The plaintiff would have the option of seeking a declaration alone (as with any other civil remedy). In this case, the plaintiff
would have to prove the following:
the pleaded imputation arises from the matter complained of, and is defamatory;
it was published of and concerning the plaintiff; and
it was published by or on behalf of the defendant.
The following defences would be available, with the onus on the defendant to prove all necessary elements. The plaintiff would still
have to prove malice to rebut certain defences, as at present.
Unlikelihood of harm (as in
Defamation Act
Justification (truth and public interest or qualified privilege requirements, as in
- unless separate privacy remedy established).
Contextual truth
Absolute privilege.
Protected report.
Court notices, official notices etc
But not qualified privilege as at common law or under statute
The remedy given would be a declaration that the defendant had defamed the plaintiff. In addition, the plaintiff would recover solicitor
/ client or perhaps even indemnity costs. If the defendant is unwilling to publish the declaration, it would have to pay to the plaintiff
the price of placing an advertisement in a rival publication.
2.128 The declaration would reflect any findings made as to:
falsity or lack of substantiation of any defamatory imputation of fact;
falsity or lack of substantiation of any imputation of fact alleged to be the proper material for comment;
lack of genuineness of any opinion allegedly forming the basis for the defamatory imputation; and
lack of good faith in publishing a protected report or court notice, etc.
The plaintiff may prove that four defamatory imputations arise from the matter complained of. Declarations could be made that the
defendant has not substantiated the first defamatory imputation; that the plaintiff has proved the second to be untrue; that the
defendant has not proved a factual basis for the opinion expressed as the third imputation; and that the defendant did not honestly
hold the opinion expressed as the fourth imputation.
Action for damages
Requirements.
If damages are sought, the plaintiff would have to prove the following:
the pleaded imputation arises from the matter complained of, and is defamatory;
the imputation is
(a) a false imputation of fact,
(b) an imputation of fact not published in the public interest (unless separate privacy remedy established),
(c) an expression of opinion;
it was published of and concerning the plaintiff;
it was published by or on behalf of the defendant; and
it was published in circumstances likely to result in harm to the plaintiff’s reputation.
The following defences would be available.
Contextual truth (as to imputation of fact).
Absolute privilege.
Qualified privilege - common law or under statute
Protected report.
Court notices, official notices etc
Comment (as to imputation of opinion).
Offer of amends (s 36-45).
The remedy granted would be damages. These would be discounted if a judicial declaration was also sought, obtained and publicised.
A declaration could still be granted if the damages claim fails but the separate requirements for a declaration are satisfied. However
in this case the plaintiff, being only partially successful, will not recover full costs.
Correction defence
correction defence would be available, to bar or limit general damages. This would require a correction to be published within seven
days of one being requested, or service of a statement of claim (whichever occurs first). Publication of a correction would have
to be accompanied by an offer to pay the plaintiff’s costs to date.
2.134 An offer to publish a reply (within one week of one being requested, or service of a statement of claim) would be strong evidence
of good faith (and vice versa) under the proposed media qualified privilege defence.
Correction orders
2.135 These would be available as final relief in the action. In addition a rapid procedure for making correction orders is desirable.
The Commission welcomes submissions on how such a procedure could be made workable.
ISSUES ARISING IN CHAPTER 2 - ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES AND PROCEDURES
1. Should the primary purpose of defamation law be to enable plaintiffs to restore their reputation, or to provide compensation for
injury to reputation and feelings?
Voluntary Corrections
2. Should plaintiffs be required to request a correction before commencing litigation?
3. Should defendants be able to rely on prompt and adequate corrections as a defence?
4. What information should accompany a request for a correction?
5. When must the correction be printed?
6. Is it acceptable to make a correction defence available only to media defendants? If not, how could it be made more easily available
to other defendants?
7. Should a prompt and adequate correction bar any award of general damages against the defendant? Or limit general damages to a specified
maximum? Or require the plaintiff to prove some additional element before general damages can be recovered?
8. Should defendants only be able to use a correction defence in certain circumstances?
9. Should courts have power to recommend publication of a correction? Or should this be done, if at all, by a mediator outside the
court system?
10. Should plaintiffs be given a statutory right of reply?
Court-Ordered Corrections
11. Would a rapid procedure for making correction orders be a significant intrusion on freedom of the press?
12. If not, what procedures should be adopted? Is a form of summary procedure desirable? What evidentiary standards should apply?
13. Would correction orders made at the final trial of the action effectively restore reputation?
Declaratory Judgments
14. Should two separate remedial regimes be created - allowing a plaintiff to seek a declaration alone, or damages and (if desired)
a declaration as well?
15. If so, should plaintiffs bear the onus of proving falsity (or that the imputation did not relate to a matter of public interest)
if seeking damages? What problems, if any, are likely to arise if the onus of proving truth remains on the defendant when the plaintiff
seeks a declaration alone?
16. Should the qualified privilege defences be unavailable in actions seeking a declaration alone?
17. What costs should be payable to plaintiffs who successfully seek a declaration alone?
18. Would such a dual remedial regime adequately deter careless injury to reputation by defendants?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. The empirical survey of suits commenced in the NSW Supreme Court conducted by Edgeworth and Newcity found that the media comprised
68.5% of all defendants. (A similar study by Sourdin reached a figure of 68.1%). M Newcity “The sociology of defamation in
Australia and the United States”
Texas International Law Journal
at 31; T Sourdin
Defamation Study: A study of defamation proceedings commenced in the New South Wales Supreme Court for the period 1/1/1987 to 31/12/1988
(unpublished paper, University of New South Wales, 1990) at 15-16.
. See New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
(Discussion Paper 24, 1992) at paras 2.8-2.23 for a discussion of ecclesiastical offences.
. W P Keeton (ed)
Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts
(5th edition, West Publishing Co, St Paul 1984) at 772-773; D A Anderson “Reputation, compensation, and proof” (1984)
William and Mary Law Review
747 at 774.
. Australia. Law Reform Commission
Unfair Publication: Defamation and Privacy
(Report 11, 1979) at paras 34-35 and 253; Newcity at 15 fn 63, 45. It must be noted that defamation actions have long been used to
redress injury caused by placing the plaintiff in a ridiculous light, which is arguably not injury to reputation at all: R Watterson
“What is defamatory today?”, paper presented at the conference
Finding a Remedy for Defamation
(Sydney, June 1993).
. J Soloski and R L Wissler “The libel dispute resolution program: a way to resolve disputes out of court” in R T Kaplar
Beyond the Courtroom: Alternatives for Resolving Press Disputes
(The Media Institute, Washington 1991) at 86-88. These researchers have been criticised for too readily accepting the self-serving
statements of plaintiffs that they were not primarily motivated by money. However, 90% of plaintiffs contacted the media defendant
and attempted to resolve the dispute before suing; few plaintiffs suffered financial harm because of the defamatory matter; most
plaintiffs were dependant on their reputation to earn a living; and most had never sued for anything before. These factors support
the claims by plaintiffs that their primary interest was in restoring their reputation.
Uren v John Fairfax and Sons Pty Ltd
[1966] HCA 40
(1967) 117 CLR 118
at 150 per Windeyer J. See
Carson v John Fairfax & Sons Ltd
[1993] HCA 31
(1993) 67 ALJR 634
at 643, 648-649; and in the Court of Appeal
(1991) 24 NSWLR 259
at 272(B-E), 299-300.
. J G Fleming “Retraction and reply: alternative remedies for defamation” (1978) 12
University of British Columbia Law Review
15 at 15-16; ALRC Report 11 at paras 252, 257.
. This definition, and that given for “reply”, is that of the Annenberg Program: see R M Schmidt “A proposal for
libel law reform” in Kaplar (ed) at 70-71.
. D A Hunt “Defamation - pre-trial practice” in J C Gibson (ed)
Aspects of the Law of Defamation in New South Wales
(Young Lawyers Section, Law Society of NSW, Sydney 1990) at 8-9.
Fielding v Variety Inc
[1967] 2 QB 841 at 849;
Lawrie v Northern Territory News Services Pty Ltd
(1985) 82 FLR 70
Mirror Newspapers Ltd v Fitzpatrick
[1984] 1 NSWLR 643
at 659-660.
. T K Tobin and M G Sexton
Australian Defamation Law and Practice
(looseleaf, Butterworths, Sydney 1991) at para [16,030].
. Full details are set out in R Brown
The Law of Defamation in Canada
(Carswell, Ontario 1987), Vol 2 at 1059-1061.
. Keeton at 846-847.
. The Project produced an extensive Report in 1988; see Schmidt in Kaplar (ed) at 65-82.
. A bill “to protect the constitutional right to freedom of speech by establishing a new action for defamation”, H R 2846,
99th Cong, 1st Sess (1985). A retraction under this Bill would only preclude the awarding of costs against the defendant in a declaratory
judgment action.
. Full details are set out in Brown, Vol 2 at 795-804. It is not clear why daily television or radio programs should be given twice
as long to consider the issue as daily newspapers.
. California’s retraction statute has been held not to cover magazines, because it requires a retraction within three weeks
of demand: G D Schwarzbach “Shouldn’t California’s retraction statute protect magazines too?”
Southwestern University Law Review
. Anon, “US ‘model’ libel law would substitute retractions for money damages” (1989) 21 (2)
Australian Author
. D M Cendali “Of things to come - the actual impact of
Herbert v Lando
and a proposed national correction statute” (1985) 22
Harvard Journal of Legislation
441 at 496.
McKenzie v Mergen Holdings Pty Ltd
(1990) 29 NSWLR 43
, which discusses the evidence of malice which is required when attempting to rebut the defence of qualified privilege.
. The Hon R M Hope AC, CMG, QC, Chairman and Professor David Weisbrot, Commissioner of the NSW Law Reform Commission
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992
(9 September 1992) at 2.
. Other published guidelines could be relevant in some circumstances. For example, the Australian Press Council has “laid down
the broad principles to which it is committed”, a list which includes items such as “Rumour and unconfirmed reports,
if published at all, should be identified as such”. However, these principles are not intended to be a “precise and exhaustive
formula...by which newspapers must govern themselves” (Australian Press Council,
Annual Report No. 16
, Sydney, 30 June 1992, at 173-174).
. Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance, Registered Rules, Rule 65 (
Journalists’ Code of Ethics
), Item (d).
Journalists’ Code of Ethics
, Item (a).
. R P Bezanson, G Cranberg and J Soloski
Libel Law and the Press: Myth and Reality
(Free Press, New York, 1987) at 40-47.
. Fleming at 25-26.
. C Danziger “The right of reply in the United State and Europe” (1986) 19
New York University Journal of International Law and Politics
171 at 183-194.
. A Palmer “Defamation law reform”
Law Institute Journal
at 506-507.
. Although according to a spokesperson for the New Zealand Justice Minister, it may still be possible to seek damages caused by reckless
and wilful libels: S Parker “Free speech gets cheaper”
The Bulletin
, 15 December 1992, at 20.
. Correction orders as an alternative remedy to damages - and a factor to be considered when assessing damages - have been endorsed
by the Free Speech Committee:
Discussion Paper on Defamation Law Reform
(Sydney, September 1990) at 15.
Red Lion Broadcasting Co v Federal Communications Commission
[1969] USSC 141
(1969), discussed in Danziger at 180-181.
. Applegarth at 35-36; Law Council of Australia
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(30 January 1992) at 24-28; NSW Bar Association
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(14 February 1992) at 13; T K Tobin QC and M G Sexton
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(30 January 1992) at 13-15; Law Institute of Victoria
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(14 February 1992 - first drafted March 1991) at 15-25.
. Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992,
Report on the Defamation Bill 1992
(Legislative Assembly, Parliament of New South Wales, October 1992) (NSW Legislation Committee Report) at 130.
. ALRC Report 11 at para 258.
. See Chapter 4.
. Eg ALRC Report 11 at para 258.
. NSW Legislation Committee Report at 155. For news of the Lord Chancellor’s proposals in the UK, see
Guardian Gazette
, 6 January 1993, at 6.
. England and Wales. Supreme Court Procedure Committee
Report on Practice and Procedure in Defamation
(July 1991) (Neill Committee Report) at 144-150. On the proposed new offer of amends defence, see Chapter 11 of this Discussion Paper.
. R P Meagher, W M C Gummow, and J R F Lehane
Equity: Doctrines and Remedies
(3rd edition, Butterworths, Sydney 1992), ch 19.
. ALRC Report 11 at paras 274, 262.
. See Chapter 10.
. Soloski and Wissler in Kaplar (ed) at 72-73.
. P N Leval “The no-money, no-fault libel suit: Keeping
in its proper place” in J Soloski and R P Bezanson (eds)
Reforming Libel Law
(Guilford Press, New York 1992) at 215-216.
Singleton v Ffrench
(1986) 5 NSWLR 425
at 443-444;
Defamation Act
. Powe at 136-138.
. M A Franklin “A declaratory judgment alternative to current libel law”
California Law Review
at 817-818; Barrett at 864 and fn 104; J S Hulme and S M Springer “Vindicating reputation: an alternative to damages as a remedy
for defamation” in Soloski and Bezanson (1992) at 159, 165-167.
. The ALRC recommended solicitor / client costs: ALRC Report 11 at para 296.
Miami Herald Publishing Co v Tornillo
[1974] USSC 147
(1974) at 258-259. This case invalidated a Florida statute which required a newspaper to print replies by political candidates to
editorials, but the reasoning relied on the fact that such a reply was compulsory even though falsity had not been shown. See Barrett
at 870 and fn 138; R Dworkin “The coming battles over free speech”
New York Review of Books
, 11 June 1992, at 63-64; W A Eberhard “There’s got to be a better way: alternatives to the high cost of libel”
Mercer Law Review
Discussion Paper 32 (1993) - Defamation
3. Alternative Dispute Resolution
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
3.1 The aim of achieving speedy restoration of reputation may be served in some cases by resolving defamation claims outside the court
structure. The Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992, and most submissions to it, were generally supportive of using
alternative methods of dispute resolution (primarily mediation) in an attempt to avoid the high costs and long delays common to civil
litigation. These problems are especially acute in the area of defamation, where freedom of speech and personal reputation are at
3.2 Mediation is the most prominent of the various methods of
consensual dispute resolution
, which is:
where a neutral third party uses a structured process in a formal manner and setting to assist the parties to negotiate a mutually
acceptable resolution of matters in dispute between them.
The Commission wishes to explore whether mediation could be used more widely in defamation cases, in particular, whether it may facilitate
the resolution of disputes through publication of a correction, apology or reply.
The benefits of Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) in the defamation context
3.3 Costs and delays affect all types of civil litigation. They are exacerbated in defamation actions because of the complexity of
the law and the differences in the defamation laws of the various States and Territories. Competent practitioners require specialised
knowledge and experience, and as a result there are fewer practitioners available to serve parties’ needs than in less esoteric
areas. Genuine plaintiffs seek a rapid vindication of their reputation; a remedy delivered many years later often will be no remedy
at all. Defendants wish to exercise their rights of free expression and complain that defending a defamation claim is an unacceptable
restriction on that right, which becomes worse the longer the case drags on. Costs also may be increased by the fact that defamation
is one of the few areas of civil litigation where juries are still used (unless the parties agree otherwise); this can result in
more expensive court time being required, although verdicts are usually delivered more quickly once the hearing is completed.
3.4 An alternative mode of resolving defamation claims offers the promise of reducing costs for all concerned, providing rapid correction
of the public record, and removing the threat of excessive awards - the same interests identified when discussing alternative remedies
in Chapter 2.
The problem of ADR in the defamation context
3.5 Some plaintiffs may not be interested in vindicating their reputation, nor publicising the truth on a particular issue, but seek
only to stifle debate. Some defendants may wish to delay proceedings and wear the plaintiff down, mentally or financially. The costs
and delays of litigation are attractive to parties with these attitudes, which may hamper attempts to mediate and finally resolve
3.6 The nature of the issues in defamation cases (intense personal feelings of the plaintiff, intense commitment to principle - or
profitability - on the part of many defendants) makes mediation more difficult in this context than in many others where it has been
successful. In the family law context, for example, while feelings are equally or more intense, both parties have an interest in
reaching an acceptable solution. In commercial contexts such as building disputes there is often some doubt in the mind of both sides
as to the strength and worth of their claim, which creates common ground for a mutually acceptable settlement. However, in many defamation
cases the plaintiff will vigorously deny the defamatory imputations while the defendant will insist on its right to publish them.
There is little common ground. In addition, the parties do not usually have to maintain a continuing relationship, as do business
partners and divorcing parties with children.
3.7 The Defamation List provides ready access to the Supreme Court, and also imposes strict time limits on parties, with costs penalties
for delays. This, coupled with the intense commitment of the parties to the dispute, often results in defamation cases being conducted
vigorously, with both sides locked into litigation and an adversarial approach. In some other areas of law it may be easier for the
parties to stay out of court and resolve the dispute through negotiation.
3.8 From the plaintiff’s point of view, an apology or retraction is the desirable outcome of any mediation process, and is most
likely to be accepted at an early stage in the proceedings. Unfortunately, this is precisely the time when the parties are least
likely to agree. The plaintiff is angry and upset, but the defendant stands by the imputations while seeking to establish whether
it can defend the claim in court. Media defendants in particular are often naturally defensive when complaints are made to them;
the professional pride of journalists and concern for their own reputations may hamper attempts to resolve disputes amicably.
3.9 Concern has been expressed that parties may exploit mediation to gain tactical advantages at any later trial, in particular, by
extracting relevant information from the other side without revealing any details of their own case.
This can be controlled by the mediator to some extent, especially as information will be disclosed only with the parties’ consent,
and both parties must agree that the discussions are entirely without prejudice. There is little real prospect of sanctions on parties
who attempt to abuse the process - especially defendants (a stay of proceedings could be suggested by the mediator as a sanction
on uncooperative
3.10 In many cases, then, mediation will not be likely to work, and will result only in increasing costs and delays. Against this,
it can be argued that where mediation does work, substantial money and time will be saved.
3.11 A fundamental objection to imposing a
mediation process on defamation actions is that many disputes already are resolved by negotiation and settlement. Arguably, where
the parties are likely to participate seriously in mediation, they may be able to resolve the dispute themselves.
CURRENT ALTERNATIVES TO LITIGATION
Direct negotiation with publishers
3.12 This usually occurs as a prerequisite to litigation. In some cases, it may achieve resolution of the dispute. For example, in
its Submission to the Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992, News Limited argued that “there is already in place
an effective and low-cost informal system whereby publishers frequently retract and apologise”, and often pay the legal costs
of the aggrieved party. Greater use of formalised procedures for handling complaints with courtesy and tact could be more successful
in avoiding litigation than a mediation system.
Media complaints bodies
3.13 Several methods of resolving media disputes outside the courts already exist in New South Wales. Complaints to these bodies are
not confined to defamation, but may result in avoidance of defamation suits.
Australian Press Council
3.14 The Council deals with complaints about the editorial and article content of the print media. Complaints must first be directed
to the editor or other representative of the publication concerned; if not resolved, they must be lodged with the Council within
three months of publication. The Council requires complainants to sign a waiver of the right to take legal action over the subject-matter
of the complaint.
3.15 The Council secretariat may negotiate with the publication concerned and achieve settlement of the complaint; or it may mediate;
or it may submit the complaint to adjudication by the Council. Procedures are informal and at no cost to the complainant. While most
adjudications are published by the publication concerned (and sometimes by others), there is no power (legal or consensual) to sanction
publishers.
3.16 The Council has expressed a willingness to assist in the speedy resolution of defamation claims, making increased use of its
facilities and expertise in mediation of complaints against newspapers and magazines. Waiver of legal rights would not be required
in appropriate circumstances, such as where litigation has commenced and both parties agree a waiver is not required.
It has been suggested that the composition and funding of the Council would need to be changed to make it a more appropriate forum
to resolve general defamation disputes. More than half of the Council members are media industry representatives or journalists,
and it is funded by press organisations.
While all major publishers are currently represented, membership is voluntary.
Other media complaints bodies
3.17 While not appropriate for complaints over damage to reputation, other bodies may provide an informal and low-cost service to
individuals aggrieved by media activities. The Judiciary Committees of the Journalists’ Section of the Media, Entertainment
and Arts Alliance will hear complaints about individual journalists. Many other bodies exist for hearing complaints over published
and broadcast material, especially advertising.
Non-media dispute resolution bodies
Commercial contexts
3.18 Professional mediators are available to parties willing to bear the cost through the Australian Commercial Disputes Centre and
similar bodies. Professional associations such as Lawyers Engaged in Alternative Dispute Resolution (LEADR) accredit their members
as mediators or specialists in dispute resolution.
Local community contexts
3.19 Defamation claims occasionally arise between neighbours or other people in ongoing relationships at a local level, for example,
in sporting clubs. Mediation of community disputes is available through Community Justice Centres and similar bodies.
3.20 There are many alternatives for resolving disputes; but there are clearly many cases where the services provided by these bodies
are inadequate. Considerable time and resources are used up in fighting defamation claims in the courts, with results both uncertain
and inappropriate (plaintiffs either get damages or nothing, as discussed in Chapter 2). Mediated settlements leading to the publication
of a correction (with or without financial compensation) would better suit the interests of the parties and the public.
ISSUES TO BE RESOLVED
3.21 The Hon A R Moffitt CMG QC, in a detailed submission to the Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992, raised several
issues to be resolved in any mediation scheme for defamation actions:
Should mediation be compulsory in all cases? If not, in what cases should it be used?
When and how often should mediation sessions be held?
Who should attend them?
Should there be any obligations on the parties to disclose information? If so, when and what information? Should disclosure be made
privately to the mediator only? Who should disclose first?
What sanctions should there be on parties who abuse the process?
Who should bear the costs of the mediation process if it does not succeed?
In addition, other questions must be resolved, such as:
What qualifications and attributes should a mediator have?
What is the role of the mediator?
Should mediation be compulsory in all cases?
Advantages.
Compulsory mediation forces parties to negotiate. Even parties who are initiating or defending a claim for ulterior purposes may
come to realise that lengthy and costly litigation is not in their interests. It is possible that the adversarial posture and the
accompanying hostility of litigation could be avoided. This may encourage the settlement of disputes without the involvement of the
courts, effectively promoting the current informal system.
Disadvantages.
There are serious objections to compulsory mediation. From a policy point of view:
...there is undeniable concern that mandatory participation is a denial of access to justice through the courts, that parties are
subject to unacceptable pressures to settle, and also that mandatory mediation is a contradiction in terms. Coercion may come about
by compulsion to participate, and from covert structural pressures and procedural hurdles which create pressure to settle. Others
believe that pressure to enter consensual ADR is acceptable so long as there is no coercion within the system.
These concerns are especially serious if the proposals of several media groups are adopted and mediation must be attempted before
a plaintiff may sue.
3.24 From a practical point of view, there may be many cases where mediation is unlikely to succeed. In those cases, forcing parties
to negotiate would only increase tension and waste time and money.
If mediation is not to be compulsory in all cases, in what circumstances should it be used?
Possible criteria in deciding whether to arrange mediation include:
(1) when both parties agree to participate;
(2) when the defamation is essentially “accidental” and not researched and intended by the defendant;
(3) where there are multiple issues which could apparently be narrowed;
(4) on the other hand, where there are no lengthy and complicated issues of fact;
(5) where one party has significantly less resources than the other and cannot afford a full trial.
Where some of these criteria ((1), (2) and (4)) are present, the parties may be able to resolve the dispute without court involvement
at all, as discussed above. The Commission welcomes submissions on ways of determining when mediation should be used.
When should mediation occur?
3.26 As mentioned above, several media groups proposed that parties should be required to attempt mediation before being allowed to
commence proceedings. This is likely to be a waste of time and money and a denial of access to justice if it is recognised that mediation
sometimes will be futile or inappropriate.
3.27 Mediation should be attempted as soon as possible after publication, given that the objective is to settle on a correction (which
will be ineffective if published too long after the defamatory matter). The Legislation Committee proposed the following procedure:
Compulsory pre-trial conferences before a court-appointed mediator, within a short period (say 7-10 days) of the issue of a writ [sic],
at which conference mediation and the issues of accuracy or correction can be explored.
This proposal is that a
should be compulsory soon after proceedings have commenced. At that conference, the possibility of resolving the dispute through
mediation can be explored. The mediator would be able to terminate the proceedings at any stage if mediation appeared hopeless and
the parties’ battle lines were drawn.
3.28 If the aim of the conference is to assess the parties’ attitude to mediation, this could be done by the judge at the first
directions hearing, which in many defamation cases in New South Wales is held within 7-10 days of commencement of proceedings by
issue of a statement of claim. This would avoid the clash which could otherwise result if the first directions hearing and the conference
were both to be held within 7-10 days of commencement.
3.29 The other possibility is to hold the conference after a defence has been filed. This would help to define the issues in dispute.
However, it may also delay the mediation session for too long for a published correction to be satisfactory, and allow the parties
to become locked into litigation. To define the issues at the mediation session, the defendant could be required to present “points
of defence” only.
Who should attend the conference and mediation sessions?
3.30 Several submissions argued that lawyers should not be present at conferences.
However, this could put the inexperienced personal plaintiff at a disadvantage. Representatives of media defendants may attend many
such conferences and so be far more experienced and comfortable with the procedure. Imbalance of power between the parties is potentially
a serious problem in any informal dispute resolution mechanism.
3.31 The question then is whether the parties themselves should be present. The intensity of feeling discussed above may obstruct
settlement.
In many cases, however, settlement is more likely to be reached if the parties do see each other. Plaintiffs may appreciate the opportunity
to put their grievances directly to the defendant, who may realise the harm that their publication has done. It has been suggested
that, in media cases, the journalist who wrote the material should not be present; professional pride and attachment to the story
as written may hamper attempts to settle.
However, it seems more likely that settlement will be reached if plaintiffs can ask the journalist directly what steps were taken
to research the material and so on. Both sides would then have some chance to understand the other’s position; the plaintiff
may realise that the defendant in fact acted reasonably, or the defendant may realise that the story has no foundation. For this
reason, both the journalist and someone with authority to settle (such as an editor or news director) normally should be present.
3.32 Thus, in the Commission’s preliminary view, the parties should attend in person, with someone who has authority to settle
if necessary. Both parties should be permitted to bring lawyers.
What procedures should be adopted, especially with regard to disclosure of information?
3.33 The conference should be informal and not governed by any special rules regarding disclosure of information. As with most mediation
sessions, the mediator should meet each party separately and ascertain their attitude to the case, the issues in dispute, the information
they are willing to disclose, and the result sought. This will help to focus further discussion. The information gained by the mediator
should not be disclosed without the consent of the party, but would be useful for the mediator’s attempt to reach settlement.
The proceedings should be confidential and details of what occurred during them should not be admissible in later litigation.
What role should the mediator play?
3.34 The aim of mediation should be to assist the parties to reach their own solution. Therefore, the mediator should assist the parties
to analyse the dispute and concentrate on areas of disagreement. The mediator’s role is to advise the parties and guide their
discussion about relevant issues and information. The mediator may offer suggestions and point out things the parties may have overlooked,
No power to order a remedy should be given.
3.35 When meeting each party separately, the mediator should be entitled to make proposals as to the areas which should be discussed,
and suggest solutions. The mediator would then be able to assess each party’s attitude to settlement on terms such as publication
of a correction and the payment of costs.
3.36 If mediation results in the publication of a retraction, apology or reply (whether pursuant to the mediator’s recommendation
or otherwise), but the dispute is not settled and litigation proceeds, this could bring to defendants the benefit of the correction
defence proposed in Chapter 2 and bar general damages.
Should there be sanctions on parties who abuse the process?
3.37 One proposal was that the mediator be empowered to recommend a solution, such as publication of a correction and payment of costs.
If litigation proceeded, sanctions could be imposed at the assessment of damages stage on parties who did not accept the recommendations
of the mediator.
This would go beyond mediation, which is
dispute resolution - helping the parties to reach their own solution. Knowledge that the mediator was empowered to recommend a solution,
which could have costly consequences if not accepted, would be counterproductive and inhibit attempts to reach settlement.
3.38 Thus, the only “sanction” available on parties who abuse the process and do not act in good faith would be termination
of the process and continuation of litigation.
Who should bear the costs of mediation?
3.39 Successful mediation normally would include an agreement as to costs. If mediation fails and litigation proceeds, it may be simplest
to provide that costs of mediation will follow the result. If mediation fails but the litigation is discontinued, each party would
normally bear their own costs.
3.40 If mediation were to be made a prerequisite to suit, media groups may be willing to bear the cost of the mediation sessions,
given that they are effectively being insulated from litigation.
This would mean mediation would be compulsory only before suing a media defendant (unless the system was made available for the mediation
of all defamation claims). However, as discussed above, mediation should not be compulsory.
3.41 Print media organisations already fund the Australian Press Council which can mediate complaints. In England, the Supreme Court
Procedure Committee examining Practice and Procedure in Defamation (the Neill Committee) received suggestions that publishers may
be willing to fund an arbitration system, which would have the power to award modest amounts of compensation.
Using this system would presumably bar the plaintiff from suing for defamation and receiving damages. If such a system was cost-effective
for publishers, it could possibly be set up here. Media groups may feel, however, that this would encourage claims against them.
In addition, as the Neill Committee stated, issues such as when this system could be used and the relationship between this system
and the traditional court process would need to be resolved.
What qualifications and attributes should the mediator have?
3.42 This issue was extensively canvassed before the Legislation Committee.
Most submissions agreed that a panel of suitable mediators should be established. The primary quality was an ability to “sensibly
and strongly” resolve the dispute. Knowledge of the law and the media industry would be required, as would experience in the
conduct of mediation. This tends to suggest either media lawyers or journalists with some legal training. The former may be thought
to intrude excessive legalism and formality into the process, while the latter may be objected to as possibly appearing biased towards
media defendants. Nevertheless, many people with the requisite attributes could be found. A set of proposed mediators could be put
forward by each party.
Giving mediators a more active role
3.43 It may be helpful to explore whether mediators could play a more active role in the resolution of defamation disputes.
Fact-finding powers
3.44 The mediator may be empowered to investigate the facts of the case and state findings. These findings could be used by the parties
to negotiate a possible settlement.
The problem is that the mediator would need coercive powers to compel the production of documents and the answer of interrogatories
and so forth. Without these powers, the version of the facts arrived at by the mediator is likely to be incomplete, or at least quite
different to the version which would be established in court.
Expert appraisal
3.45 The mediator may be empowered to offer an assessment of the relative strengths and weaknesses of each party’s case, and
an opinion on how the dispute would be likely to be resolved in court and why. Again, without coercive powers to examine evidence
it seems likely that any version of the facts arrived at by the mediator would be quite different to the version established in court,
and this would reduce the usefulness of the mediator’s opinion. However, it would be possible for a mediator to offer an expert
opinion on whether the imputations arise and are defamatory, and the likelihood of the various defences succeeding.
AN ARBITRATION SYSTEM?
3.46 The system discussed above is little more than a gloss on the litigation process, although it may be effective in avoiding litigation
in many cases. It may be possible to remove defamation disputes from the courts altogether and resolve them in an alternative forum.
Since informal negotiations do not always reach settlement, and mediation (even if compulsory) is unlikely to do so either, it would
be necessary for an alternative process to include the power to impose a remedy. This would mean some kind of arbitration system.
3.47 The proposed benefits of such a system would be a reduction in complexity, delay and cost. It may also facilitate the use of
more appropriate remedies than damages, designed to restore the plaintiff’s reputation. It may also provide a system in which
inexperienced parties feel less alienated and more in control of the issues.
3.48 The possible models of informal (or less formal) adjudicative processes are varied. All of them do require some kind of structure,
and it is arguable that the complexity of the issues in many defamation cases would require something looking very much like a traditional
court case for their resolution. Another drawback is that a new arbitration system would require the commitment of funding and resources
to establish and run it, although it may be cheaper than relying on the courts.
The Libel Dispute Resolution Program
3.49 A comprehensive proposal for the resolution specifically of defamation disputes has been developed by the Iowa Libel Research
The Libel Dispute Resolution Program (“the Program”), which is being run in conjunction with the American Arbitration
Association, provides a voluntary process for resolving media libel cases outside the courts.
3.50 Disputes to be submitted to the Program should be likely to be seriously litigated. They must involve statements of a factual
nature which have damaged the plaintiff’s reputation, since the truth or falsity of the statements and the existence of harm
to reputation are the only issues to be decided. (Malice, if any, on the part of the defendant is irrelevant). The plaintiff must
identify the specific statements alleged to be false; show that they have caused harm to reputation; and (unless the parties agree
otherwise - which seems unlikely) prove that they are false.
3.51 Staff of the Program will explain the procedures available and help the parties to decide which of them to use. The parties negotiate
the details of the process and the remedy to be available, which will usually be a written finding by the “neutral” on
the falsity issue. The defendant would usually agree to publish or broadcast these findings or pay for their publication or broadcast
in a comparable medium. The parties may agree on any other non-monetary remedy, and on whether costs should be awarded to the winning
party. These agreed-upon details of the procedures and the remedy are included in a submission agreement, which also states that
the parties agree to waive further legal action.
3.52 The “neutral” is the arbitrator who will conduct the formal hearing. Within seven days of signing the submission
agreement, the neutral is selected or appointed. The parties advise which of a list of neutrals is acceptable, and the administrator
of the program selects one. Any contacts or interests between the parties and the neutral must be disclosed.
3.53 The program is tightly scheduled, with strict time limits. Within 21 days of signing the agreement and commencing the program,
a structured exchange of information takes place in lieu of discovery (although the parties can agree to discovery). The information
is subject to agreement, but may include: identification of witnesses and a summary of their evidence; description of physical evidence;
copies of documents; summaries of claims and defences and underlying facts; and offers of admission and stipulation. This information
is relied upon at the hearing, although the neutral has a discretion to admit other information.
3.54 Parties may then agree to hold a settlement conference with a mediator or special master (who provides expert appraisal of the
case). This must be held within 30 days of the program’s commencement. It requires the attendance of both parties and their
lawyers, and is designed to reduce the scope of the dispute and encourage settlement discussions.
3.55 Alternatively, parties may proceed directly to a hearing, in which case they need only have a telephone conference with the neutral
beforehand to resolve questions over information to be exchanged and the conduct of the hearing. The hearing must be held within
50 days of commencement. The parties, by mutual agreement, control the range of issues to be resolved, the remedy available, and
the procedures used. Generally, the plaintiff presents its proofs and witnesses first, and these may be examined. Conformity to the
rules of evidence is not required. On request of the neutral, the parties “shall” produce whatever additional evidence
is sought; the neutral has powers to subpoena witnesses or documents. The neutral is “empowered to take whatever steps seem
appropriate for non-compliance with the procedures.”
3.56 The neutral must issue a finding within 10 days of the conclusion of the hearing. The entire program should be completed within
75 days of commencement.
Assessment of the Program
3.57 The first issue to be noted is that the Program is designed to avoid many of the faults of United States libel law, only some
of which exist in New South Wales. It is designed to reduce delays, costs, and the use of judicial resources, which could be beneficial
here. However, most problems of United States law derive from the focus on the defendant’s state of mind, irrelevance of the
issue of truth or falsity, and intrusion into editorial processes, which are required by the public figure test.
United States contingency fee arrangements also may encourage speculative litigation; such arrangements could not be used under the
Iowa program, because no damages can be awarded. Contingency fees are not yet available in New South Wales, although a form of these
may be permissible soon.
3.58 The absence of damages may be thought to remove the main deterrent to media carelessness. The promoters of the Program counter
this by arguing that regular findings of falsity will be a significant deterrent to media excesses.
In reply, it is noted that the relaxation of the rules of evidence may enable media defendants to establish their version of the
facts more easily (remembering that the plaintiff in the United States must prove falsity). It must be asked whether there will be
any real or perceived difference between a finding of “truth” by an arbitrator, and a finding by a court.
3.59 If the Program were adapted for use in New South Wales, the onus could be left on the defendant to prove truth, to compensate
plaintiffs for having no chance of damages (see the discussion of declaratory judgments in Chapter 2). The relaxation of the rules
of evidence could make things easier for defendants; and the arbitrator could, in appropriate circumstances, issue creative findings
such as “truth has not been established, but the defendant acted reasonably in publishing the material”. It must be noted
that the Program’s requirement that the plaintiff prove the existence of harm to reputation would be a radical change to the
law if introduced in New South Wales: here harm to reputation is presumed.
3.60 One difficulty is that the arbitration hearing could well become a mini-trial, depending on the complexity of the procedures
agreed upon by the parties.
3.61 The most fundamental criticism of the Program is a variant of that directed at all alternative dispute resolution proposals for
defamation. If the parties were amicable enough to agree on the many details that are left to their discretion, they probably would
be amicable enough to resolve the dispute themselves without help.
3.62 In practice the Libel Dispute Resolution Program has not been as successful as was hoped. During a three-year research phase
(1987-1990), lawyers acting for parties in 128 libel disputes were contacted and asked whether they wished to use the Program. Only
five disputes were formally submitted to the Program; only one was successfully resolved. Some responsibility for this failure apparently
can be attributed to resistance from media and plaintiff lawyers.
ISSUES ARISING IN CHAPTER 3 - ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION
1. Given the current alternatives to litigation, is it desirable to create a formalised system aimed specifically at the resolution
of defamation disputes outside the court structure?
2. Should mediation be compulsory in all defamation actions?
3. If not, in what circumstances should mediation be used?
4. When should mediation occur - before suit; after issue of a statement of claim; or after filing of a defence?
5. Who should attend mediation sessions - lawyers? the parties themselves? the journalist who wrote the article in the case of a media
6. Should there be any formal rules governing procedure and disclosure of information at mediation sessions?
7. Should the mediator’s role be restricted to helping the parties to find their own solution? Or should the mediator have any
power to make findings of fact, offer an expert opinion on the likely result at trial, or recommend a solution?
8. Should there be any specific rules governing payment of the costs of mediation?
9. What qualifications and attributes should the mediator have?
Arbitration
10. Should an arbitration system designed specifically for the resolution of defamation disputes be created? Would such a system be
cost-effective?
11. Should participation in such a system be entirely voluntary? If so, would many disputes be submitted to it?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
Training and Accreditation of Mediators
(Report 67, 1991) at para 2.5.
. R P Bezanson, G Cranberg, J Soloski,
Libel Law and the Press: Myth and Reality
(Free Press, New York, 1987) at 29-53; R M Ackerman “Defamation and alternative dispute resolution: healing the sting”
Missouri Journal of Dispute Resolution
1 at 18-20; R A Smolla “Taking libel reform seriously”
(1986-7) 38
Mercer Law Review
at 804-807.
. The Hon A R Moffitt CMG, QC
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992
(23 March 1992) at 4-6.
. Australian Press Council
Annual Report No 16
(Sydney, 30 June 1992) at 58-62, 143; M Armstrong, M Blakeney and R Watterson
Media Law in Australia: A Manual
(2nd edition, OUP, Melbourne 1988) at 208.
. Australian Press Council
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(10 February 1992) at 17-18.
. Law Council of Australia
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(30 January 1992 - first drafted 27 February 1991) at 15-16; Law Institute of Victoria
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(14 February 1992 - first drafted March 1991) at 19-20.
. Australian Press Council
Annual Report 16
at 175-176.
. NSW LRC Report 67 at paras 2.24-2.25, Appendix D.
. NSW LRC Report 67 at paras 2.19-2.20, Appendix B.
. Moffitt at 4.
. NSW LRC Report 67 at para 6.22.
. Australian Broadcasting Corporation
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(7 January 1992); John Fairfax Group Pty Ltd
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(7 February 1992); Australian Press Council
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(17 June 1992) at 6-9.
. A A Henskens
Evidence before the Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992
(19 February 1992) at 23-24.
. Moffitt at 7.
. Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992,
Report on the Defamation Bill 1992
(Legislative Assembly, Parliament of New South Wales, October 1992) (NSW Legislation Committee Report) at 155. Note that defamation
proceedings in New South Wales are commenced by statement of claim, not by writ.
. Australian Broadcasting Corporation
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(7 January 1992), although the ABC later conceded that parties should be permitted to bring lawyers:
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(7 August 1992) at 4; Australian Society of Authors
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(24 March 1992) at 1.
. NSW LRC Report 67 at paras 4.19-4.20 (“empirical studies of informal dispute resolution have found that the rhetoric of self-determination
and voluntary participation is matched with the realities of capitulation and coercion.”)
. M G Sexton
Evidence before NSW Legislation Committee
(18 February 1992) at 70.
. P L Bartlett
Evidence before NSW Legislation Committee
(18 February 1992) at 25-26.
. Moffitt at 7.
. J Soloski and R L Wissler “The Libel Dispute Resolution Program: a way to resolve disputes out of court” in R T Kaplar
Beyond the Courtroom: Alternatives for Resolving Press Disputes
(The Media Institute, Washington, 1991) at 92.
. Although the proposed time limit for publication of a correction (seven days from issue of a statement of claim) may not be satisfied
if the defendant waits for mediation to be completed. This would provide incentive for defendants to begin negotiating earlier.
. Australian Press Council
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(17 June 1992) at 8.
. Australian Broadcasting Corporation
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(7 January 1992) suggested that a system of compulsory mediation before suit could be funded by publishers on a levy basis loosely
related to output and / or circulation; there would be no cost to the complainant.
. England and Wales. Supreme Court Procedure Committee
Report on Practice and Procedure in Defamation
(July 1991) at 160-162.
. NSW Legislation Committee Report at 131-155. The Commission has already considered the question of desirable attributes for mediators
in its Report on
Training and Accreditation of Mediators
(NSW LRC Report 67), especially ch 3.
. Ackerman at 20-25.
. The Hon Justice M J R Clarke
Evidence before NSW Legislation Committee
(8 September 1992) at 16.
. Full details of the methods and findings of the Project can be found in Bezanson, Cranberg and Soloski (1987). This summary of the
Libel Dispute Resolution Program is drawn from Soloski and Wissler in Kaplar (ed) at 83-111.
. See Chapter 10 below.
. R L Wissler, R P Bezanson, G Cranberg and J Soloski “Resolving libel cases out of court”
. D Bartlett “Alternative routes to conflict resolution: is this trip necessary?” in Kaplar (ed) at 122.
. R L Wissler, R P Bezanson, G Cranberg, J Soloski, and B Murchison “Resolving libel disputes out of court: the Libel Dispute
Resolution Program” in J Soloski and R P Bezanson (eds)
Reforming Libel Law
(Guilford Press, New York 1992) at 294-310. The authors note that this low participation rate is typical of voluntary ADR programs
in other areas of the law. See also D J DeBenedictis “Little interest in libel ADR”,
American Bar Association Journal
(January 1992) at 22.
Discussion Paper 32 (1993) - Defamation
4. The Roles of Judge and Jury
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
4.1 One of the major issues in the recent debate over reform of defamation law has been the method of assessing damages. The
Defamation Bill
1992 (NSW) proposed that damages should be assessed by the judge (cl 11). This provision was specifically rejected by the Legislation
Committee which examined the Bill; it recommended that juries retain this function, and that methods of avoiding inappropriate awards
be explored. These included drafting directions to be given to the jury when assessing damages, and placing a cap on general damages.
4.2 The Commission wishes to examine whether juries actually do make inappropriate awards and, if so, what would be the best method
of dealing with this problem. However, the role of juries in defamation trials raises many other issues besides the assessment of
damages, especially that of the complexity caused by the division of functions between judge and jury. The Commission wishes to explore
several methods of improving procedure in defamation trials, which include changes to the role of juries.
4.3 Three options will be discussed. These are:
(1) Conduct defamation trials before judges alone.
(2) Retain juries only to decide whether the imputations are conveyed and are defamatory, as a preliminary step before any other evidence
is heard (beyond what may be required to establish identification of the plaintiff or whether a true innuendo is conveyed). If the
jury finds for the plaintiff, the judge would take over and decide all questions relating to defences and quantum.
(3) Retain juries in their present role, but implement some or all of the following reforms:
allow the jury to decide first the issue of whether defamatory imputations are conveyed;
hear opening addresses from both parties at the start of the trial, so that all issues are put before the judge and the jury at the
impose a cap on damages;
allow judges to give increased guidance on quantum; and
give appellate courts power to substitute their own assessment of damages if the jury’s verdict is deemed inappropriate.
OPTION ONE: CONDUCT DEFAMATION TRIALS BEFORE JUDGES ALONE
Problems with using juries in defamation trials
4.4 Available empirical evidence suggests that awards of damages by juries are generally not excessive (see the discussion at paragraphs
4.48-4.52 below).
4.5 However, the complexity of the procedure in defamation trials is greatly increased by the division of functions between the judge
and the jury. The common law and the
Defamation Act
(NSW) create a patchwork of different issues to be decided by each. On some issues, the jury makes the first decision, to be followed
by the judge. On others, this order is reversed. For example, the common law defence of qualified privilege requires that the jury
decide all questions of fact as to the circumstances of publication; the existence of an occasion of qualified privilege is then
a question of law to be decided by the judge; the judge must then decide whether there is any evidence of malice; if so, the issue
of malice goes back to the jury.
Under the statutory form of qualified privilege
, the existence of the defence is also decided by the judge (s 23); this means that the judge must decide the ultimate question of
the reasonableness of the defendant’s conduct in publishing; but all disputed facts on which that decision depends must first
be decided by the jury.
4.6 Giving instructions to the jury on the law is very time consuming. In some cases the jury has to consider several different and
complex sets of laws, because publication may have occurred in more than one State. This is difficult enough to comprehend for an
experienced judge. It is often necessary to ask the jury to answer extensive, specific written questions. The jury may be required
to answer several sets of questions, and then be asked to retire again to bring in a verdict. Applications to discharge the jury
are common. Evidence before the Legislation Committee indicated that using a jury in a defamation trial doubles the length of the
trial at least, and may protract it even further, with resulting increases in costs for all parties.
4.7 This complexity increases the risk of error in the judge’s summing up to the jury or any other aspect of the trial. If overturned
on appeal, a new trial is often required - usually a general new trial (rather than one confined to specific issues) because of the
interlocking of issues relating to liability, defences and damages. In trials before judges alone, an appeal court is generally able
to see any error from the judge’s reasons and substitute the correct decision itself.
4.8 It is arguable that the delay during the trial caused by using a jury is more than offset by the relative speed with which a jury
delivers its verdict. A judge must give reasons and this causes extensive delays in the handing down of a verdict. It may be, also,
that the requirement of giving reasons could disclose some errors which are not apparent from a jury verdict, and so lead to more
However, the extensive use of written questions for the jury in defamation trials may expose many errors in the jury’s reasoning.
The jury’s decision is not as inscrutable as in a criminal trial.
Examples of problems caused by the requirement of using a jury
4.9 The following cases are good illustrations of the way in which the division of functions between the judge and the jury can cause
problems. In
Morosi v Mirror Newspapers Ltd
, nine actions were consolidated and heard together. Many complex questions arose for the jury. These questions were divided into
two groups. The jury answered the first group after a retirement of eight hours and forty minutes. They then retired again to answer
the second group, taking four hours and thirty minutes. The judge summed up and asked the jury to deliver a verdict, which they did,
after a further retirement of four hours and six minutes. The Court of Appeal upheld this creative method of managing the trial,
which was necessitated by the split of functions between judge and jury, and managed to circumvent the time limits on jury verdicts
imposed by the
1912 (NSW).
it was held that all relevant questions had been identified and submitted to the jury. This is not always possible. In
McKenzie v Mergen Holdings Pty Ltd
, a verdict by direction was entered at the first trial on the question of malice, which should have been left to the jury. On appeal,
a new trial was ordered. Following that trial, further disagreements over the jury’s role in deciding various issues led to
another appeal. A third general trial was ordered, at which no jury was used. This resulted in judgment for the plaintiff in the
princely sum of $30,000.
Morgan v John Fairfax & Sons Ltd
, the plaintiff sued over an article published on 17 November 1983. At the first trial, after 16 days of evidence, the jury was discharged
because unduly prejudicial material had been placed before it. Following an appeal, a second trial commenced and ran for 14 days.
The judge decided that statutory qualified privilege was made out; but the jury had not decided all the primary facts necessary for
that finding. Accordingly another appeal resulted in the order of a third new trial. An appeal to the High Court resulted in a remitter
of the matter to the Court of Appeal, which held that the third trial should be a general hearing of all issues, a result dictated
by the division of functions in the
Defamation Act
. The third trial ran for 17 days and was finally completed on 16 October 1991. The result was a verdict for the defendant (and another
trip to the Court of Appeal, which was dismissed on 26 February 1992).
4.12 These may be extreme examples, but many of the problems they illustrate could be avoided.
Benefits of conducting defamation trials before judges alone
4.13 The length of proceedings should be considerably shortened overall where juries are not used, since the matter is likely to reach
trial more quickly, and any errors usually can be corrected on appeal without requiring a retrial. Judges will be able to rule on
many issues, such as those relating to available defences, in advance of trial. Currently defences which have little chance of succeeding
are often pleaded anyway, the most notable example being statutory qualified privilege
2CHP4_9" href="#fnDP32CHP4_9">
The availability of this defence cannot be decided in advance of trial, and pleading it may allow defendants to adduce evidence of
whether they intended to refer to the plaintiff or convey the pleaded imputations. This evidence is irrelevant to the questions of
whether they actually did refer to the plaintiff or convey the imputations, but it may mislead the jury on those issues.
4.14 Indeed, in most cases, it should no longer be necessary to hold separate trials on such issues as the capacity of the matter
to convey the pleaded imputations, and whether those imputations are capable of defaming the plaintiff. Many cases should be able
to proceed directly to the main general trial.
4.15 It is primarily these practical considerations, rather than the size of jury awards, which lead the Commission to suggest that
juries be removed from defamation trials.
The requirement of using juries in defamation trials
Supreme Court
4.16 Civil claims in the Supreme Court are generally tried without juries. Section 88 of the
Supreme Court Act
(NSW) provides that juries shall be used where certain issues are involved, including defamation claims. The Court has a discretion
to order trial of some or all factual issues by a judge alone, where all parties so agree or difficult and complex investigations
which cannot conveniently be made with a jury are required (s 89).
4.17 The other issues which require the use of a jury are fraud, malicious prosecution, false imprisonment, seduction and breach of
promise to marry. The last two actions are virtually dead letters.
Where a charge of fraud is involved, there is of course an element of criminal dishonesty to the proceedings which makes the use
of a jury desirable. With regard to defamation, malicious prosecution and false imprisonment, it is felt that the input of the community
into these claims is valuable, because they represent areas where compromise between the rigours of the law and important freedoms
is involved.
4.18 However, to say that defamation actions require “trial by jury” is misleading. The role of the jury is circumscribed
by a number of provisions in the
Defamation Act
which reserve important questions to the judge. These include deciding what is in the public interest (s 12) and whether the defendant
acted reasonably when statutory qualified privilege is claimed (s 23).
CHP4_11" href="#fnDP32CHP4_11">
Juries are not trusted to take due consideration of the subtle value of free speech, and are assumed to automatically want to compensate
the plaintiff when publication of a defamatory imputation is found.
Some commentators argue that juries decide too often on purely emotional factors, such as sympathy for a wounded plaintiff, without
considering the wider impact of their decision.
Against this, others argue that judges sitting alone (as happens in the Australian Capital Territory) also can be overly sympathetic
to plaintiffs.
4.19 In any case, the jury’s role in deciding whether the defendant did defame the plaintiff is subject to the judge’s
control. The judge may rule at an earlier separate trial whether the matter complained of is capable of conveying the imputations
alleged. Judges can even rule on appeal that an imputation is not capable of arising despite the jury’s finding that it did.
Judges also decide whether imputations are capable of being defamatory; in doing so, they must make important decisions about current
community attitudes.
District Court
4.20 Defamation actions may be heard in the District Court, where juries are usually not used for any civil cases (
District Court Act
Any party may seek to use a jury by filing a requisition for one and paying the prescribed fee (s 78); although the Court retains
a discretion to dispense with the jury (s 79A). Clearly, no harm to the public interest is felt to result from the removal of juries
from defamation cases in the District Court, which may be more frequently used for defamation actions now that its jurisdictional
limit has been raised to $250,000.
The position in other States
4.21 As Mason CJ and Deane J put it in
Coyne v Citizen Finance Ltd
, “in all Supreme Courts other than that of New South Wales, a judge assesses damages for defamation in the absence of some
contrary order or election”.
Juries are not used for defamation cases in South Australia or the Australian Capital Territory. In the Northern Territory juries
are normally not used. In the other States juries are available if sought; such a request is usually granted, except in certain circumstances.
4.22 Current legislation requires that juries be used for defamation trials in the New South Wales Supreme Court (unless the parties
otherwise agree); they are not required in the District Court; nor are they required in any other Australian jurisdiction. Even in
the Supreme Court, their role is circumscribed. Within its limits, it is a crucial role, but many important issues are decided by
the judge alone, and the jury is not necessary for much of the trial. The requirement of using a jury can drastically prolong the
trial and tax the resources of both the court and the parties.
4.23 In the end, the question of whether to retain juries is a complex political and jurisprudential one, and has been answered in
different ways around Australia. From a legal and procedural point of view - as well as a practical one, considering the issues of
costs and delays - trials before judges alone make more sense. However there are policy arguments on both sides, the force of which
is perceived differently by different people at different times.
In the late eighteenth century juries were seen as the guardians of free speech and democratic rights against Government excesses.
Now they are often perceived as threats to free speech because they are hostile to defendants (particularly the media) and occasionally
award excessive damages.
If the policy considerations are finely balanced, the practical ones may indicate that judges alone be used.
OPTION TWO: RETAIN A LIMITED ROLE FOR JURIES
Can juries assess liability while the judge assesses damages?
Defamation Bill
1992 was heavily criticised for retaining the same division of functions between judge and jury as in the present Act, but providing
that the judge should assess damages (cl 11). A number of commentators noted that decisions on many factual issues relating to the
various defences were crucial factors in deciding the appropriate level of damages.
In addition, much evidence presented by plaintiffs relates to issues such as hurt feelings, which are not relevant to liability and
may cloud a jury’s decision on that question. Therefore, procedure would become far more complex as the jury would have to
be sent out for long periods, or else two separate trials would be required.
These difficulties strongly suggest that whoever decides liability (judge or jury) must also assess damages.
The jury’s most important function: assessing what is defamatory
4.25 It may be possible to implement a compromise which allows community input into the resolution of disputes involving free speech,
while avoiding most of the problems caused by the current division of functions between the judge and the jury. This idea was advanced
in evidence before the Legislation Committee by Justice M J R Clarke.
4.26 The input of community values in a defamation trial is especially valuable in one area: deciding whether the matter complained
of conveys the imputations pleaded by the plaintiff, and if so, whether those imputations would lower the standing of the plaintiff
in the eyes of the community. It is argued that judges may be too far removed from the ordinary community to assess the impact of
particular words on the ordinary reasonable person. As in criminal trials, the role of the jury is to bring to bear the “common
sense” of the community. If it is felt that the community should retain a role in the conduct of defamation trials, this “imputations”
stage would be the most important area in which juries should be used.
Procedure to be followed
4.27 The procedure would be that a jury would be empanelled, there would be a short opening from counsel for the plaintiff, and the
matter would be placed before the jury. Then there would be short addresses, a short summing up by the judge, and the jury would
give their decision. The aim is that the jury would give their impressions of the material without their perception being clouded
by hearing extensive evidence - almost the same impression as would be gained if they read or watched it casually over their breakfast.
4.28 The jury would have to be told what the pleaded imputations were, and would need to be instructed in the various “loose
thinking” tests which are applied when deciding whether the imputations are conveyed.
If they considered that the matter did convey the pleaded imputations, they would be well placed to decide whether those imputations
were defamatory. The jury would return a verdict on each of the imputations; if they found for the defendant on all of them, the
case would end there; if not, the jury would be discharged, and the judge would then proceed to decide all questions relating to
defences and remedies.
4.29 In some cases, it may be necessary for some additional evidence to be put forward in order for the jury to make their decision.
One situation is where the defamatory matter does not clearly refer to the plaintiff on its face, and identification of the plaintiff
by the reader depends on special knowledge. Another case is where the plaintiff pleads a “true innuendo”; that is, where
the pleaded imputation would only be conveyed to persons with special knowledge of certain facts. Here evidence that the matter was
published to persons with that knowledge would be necessary to decide whether the plaintiff was defamed.
4.30 If adopted, this procedure also would be used to decide whether contextual imputations pleaded by the defendant were conveyed.
4.31 The Commission welcomes submissions on whether the jury’s role should be confined to deciding whether the pleaded imputations
are conveyed.
Basing the cause of action on pleaded imputations
4.32 Under Option Two, the role of the jury essentially is to decide if the plaintiff has made out a cause of action by showing that
a defamatory imputation was conveyed. This is an appropriate point to consider a suggested reform to the cause of action in defamation
in New South Wales.
The New South Wales position
4.33 Since the passage of the
Defamation Act
, each imputation pleaded by the plaintiff is a separate cause of action
This provision was designed to overcome the “difficult” and “unserviceable” distinctions, and “areas
of doubt”, arising at common law regarding the cause of action in defamation.
4.34 Given that the pleaded imputations constitute the case which the defendant must answer, they must be pleaded with sufficient
precision to define the issues. The jury considers the whole of the publication in its form and context to decide whether these imputations
would be conveyed to the ordinary reasonable reader, and whether they are defamatory. The jury may find that an imputation arises
which is different in form - but not in substance - from the one pleaded by the plaintiff.
4.35 There has been an “unfortunate furore” in the case law over the level of precision required when pleading imputations,
although this now appears to have been resolved.
4.36 The draft Bills introduced in 1991 into the Parliaments of New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland, and tabled in the ACT, were
based largely on the current New South Wales Act, and so introduced the concept of imputations as the cause of action into these
other jurisdictions. Concern over this was expressed by the ACT Community Law Reform Committee in discussions with the Commission.
The ACT Committee preferred the relatively straight-forward process of allowing the court to consider the full effect of a defamatory
matter. They pointed to recent criticisms in the case law of extensive interlocutory skirmishes, which seemed to encourage barren
semantic speculation about the effect of a defamatory matter.
The ACT Committee argued that this placed an unfair onus on plaintiffs and exposed the action to a process of gradual attrition.
The common law position
4.37 In jurisdictions such as Victoria and England, in circumstances in which the meaning of the words is not clear, the plaintiff
may plead the meanings which they are alleged to convey. However, the jury is not restricted to those meanings and must decide for
itself what meanings the words in fact convey.
4.38 The defendant may allege that the words convey a different set of meanings, which again may or may not be accepted by the jury.
This means that the defendant may establish defences based on an entirely different set of meanings to that pleaded by the plaintiff.
The issues to be contested are thus not defined until after the trial has started. Attempts to introduce greater precision into the
process have intensified many of the “difficult” and “unserviceable” distinctions lamented by this Commission
in its 1971 Report.
4.39 For example, where justification is pleaded, the defendant need not say what meaning the words actually bear. What is argued
is that if the matter bears the meaning for which the defendant contends, the defendant will justify it. This can lead to some interesting
mental gymnastics and “somewhat subtle distinctions”.
As Nathan J stated in
Kennett v Farmer
: “In accord with this concept, a defendant not only can but should, but not must [sic] plead the meanings of defamatory words
he seeks to justify.”
4.40 A defendant is able to lead evidence that a less serious meaning to that pleaded by the plaintiff was conveyed, and that the
less serious meaning was true. This allows defendants to use the unfair tactic of leading evidence that they “almost got it
right”, which may influence the jury to reduce the damages.
4.41 Additionally, the common law approach leads to the waste of much expensive court time. At the conclusion of evidence, a bargaining
process often takes place between opposing counsel and the judge to decide which meanings can be left to the jury.
4.42 The focus on imputations as the cause of action does increase technicality, but it increases precision. It requires more time
to be spent in advance of trial in drafting the pleaded imputations, but it makes the issues at trial much clearer and saves much
court time. The defendant knows the case it must meet at trial, and the plaintiff knows the defences it must overcome.
4.43 It is true that many of the problems of the common law approach can be avoided if juries are abolished in defamation trials.
However, if juries are retained, in either the restricted role of assessing only whether defamatory imputations were conveyed (Option
Two) or in their current role (Option Three), the focus on imputations as the cause of action is likely to continue to simplify trial
procedure, in line with the Commission’s other recommendations about the role of juries.
4.44 The Commission welcomes submissions on whether pleaded imputations should be retained as the cause of action in New South Wales.
OPTION THREE: RETAIN JURIES IN THEIR CURRENT ROLE
4.45 If the current division of functions between judge and jury is to be retained, it may still be possible to introduce various
reforms to improve trial procedure. Juries will still decide whether imputations are conveyed and are defamatory, decide whether
defences are made out, and assess the damages.
Deciding whether imputations are conveyed and are defamatory, as a preliminary step before any other evidence is heard
4.46 This procedure involves implementing the reform discussed in Option Two above, but without discharging the jury after they have
decided this “imputations” step (unless they find for the defendant on all imputations). Juries would thus be permitted
to give their initial impression of the defamatory matter without their views being influenced by hearing days of evidence. The remaining
issues at trial would be limited to the imputations on which the jury found for the plaintiff. This should simplify the presentation
of evidence and shorten the trial. This procedural reform was discussed and endorsed by the New South Wales Court of Appeal in
Radio 2UE Sydney Pty Ltd v Parker
Hearing opening addresses from both sides at the start of the trial
4.47 The aim of defining and narrowing the issues for consideration by the judge and jury could be achieved to some extent by an alternative,
though less drastic, reform. This would require both sides to give their opening addresses, the plaintiff followed immediately by
the defendant, at the start of the trial. This should help the court to remain focussed on the real issues in contention between
the parties throughout the remainder of the trial.
Controls on the assessment of damages
4.48 The remainder of this chapter discusses the assessment of damages by the jury. As discussed above, it is probably best that whichever
tribunal of fact (judge or jury) decides the various factual issues relating to liability and defences also should assess damages.
Therefore little time will be spent in discussing whether judges or juries are better placed to assess damages; if Option One or
Option Two are adopted, they will be assessed by the judge, but if Option Three is adopted they will be assessed by the jury. However,
it is necessary to examine whether juries do make unsatisfactory (usually excessive) awards of damages and, if so, what would be
the best methods of dealing with this problem.
Do juries make excessive awards of damages?
4.49 Several recent defamation cases in New South Wales have generated flurries of media concern because of perceived extremely high
awards. These are seen as excessive when compared to the limited damages available for crippling personal injuries received in motor
vehicle or work-related accidents, or when compared to other systems of awarding monetary compensation for injuries, such as that
available for victims of crime.
4.50 It is true that some recent jury verdicts in New South Wales have been unprecedented in size in Australian defamation litigation.
These include sums of $400,000 and $200,000 awarded to Mr Nicholas Carson (for two separate defamatory articles - both verdicts have
now been overturned on appeal by the High Court);
$300,000 to Mr John Andrews (this award did not survive appeal) and $180,000 to his company (for three articles which defamed them
$300,000 to Ms Jane Makim (for five separate publications - now settled before appeal heard);
and $350,000 to Mr Andrew Ettingshausen (currently on appeal).
There have been other cases where verdicts totalling over $300,000 were awarded, but these were settled either before or after the
inevitable appeal.
4.51 Available empirical data suggests that these verdicts are much higher than the norm. A study of cases in the New South Wales
Supreme Court found 22 cases between 1979 and 1985 in which the plaintiff succeeded and the amount of the verdict was available.
The average amount awarded was $44,355. This figure includes the distorting effect of the $480,000 awarded in the
4.52 A more recent study of cases commenced in the New South Wales Supreme Court between January 1987 and December 1988 (and going
to trial by October 1990) found only six cases in which information on quantum was available. The study found that no meaningful
conclusion could be drawn from the wide range in quantum (between $11,222 and $436,000, including interest).
Should damages be capped?
4.53 One proposal for ensuring that arguably excessive verdicts do not occur is to place a cap on general damages.
4.54 At present in New South Wales, general damages for non-economic loss suffered in motor vehicle or work-related accidents are
subject to a statutory maximum (or “cap”).
There are reasons for this cap on damages which do not apply in the defamation context. Compensation for personal injuries suffered
in motor accidents or at work is awarded under statutory schemes funded by insurance contributions. These schemes represent the community’s
desire to ensure that persons accidentally injured in such situations are compensated, while recognising the community’s inability
to fund high levels of insurance premiums. Compensation in such situations is accepted as a community cost.
4.55 These factors suggest that comparisons between the cap on general damages under such schemes and the lack of a cap on defamation
damages are relevant only up to a point. It is true that the cost of many defamation verdicts are passed on to the community, because
media corporations may claim them as a tax deduction.
The media also may distribute the cost of verdicts through fees charged to advertisers and consumers.
4.56 Comparisons with the “ceiling” on compensation for victims of crime are even less relevant. Such compensation is
not paid by the wrongdoer, nor even the wrongdoer’s insurer, but is paid out of the public purse.
As discussed in Chapter 2, the possibility of paying damages for defamation may act to deter carelessness or vindictiveness by the
Arguments in favour of capping general damages in defamation
4.57 The main argument in favour of capping is that it would help to provide certainty in predicting the results of defamation litigation.
Defendants would know their maximum exposure, and plaintiffs their maximum return (subject to any special damages and costs which
may be recovered). This should remove the “chilling” effect on free speech which results from the prospect of unlimited
damages. It should also promote settlement of defamation litigation; both sides will be able to rationally calculate how much time
and money a case is worth. Caps are already used in other areas of compensation for non-pecuniary loss, and so the technique of capping
is familiar.
4.58 Capping damages in defamation actions need not mean that such awards cannot fulfil their function of vindicating reputation.
The extent of vindication would be reflected in the proportion of the maximum amount that is awarded. A plaintiff given $95,000 out
of a maximum $100,000 (for example) could claim to be extensively vindicated. This purpose would be served by telling the jury the
maximum amount they can award (many members would know it anyway), and instructing them that the degree of vindication deserved will
be reflected in the proportion of this amount awarded, not in the buying power of the actual sum.
Arguments against capping general damages in defamation
4.59 Juries may start to award the full amount of the cap regularly. This would cause injustice when later, more serious defamations
4.60 Practitioners may be able to get around the cap by adducing more evidence of special damages, such as medical evidence of stress.
Arguably, however, if this evidence is legitimate then it should be adduced anyway.
4.61 A cap on general damages in New South Wales alone would promote forum shopping among the various Australian jurisdictions.
4.62 The size of awards in defamation may be taken as indicating the community’s view that compensation available in other areas
is inadequate. A cap would then give special protection to defendants in the face of expressed community values of what the injury
caused by their activities is worth.
4.63 While professional defendants such as media bodies have an interest in certainty in defamation litigation, plaintiffs are more
interested in achieving a just result in the circumstances of their particular case. Knowing their maximum exposure could give defendants
an unfair advantage in litigation. It would enable them to abuse the process and wear plaintiffs down, knowing that the litigation
will eventually become uneconomical. It may also give unfair protection to defendants by allowing them to calculate the likely profits
from publishing the defamatory matter, knowing their losses are limited (although special damages and costs will remain unpredictable).
It is true that costs could be used as a sanction on parties who so abuse the court’s process; perhaps indemnity costs could
be awarded to the plaintiff.
Call for submissions
4.64 The Commission welcomes submissions on the issue of capping damages.
Other methods of ensuring rational awards
4.65 Two other ways of ensuring that juries do not make inappropriate awards will be discussed. One is drafting standard directions
on quantum; the other is allowing appellate courts to substitute their own verdict for that of the jury where appropriate. Before
discussing these possibilities, it is necessary to consider a recent decision of the High Court.
The High Court’s decision in
4.66 The High Court has recently delivered a landmark judgment on the assessment of damages in defamation actions. In
Carson v John Fairfax & Sons Ltd
the High Court established that the scale of values applied in awarding damages for personal injuries should be higher than the scale
of values applied in awarding damages for injury to reputation.
4.67 In a joint majority judgment, Mason CJ and Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ held that it is legitimate for appellate courts, when
deliberating on the quantum of a defamation verdict, to consider verdicts in personal injury cases for the purpose of comparison.
This is due to the need to maintain an “appropriate” or “rational” relationship between the scale of values
applied in the two classes of case.
Comparisons can thus be made with amounts awarded as general damages in personal injury cases.
, the majority also stated that they saw “no significant danger” in allowing trial judges to make comparisons with the
general damages component of personal injury awards when summing up to the jury. Counsel may also make such comparisons in their
closing addresses.
4.69 The minority (Brennan J, Toohey J and McHugh J) all held in separate judgments that comparisons should not be made between defamation
damages and general damages awarded in personal injury actions. They relied on previous authority to this effect in the High Court
and the English Court of Appeal.
They held that awards of damages in the two classes of case have different elements and different purposes and are not comparable.
Besides these conceptual objections, the minority also pointed out significant practical problems in allowing judges and counsel
to put the circumstances of different cases before the jury.
4.70 This case will have an impact on the two reforms mentioned above for ensuring that juries do not make inappropriate awards. These
two reforms are giving directions to juries on quantum, and allowing appellate courts to substitute their own verdict for that of
Standard directions on quantum
Current directions on quantum.
Until recently, very little guidance was offered to juries in assessing damages. The size of the verdict was seen as entirely a matter
for them. The principles on which damages in defamation are assessed were explained, but no guidance was given as to the actual amount
which they should award. The jury was told not to refer to awards made in other cases as the circumstances may be very different.
Apart from this, they were told not to be unduly mean, nor overly generous. More recent practice is to direct the jury to consider
the real value of any sum awarded (see paragraphs 4.81-4.83 below).
Comparisons with personal injury awards.
The majority in the
case stated that juries must arrive at a precise figure and so will derive less assistance than appellate courts from rough comparisons
with personal injuries awards. They went on:
Having said this, we see no significant danger in permitting trial judges to provide to the jury an indication of the ordinary level
of the general damages component of personal injury awards for comparative purposes, nor in counsel being permitted to make a similar
This was thought to be even more helpful than other possibilities such as inviting juries to consider the investment or buying power
of awards, or offering them a range of figures.
4.73 The majority considered that juries may be misled by media reports of very large personal injury awards, unless the general damages
component was isolated and explained to them. It could be argued that juries might also be misled by media reports of very large
defamation verdicts. These often gain prominent media attention. Perhaps the rarity of such awards also should be explained to them.
4.74 Among the minority in
, McHugh J in particular raised several practical problems with making such comparisons.
Full details of the facts and circumstances of the personal injury cases referred to would have to be given to the jury before the
general damages awarded would have any meaning to them. It would seem that judges should refer to more than one award and that counsel
should make submissions as to which awards are relevant. This would further delay defamation trials. In addition, it would seem that
verdicts could now be set aside if the judge refers to the wrong “benchmark” awards.
Offering a range of figures to the jury.
One suggestion is that the judge should provide a range of figures to the jury. This proposal has been supported in the High Court.
4.76 It can be argued that giving a range of figures would either usurp the jury’s role or provide a fertile ground for appeals.
If the jury made an award within the suggested range, they would be no more than a rubber stamp for the judge’s assessment
of damages. If they did not, the party dissatisfied with the award could claim on appeal that the jury was unreasonable because they
ignored the recommendation of an experienced judge.
Inviting the jury to consider the investment or buying power of awards.
This possibility was raised by the English Court of Appeal in overturning an award of �600,000 in
Sutcliffe v Pressdram Ltd
The Court assessed whether the jury had made an error. The main indication that an error had occurred was the incredible capital
and income value of the award, which the Court considered could not have been fully examined and appreciated by the jury.
4.78 The Court examined possible sources of the apparent error by the jury. The first was the use of a “newspaper” scale
of values, where a person’s story might be worth �100,000 or more (“This is a scale of values with which ordinary men
and women may be totally unfamiliar and is arguably wholly false”).
Another possibility was the jury’s desire to punish the defendant in a case where punitive damages should not have been awarded.
4.79 A third possible source of error was making comparisons with awards in other cases. The Court affirmed the traditional approach
that such comparisons are impermissible; on this point the case now has limited usefulness in New South Wales. The Court stated that
juries should not be invited to refer to other cases, because this would only confuse the jury where the parties disagreed over whether
the circumstances where similar. In addition, if counsel discussed figures, this would be “unseemly and unhelpful”; if
the judge discussed figures, this would usurp the jury’s role.
4.80 In the
case, a majority of the New South Wales Court of Appeal held that two verdicts totalling $600,000 were excessive and ordered a re-trial.
In this case also, the main factors relied upon were the apparent desire of the jury to punish the defendant, and the capital and
income value of the award.
The majority of the High Court affirmed that these were relevant indications of an excessive award.
Possible content of standard directions on quantum.
, the English Court of Appeal suggested that juries be invited to consider what could be bought with any sum of money they might be
planning to award. If the amount in mind was very large, they could be invited to consider what the result would be in terms of weekly,
monthly or annual income if the money was deposited in a building society account, without touching the capital sum awarded.
4.82 The jury could also be told not to include any desire to punish the defendant in their award (a direction already given in New
South Wales, where punitive damages have been abolished). They could also be told to consider the risk of an over-large verdict failing
on appeal and exposing the plaintiff to delay, expense and inconvenience.
4.83 As mentioned above, more recent practice in New South Wales is to direct the jury along these lines.
The jury should consider the real value of any sum they may have in mind to award, in terms of the value of a holiday, a car or even
perhaps a house. The jury must apply community standards in assessing the circumstances of publication and the value of a reputation.
Problems with standard directions on quantum.
The first problem with standardisation is drafting the directions. The Commission welcomes submissions on how they could be framed.
4.85 Drafting will be crucial to avoid the possibility that the directions will influence the jury towards one party or the other.
In some cases, the directions could be seen as a recommendation to find for the plaintiff. In others, they may discourage the jury
from giving expression to their real view of what is necessary to compensate the plaintiff and vindicate his or her reputation.
4.86 The directions must not amount to an assessment by the judge of the seriousness of the defamation, which remains a matter for
the jury. The directions should instruct the jury to consider the true value of the sum they propose to award, in terms of their
general knowledge of the value of property. The aim is to award a sum which will adequately console the plaintiff, and convince later
readers of the baselessness of the defamatory material.
4.87 Problems to be resolved with making comparisons with personal injuries awards are discussed at paragraph 4.74 above.
Empower the Court of Appeal to substitute its own verdict for that of the jury
4.88 A second method of ensuring that inappropriate awards are not made would be to increase the availability of the Court of Appeal’s
power to reassess the damages. That power is currently governed by
Supreme Court Act
(NSW). That section provides that the Court of Appeal may reassess damages where it is “fully able” to do so, without
seeing or hearing the plaintiff or defendant or other witnesses. Furthermore, one of three additional conditions must be satisfied
before the Court of Appeal may reassess the damages: (i) the parties agree to the reassessment; (ii) it appears desirable to reassess
the damages to avoid a multiplicity of trials; or (iii) there has been an error of law by the judge, or a manifest error of fact
by the jury, which has led to the wrongful inclusion or exclusion of some item of damages.
4.89 The complex factual questions involved in awarding damages for defamation mean that it is rarely possible for the Court of Appeal
to exercise this power. Consequently, a new trial must usually be ordered.
Benefits of expanding this power.
Introducing a role for the judiciary, even if only in extreme cases, would represent a compromise between those who disagree over
whether judge or jury should assess damages. It would help to avoid the usual necessity of holding a retrial where a defamation verdict
is deemed excessive (or inadequate).
Problems with expanding this power.
To allow the Court of Appeal to substitute its own verdict would mean an erosion of the jury’s role in assessing the proper
compensation for injury to reputation. It also would reduce the importance of the rule which allows juries to consider the way the
trial was conducted by the defence when assessing the injury to the plaintiff’s feelings. The performances of the plaintiff,
defendant and witnesses is currently an extremely important factor in determining the size of the verdict. The Court of Appeal would
need to decide whether a verdict was inappropriate without seeing and hearing this testimony.
4.92 The main problem would be to decide when the Court of Appeal should be allowed to exercise the power. In
, the majority of the High Court held that a jury verdict in a defamation case should not be granted any special status, but should
be treated like any other verdict; that is, it should not be disturbed unless no reasonable jury could have awarded it.
The powers of the Western Australian Full Court.
The Full Court of the Western Australian Supreme Court has a very broad power to vary or set aside verdicts, or reduce the damages
awarded. It has all the powers and duties of the Court, Judge or Master appealed from, including the power to draw inferences of
Coyne v Citizen Finance Ltd
, the High Court affirmed that the Full Court should adopt the same approach to jury verdicts as elsewhere in Australia. That is,
the Full Court should assume that the jury took a view of the evidence most consistent with the size of the verdict, and not disturb
the verdict unless no reasonable jury could have awarded it.
The English approach
4.94 A new appeal procedure was created in England by the
Courts and Legal Services Act
1990, s 8, which allows the Court of Appeal to vary damages without the consent of both parties. It was passed to provide for reassessment
of damages in defamation cases in particular. The section provides:
Powers of the Court of Appeal to award damages
(1) In this section “case” means any case where the Court of Appeal has power to order a new trial on the ground that
damages awarded by a jury are excessive or inadequate.
(2) Rules of court may provide for the Court of Appeal, in such classes of case as may be specified in the rules, to have power, in
place of ordering a new trial, to substitute for the sum awarded by the jury such sum as appears to the court to be proper.
(3) This section is not to be read as prejudicing in any way any other power to make rules of court.
The Rantzen Case.
A landmark decision on the operation of the new power was made by the Court of Appeal in
Rantzen v Mirror Group Newspapers
Esther Rantzen, a famous television presenter, had founded a charity for sexually abused children. The defendant published articles
alleging that she had protected a teacher she knew to be a child abuser, and was thus insincere and a hypocrite. A jury awarded Ms
Rantzen �250,000.
4.96 The Court noted that previous decisions on when a new trial could be ordered applied a very strict test, allowing this only if
the damages were “grossly excessive” or “excessive and wholly unreasonable” or “divorced from reality”.
The new power to substitute the Court’s own assessment of damages was not to be so circumscribed, since s 8(2) used only the
word “excessive”.
4.97 The Court noted that Article 10 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms conferred
a “right to freedom of expression”. Furthermore, any restrictions on this right had to be “necessary in a democratic
society... for the protection of the reputation or rights of others”. The Court considered that a limitless discretion on juries
to award damages went beyond an acceptable restriction. Large awards of damages were now to be subject to “a more searching
scrutiny”. The test to be applied in deciding whether to overturn a verdict was:
...could a reasonable jury have thought that this award was necessary to compensate the plaintiff and re-establish his reputation?
4.98 The Court went on to consider what guidance could be given to juries in future cases. Juries could be invited to consider the
purchasing power of awards, and asked to ensure that their award is proportionate to the damage suffered by the plaintiff and necessary
to adequately compensate the plaintiff and re-establish the plaintiff’s reputation. Comparisons with other jury awards in defamation
cases were rejected, because juries were given minimal guidance until recently and their decisions did not establish any norm or
standard. Comparisons with personal injuries awards also were rejected, because there was no satisfactory way in which they could
be used to provide guidance in defamation cases. (On this point the case is of little relevance in New South Wales, after the High
Court’s decision in
4.99 However, awards made by the Court of Appeal in the exercise of its new power to substitute a verdict could be put before juries
as a guide. This was because the drafters of s 8 of the
Courts and Legal Services Act
1990 apparently intended that the Court’s awards would eventually “provide a corpus to which reference could be made
in subsequent cases.”
4.100 In the instant case, the Court decided that “a very substantial award was clearly justified”, but that “[j]udged
by any objective standards of reasonable compensation or necessity or proportionality the award of �250,000 was excessive.”
The sum of �110,000 was substituted. (No reason was given as to why this was the appropriate amount).
Assessment of the Rantzen Case.
The Court’s use of the European Convention on Human Rights, and in particular the right to freedom of expression in Article
10, to interpret English domestic law is interesting. It is relevant to New South Wales in the light of the Australian High Court’s
recent exposition of an implied guarantee of freedom of communication in the Australian
Constitution
. Australia is also a signatory to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, Article 19 of which provides a similar
right to that in Article 10 of the European Convention.
Particularly relevant is the approach of adopting a less strict test to assess when damages are excessive.
ISSUES ARISING IN CHAPTER 4 - THE ROLES OF JUDGE AND JURY
Option One - Conduct Defamation Trials before Judges Alone
1. If defamation trials were conducted before judges alone, would there be a significant reduction in the input of community values?
2. If so, would this be outweighed by the practical benefits in conducting defamation trials before judges alone?
Option Two - Retain a Limited Role for Juries
3. Should juries be retained only to decide whether the pleaded imputations are conveyed and are defamatory, with the judge deciding
all questions of defences and remedies?
Option Three - Retain Juries in their Current Role
4. Should the jury first decide whether the pleaded imputations are conveyed and are defamatory, before any other evidence is heard?
5. Should both sides give their opening addresses, the plaintiff followed immediately by the defendant, at the start of the trial?
6. Should general damages in defamation be subject to a statutory maximum (or “cap”)?
7. If so, what should be the size of the cap? Should juries be told the size of the cap before they assess damages?
8. Should juries be given a standard set of directions on the quantum of damages in defamation? If so, what should be included in
this standard set of directions?
9. Should the Court of Appeal have a general power to substitute its own award of damages for that of the jury, without the consent
of the parties?
10. If so, what test should be applied in deciding whether the jury’s assessment of damages is excessive or inadequate?
Other Issues
11. Should pleaded imputations be retained as the cause of action in defamation in New South Wales?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992,
Report on the Defamation Bill 1992
(Legislative Assembly, Parliament of New South Wales, October 1992)
. T K Tobin and M G Sexton
Australian Defamation Law and Practice
(looseleaf, Butterworths, Sydney 1991) at para [14,080].
Morgan v John Fairfax & Sons Ltd
(1990) 20 NSWLR 511.
. The Hon Justice M J R Clarke
Evidence before NSW Legislation Committee
(8 September 1992) at 1-10; J Gibson
Evidence before NSW Legislation Committee
(19 February 1992) at 42-43. See also P T George “Congruency: unravelling the defamation action”
Australian Bar Review
. T K Tobin QC
Evidence before NSW Legislation Committee
(18 February 1992) at 61.
. An account of the proceedings is given at
[1977] 2 NSWLR 749
(see the discussion by the Court of Appeal at 756-758). On the problems caused by time limits imposed on jury verdicts, see the comments
by Hunt J in
Morgan v John Fairfax & Sons Ltd
(1990) 20 NSWLR 511
at 552-553.
. An account of the proceedings is given at
(1991) 24 NSWLR 305
; the final trial is reported at
(1992) 7 BR 350.
Similar problems in identifying the questions to be submitted to the jury after a 26 day trial led to the Court of Appeal ordering
a new trial in
Radio 2UE Sydney Pty Ltd v Parker
(1992) 29 NSWLR 448.
. The most recent reported decision in this litigation is at
(1991) 23 NSWLR 375.
. An empirical study by T Sourdin of cases commenced in the NSW Supreme Court in 1987 and 1988 found that, in the 44% of files in
which information was available, more than 80% contained a plea of statutory qualified privilege. This was considered surprising
given that this defence has rarely succeeded. (
Defamation Study
, unpublished paper, University of New South Wales, 1990 at 22-3).
. There appear to be no reported cases of seduction in Australia, England or New Zealand for some 50 years: R P Balkin and J L R Davis
Law of Torts
(Butterworths, Sydney 1991) at 750-51. Damages can no longer be recovered for breach of promise to marry:
Marriage Act
. This statutory provision is criticised by S Walker “Media and broadcasting law”
Australian Business Law Review
at 352, who argues that “the question whether conduct is reasonable [is] a matter appropriate for a jury’s determination”.
. The Hon A R Moffitt CMG QC
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992
(31 January 1992) at 2-5; The Hon G J Samuels AC QC
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(30 June 1992) at 1-2.
. J F Kerr “Juries not always up to dispensing justice”
The Canberra Times
, 24 February 1993, at 26.
. There appear to have been only three successful newspaper defendants in the ACT Supreme Court in the past 28 years:
Elkin v Federal Capital Press of Australia
(unreported),
Supreme Court, ACT
, 19 May 1992, Higgins J, SC438 of 1988;
Federal Capital Press of Australia Pty Ltd v Edwards
(unreported),
Supreme Court, ACT
, 8 July 1992, Gallop J, SCA 55 of 1992;
Evans v John Fairfax Group Pty Ltd (Rec & Man App)
(unreported),
Supreme Court, ACT
, 12 February 1993, Higgins J, SC 243/1990.
Radio 2UE Sydney Pty Ltd v Parker
(1992) 29 NSWLR 448.
Courts Legislation (Civil Procedure) Amendment Act
1991 (NSW), s 3 sch 2 cl 1 (commenced 1 July 1993).
[1991] HCA 10
(1991) 172 CLR 211
. For a summary of some of the more extreme arguments advanced on both sides, see G Samuels “Forensic tribunals” (1984)
Australian Journal of Forensic Sciences
11 at 11-12.
. ALRC Report 11, at paras 252 (fn 1), 288; L Levine “Judge and jury in the law of defamation: putting the horse behind the
cart” (1985) 35
The American University Law Review
3 at 40-42; J G Fleming “Retraction and reply: alternative remedies for defamation” (1978) 12
University of British Columbia Law Review
15 at 17-18; F Schauer “The role of the people in First Amendment theory”
California Law Review
at 765-768.
Sutcliffe v Pressdram Ltd
[1990] 1 All ER 269 at 286-287 per Nourse LJ.
Evidence before NSW Legislation Committee
(8 September 1992) at 4, 7; Samuels
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
. Young Lawyers
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(31 January 1992) at 3-4; NSW Bar Association
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(14 February 1992) at 2-3.
Evidence before NSW Legislation Committee
(8 September 1992) at 3-8.
Farquhar v Bottom
[1980] 2 NSWLR 380
at 386 per Hunt J; see J G Fleming
The Law of Torts
(eighth edition, LBC, Sydney 1992) at 530-531, 534.
. See New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
(Report 11, 1979) at 86-91 (paras 36-56).
. P T George “Congruency: unravelling the defamation action”
Australian Bar Review
at 126-127.
. D A Hunt “Defamation - pre-trial practice” in J C Gibson (ed)
Aspects of the Law of Defamation in New South Wales
(Young Lawyers Section, Law Society of NSW, Sydney 1991) at 9, 11-12.
. For example,
Drummoyne Municipal Council v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
(1990) 21 NSWLR 135
at 148-152 per Kirby P.
Prager v Times Newspapers Ltd
[1988] 1 WLR 77 at 91 per Nicholls LJ.
[1988] VicRp 90
[1988] VR 991
at 1000-1001.
. See George at 124-126, 133-134 for a full critique of the common law approach.
(1992) 29 NSWLR 448
, where Handley JA and Cripps JA agreed with Clarke JA, Handley JA adding a special endorsement of this procedural reform.
Carson v John Fairfax & Sons Ltd
[1993] HCA 31
(1993) 67 ALJR 634.
Andrews v John Fairfax & Sons Ltd
[1980] 2 NSWLR 225.
Makim v Nationwide News
(unreported), Supreme Court, NSW, 27 November 1990, Enderby J, CLD 15263/88.
Ettingshausen v Australian Consolidated Press
(unreported), Supreme Court, NSW, 10 February 1993, Hunt J, CLD 12807/91.
. The Commission has not undertaken an exhaustive empirical survey of defamation verdicts, but is aware of two such cases:
Pillon v Nationwide News
(unreported), Supreme Court, NSW, 10 December 1985, Grove J, CLD 14035/83 (jury verdict of $350,000);
Singleton v Ffrench
(1986) 5 NSWLR 425
(where the size of the verdicts - totalling $450,000 for three plaintiffs - was not disputed on appeal).
. M Newcity “The sociology of defamation in Australia and the United States”
Texas International Law Journal
at 57. Note that this study examined cases on the Defamation List between February 1979 and June 1981; verdict data included cases
going to trial up to 1985. The total number of cases examined was 435, of which 91 had reached a trial verdict.
. Sourdin at 34-35. The total number of files examined in this study was 271, of which only 13 had reached trial.
Motor Accidents Act
Workers Compensation Act
The Herald and Weekly Times Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(1932) 28 CLR 113.
. Compensation paid out by the Crown may be recovered from convicted offenders, but the recovery provisions have been described as
mere political window-dressing:
The Law Handbook
(4th edition, Redfern Legal Centre Publishing, Sydney 1991) at 375-376.
. Young Lawyers
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(31 January 1992) at 4-5; Law Institute of Victoria
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(14 February 1992 - first drafted 28 September 1990) at 25.
. R Dixon “What price a football player’s dignity?”
, 12 February 1993; Law Council of Australia
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(30 January 1992) at 35-36.
[1993] HCA 31
(1993) 67 ALJR 634.
. Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ at 640-643.
Coyne v Citizen Finance Ltd
[1991] HCA 10
(1991) 172 CLR 211
at 234-235 per Toohey J (with whom Dawson J and McHugh J agreed). See also
Planet Fisheries Pty Ltd v La Rosa
[1968] HCA 62
(1968) 119 CLR 118
Sutcliffe v Pressdram Ltd
[1991] 1 QB 153;
Rantzen v Mirror Group Newspapers
(unreported), Court of Appeal, England, 31 March 1993, Neill, Staughton, Roch LJJ; see [1993] NLJR 507.
. Per Brennan J at 650-651, 655; Toohey J at 660-661; McHugh J at 671-673.
. Per Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ at 642.
. At 672-673.
. By Toohey J in
Coyne v Citizen Finance
Carson v John Fairfax
, Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ stated “there is much to be said for trial judges offering some guidance on damages...perhaps
even indicating a range of damages which might be considered appropriate” (at 642). Toohey J went further, saying it was appropriate
for a judge to indicate a range of figures to the jury (at 661).
Sutcliffe v Pressdram Ltd
[1990] 1 All ER 269 at 292.
. [1990] 1 All ER 269 at 281-284, 288-290, 291-293.
. [1990] 1 All ER 269 at 282 per Lord Donaldson MR.
. [1990] 1 All ER 269 at 283-284, 290, 293. See also P Milmo “Libel damages and European human rights”
New Law Journal
(1991) 24 NSWLR 259
at 274-275, 301-303.
. Per Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ at 643-644.
Morgan v John Fairfax & Sons Ltd [No 2]
(1991) 23 NSWLR 374
at 391 per Hunt J;
Coyne v Citizen Finance
Carson v John Fairfax
(High Court) at 642, 661.
Carson v John Fairfax
at 643-644.
Supreme Court Act
Rules of the Supreme Court
1971 (WA), O 63 rr 2(1), 10.
[1991] HCA 10
(1991) 172 CLR 211
at 227-229 per Toohey J.
. (Unreported), Court of Appeal, England, 31 March 1993, Neill, Staughton, Roch LJJ; see [1993] NLJR 507.
. [1993] NLJR 507, at 508.
. See Chapter 10 below.
Discussion Paper 32 (1993) - Defamation
5. Other Procedural Issues
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
5.1 This chapter considers various reforms designed to reduce the incidence of vexatious litigation in defamation actions.
These reforms are aimed at ensuring that defamation actions can restore reputation more effectively, and also minimising their restraint
of freedom of speech.
5.2 The proposals discussed include a shorter limitation period for defamation claims, and giving courts a specific power to strike
out defamation actions. The incidence and effectiveness of so-called “stop writs” is examined briefly. Another proposal
discussed is encouraging the use of agreed statements of issues and witnesses’ statements in defamation actions.
A SHORTER LIMITATION PERIOD FOR DEFAMATION CLAIMS
5.3 Defamation actions should be heard and resolved quickly. One way of encouraging this is to shorten the time after publication
in which actions can be brought.
The current limitation period in Australian jurisdictions
5.4 In most Australian jurisdictions, including New South Wales, the limitation period for defamation actions is six years.
In the Northern Territory, it is three years.
In Western Australia and South Australia, actions for slander have a limitation period of two years.
5.5 This period runs from the date of accrual of the cause of action, which in defamation actions is the date of publication of the
matter which is the subject of the complaint.
5.6 In Western Australia, libel actions against a newspaper or any person responsible for its publication must be brought within twelve
months of that publication.
The limitation period in overseas jurisdictions
England and Wales
5.7 The limitation period for most tort actions in England is six years. However in 1985 the limitation period for defamation claims
was reduced to three years.
The Lord Chancellor, Lord Mackay, has recently proposed that it should be reduced to one year, with the court having a discretion
to extend it to a maximum of three years in appropriate cases.
New Zealand
5.8 Defamation actions in New Zealand have a limitation period of two years, with a discretion granted to the court to extend it to
a maximum of six years.
5.9 In Alberta, British Columbia and New Brunswick, the limitation period for defamation is two years from publication. The same applies
in Manitoba, Prince Edward Island and Saskatchewan, although actions for slander not actionable
must be brought within two years of the date of occurrence of the special damage which is the gist of that action. In Newfoundland
and Ontario an action for slander must be brought within two years after the words were spoken; libel actions must be brought within
six years of publication. In Nova Scotia an action for slander must be brought within one year and an action for libel within six
years after the cause of action arose.
5.10 The position is complicated by special provisions applying to newspapers and broadcasters. Some provinces provide that an action
for any defamation published in a newspaper, or broadcast, must be commenced within six months after the publication came to the
notice or knowledge of the person defamed. In Ontario and Newfoundland, the relevant period is three months.
Arguments in favour of a shorter limitation period for defamation
5.11 Persons concerned at damage to reputation normally would be expected to pursue vigorously efforts to restore it. Memories fade.
Journalists and their sources can be hard to trace after time has elapsed. Notes, tapes and other records are often retained only
for short periods. The prospect of a defamation action can lead to self-censorship by writers and the stifling of a legitimate debate.
Plaintiffs need not adduce proof of damage, and have a lighter onus to satisfy than in other torts (although this may change under
proposals being considered by the Commission - see Chapter 2).
Arguments against a shorter limitation period for defamation
5.12 In all types of civil actions, defendants face difficulties if plaintiffs do not commence proceedings quickly. There is no reason
to give special treatment to defamation defendants. Most defamation actions are brought quickly anyway. A recent study of New South
Wales cases found that approximately 80% of matters were commenced within six months of publication; only 7.9% were commenced more
than twelve months after publication.
Delay in commencing is already a factor which is considered when assessing damages. Considerable time may be needed to realise and
fully assess the extent of injury to the plaintiff’s reputation, and obtain legal advice. Attempts to settle without litigation
may be handicapped if litigation must be commenced quickly. Applying a shorter limitation period in New South Wales alone will encourage
forum shopping.
5.13 There appears to be a general trend in common law jurisdictions to provide for a shorter limitation period in defamation than
in other tort actions. Free expression would be promoted by shortening the current six year limitation period in New South Wales.
Given that most actions are commenced promptly anyway, it can be argued that few parties would be disadvantaged.
Defamation Bill
1992 (NSW) amends the
Limitation Act
(NSW) to provide for a limitation period in defamation actions of six months from discovery of publication of the defamatory matter,
subject to a maximum of three years from publication (cl 73 and Schedule 4).
5.15 If the time provided in the Bill is thought to be insufficient, then a period of one year from discovery of publication, with
a maximum of three years from publication, seems a reasonable compromise.
"STOP WRITS"
5.16 This term is used to describe a defamation action commenced with the sole or dominant purpose of gagging further discussion of
a particular subject. As a matter of law their power to do this is virtually non-existent, but they may have some practical effect
on discussions, particularly if the defendant does not understand the law.
The limited effectiveness of stop writs
5.17 The idea that commencing a defamation action can “stop” the publication of material appears to be based on a misconception
of the law of contempt of court. That law is concerned with balancing the public interest in the due administration of justice with
the public interest in freedom of expression. It does
provide that once litigation has commenced, public discussion of the subject-matter of that litigation is prohibited.
The crime of contempt of court is committed when material is published in circumstances where the clear tendency of the publication
is likely, as a matter of practical reality, to interfere with the due course of justice.
However, where the topic is of sufficient public importance, the public interest will favour free discussion of it over the possibility
of prejudice to a litigant.
5.18 A defamation suit commenced to restrain publication of further material by the defendant will usually be futile. An injunction
to forbid such publication on the basis that it may prejudice the defamation action normally will be refused.
Furthermore, if this is the sole or predominant purpose of commencing the action, it will be permanently stayed as an abuse of process.
The possibility is even open to the defendant to sue the plaintiff in the civil tort of abuse of process.
5.19 However, further publications may increase the risk of adverse consequences to the defendant in the trial of the defamation action.
Repetition of defamatory material may provide some evidence of malice at the time of publication, and also aggravate damages (because
it will amount to repetition of a wrong). More importantly, the defendant may have a perception of this risk, and so be intimidated
into not publishing.
The prevalence of stop writs
5.20 Empirical research has not been able to establish the number of defamation suits commenced in order to gag further discussion.
The Edgeworth and Newcity study found that 30.7% of the 435 suits they studied were neither formally settled nor prosecuted to trial
(after a lapse of four years or more). Some of these could have been intended to act as stop writs. Many may have been simply allowed
to lapse, or not prosecuted due to difficulties in meeting legal fees and costs or in obtaining evidence, or settled informally without
the court having any record of the terms.
5.21 The Sourdin study used a test of “dormancy”, defined to include cases in which no activity had been recorded on the
file for a period exceeding ten months and the time for compliance with directions and consent orders had expired at least ten months
previously. Of the 264 files examined in this way, approximately 42.5% were characterised as dormant. Again, it is not possible to
conclude from this how many, if any, were intended to act as stop writs.
Without knowing what the plaintiff’s motivation was, it is impossible to draw any conclusions as to the prevalence of stop
The best solution to the perceived problem of stop writs
5.22 The best solution to any perceived chill on free expression is an understanding of the law, and the encouragement it offers to
free discussion of matters of public interest. In 1987, the Australian Law Reform Commission noted that there are many benefits in
giving journalists careful and thorough training in contempt law.
This holds true today.
EXPRESS POWERS TO STRIKE OUT DEFAMATION ACTIONS
5.23 Despite the extremely limited effectiveness of “stop writs”, the
Defamation Bill
1992 contains a “want of prosecution” provision designed to eradicate their use.
Clause 14 gives the court in which defamation proceedings are pending an express power to strike out the proceedings if it considers
that the plaintiff had failed to prosecute them for a year, or had shown disregard for or an unwillingness to comply promptly with
an interlocutory order.
The court’s current powers to strike out actions
5.24 Courts have an inherent power to strike out proceedings which are an abuse of process. The defendant must show that the plaintiff,
in starting and continuing the action, had the ulterior purpose of seeking a collateral advantage beyond what the law offered as
a remedy for the wrong alleged, and that, but for this ulterior purpose, the plaintiff would not have started proceedings at all.
5.25 In addition, court rules provide a power to stay or dismiss such proceedings, such as in Part 13 Rule 5 of the
Supreme Court Rules
(NSW). A power to strike out pleadings which are an abuse of process is conferred by
Rule 26. Again, the party seeking these orders must satisfy a very stringent test. A defendant alleging that the plaintiff has no
cause of action must show that the plaintiff’s claim is so obviously untenable that it cannot succeed, or that it is manifestly
unarguable.
Is an express power to strike out defamation proceedings desirable?
5.26 The Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992 supported giving courts an express power to strike out defamation proceedings,
as in cl 14 of the Bill. This was because “the Court of Appeal has interpreted the existing powers of the court in such a way
as virtually to emasculate them.”
5.27 One problem with cl 14 is that it uses several vague terms: “failed to prosecute”, “shown disregard”,
“unwillingness to comply promptly”. If the interpretation of these terms is to remain in the court’s discretion,
this express power may well be interpreted in the same way as the court’s present powers.
5.28 It would be easy for a plaintiff to take at least one step every twelve months and so avoid having the claim struck out under
cl 14(a). This means that this provision would not effectively deal with “stop writs”.
5.29 Clause 14(b) would effectively take care of plaintiffs who have no real intention of prosecuting the claim to trial. It would
also make “every timetable or direction a peremptory order, which is outrageous, and only against the plaintiff, which is iniquitous.”
This provision, if it is retained, should be extended to defendants. It is inequitable that a plaintiff would have to make a special
application for a peremptory order against a dilatory defendant.
5.30 The Defamation List is already conducted in such a way that a party who really wants to get the action to trial can do so. If
both sides are willing to let the action sleep in the court files, a provision such as cl 14 will have little effect. The procedural
and remedial reforms proposed in this Discussion Paper should effectively ensure that defamation suits are disposed of promptly.
For example, if juries are not used in defamation trials, the summary judgment procedure under
Supreme Court Rules
could be more widely used. Separate trials under
, for the purpose of deciding on the capacity of matter to convey defamatory imputations, should not be necessary. The availability
of defences should be more easily decided.
5.31 If a provision such as cl 14 is nevertheless desired, it would be better to put it in the
Supreme Court Rules
. It should apply to both parties. If it is not to apply to all directions and orders, some criteria as to when it should be used
are required.
FILING AGREED STATEMENTS OF ISSUES AND WITNESSES' STATEMENTS
5.32 It has been suggested that delays in defamation litigation would be further reduced if some of the streamlining procedures used
in the Commercial Division could be adopted. Statements setting out the facts and issues could be exchanged, followed by an exchange
of witnesses’ statements. It may then be possible to file an agreed statement of issues before trial.
5.33 Filing statements of facts and issues in the Commercial Division is designed to eliminate the necessity for pleadings, at least
in some cases.
It may be harder to eliminate formal pleadings in the Defamation List. This is because a plaintiff’s cause of action under
Defamation Act
(NSW) is the imputation pleaded by the plaintiff as arising from the matter complained of.
These imputations must be pleaded with precision so as to define the issues and inform the defendant of the case it must meet.
5.34 However, filing of witnesses’ statements is a procedure which has been used in the Defamation List,
and could be used more often. This could also apply to the filing of agreed statements of issues before trial.
5.35 The Commission welcomes submissions on these proposals.
ISSUES ARISING IN CHAPTER 5 - OTHER PROCEDURAL ISSUES
Limitation Period
1. Should the limitation period for commencing a defamation action be shortened to one year from discovery of publication, with a
maximum of three years from publication?
2. Is there an effective way to correct the misconception that commencement of a defamation action has some legal power to gag further
discussion of the subject-matter of the action?
Express powers to strike out defamation actions
3. Is there a need to give courts an express power to strike out defamation actions if either party delays excessively?
4. If so, what should be defined as an excessive delay?
5. Should every direction made in defamation litigation be treated as a peremptory order (so that the action or the defence will be
struck out if the order is not complied with promptly)?
Filing agreed statements of issues and witnesses’ statements
6. Could greater use be made of agreed statements of issues and exchange of witnesses’ statements in defamation litigation?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. Young Lawyers Section, NSW Law Society argues that “[t]here is probably more vexatious litigation in the field of defamation
than in many other areas of the law.”
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(31 January 1992) at 6-7.
Limitation Act
Limitation of Actions Act
Limitation of Actions Act
Limitation Act
Limitation of Actions Act
Limitation Act
Limitation Act
Limitation Act
Limitation Act
s 38(1)(a)(ii)
(applies to slander actionable per se);
Limitation of Actions Act
Victoria also retains the distinction between libel and slander, but has no special limitation period for slander.
Newspaper Libel and Registration Act 1884
Amendment Act
1888 (WA), s 5.
Limitation Act
1980 (UK), s 4A, inserted by the
Administration of Justice Act
1985 (UK), s 57(2).
. J McLeod “Proposals could close down ‘libel Las Vegas’” ,
Guardian Gazette,
6 January 1993, at 6.
Limitation Act
1950 (NZ), s 4(6A) and (6B), inserted by the
Defamation Act
1992 (NZ), s 55.
The Law of Defamation in Canada
(Carswell, Toronto 1987), Vol 2 at 794-795, 805.
. T Sourdin
Defamation Study
(unpublished paper, University of New South Wales, 1990) at 10-14. These figures are based on a sample size of 264 actions commenced
between 1 January 1987 and 31 December 1988.
Wallersteiner v Moir
[1974] 1 WLR 991 at 1004-1005 per Lord Denning MR.
Hinch v Attorney-General of Victoria
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15
Attorney General for NSW v TCN Channel Nine Pty Ltd
(1990) 20 NSWLR 368.
Ex parte Bread Manufacturers Ltd; Re Truth & Sportsman Ltd
(1937) SR(NSW) 242.
National Mutual Life Association of Australasia Ltd v GTV Corporation Pty Ltd
[1989] VicRp 66
[1989] VR 747
at 759-761 per Ormiston J.
. M J R Clarke “No comment - it’s sub judice”, paper presented at the seminar
Latest Developments in Media Law
(Sydney, 4 December 1992) at 4-5.
. B Edgeworth and M Newcity “Politicians, defamation law and the ‘public figure’ defence” (1992) 10
Law in Context
. Sourdin at 17-22.
. Australia. Law Reform Commission
(Report 35, 1987), at para 265.
. Attorneys General of Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria
Reform of Defamation Laws - Discussion Paper (No 2)
(January 1991) at 58, 59.
Goldsmith v Sperrings Ltd
[1977] 2 All ER 566.
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
at 128-130;
Jones v Amalgamated Television Services Pty Ltd
(1991) 23 NSWLR 364
. Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992,
Report on the Defamation Bill 1992
(Legislative Assembly, Parliament of New South Wales, October 1992) at 31.
. Young Lawyers
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
Rajski v Carson
(1986) 4 NSWLR 735
(1988) 15 NSWLR 84
(Court of Appeal), where the existence of a defence of absolute privilege turned on disputed questions of fact which had to be resolved
by a jury: see Chapter 7 footnote 31.
. P T George “Congruency: unravelling the defamation action”
Australian Bar Review
; Law Council of Australia
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(30 January 1992) at 39.
. Supreme Court, New South Wales, Practice Note 39 (12 November 1986).
. See Chapter 4, paras 4.33-4.44.
. See, for example,
Gene Lobel Photo Art & Sound (Cremorne) Pty Ltd v MacIntosh
(Supreme Court, NSW, CLD 12860/90, directions made by Badgery-Parker J on 27 May 1993).
Discussion Paper 32 (1993) - Defamation
6. Justification
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
6.1 Previous attempts to reform defamation law on a national basis have been frustrated by profound disagreements over the defence
of justification. The issue is whether defendants should be able to escape liability for defamatory publications solely because they
are true. The alternative is to require defendants to prove some additional element which will, in effect, provide some protection
for privacy.
6.2 This chapter also raises the issue of who should bear the onus of proving truth or falsity. This discussion arises from the proposals
for alternative remedies considered above in Chapter 2.
VERSIONS OF THE DEFENCE IN AUSTRALIAN JURISDICTIONS
6.3 Australian jurisdictions can be grouped into (1) those which retain the common law defence of truth alone; (2) those where the
defendant must also show the publication was for the public benefit; and (3) New South Wales.
Truth alone
6.4 At common law it is a defence to the publication of defamatory matter if the defendant shows it was true in substance and in fact.
This defence is available in Victoria, Western Australia, South Australia and the Northern Territory.
6.5 The defendant must prove the truth of all material statements in the published matter. The plaintiff will succeed if any distinct
allegation arising from the matter is not proved. However, it is sufficient that the “sting” of the allegation complained
of is proved true, and this can be done by proving the truth of other allegations with a common sting.
Truth and public benefit
6.6 In Queensland, Tasmania and the Australian Capital Territory the defendant must, in addition to proving the truth of the allegations
complained of as at common law, show that it was for the public benefit that the matter be published.
This creates the most restricted version of the defence of justification. “Public benefit” is a narrower concept than
the New South Wales requirement of “public interest” (see below). It is a question of fact for the jury.
The position in New South Wales
6.7 In New South Wales, an imputation must be shown to be of “substantial truth”, meaning “in substance it is true
or in substance it is not materially different from the truth” (s 7(2)). This definition was designed to clarify but not modify
the common law.
6.8 In effect, the
Defamation Act
(NSW) makes three different justification defences available:
(1) The imputation is substantially true and relates to a matter of public interest.
The issue of public interest is decided by the judge.
(2) The imputation is substantially true and is published under qualified privilege (meaning it is published on an occasion of qualified
privilege, is relevant to the occasion, and the manner of the publication is reasonable having regard to the imputation and to the
occasion of qualified privilege).
This defence is not defeated if the plaintiff shows the defendant acted with malice (unlike the defence of qualified privilege alone).
(3) The imputation is false, but the substantial truth of other “contextual” imputations also conveyed by the published
matter means that the imputation complained of does not further injure the plaintiff’s reputation. Each of the contextual imputations,
and the imputation complained of, must either relate to a matter of public interest or be published under qualified privilege.
This is a significant expansion of the common law defence, where a plaintiff can succeed by suing only over those allegations which
the defendant cannot justify, even though the matter published contains other allegations which the defendant can justify. Legislation
in England and Tasmania provides a narrower form of this contextual truth defence.
It applies only where the plaintiff sues over words containing two or more “charges” against the plaintiff, some true
and some untrue; so plaintiffs are still free to sue only over those parts of a defamatory publication which contain untrue allegations.
SHOULD NEW SOUTH WALES ADOPT A DEFENCE OF TRUTH ALONE?
6.9 The benefits and disadvantages of a defence of truth alone were extensively canvassed before the New South Wales Legislation Committee
on the Defamation Bill 1992.
Advantages of truth alone
6.10 It can be argued that publication of true statements does not
damage reputation but rather only brings it down to its proper level.
The public benefit or public interest requirement is really designed to protect privacy, not reputation. When this Commission proposed
the new “public interest” defence in 1971, the Commission acknowledged that the law of defamation was never intended
to protect privacy and “is not a fit instrument for that task.”
In addition the defence of truth alone is simpler to understand and easier to apply.
Disadvantages of truth alone
6.11 The defence of truth alone “condones embarrassing exposures of purely private matters, lacking any countervailing public
This Commission noted that the “public benefit” requirement may have been introduced to assist in the social rehabilitation
of former convicts. While this rationale was no more relevant in 1971 than it is today, the Commission did not then recommend a defence
of truth alone because “gratuitous destruction of reputation is wrong, even if the matter published is true.”
It simply replaced the “public benefit” requirement with the more familiar concept of “public interest”.
The issue is whether and how to protect privacy
6.12 The public interest requirement means that at least some protection for individual privacy is provided by New South Wales defamation
law. The question is whether privacy should be protected separately or at all.
The compromise in the Defamation Bills 1991
6.13 The Attorneys General of Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria noted that there was general community support for some form
of privacy protection. They referred to previous discussions by the Standing Committee of Attorneys General during earlier reform
attempts. The Attorneys supported the views of the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC), which had opposed any reduction in the
available privacy protection, such as the public interest or public benefit requirement in some jurisdictions.
6.14 The Attorneys argued that, despite the ALRC’s recommendations that truth alone should be a defence for defamation and that
decision to provide separate protection for privacy may have been influenced by the fact that the ALRC had a separate reference on
statute covering “unfair publication”, although it had different elements with respect to defamation and invasion of
6.15 The Attorneys concluded that privacy was a value which required protection, and that it was appropriate for this protection (at
least in a limited form) to be part of the law of defamation.
The “truth and privacy” hybrid
Defamation Bills
1991 contained a hybrid form of the justification defence. Truth alone was sufficient, unless the matter carrying the imputation
concerned the plaintiff’s “private affairs” (defined inclusively in cl 4).
If so, the publication of the matter either had to (a) be “warranted” in the public interest, or (b) attract the common
law defence of qualified privilege (malice being irrelevant here) and the manner of publication be reasonable in the circumstances
(cl 20). Clause 22 contained “examples” of situations where publication would be warranted in the public interest.
6.17 This was an attempt at compromise between truth alone and the additional public interest or benefit requirement. The New South
Wales Legislation Committee on the Bill agreed with many submissions which argued that this hybrid defence added needless complexity
to the law in this State.
The onus was on the defendant to show substantial truth; it then shifted to the plaintiff to show that the matter concerned his or
her private affairs; the defendant then had to show publication was warranted in the public interest.
6.18 Particular criticism was directed to the use of the word “warranted”, which made the defendant’s burden far
heavier than the current requirement of showing that the imputation “relates to” a matter of public interest. The definition
of “private affairs” in cl 4, being inclusive, was not a true definition and attempts to apply it in practice could cause
endless disputes and confusion. The novel use of “examples” in cl 22 was a drafting technique of uncertain effect, and
illustrated the difficulty of defining the circumstances in which such publication should be excused.
6.19 The alternative of showing that the circumstances of publication would attract the common law defence of qualified privilege
would almost never be available for a media defendant, since they can rarely use the common law form of that defence. This represents
a contraction of the available protection, since under the current New South Wales Act truth on an occasion of statutory qualified
privilege is a defence (s 14(2), 15(2)). This defence is available even where the defendant is shown to have acted with malice.
6.20 Clause 21 basically re-enacted the contextual truth provisions of the current Act, with a major drafting error which would have
destroyed the defence. It is currently available where the false imputation “does not further injure the reputation of the
plaintiff” (s 16(2)(c)). Clause 21(1)(b) made it available where the false imputation “does not further harm the plaintiff”.
Since this would likely to be construed to encompass harm to the plaintiff’s feelings - easily shown with respect to a false,
defamatory imputation - the defence would rarely succeed.
The recommendations of the Legislation Committee
6.21 The Committee concluded that truth alone should be the defence for defamatory imputations. A tort of privacy should be introduced
in separate legislation. Until this is done, the defence of justification should continue to require truth and public interest or
qualified privilege as set out in the
Defamation Act
The defence of contextual truth under
also should remain unchanged.
THE COMMISSION'S APPROACH
6.22 The provisional view of the Commission is that privacy protection should not form part of the law of defamation. The interests
to be protected are different and the means of protecting them should also be different. Truth alone is a better defence for defamation
law; it is simpler, and disclosure of truth does not wrongfully harm a person’s reputation. On the other hand, the truth of
information and whether it is defamatory is irrelevant to whether it invades a person’s privacy. If privacy protection is desired,
it should be provided by separate legislation.
6.23 This means that protection of privacy should not be examined as part of a reference on reform of defamation. Privacy is a notoriously
slippery concept. An enormous amount of work on how it should be protected has been done within Australia and around the world. Protection
from misuse of “information privacy” by Commonwealth agencies resulted from the Australian Law Reform Commission’s
1983 Report on
Despite the extensive research and consultation undertaken by the ALRC and the depth of expertise and talent available to it, its
1979 recommendations for the protection of “publication privacy” have not been adopted, federally or anywhere else. This
illustrates the difficulties involved in reaching agreement between all interested parties on a workable model in this area.
6.24 The Commission proposes to concentrate on desirable reforms to the law of defamation in New South Wales. Protection of privacy
should be examined separately. Until this is done, the current justification defences under the
Defamation Act
(NSW) should remain unchanged.
Reasons for retaining the current justification defences until privacy is examined separately
6.25 The defences of truth on an occasion of qualified privilege and contextual truth raise little controversy, and are generally
accepted as appropriate means of resolving the conflict between freedom of speech and protection of reputation. It is the defence
of truth and public interest which attracts criticism. The provisional view of the Commission is that this form of privacy protection
is not unduly restrictive of free speech in New South Wales. One reason is that the other justification defences are available.
The public interest requirement gives some protection to privacy
6.26 The current law essentially gives the same protection to privacy as the proposal in the
Defamation Bill
1992. This is illustrated by the case of
Chappell v TCN Channel Nine Pty Ltd
To remove the public interest requirement would be to make a decision about the extent of privacy protection which should be available.
This should not be done before the issue is comprehensively examined.
“Public interest” has often been interpreted and applied
6.27 In contrast to concepts such as “private affairs”, “public interest” is a well known phrase which is
also present in other aspects of defamation law, such as the defence of comment. Many cases have analysed and applied the concept
of public interest in particular circumstances. While no definition which will apply in all circumstances has been or can be given,
a discussion of such a definition by Lord Denning is often cited:
I myself would not confine it within narrow limits. Whenever a matter is such as to affect people at large, so that they may be legitimately
interested in, or concerned at, what is going on, or what may happen to them or others, then it is a matter of public interest on
which everyone is entitled to make a fair comment.
The public interest requirement is not too onerous
6.28 Few cases can be cited in which a defence of justification failed because the public interest requirement could not be satisfied.
’s case is one example.
There is no presumption of falsity in New South Wales
6.29 At common law defamatory matter is presumed to be false, and the defendant cannot lead evidence of truth unless a plea of justification
However in New South Wales, there is no presumption that defamatory matter is either true or false, although as discussed above the
onus is on the defendant to establish truth if justification is pleaded.
This means that the defendant may lead evidence of the truth of defamatory matter in mitigation of damages, even where justification
is not pleaded - perhaps because the public interest requirement cannot be satisfied or there are evidentiary difficulties. The plaintiff
is also entitled to lead evidence of falsity in any case, and so achieve some restoration of reputation.
6.30 The above considerations, coupled with the availability of the other justification defences, suggest that the truth and public
interest defence does not overly inhibit free speech in New South Wales, at least compared with the position in other Australian
ONUS OF PROOF
6.31 A more fundamental question is whether the defendant should have to prove truth at all. The proposals for alternative remedies
discussed in Chapter 2 suggested that plaintiffs should have to prove falsity if they wish to claim damages, but not when seeking
a declaration alone.
6.32 The reasons for this proposal are:
it will bring a damages claim in defamation closer to other torts, where the plaintiff has the onus of proving most vital elements;
it will place the onus of proof on the party who would generally be expected to have best access to the relevant facts; and
it will encourage plaintiffs to sue for a declaration alone, which will encourage the free flow of information to the public, and
also ensure that false statements can be corrected and damaged reputations restored.
6.33 The reasons generally given for requiring defendants to prove truth are:
it acts as a powerful deterrent to the publication of false information;
it gives effect to the presumption of innocence, which assumes that a person has a good reputation in the absence of evidence to the
contrary; and
it removes the inequity of requiring the plaintiff to prove a negative.
6.34 If the alternative remedies discussed in Chapter 2 are accepted, this will obviously remove some of the problems defendants experience
with the defence of justification. They will still bear the onus of proving truth (and the public interest or qualified privilege
requirements of the defence of justification) if the plaintiff seeks a declaration alone.
6.35 Submissions on any aspect of this proposed remedial structure, including placing the onus of proving falsity on the plaintiff
when damages are sought, are welcomed by the Commission.
ISSUES ARISING IN CHAPTER 6 - JUSTIFICATION
1. Does the defence of truth and public interest cause excessive restriction of free speech in New South Wales?
2. Is legal protection of privacy desirable? If so, should it be part of the law of defamation, or entirely separate?
3. Following the proposals being considered for declaratory judgments, discussed in Chapter 2, should plaintiffs bear the onus of
proving falsity (or that the imputation did not relate to a matter of public interest) if seeking damages?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. In Western Australia, s 356 of the
Criminal Code
1913 (WA) imposes an additional requirement of public benefit, but the High Court held in
West Australian Newspapers Ltd v Bridge
[1979] HCA 10
(1979) 141 CLR 535
that the common law defence is also available for civil actions in that State.
. See the cases discussed by T K Tobin and M G Sexton
Australian Defamation Law and Practice
(looseleaf, Butterworths, Sydney 1991) at paras [11,001] - [11,060].
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 376;
Defamation Act
1957 (Tas) s 15. The relevant wording is slightly different in the ACT:
Defamation Act
1901 (NSW) s 6.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
(Report 11, 1971) at 86 (paras 30-31).
Defamation Act
s 15(2)(a).
. Section 12.
Section 15(2)
. NSWLRC Report 11 at 93 (paras 71-72); T K Tobin “Defending a defamation action” in J C Gibson (ed)
Aspects of the Law of Defamation in New South Wales
(Young Lawyers Section, NSW Law Society, Sydney 1990) at 70-71.
Section 16.
Defamation Act
1952 (UK) s 5;
Defamation Act
1957 (Tas) s 8.
Rofe v Smith’s Newspapers Ltd
(1924) 25 SR (NSW) 4
at 21-22 per Street A-CJ.
. NSWLRC Report 11 at 7 (para 5).
. J G Fleming
The Law of Torts
(8th edition, Law Book Company, Sydney 1992) at 556-557.
. NSWLRC Report 11 at 92 (para 64).
. Australia. Law Reform Commission
Unfair Publication: Defamation and Privacy
(Report 11, 1979) at paras 3, 230, 243; Attorneys General of Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria
Discussion Paper on Reform of Defamation Law (No. 1)
(August 1990) at paras 7.4 - 7.9.
. Attorneys General of Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria
Reform of Defamation Laws - Discussion Paper (No. 2)
(January 1991) at paras 4.1 - 4.8.
Defamation Bill
1991 (NSW), cl 4(1): “
‘private affairs’
of a person includes the health, private behaviour, home life, personal relationships or family relationships of the person”.
. The matter was complicated further by the use of sub-examples within cl 22, such as: “
is relevant to a topic of public interest, examples of such topics being: (a) the public, commercial or professional activities of
a person” etc.
. Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992,
Report on the Defamation Bill 1992
(Legislative Assembly, Parliament of New South Wales, October 1992) at 33-52.
. Australia. Law Reform Commission
(Report No 22, 1983); see the
(Cth). Adoption of similar measures in NSW has been urged by the NSW Privacy Committee:
(submission to the Independent Commission Against Corruption, June 1991); see the
Data Protection Bill
1992 (NSW).
(1988) 14 NSWLR 153.
London Artists Limited v Littler
[1969] 2 QB 375 at 391.
Roberts v Camden
[1807] EngR 404
(1807) 103 ER 508.
Defamation Act
Singleton v Ffrench
(1986) 5 NSWLR 425
at 441-444.
Discussion Paper 32 (1993) - Defamation
7. Absolute Privilege
History of this Reference (Digest)
7.1 There are limited circumstances in which public policy recognises that the interest of society in free speech is paramount. In
these cases the individual’s right to protect his or her reputation is completely subordinated to the right of unimpeded speech,
effectively offering absolute freedom to publish defamatory material. The privilege accorded is absolute because the defence cannot
be defeated even if malice on the part of the defendant can be established.
7.2 Absolute privilege denies plaintiffs the opportunity of vindicating their reputation. As a function of this drastic consequence,
the circumstances attracting absolute privilege are limited. It is traditionally available only in those situations where the prospect
of future proceedings in defamation or any other cause of action would otherwise inhibit the efficient functioning of governmental
institutions: the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary. The major categories of publication protected at common law by absolute
privilege are statements made in the course of judicial proceedings, communications concerning matters of State and statements made
in the course of parliamentary proceedings.
7.3 The defence of absolute privilege has a recognised role in defamation law and the Commission does not propose to review the arguments
in support of retaining the defence. This chapter restricts itself to an examination of the scope of the defence. The checks against
abuse of the privilege are considered below.
STATEMENTS MADE IN THE COURSE OF JUDICIAL OR QUASI-JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS
7.4 Freedom of speech without fear of consequences is considered indispensable for the proper administration of justice. The protection
of absolute privilege extends to all the participants in judicial proceedings: the parties, witnesses, counsel, jury, and judge.
Protection is not only for statements in court but for any publication necessary for the conduct of the proceedings such as pleadings
in civil litigation.
7.5 The privilege has been extended beyond courts of justice to other tribunals with “similar attributes”. The question
of whether absolute privilege is available in respect of a particular tribunal exercising quasi-judicial functions requires in each
case a detailed examination of the constitution, functions, and procedures of the tribunal in question. Relevant factors include
the object of the tribunal, its constitution, the nature of the question into which it is its duty to inquire, the procedure adopted
by it in carrying out the inquiry, and the legal consequences of the conclusion reached by the tribunal as a result of the inquiry.
Statutory modifications
7.6 Whereas the judiciary has been reluctant to extend the application of absolute privilege the legislature has not demonstrated
the same restraint. The
Defamation Act
(NSW) extends the defence of absolute privilege to a number of public bodies in respect of publications to or by them.
Sections 17A
set out the circumstances in which publication to or by these particular bodies is amenable to the defence of absolute privilege.
There is also a defence of absolute privilege for a publication in the course of an inquiry made under the authority of an Act or
Imperial Act or under authority of Her Majesty, of the Governor, or of either House or both Houses of Parliament.
The official report of the result of such an inquiry is likewise absolutely privileged.
7.7 At present there are four mechanisms whereby a tribunal or public body may derive immunity from suit: (i) pursuant to s 17A-N
Defamation Act
; (ii) pursuant to
Defamation Act
; (iii) by specific provision in another Act (often a constituting Act); and (iv) at common law. Those deriving protection from s
17A-N are clearly set out in the Act. Six tribunals which have been conferred s 18 protection by statute have been identified.
These are: the Community Welfare Appeals Tribunal; the Guardianship Board; the Transport Appeals Board; the Victims Compensation
Board; the Government and Related Employees Appeal Tribunal and the Mental Health Review Tribunal. Instances of absolute privilege
conferred by statute include
Judicial Officers Act
(NSW) in respect of publications to or by the Judicial Commission, the Conduct Division or any member or officer of the Commission
in relation to a complaint or the hearing of a complaint, and s 16 of the
Pure Food Act
1908 (NSW) in respect of the publication by the Director-General of the Department of Health of a report containing the results of
an examination upon advertised food and appliances in the Gazette and in any newspaper, journal, magazine, and in respect of the
republication by any proprietor or manager of a newspaper, journal or magazine of such a report.
Shortcomings in the present scheme
7.8 The law on absolute privilege lacks consistency and coherence. This incoherence manifests itself in various ways:
There is no one central reference point whereby information on a body’s privilege status is readily ascertainable.
The extension of absolute privilege has occurred in a haphazard manner. This is not surprising considering that most of the bodies
given protection under ss 17A-N have been constituted at different points in time subsequent to the passage of the
Defamation Act
. However, as a consequence of this haphazard development, it is not immediately apparent at present whether certain tribunals and
public bodies have been denied specific protection consciously or through inadvertence. For example, there is no specific provision
according absolute privilege to the proceedings of local councils. Conversely, it is not evident whether specified tribunals and
public bodies have been granted absolute privilege following a detailed consideration of its constitution and procedures or merely
by superficial comparison to those already accorded absolute privilege. It is necessary to ensure that there is a consistent policy
basis against which all claims to absolute privilege are measured.
The choice of three different statutory methods of extending absolute privilege begs the question about the respective merits of each
of the mechanisms and whether each achieves the same result. The availability of three mechanisms also increases the possibility
of duplication. For example, the
Royal Commissions Act
(NSW) gives specific protection to inquiries by way of Royal Commission, although it would seem that such inquiries would also be
Defamation Act
Indeed the precise ambit of
is uncertain. It is unclear whether this protection is available only if specifically conferred or whether the protection is automatic.
7.9 The submission from the Communications Law Centre to the Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill suggested the introduction
of a provision similar to that found in the Victorian Bill, whereby protection is given for the publication in the course of the
proceedings of an inquiry by any tribunal, board, committee or other body established by an Act. The Commission has several reservations
7.10 The Victorian draft provision is wide-ranging in the sense that it covers
tribunal, board, committee or other body established by an Act. Under this provision the Psychosurgery Review Board and the Police
(to name but two examples) would receive protection apparently unavailable at present, provided that they can establish that the
publication in question was in the course of the proceedings of an inquiry. However, under the Victorian clause privilege is only
available for “the publication in the course of the proceedings of an inquiry”. At present, the wording used in s 17A-N
is more extensive. For example, protection is available for publications for the purpose of the execution and administration of an
Act (eg s17B, s17D), or for publications to an officer (of the relevant body or institution), as such an officer (s 17A, s 17K).
A general provision is inconsistent with the need for clearer detail in the current provisions recommended elsewhere by this Commission.
7.11 A provision as general as the Victorian clause is likely to create as many problems as it solves. It is arguable at any rate
that s 18 and 19 achieve the same protection as that proposed by the Victorian draft provision (see above). However, the Commission
would appreciate submissions on this issue.
COMMUNICATIONS CONCERNING MATTERS OF STATE
7.12 This category covers publications by high officers of State in the course of their duties. The
Defamation Act
(NSW) makes no specific provision for executive communications, although the common law would apply. The scope of this category of
absolute privilege is very unclear: there is no clear definition of what is meant by an act of State or a State matter, nor is there
any description of the classes of officials covered.
7.13 Courts have demonstrated a clear reluctance to extend this area of absolute privilege. In its 1979 report on defamation and privacy
the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) considered that:
The public interest in frankness among government officers does not differ from the public interest in the full and frank exchange
of information between say, university officers, officers of a statutory commission, or directors of a public company.
7.14 The ALRC concluded that:
The special position of government officers, where it exists, should be abrogated and their rights and liabilities should be regulated
by the law of qualified, or limited, privilege.
7.15 The Commission welcomes submissions as to whether this area of the law should be left to the common law or whether it is considered
desirable to take active steps to either limit or otherwise codify this category of absolute privilege.
STATEMENTS MADE IN THE COURSE OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS
7.16 Statements made in the course of parliamentary proceedings are absolutely privileged. It is not the subject matter of the statements
themselves that is privileged but the fact that they are made in the course of parliamentary proceedings.
7.17 A Discussion Paper on parliamentary privilege in New South Wales prepared by the Attorney General’s Department in 1991
identified four sources of parliamentary privilege:
such privileges as were imported by the adoption of the Bill of Rights (1 William and Mary Sess. 2 c. 2):
Imperial Acts Application Act
such privilege as is conferred by the
Defamation Act
such privilege as is conferred by other legislation eg
Parliamentary Evidence Act
(NSW) and the
Public Works Act
such powers and privileges as are implied by reason of necessity:
Armstrong v Budd
(1969) 71 SR (NSW) 386.
7.18 Article 9 of the Bill of Rights 1688 declares that:
proceedings in Parliament ought not be impeached or questioned in any court or place out of Parliament.
7.19 The extent of the privilege provided by this Article is unclear. As a threshold question the Discussion Paper notes that doubts
have been expressed as to the applicability of Article 9 to the New South Wales Parliament.
The balance of opinion, however, is that Article 9 is in force in New South Wales by operation of the
Imperial Acts Application Act
. This view is supported by the Solicitor General, the Crown Solicitor and by the Joint Select Committee on Parliamentary Privilege.
7.20 The two main areas of uncertainty in relation to the extent of the privilege provided by Article 9 are the scope and meaning
of the terms “proceedings in Parliament” and “ought not be impeached or questioned”.
The scope and meaning of the phrase “proceedings in Parliament”
7.21 The absolute privilege accorded at common law to parliamentary debates extends to statements made by witnesses giving evidence
before a committee of Parliament and also to publications incidental to the proceedings, such as the dictation and typing of a speech
delivered in Parliament.
The orthodox view is that the protection does not extend to re-publication by members of their speeches outside the House. In Canada,
however, the Court of Appeal of Ontario was prepared to take a broader view of “proceedings in Parliament” by characterising
a press release issued by a Minister and the dispatch of a telegram by the Prime Minister as part of proceedings in parliament.
Aylesworth JA said:
I venture also to express the view that the modern judicial concept of the meaning and application of the phrase “proceedings
in Parliament” is broader than had been the case in some instances in the past. If this be so, certainly there would appear
to be ample justification for it in the development of the complexities of modern government and in the development and employment
in government business of the greatly extended means of communication.
7.22 According to Aylesworth JA “all of the actions of the respondents complained about ... were no more and no less than the
legitimate and lawful discharge by the respondents of their duties in the course of parliamentary proceedings as Ministers of the
Crown and Members of the House.” In arriving at his decision His Honour relied on the Privy Council case of
AG Ceylon v de Livera
where Viscount Radcliffe said
The most, perhaps, that can be said is that, despite reluctance to treat a member’s privilege as going beyond anything that
is essential it is generally recognised that it is impossible to regard his only proper functions as a member as being confined to
what he does on the floor of the House itself.
7.23 Following
the Ontario High Court has held that it is part of the “proceedings in Parliament” to release to the media information
used in Parliament.
7.24 It has been suggested that a principle can be extracted from the Canadian cases: absolute privilege protects a member of Parliament
from liability for defamation for publishing a statement outside the House which releases information used in the House, but only
where the member’s action outside the House is an extension of the proceedings in the House. To amount to an “extension”
of proceedings in the House, the action outside the House must be necessary for the proper discharge of the Member’s duties.
7.25 Australian decisions on the meaning of “proceedings in Parliament” have been more cautious. In
ABC v Chatterton
Prior J found that a media interview in which a member of Parliament spoke on the subject of a question he had asked in the House
was not part of proceedings in Parliament. Prior J did contemplate that a statement made outside the House could be absolutely privileged,
but only if “it was so related to a proceeding in the House that it was itself a proceeding in the House”. Zelling ACJ
was more equivocal. He said that:
it is arguable but not certain that what was said by the appellant outside the House was covered by absolute privilege. Insofar as
he simply repeated what he said in the House, in my opinion, it was covered by privilege. The difficult question is whether it is
part of the proceedings of Parliament or of a Member to answer questions in this day and age on television.
7.26 In another case, the endorsement by a minister at a press conference of allegations earlier made by him against the plaintiff
in Parliament was held not to be part of “proceedings in Parliament” and consequently not entitled to absolute privilege.
7.27 Of course, if the statement outside of Parliament amounts only to “reporting” by the member of his or her prior statement
in Parliament, this will be protected by qualified privilege. The qualified privilege extends to a fair and accurate repetition of
the parliamentary statement, but not “embroidery” of it.
7.28 One further area where it has been suggested that absolute privilege could be extended is in respect of communications
members, especially representations from a member of Parliament to a Minister on behalf of constituents.
This matter has been considered by both the New South Wales Joint Select Committee on Parliamentary Privilege and the Commonwealth
Joint Committee on Parliamentary Privilege. Both the Commonwealth Committee and the New South Wales Attorney General’s Department
in its Discussion Paper on the recommendations of the New South Wales Joint Committee concluded that members writing to ministers
are adequately protected by the availability of the defence of qualified privilege. It was felt that intemperate or malicious letters
from constituents would not be discouraged if protected by absolute privilege. Furthermore there are alternatives to correspondence
which are available to members, which do attract absolute privilege.
7.29 The uncertain scope of the term “proceedings in Parliament” has prompted many calls for a clear definition of the
term. The Commonwealth
Parliamentary Privileges Act
defines the expression to include all words spoken and acts done in the course of, or for the purposes of or incidental to, the transacting
of the business of a House or of a committee.
7.30 The majority of submissions seeking to have the term defined have rejected this provision as a model, arguing that it is itself
open to interpretation. The Law Institute of Victoria recommends that the legislation adopt a definition which clearly states exactly
what activities are covered by the term “proceedings in Parliament:
Any definition of “proceedings in parliament” to be adopted should clearly state, for instance, whether or not the repetition
outside parliament of a statement made inside parliament is covered by the privilege and should do the same for all other activities
to which it is unclear whether the privilege applies.
7.31 The Law Council of Australia is in favour of strictly confining the defence to statements or other matter published during the
course of parliamentary proceedings, so that members of Parliament, in referring outside a chamber or committee of the Parliament
to matter published in the course of parliamentary proceedings, should be taken to be republishing in circumstances in which absolute
privilege is not available. The term should be defined, but the Council agrees with the Law Institute of Victoria that the definition
Parliamentary Privileges Act
(Cth) should not be adopted as it is itself open to significant interpretation.
7.32 By way of contrast, the Press Council submitted that a broad definition of the term should be adopted, one that includes such
matters as press releases and statements made in the precincts of Parliament.
7.33 The Committee on Defamation in England (the “Faulks Committee”) recommended that the definition proposed in the Second
Report of the Joint Committee on the Publication of Proceedings in Parliament
be adopted. The recommended definition is in the following terms:
(1) For the purpose of the defence of absolute privilege in an action or prosecution for defamation the expression “proceedings
in Parliament” shall without prejudice to the generality thereof include
(a) all things said done or written by a Member or by any officer or either House of Parliament or by any person ordered or authorised
to attend before such House, in or in the presence of such House and in the course of a sitting of such House, and for the purpose
of the business being or about to be transacted, wherever such sitting may be held and whether or not it be held in the presence
of strangers to such House: provided that for the purpose aforesaid the expression “House” shall be deemed to include
any Committee sub-Committee or other group or body of members and officers of either House of Parliament appointed by or with the
authority of such House for the purpose of carrying out any of the functions of or of representing such House; and
(b) all things said done or written between Members or between Members and officers of either House of Parliament or between Members
and Ministers of the Crown for the purpose of enabling any Member or any such officer to carry out his functions as such provided
that publication thereof be no wider than is reasonably necessary for that purpose.
(2) In this section “Member” means a Member of either House of Parliament; and “officer of either House of Parliament”
means any person not being a Member whose duties require him from time to time to participate in proceedings in Parliament as herein
7.34 The Faulks Committee further recommended that if it was considered desirable to narrow the definition of “officer of either
House of Parliament” still further so as to exclude any person who may in a general sense take part in proceedings in Parliament
(eg messengers, etc) but where the public interest does not require that they should receive absolute privilege, either of the following
additions might be made to the definition, namely:
(1) and who should in the opinion of the Court be entitled in the public interest to the same absolute privilege in relation to an
action or prosecution for defamation as a Member.
(2) and who is a Member of a class of person from time to time designated by the Lord Chancellor or by Mr Speaker for the purpose
of this section.
7.35 The Commission agrees that if a definition is to be adopted, it is preferable that it be an inclusive and exhaustive definition,
in order to ensure certainty. This is important not only for the parliamentarians themselves but also for those persons reporting
the proceedings.
Unfortunately the Commission is not convinced that certainty would in fact be achieved by such a provision.
7.36 The task of identifying each activity which should be covered by absolute privilege is fraught with problems and the Commission
is reluctant to recommend that such a course be adopted. Any definition risks being cumbersome and inflexible. A definition which
fails to predict all possible contingencies will result in piecemeal amendments each time an activity arises which had not been taken
into account, or to accommodate developments designed to assist parliamentary procedures and also to meet the public’s need
to be kept informed of government business. These developments may or may not be of a technological nature. For example, the use
of parliamentary committees is now considered an integral part of the parliamentary process and their use has increased as the work
of the House has grown. However, it has been suggested that the law of absolute privilege has not evolved in line with this development.
7.37 Any definition adopted must be precise in its terms. Litigation to resolve interpretative differences of statutory provisions
ostensibly clear on their face is all too familiar. The case of
Rajski v Carson
on the meaning of
Defamation Act
(NSW) is a clear example.
Furthermore, the submissions to the Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill highlighting uncertainties in relation to the current
Defamation Act
and consequential calls for clarification clearly demonstrate the sorts of problems that are likely to be experienced by legislative
drafters in attempting to define “proceedings in Parliament”.
7.38 This is the Commission’s tentative view. Submissions as to whether the term should be defined, and if so, the form and
content of the definition are welcomed.
Statutory provisions
7.39 Relevant federal legislation includes the
Parliamentary Papers Act
(Cth) and the
Parliamentary Proceedings Broadcasting Act
(Cth). The latter Act provides that no action or proceedings are to lie against any person for broadcasting or rebroadcasting any
part of the proceedings of either house of the Parliament or of a joint sitting.
7.40 In relation to the New South Wales Parliament, the
Defamation Act
, accords a defence of absolute privilege in respect of parliamentary papers published by order or under authority of either or both
Houses of Parliament and the subsequent publication of such a document by any person. A defence of absolute privilege is also provided
for the publication by the government printer of the debates and proceedings of either or both Houses of Parliament and the subsequent
publication of such a debate by any person.
7.41 Schedule 1 of the
Defamation Bill
provides a more comprehensive list of parliamentary papers attracting absolute privilege. The Schedule clarifies that proofs are
privileged until such time as the official version becomes available, and provides a defence of absolute privilege for audio recordings,
or transcripts of audio recordings, of the debates and proceedings of a house, a committee or a joint sitting or committee, while
the official version of those reports has not become available. In addition, absolute privilege is accorded to a report of an individual
complete speech of a member, provided the report is printed with the prescribed certificate. These provisions implement certain recommendations
of the Joint Select Committee on parliamentary privilege.
7.42 Witnesses called to give evidence before the Legislative Assembly or Council, or committees of either house or a joint committee
of both houses are accorded absolute privilege pursuant to
Parliamentary Evidence Act
The scope and meaning of “impeached or questioned in any court or place out of Parliament”
7.43 A clear understanding of this expression is of importance in determining the precise use which can be made in defamation proceedings
of statements made in Parliament.
7.44 In the strictest interpretation of this expression even the tender of Hansard in court without the consent of the House would
be a breach of the privileges of Parliament.
7.45 An intermediate line of authority, characterised by the approach taken by the court in
Uren v John Fairfax & Sons
and also in
Comalco v ABC
says that the phrase means that the words spoken in Parliament can be proved, but that they could not be the subject of any submission
or inference. In other words, a court cannot subject a member’s parliamentary speech to scrutiny to see whether inferences
can be drawn about the member’s truthfulness, bona fides, intentions or motives.
7.46 The other line of authority which has emerged more recently takes a very narrow view of the words used in Art 9. This approach
was adopted in
Hunt J held that on their true construction, the words used in Art 9 mean that:
no court proceedings (or proceedings of a similar nature) having legal consequences against a member of parliament (or a witness before
a parliamentary committee) are permitted which by those legal consequences have the effect of preventing that member (or committee
witness) exercising his freedom of speech in parliament (or before a committee) or of punishing him for having done so. In other
words, the phrase “impeached or questioned in any court or place out of parliament” in art 9 should be interpreted in
the sense that the exercise of the freedom of speech given members of parliament (and committee witnesses) may not be challenged
by way of court (or similar) process having legal consequences for such persons because they had exercised that freedom.
7.47 The case law makes it quite clear that statements made in Parliament are incapable of founding a cause of action in defamation.
However, it remains far from clear whether such statements can nevertheless be used collaterally in defamation proceedings for evidentiary
Church of Scientology of California v Johnson-Smith
the plaintiff brought an action for defamation in respect of a statement made by the defendant member of the British Parliament in
a television interview. The defendant pleaded fair comment. The plaintiff sought to defeat the defence by alleging malice and citing
as evidence a statement made by the defendant in the House of Commons. Browne J excluded the evidence of the proceedings in Parliament
on the basis that the scope of parliamentary privilege was not limited to the exclusion of any cause of action in respect of what
was said or done in the House itself but extended to the examination of proceedings in the House for the purpose of supporting a
cause of action, even though the cause of action itself arose out of something done outside the House.
7.49 By contrast, in
Wright & Anor v Lewis
the Full Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia decided that it was possible to examine the statement of the parliamentarian.
The case apparently follows Hunt J in
and his formulation of the object of Art 9 is approved (although the case can be distinguished on its own facts). In this case the
plaintiff was a parliamentarian who invoked the Article in an effort to strike out the particulars of the defence. The Court was
impressed by the manifest injustice to the defendant of the plaintiff succeeding and White J clearly said that the proposition that
courts will not subject a member’s parliamentary speech to scrutiny to see whether inferences can be drawn therefrom as to
the member’s truthfulness, bona fides, intentions or motives did not apply
where the member is a plaintiff
(emphasis added)
7.50 The position remains far from clear. As regards the Australian Parliament, the
Parliamentary Privileges Act
(Cth) applies.
Section 16(3)
of this Act provides that in proceedings in any court or tribunal, it is not lawful for evidence to be tendered or received, questions
asked or statements, submissions or comments made, concerning proceedings in Parliament, by way of, or for the purpose of:
(a) questioning or relying on the truth, motive, intention, or good faith of anything forming part of those proceedings in Parliament;
(b) otherwise questioning or establishing the credibility, motive, intention or good faith of any person; or
(c) drawing or inviting the drawing of, inferences or conclusions wholly or partly from anything forming part of those proceedings
in Parliament.
7.51 This provision was enacted primarily to avoid the consequences of the very narrow interpretation and reading down of Art 9 in
the judgments of Cantor J and Hunt J in
. According to Beaumont J this provision is in substance declaratory of the position in England and Australia before the enactment
of the Act.
7.52 The Commission raises this issue because it does concern defamation law and because it is desirable that the position be clarified.
However, the interpretation given to this expression has ramifications beyond the law of defamation and any legislative clarification
would need to be incorporated, not in the
Defamation Act
, but in a broader Act.
A separate Act dealing with parliamentary papers and proceedings?
7.53 One of the recommendations of the Joint Select Committee on parliamentary privilege was that the various provisions of the
Defamation Act
(NSW) relating to parliamentary proceedings together with the
Parliamentary Papers (Supplementary Provisions) Act
(NSW) and its various amending Acts should be repealed and their provisions, as amplified or modified by the Recommendations of the
Committee, be incorporated in a Parliamentary Papers and Proceedings Act.
7.54 The Discussion Paper prepared by the Attorney General’s Department says that the benefits derived from this recommendation
must be weighed against the utility of retaining all statutory provisions dealing with defamation within the one Act. It argues that
more people would resort to and rely on the
Defamation Act
than to any proposed
Parliamentary Privileges Act
, and that the needs of members could potentially be served by preparation of a handbook containing all legislative provisions relevant
to their activities as parliamentarians.
7.55 The Commission tends to prefer the view expressed by the Attorney General’s Department, but welcomes submissions in relation
to this proposal.
ARGUMENTS AGAINST EXTENDING ABSOLUTE PRIVELEGE
Abuse of absolute privilege
7.56 The principal argument against extending absolute privilege is the possibility that this privilege may be abused. Concerns are
most commonly expressed about the abuse of absolute privilege by parliamentarians. Serious and unjustified charges may be levelled
by parliamentarians against persons with no right of explanation, correction or reply. Even though the actual attack might not in
itself cause much damage, once reported by the media it could cause serious damage to those persons.
7.57 Insofar as statements made in judicial proceedings are concerned there do not appear to be major concerns, referable no doubt
to judicial control over the conduct of witnesses and proceedings generally. Additional safeguards against abuse do exist, for example,
if the privilege is grossly abused by counsel this may be grounds for disciplinary action against the legal practitioner.
7.58 In its 1979 report entitled
Unfair Publication: Defamation and privacy
, the ALRC noted a number of checks against the abuse of privilege. First and foremost the benefit of absolute privilege is reposed
in those who can be expected to exhibit a corresponding high sense of responsibility. If the beneficiary fails to exhibit the due
level of responsibility the ALRC concluded that this should be dealt with, not by abolishing absolute privilege, but by developing
processes within the institutions themselves. For instance abuse of privilege by parliamentarians would be most effectively contained
through tighter control by the presiding officer or the influence of the relevant committee of privileges.
7.59 In 1985 the New South Wales Joint Select Committee on Parliamentary Privilege recommended that Standing Committees of Privilege
of the Houses of Parliament should be established. In 1989 the Legislative Council did establish, by motion, a Parliamentary Privileges
Committee. There is no equivalent committee for the Legislative Assembly.
7.60 A submission to the New South Wales Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill suggested that a person attacked in Parliament
should have a right of reply, that right of reply to be incorporated into Hansard.
The only legislature in the Westminster system which currently provides such a right is the Australian Senate. This was introduced
in 1988. Under this procedure anyone can address his or her grievance about a statement made by a Senator to the President of the
Senate. If the President determines that the complaint is not frivolous or vexatious he or she will refer it to the Committee of
Privileges for report. The Committee is meant to consider the matter quickly, without any evaluation of the truthfulness of either
statement. If the Committee determines that it is an appropriate case, a reply approved by the complainant is formulated. The reply
might be tabled or, more commonly, incorporated into Hansard, and is itself protected by absolute privilege. The Secretary of the
Committee reports that both the aggrieved party and the Senators are pleased with this procedure. Initial concerns of the Committee
that it might be inundated by such requests have proved unfounded. Proceedings in the House are not unduly interrupted as the reply
is not read out.
7.61 The Commission welcomes submissions on whether such a procedure should be available in the New South Wales Parliament.
Availability of alternative defences
7.62 At common law there is much reluctance to extend absolute privilege because of its drastic consequences in terms of an individual’s
capacity to take action to protect their reputation. The legislature has extended the defence into areas where it has not been available
at common law. Submissions from various bodies have been received by the Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill and by the
Attorney General seeking to have absolute privilege accorded to their proceedings and procedures. Examples include the Australian
Securities Commission
and church organisations requesting absolute privilege in respect of church tribunals. Furthermore, it was noted above that suggestions
have been made in the past that correspondence between members and ministers should be absolutely privileged.
7.63 It is critical to bear in mind that in each of these instances a defence of qualified privilege will generally be available.
The existence of another form of protection which the correspondent can invoke (ie qualified privilege) is an additional reason for
confining the very substantial protection of absolute privilege to the narrow class which incontestably falls within the designated
Practical considerations
7.64 From an operational point of view it is considerably more convenient for a parliamentarian or body or tribunal to have his, her
or its procedures protected by absolute privilege. In this way the likelihood of an action for defamation being instituted is minimised.
In the absence of an express entitlement to absolute privilege, a parliamentarian or officer of a tribunal or public body will be
required to incur the inconvenience of ensuring that the circumstances of publication would support a defence of qualified privilege
in the event of a defamation action being commenced. To achieve the security and peace of mind afforded by the availability of a
defence of absolute privilege a parliamentarian or public body will be prepared to go to some lengths.
7.65 So, for example, instead of referring potentially defamatory correspondence from a constituent to the relevant minister, a member
of Parliament might raise the issues during question time in Parliament, or in a private member’s statement.
7.66 In a submission to the Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly indicated that parliamentary
committees, in the course of fulfilling their statutory functions, handle a large amount of correspondence. Rather than refer this
correspondence (which may or may not be absolutely privileged) to, say, the Ombudsman or the Independent Commission Against Corruption
(ICAC), the committees are prepared to hold formal hearings to ensure that the absolute privilege afforded to Hansard transcripts
of committee proceedings is obtained, even though they acknowledge that this is an overelaborate, expensive and inefficient means
of referring a simple matter, such as a letter received from a member of the public which contains potentially defamatory allegations,
to the ICAC or Ombudsman for comment and response.
7.67 The extension of absolute privilege is a more difficult issue in practice than it is in theory, and practical considerations
must be kept in mind.
ISSUES RAISED IN CHAPTER SEVEN: ABSOLUTE PRIVILEGE
1. What is the preferred mechanism for rectifying the present ad hoc arrangements for conferring absolute privilege on tribunals and
other bodies?
Should there be a consolidation of the provisions extending absolute privilege so that there is one single machinery whereby publications
in the course of the proceedings of an inquiry by any body established by an Act are absolutely privileged?
Alternatively, is it desirable to retain specific provisions conferring absolute privilege to nominated tribunals and bodies?
(i) If so, are there any tribunals or bodies that are not currently, but that should be covered by absolute privilege?
(ii) In particular, should the proceedings of local councils be absolutely privileged?
2. Should the law on absolute privilege as regards communications concerning matters of State be left to the common law or should
steps be taken to either abrogate, limit or otherwise codify this category of absolute privilege?
3. Should the term “proceedings in Parliament” be defined by statute? If yes:
(i) what matters should be encompassed by the expression?
(ii) should
Parliamentary Privileges Act
(Cth) or the definition proposed by the English Joint Committee on the Publication of Proceedings in Parliament be used as a model?
4. Should the provisions in the
Defamation Act
relating to parliamentary privilege be removed and incorporated into a separate
Parliamentary Papers and Proceedings Act
5. Should a person attacked in Parliament have a right of reply similar to that available in the Australian Senate?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Select bibliography
Table of contents
See for example
Trapp v Mackie
[1979] 1 All ER 489.
. These have been reproduced in Schedule 1 of the
Defamation Bill
, with minor amendments. For example, reference to the Commissioner of Complaints, the office of which has since been repealed, is
omitted. The Schedule refers to the Harness Racing Authority, the body replacing the Trotting Authority. Reference to the
Pricing Tribunal Act
Casino Control Act
have been dropped.
Defamation Act
, reproduced as clause 3 of Schedule 1 of the
Defamation Bill
. J C Gibson (ed)
Aspects of the Law of Defamation in New South Wales
(Young Lawyers Section, Law Society of NSW, Sydney, 1990) at 126-127.
. Young Lawyers (Law Society of NSW)
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992
(31 Jan 1992) at 11. This submission gives further examples.
. T K Tobin and M G Sexton
Australian Defamation Law and Practice
(looseleaf, Butterworths, Sydney 1991) at para [12,165].
. Indications that s 18 protection must be specifically conferred include the large proliferation of bodies specifically given protection
in s 17A-N. Furthermore, this would appear to be the attitude of the legislature. For example the
Mental Health Act
protection for proceedings of the Mental Health Review Tribunal but such protection is not available to the Psychosurgery Review
Board constituted under the same Act.
. The Police Board submitted to the Legislation Committee that the Board be given absolute privilege, but the Legislation Committee
expressed its disagreement.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
Scrutiny of the Legal Profession: Complaints Against Lawyers
(LRC 70, 1993), Recommendation 14. In this recommendation the Commission stated that s 17J should be made more specific to clarify
that complainants and respondent legal practitioners are absolutely immune from civil suit for “all communications made to
the officers of the agency responsible for the handling of complaints, for all communications made to the various disciplinary bodies
exercising direct or delegated statutory powers, and for all statements made within the disciplinary proceedings”.
. Starke J in
Gibbons v Duffell
[1932] HCA 26
(1932) 47 CLR 520.
. Australia. Law Reform Commission
Unfair Publication: Defamation and privacy
(Report 11, 1979) at 71.
. New South Wales. Legislation and Policy Division of the Attorney General’s Department
Discussion Paper on Parliamentary Privilege in New South Wales
. The Discussion Paper refers to the case of
Namoi Shire Council v Attorney General
(1980) 2 NSWLR 639
Holding v Jennings
[1979] VicRp 29
[1979] VR 289.
Roman Corp Ltd v Hudson’s Bay Oil and Gas Co Ltd
(1972) 23 DLR (3d) 292.
[1963] AC 103
Re Clark and Attorney General of Canada
(1977) 81 DLR (3d) 33.
. S Walker “Defamation and parliamentarians”
Communications Law Bulletin
(1986) 46 SASR 1.
. at 18-19.
Beitzel v Crabb
[1992] 2 VR 121.
. See for example Recommendation 17 of the NSW Joint Select Committee on Parliamentary Privilege. Also S Walker “Defamation
and parliamentarians” at 15.
Parliamentary Privileges Act
“Proceedings in Parliament” are defined for the purposes of the section. The section deals with parliamentary privilege
in court proceedings.
. Law Institute of Victoria
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(14 Feb 1992-first drafted March 1991) at 26-27.
. (1969-70) HL 109; HC 261.
. Great Britain. Committee on Defamation
Report of the Committee on Defamation
Cmnd 5909, March 1975 at 6 and Appendix X.
. The media may rely on the common law to obtain qualified privilege for the publication of a fair and accurate report of parliamentary
proceedings.
(1988) 15 NSWLR 84.
Defamation Act
gives a defence of absolute privilege for publications to or by the Legal Aid Commission if the publication is made for the purpose
of the execution or administration of the
Legal Aid Commission Act
. At first instance Hunt J held that the availability of the defence depends upon the purpose for which the publication was made
(in the sense of the result which the publisher sought to achieve) and is unaffected by the motive with which the publication was
made (in the sense of the reason why he seeks to achieve that result). By contrast, the Court of Appeal found the distinction made
by Hunt J between purpose and motive elusive and unsatisfactory. The Court (Mahoney JA dissenting) held that the defence is available
only where the clear and unassailable objective of the correspondent is “the execution or administration” of that Act:
where other purposes or objectives are shown to be arguable issues of fact the resolution of those issues must be left to be tried
by the jury. An application for special leave to appeal to the High Court was refused in April 1989 on the basis that the matter
was not in a proper form for it to be considered. However the High Court indicated that the construction of the provision was of
sufficient importance to justify the grant of special leave once the matter was brought before it in a proper way.
. For example, both the Speaker and the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly have queried whether correspondence handled by Parliamentary
Committees in the course of fulfilling their statutory functions is absolutely privileged under either s 17 or
Defamation Act
. Also the Ombudsman has submitted that
(and the equivalent provision in the Bill) should be clarified to confirm that the protection of absolute privilege extends to a
report of non-compliance under s 27 of the
Ombudsman Act
[1979] 2 NSWLR 287.
(1983) 50 ACTR 1.
(1986) 5 NSWLR 18.
. [1972] 1 QB 522.
. (1990) Aust. Torts Reports 67,859.
Amann Aviation Pty Ltd v Commonwealth of Australia
(1988) 81 ALR 710.
Clyne v NSW Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186.
. Law Council of Australia
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(30 Jan 1992-first drafted 27 Feb 1991) at 16.
. A consideration of the status of the ASC in terms of the law of privilege is beyond the purview of this review. The ASC regulates
companies on an Australia-wide basis whereas the Commission’s review is restricted to the operation of defamation law in NSW
Rajski v Carson and others
(1988) 15 NSWLR 84
at 93 (Ct App).
Discussion Paper 32 (1993) - Defamation
8. Protected Reports
History of this Reference (Digest)
8.1 Reports of certain official proceedings are given qualified privilege because of the public interest in full information on the
administration of public affairs. Under current legislation this privilege is forfeited only where the publication is not in good
faith for public information or the advancement of education.
8.2 The past few decades have been witness to an unprecedented scrutiny of, and involvement by, the general community in the processes
of government, and a corresponding increase in general demand for information on the administration of public affairs. The expanding
categories of protected report provided by the legislature reflects this general upsurge, and encourages the public’s right
to know and to be kept informed.
8.3 In determining whether reports of particular proceedings ought to be given protection, the status of the body in question, the
public concern in the matter reported, and the safeguards against abuse and irresponsibility are primary considerations.
8.4 Division 5 of the
Defamation Act
(NSW) provides an extensive defence for the publication of fair reports of proceedings of public concern. The defence is available
in respect of reports of proceedings specified in Schedule 2 cl 2, as well as to second-hand reports based on either the original
protected report or on an earlier report purporting to be a protected report. In the latter two cases the defence is only available
if the second-hand report is fair, whether a full report or summary, and if the derivative reporter has no knowledge that should
make him or her aware that the original report is unfair or not in fact a protected report at all.
8.5 The proceedings for which there is a defence for the publication of a fair protected report include: parliamentary proceedings
in any country,
proceedings of international organisations, proceedings of a court in any country or in an international court, public inquiries
in any country, disciplinary proceedings of an association with specified objects as well as proceedings of the Ombudsman, Privacy
Committee, Equal Opportunity Tribunal together with the proceedings of a number of other specific bodies, tribunals or committees.
8.6 These categories are reproduced with some amendments in Schedule 2 of the
Defamation Bill
1992 (NSW). The
Defamation Bill
extends the protection to reports of public proceedings of a local authority and to reports of proceedings at a general meeting of
a company, although exempt proprietary companies and foreign companies are specifically excluded. News Limited, in its submission
to the Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill, has pointed out that the activities of many such companies are frequently associated
with the activities of public companies. Such companies can thus be used to screen illegal activities associated with public companies.
News Limited suggests that the protection be extended where the activities of such private or foreign companies are associated with
or relevant to the activities of public companies. The English Report of the Committee on Defamation (the “Faulks Committee”)
recommended that the protection given to reports of public company proceedings be extended to reports of documents circulated to
shareholders. This is discussed in more detail below.
8.7 A further difference between the current Act and the Bill is that pursuant to the
Defamation Bill
, reports of proceedings under
Legal Profession Act
(NSW) are no longer protected. This omission should be remedied. Finally, alterations will be required to take account of the fact
Medical Practitioners Act
1938 was repealed on 1 July 1993 by the
Medical Practice Act
8.8 The Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill received a submission from the Press Council suggesting that reports of the Press
Council’s proceedings should be added to Schedule 2. This submission is in accordance with a further recommendation of the
Faulks Committee (see below).
8.9 To the extent that
Defamation Act
is not exhaustive, the common law continues to apply in New South Wales. However, it is doubtful whether the common law would extend
a defence of protected report to categories of report which have not already been given express statutory protection.
Protected official and public documents
Defamation Act
(cl 30 of the 1992 Bill) provides a defence for the publication of specified public documents and records or copies thereof, as well
as for the publication of a fair extract, abstract or summary of the document or record.
8.11 The specified documents and records include: parliamentary documents published in any country under authority of a parliamentary
body of that country; parliamentary debates and proceedings; court judgments; government documents open for public inspection; a
report of a decision in relation to a complaint made by the Bar Council, Law Society Council, Professional Conduct Review Panel or
Disciplinary Tribunal; and a report by a conciliation officer in respect of proceedings under the
Workers Compensation Act
. The current Act, but not the Bill also extends protection to a report made by the Medical Board, a Professional Standards Committee,
or the Medical Tribunal of its decision in respect of a complaint or inquiry.
8.12 As with protected reports, the defence will be defeated if the publication was not in good faith for public information or the
advancement of education.
The purpose of the publisher usually appears from the terms of the matter complained of and from the nature of the vehicle in which
it is published. The absence of good faith which the plaintiff must establish in order to defeat the defence of fair protected report
is not the same as express malice. In particular there is no absence of good faith if the defendant knows that what is reported is
in fact untrue.
Publication of court notices and official notices
Defamation Act
also provides a defence for the publication of a notice in accordance with the direction of a court of any country,
as well as for the publication of any notice or report in accordance with an official request.
An official request is defined in the Act to mean a request by an officer of the government, a council, board or other authority
or person constituted or appointed for public purposes under State, Territorial or Commonwealth legislation.
The protection afforded by this section applies in respect of the notice or report only. The person making the official request
receives no protection under the provision.
8.14 The defence in each case will be defeated if it can be shown that the publication was not in good faith for the purpose of giving
effect to the direction, or to the request, as the case might be.
8.15 A further defence is available in respect of a second-hand publication of the original notice or report (or fair extract, abstract
or summary of it), where the request sought publication to the public generally or to a section of the public and the notice or report
relates to a matter of public interest.
This defence will be defeated if it is shown that the publication was not in good faith for the information of the public.
8.15 There has been no judicial consideration of this provision. Accordingly no unintended or undesirable consequences of the provision
have surfaced requiring remedy.
Should the defence of protected report be extended or modified?
8.16 In England, the 1975 Report of the Committee on Defamation (the “Faulks Committee”) recommended the inclusion of
a number of additional categories of reports to the list of protected reports in the
Defamation Act
1952 (UK). Examples of the additional categories of report proposed by the Committee, which have no equivalent in our Act, include:
A fair and accurate report of a press conference convened to inform the press or other media of a matter of public concern (including
a fair and accurate report of any document circulated at the press conference).
A fair and accurate report of any report or other document circulated to shareholders by the board of directors of public companies,
including fair and accurate reports of any documents circulated to shareholders concerning the appointment, resignation, retirement,
or dismissal of directors as well as auditors’ reports.
A fair and accurate report of the findings or decision of an association formed for the purpose of promoting a charitable object or
other objects beneficial to the community.
A fair and accurate report of any adjudication, official report, statement, or notice issued by various miscellaneous bodies such
as the Panel on Take-overs and Mergers, the Council of the Stock Exchange, the Press Council, the BBC Complaints Committee, the IBA
Broadcasting Panel and the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration.
8.17 The Faulks Committee also recommended that the publication by a credit bureau or agency to its subscribers of matter issued in
the ordinary course of the business of the agency should be protected by qualified privilege.
8.18 It has been recommended elsewhere that there should be a fair report defence for “attributed statements” generally.
Under this proposal a defence of protected report would be available in respect of reports of statements made by other persons under
certain conditions: the reported material must be an attributed statement; the allegation must relate to a topic of public interest;
the statement must be reported fairly accurately and reasonably contemporaneously; the author of the original statement or comment
must be named; the publication of the matter should be reasonable, having regard to the nature of the circumstances surrounding the
making of the statement; the attributed statement should be published without any adoption of the substance of the report; and, with
the exception of reports of statements made in the course of court proceedings, the person affected must be given the opportunity
8.19 The ALRC recommended that this right of reply be introduced as an element of the defence of protected report generally, so that
an opportunity for reply would also be required in respect of the reports contained in the statutory list.
The rationale of the defence [of protected report] is public information; but the public is better informed by having both sides of
the story than one.
8.20 This is the position in England and Ireland. The provisions of the defamation legislation in these jurisdictions relating to
protected reports comprise those matters privileged
explanation or contradiction (such as reports of proceedings of a public inquiry before a body or person appointed by the Government
or legislature, proceedings of an international organisation, copies or extracts of documents open to inspection by the public) and
those privileged
to explanation or contradiction.
8.21 The Commission invites submissions concerning the desirability of incorporating any of the suggestions noted above, or indeed
whether any other proceedings should be covered. Submissions on any aspect of the law of protected reports are welcomed by the Commission.
ISSUES RAISED IN CHAPTER EIGHT: PROTECTED REPORTS
1. The Commission invites submissions generally concerning the form and content of the protected report provisions; and in particular
wishes to receive comments as to whether the protection provided by these provisions should be extended to:
(i) reports of proceedings at a meeting of private or exempt companies where the activities of these companies are associated with,
or relevant to, the activities of public companies;
(ii) attributed statements;
(iii) reports of any other proceedings with particular reference to those types of proceedings and documents identified by the Faulks
Committee as meriting privilege.
2. Whether some or all of these proceedings should be protected subject to a right of reply.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Defamation Act
. Reports of proceedings of meetings of the federal houses of Parliament and their committees are
privileged pursuant to
Parliamentary Privileges Act
. Great Britain. Committee on Defamation (Chaired by the Hon Mr Justice Faulks)
Report of the Committee on Defamation
Cmnd 5909, 1975.
. At common law the defence of protected report will be defeated if the report is made with malice or if the report is not a fair
and accurate report.
Waterhouse v Broadcasting Station 2GB Pty Ltd
(1985) 1 NSWLR 59
per Hunt J.
Defamation Act
See also the
Defamation Bill
1992 cl 32.
Defamation Act
See also the
Defamation Bill
1992 cl 33.
Defamation Act
See also the
Defamation Bill
1992 cl 33(6).
Defamation Act
See also the
Defamation Bill
1992 cl 33(3).
Defamation Act
See also the
Defamation Bill
1992 cl 33(4).
. Australia. Law Reform Commission
Unfair Publication: Defamation and privacy
(Report 11, 1979) at 92.
. ALRC Report 11 at 94. The ALRC proposed two exceptions to this general rule that a reply be afforded: allegations made in court
proceedings and imputations against deceased persons.
Discussion Paper 32 (1993) - Defamation
9. Statutory Qualified Priviledge
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
9.1 Qualified privilege is a defence for defamatory statements made without ill-will or improper motive. At common law it is available
if the statement is made in the performance of any legal, moral or social duty, or in the pursuit of an interest, to a person having
a corresponding duty or interest to receive it.
9.2 In New South Wales an important extension of the common law is made by
Defamation Act
. In Queensland and Tasmania the common law defence has been replaced by the codified defence of qualified protection. In all other
Australian jurisdictions only the common law defence is available.
9.3 Debate over qualified privilege has concentrated on the question of whether it should be available to the mass media. A media
defendant, such as a newspaper, rarely can use the common law defence, due to the lack of the necessary duty / interest relationship
between the publisher and its readers. The media thus look to the statutory forms of qualified privilege to broaden the protection
9.4 The Commission does not propose to examine the common law defence.
The issues raised are the current operation of
; various proposals which have been made for changing the defence, or creating a new one; and the special position of a journalist’s
confidential sources. A particular proposal for simplifying the defence (and in fact the whole law of defamation) also will be examined
in this context.
The current position in New South Wales
Defamation Act
(NSW) provides:
Where, in respect of matter published to any person:
(a) the recipient has an interest or apparent interest in having information on some subject;
(b) the matter is published to the recipient in the course of giving to him information on that subject; and
(c) the conduct of the publisher in publishing that matter is reasonable in the circumstances,
there is a defence of qualified privilege for that publication.
For the purposes of subsection (1), a person has an apparent interest in having information on some subject if, but only if, at the
time of the publication in question, the publisher believes on reasonable grounds that that person has that interest.
Where matter is published for reward in circumstances in which there would be a qualified privilege under subsection (1) for the publication
were it not for reward, there is a defence of qualified privilege for that publication notwithstanding that it is for reward.
has been seen as potentially vital for the media and investigative journalism in particular. It could allow consideration to be taken
of the public interest in the free flow of information and the exposure of wrongdoing.
However, attempts by media defendants to rely on the defence have rarely been successful.
9.7 If a policy decision is made to make qualified privilege more generally available to the mass media, this could be done either
by revamping
, or creating a new specific media defence. Before examining these options, the purpose of
and its current operation should be examined.
The purpose of
9.8 Despite the potential of
to protect media defendants, it was not designed for that purpose. It was created following the 1971 Report of the New South Wales
Law Reform Commission on
The Commission was concerned then at the artificiality of the duty/interest requirement of the common law. This was replaced with
the test of the reasonableness of the defendant’s conduct in publishing. The context in which the new defence was discussed
was that of persons considering whether to enter into a relationship, such as one party extending credit to another, or hiring another
as an employee. The specific examples given of bodies which should be able to use the defence were mercantile agencies and credit
reference bureaux.
9.9 It seems that the Commission at that time was more concerned with facilitating the operation of business enterprises than protecting
the mass media.
was in fact designed to provide the same protection as was available under s 17 (d) and (e) of the
Defamation Act
1958 (NSW).
However, the way s 22 was drafted means that it operates quite differently in practice (see paragraphs 9.31-9.34 below).
How can media defendants gain the protection of s 22?
9.11 The common criticism by media defendants of s 22 is that it has been interpreted in such a way as to make it impossible for them
to satisfy. In particular, the requirement that conduct in publishing be “reasonable” (s 22(1)(c)) is said to have been
too narrowly interpreted. Various cases are said to have placed undue emphasis on whether or not the published statements can be
proved true (which should only be required for the defence of justification), and whether the defendant believed they were true when
they were published.
Propositions relevant to the requirement of “reasonable conduct” under s 22(1)(c)
9.12 The most complete formulation of the relevant principles under s 22 (1)(c) was laid down by Hunt A-JA (with whom Samuels JA agreed)
Morgan v John Fairfax & Sons Ltd [No 2]
These may be summarised as follows:
(1) The defendant must establish that its conduct was reasonable in the circumstances in relation to each imputation found in fact
to have been conveyed by the matter complained of. (The more serious the imputation, the greater the obligation on the defendant
to ensure its conduct was reasonable).
(2) If the defendant intended to convey any imputation so conveyed, the defendant must establish that it believed in the truth of
that imputation (except in certain circumstances - see paragraphs 9.14-9.16 below).
(3) If the defendant did not intend to convey any imputation so conveyed, the defendant must establish:
(a) that it believed in the truth of each imputation it did intend to convey (except in the same circumstances); and
(b) that its conduct was nevertheless reasonable in relation to each imputation it did not intend to convey but which was in fact
(4) The defendant must also establish:
(a) that before publishing the matter complained of, the defendant exercised reasonable care to ensure it got its conclusions right,
(where appropriate) by making proper enquiries and checking on the accuracy of its sources;
(b) that the defendant’s conclusions followed logically, fairly and reasonably from the information it had obtained;
(c) that the manner and extent of publication did not exceed what was reasonably required in the circumstances; and
(d) that each imputation intended to be conveyed was relevant to the subject about which the defendant is giving information to its
These propositions were not intended to be exhaustive.
The requirement of belief in truth
9.13 It can be seen that the defendant need not show a belief in the truth of every imputation conveyed - only those it intended to
convey. This belief must be “honest”, that is, the defendant must actually hold the belief; it need not be “reasonable”,
that is, based on reasonable grounds. (However the defendant’s
conduct in publishing
must always be reasonable, and the existence of reasonable grounds for the
is relevant in assessing whether the
was reasonable).
9.14 There are even two identified exceptions to the requirement that the defendant honestly believe in the imputations it intended
to convey. These were identified in two recent cases.
Barbaro v ATV
a film was produced by another company to be included in the defendant’s telecast. The Court of Appeal held that television
can show events as they happen and so act as a primary source. Viewers can thus assess for themselves the imputations conveyed, and
the defendant need not show it honestly believed in their truth in order for its conduct in publishing to be reasonable. This can
be contrasted to print media articles, which may refer to but do not establish their sources.
Collins v Ryan
, an interlocutory decision of Hunt J, the requirement of belief in the truth was discussed in the context of letters to the editor
published by a newspaper defendant. Where such letters contain statements of opinion, the defence of comment of a stranger will normally
apply. Where they contain statements of fact, however, the defence of comment is unavailable. Hunt J held that it was arguably reasonable
for the defendant to provide a forum in which members of the public may not only express their opinions, but also express and debate
factual issues, even where the publisher does not honestly believe in the truth of the facts asserted.
Should these requirements be relaxed?
9.17 In practice s 22 acts to encourage journalists to make proper and careful inquiries. It will not be available if the journalist
is careless and does not check the accuracy of sources. Examples of matters which could be relevant were listed in the 1971 Report
of this Commission.
They all emphasise the care taken by the publisher to ensure the recipient is not misled, either as to the facts or as to the reliability
of the publisher’s opinions.
9.18 Several commentators have argued that other factors should be expressly considered when assessing whether the defendant’s
conduct was reasonable in the circumstances. The aim would be to lessen the perceived emphasis on proof of truth (and belief in truth).
These other factors could include: the extent of the public interest in the matter published;
the status of the plaintiff as a person holding important public office;
and the journalists’ adherence to his or her professional code of ethics.
9.19 These could be expressly listed in the legislation, although they would only remain matters to be considered in the court’s
discretion.
PROPOSALS FOR A SPECIFIC MEDIA DEFENCE
9.20 The alternative to revamping s 22 to make it more easily available to the mass media is to create a specific media defence. Various
attempts have been made to formulate such a defence.
The Defamation Bills 1991
9.21 The Bills introduced into the Parliaments of Victoria and Queensland (and tabled in the ACT) in 1991 would have made an equivalent
of s 22 available in those other jurisdictions (cl 27).
9.22 The Bills also contained an additional defence, contained in cl 25. It was designed to extend qualified privilege to the media.
The New South Wales Legislation Committee which examined the Bill concluded that this defence would cause confusion, would need significant
redrafting, would not extend protection much beyond what is available under s 22, and should be abandoned.
The recommendations of the Legislation Committee
9.23 The Legislation Committee favoured retaining the common law defence of qualified privilege, and the defence under s 22. It also
proposed an additional defence, as follows:
The Committee also believes that in matters of sufficient public importance, the defence of qualified privilege should also be available
without the requirement of good faith, provided that it was in the course of, or for the purposes of, the discussion of some subject
of public interest, the public discussion of which is for the public benefit.
This defence is based on s 17(h) of the
Defamation Act
1958 (NSW). Section 17 of that Act listed a number of situations where “qualified protection” was to be available, replacing
the common law defence. These provisions were similar to those now in operation in Queensland and Tasmania.
Problems with “qualified protection” under the Defamation Act 1958 (NSW)
9.24 The qualified protection provisions of the 1958 Act were heavily criticised by this Commission in the 1971 Report. The Commission
noted that the structure of the section made it difficult to separate various matters: those going to the existence of an occasion
of privilege; those going to the nature of the imputations protected on such an occasion; and those showing lack of good faith and
so destroying the protection. (Lack of “good faith” replaced the concept of “malice”, which defeats the common
law defence). The section relied on various fine and unworkable distinctions, such as that between “motive” (as an element
of good faith) and “purpose” (as a matter relevant to the existence of an occasion of qualified protection. For example,
under s 17(h) the defendant’s purpose had to be “the discussion of some subject of public interest”). The Commission
concluded that the common law defence was more straightforward and more flexible than this list of protected situations.
9.25 Section 17(h) of the 1958 Act was singled out for particular criticism. In its original form it included a confusing reference
to comment, which is a separate defence. The Commission went on to say:
Section 17(h) has been the source of great difficulty and many of its problems remain unresolved. But we think that, at least in the
context it would have in the proposed Bill, a provision along the lines of s 17(h) would give too extensive a privilege.
Under the Bill, defences of truth are more widely available, a much greater range of reports may be published with impunity, provision
is made for escape from liability in the case of “innocent” publication, and exemplary damages are abolished. In this
context, a man having no other defence should not, we think, be given a defence by reference merely to the tests of good faith, public
interest and public benefit under s 17(h).
9.26 The Commission went on to reject a qualified privilege defence intended specifically for newspapers which had been proposed to
the Shawcross Committee in England in 1965.
The policy decision which must be made now by the Commission is whether the circumstances have changed so much since 1971 as to necessitate
designing a specific defence for the mass media.
Assessment of the New South Wales Legislation Committee’s proposed defence
9.27 The defence proposed by the Legislation Committee is based on the old s 17(h), but makes one important change - it drops the
requirement of good faith. This is replaced with the somewhat nebulous concept of “public importance”, which determines
those “matters” which attract the protection of the defence. When added to the concepts of “public interest”
and “public benefit” (not to mention “public discussion”) which are already part of the defence, this fails
to promote clarity. The proliferation of such terms was lamented by this Commission in 1971.
9.28 In addition, dropping the requirement of “good faith” would make the defence very extensive indeed. In fact, it would
not be a “qualified” privilege. At common law the concept of malice is vital since it distinguishes qualified privilege
from absolute privilege. The concept of malice would have to feature in some form in any proposed statutory qualified privilege defence
for the media.
9.29 The Legislation Committee may have intended to avoid the problem raised by the defence in cl 25 of the Bill, which would have
the concept of “good faith” to that of malice.
A better defence for the media
9.30 If a specific media defence is desirable, it may be preferable to base it on s 17(e) of the
Defamation Act
1958 (NSW), rather than s 17(h).
9.31 Section 17(e) read:
17. It is a lawful excuse for the publication of defamatory matter if the publication is made in good faith -
(e) for the purpose of giving information to the person to whom it is made with respect to some subject as to which that person has,
or is believed, on reasonable grounds, by the person making the publication to have, such an interest in knowing the truth as to
make his conduct in making the publication reasonable under the circumstances.
9.32 The requirement of “good faith” was defined in the 1958 Act. This could be replaced with a provision that the defence
is defeasible if malice is shown, as at common law. Spelling out a definition of “good faith” was argued to contain too
great a risk of injustice in the 1971 Report of this Commission.
9.33 It can be seen that the reasonableness of the defendant’s conduct depends on the extent of the recipient’s interest
in the truth. No inquiry is made into the circumstances of the publication, and no inquiry is made into the defendant’s belief
in the truth of what was published. (Note that lack of belief in truth will generally negative good faith, or show malice; but the
onus is on the plaintiff to show malice).
9.34 Section 22 actually was intended to provide the same protection as that available under the old s 17(e) (and s 17(d)). However,
because of the requirement under s 22 that the defendant’s conduct in publishing must be “reasonable in the circumstances”,
all circumstances of the publication must be considered. Reasonableness does not depend solely on the extent of the recipient’s
interest in knowing the truth. Thus, s 22 does not provide the same protection as the old s 17(e).
Benefits of a defence based on s 17(e)
Extends protection to the media.
This defence should be quite easy for the media to use, as was shown in
Calwell v Ipec Australia Ltd
In that case the defence was established even though neither party called any oral evidence in chief. In particular, neither the
author of the article nor anyone else on behalf of the defendant was called to give evidence of his belief in the truth of what had
been published. It was held that the issues to be considered are:
(i) the purpose of the publication;
(ii) its subject matter;
(iii) the interest of the public in knowing the truth; and
(iv) the relevance of the imputations concerning the plaintiff to the subject about which the defendant was giving information to
the public.
9.36 Such a defence would recognise that there are occasions where it is in the public interest for certain information to be revealed,
but the media defendant is unable or unwilling to prove the truth of that information. It allows the media to perform their socially
desired and useful role of promoting debate on matters of public interest. The defence also recognises that in practice the media
cannot always establish the truth of information in the same way that a court does; and it recognises that courts cannot always establish
the absolute truth (in a philosophical sense) anyway.
Protection of sources.
One of the most common complaints levelled at the current s 22 is that a media defendant almost always must reveal the sources of
its information at trial in order to establish the defence. This is because the likelihood of the truth of the information and the
defendant’s belief in its truth are relevant matters when deciding whether the defence is made out, as discussed above.
9.38 By contrast, under the old s 17(e) belief in truth does not have to be shown to establish the elements of the defence. These
elements can be established at trial without the journalist having to give evidence or reveal sources. Once they are established,
the onus passes to the plaintiff to defeat the defence by showing lack of good faith. If evidence of this is produced, the defendant
can then choose whether to reveal its sources.
Problems of a defence based on s 17(e)
Encouragement of media carelessness.
As discussed above, the current s 22 places a strong emphasis on the care taken by the publisher to ensure the information and conclusions
are accurate. Less emphasis is placed on this by s 17(e), because the reasonableness of the defendant’s conduct does not depend
on all the circumstances, but only on the extent of the public’s interest in knowing the truth.
9.40 This does not seem to make good sense, because it means that the more the public craves information about a particular issue,
the less care the media need to take in giving them that information.
9.41 This concern could be allayed by adding a requirement of “reasonable care” to the elements of the defence. The requirement
would have to be carefully framed to avoid reintroducing the same “reasonable conduct in the circumstances” test of the
current s 22. Such a requirement also could mean that sources would have to be identified, at least in a general way. Alternatively,
it would be open to the plaintiff to argue that failure to make reasonable inquiries is evidence of malice (or lack of good faith).
Too extensive a privilege?
A defence based on s 17(e) may protect the publication of false and defamatory statements, denying redress to plaintiffs who cannot
produce evidence of lack of good faith.
Should a defence based on s 17(e) be linked to a reply?
9.43 As discussed above in Chapter 2,
it may be appropriate to require a media defendant to offer a reply to persons allegedly defamed in order for this defence to succeed.
This is because the defence should be relatively easy to establish, and difficult for plaintiffs to defeat by finding evidence of
malice (or lack of good faith).
9.44 This defence is based on the extent of the public interest in the matter published. It may be appropriate therefore for a reply
to be available to protect individuals, and to increase the flow of information to the public.
There are three ways this could be done. One is to make offering an opportunity to reply, within a strict time limit (say one week)
of one being requested or service of a statement of claim, a condition for the success of the defence (which then bars damages).
The second is to provide that offering a reply is not a condition for the success of the defence but is only evidence of good faith.
The third is to award an opportunity to reply as a final remedy to the plaintiff in cases where this defence succeeds; this means
the media qualified privilege defence would be a “partial” one, in that it does not bar all remedies to the plaintiff.
Option 1 - Offering reply to be an element of media qualified privilege defence.
The advantage of this option is that it quickly puts both sides of the debate before the public. It allows plaintiffs to clarify
the position and contain any unjustified damage to their reputations. If the plaintiff rejects the defendant’s offer, the plaintiff
will lose at trial (provided that the other elements of the defence are made out).
9.46 Defendants should not be obliged to publish unreasonable replies. Guidelines should be provided as to what is reasonable: the
reply should appear in the same part of the newspaper or broadcast as the original defamatory matter, be moderate in tone and length,
and not expose the defendant to suit by third parties. Other suggestions are that the reply should be limited to facts and be restricted
solely to the defamatory imputations arising. This should avoid a possible problem for media defendants, in that a reply thought
to be too long or irrelevant may later be held reasonable, and so a hurried decision not to publish it will deny the defence.
Option 2 - Offering reply to be evidence of good faith.
It may be impractical for the media to afford an opportunity to reply to all who complain that a story has defamed them. Given this,
it may be thought undesirable to make the defence conditional on offering a reply. An alternative is to provide that offering a reply
is evidence of good faith (and vice versa).
Option 3 - Reply to be final relief where media qualified privilege made out.
The advantage of this approach is that a plaintiff still gains some relief if the defence is established, and that the free flow
of information is promoted. The defendant would not be forced to publish a reply under pressure in order to use the defence.
9.49 The problem with having the reply as final relief is that it will not be published until after trial of the action, which may
simply rake up old accusations. If it appears that the defence will succeed, though, the action may be settled on terms that a reply
be published.
9.50 Another disadvantage is that the court will have to play an active role in drafting the reply, assessing the impact of the original
defamatory material, and deciding what reply would be appropriate for the particular publication. Under Options 1 and 2, the content
and form of the reply will largely be negotiated between the parties, relying on the guidelines provided. The court will only have
to assess the merits of particular suggested replies if agreement cannot be reached and the case comes to trial.
9.51 Both of Options 2 and 3 were used in the defence contained in cl 25 of the
Defamation Bill
1991. Offering a reply was evidence of good faith (cl 25(2)). If the defence succeeded - and the court decided that the statement
was false - it could order the defendant to publish a reply approved by the court (or a mediator appointed by the court) (cl 25(4)).
THE PROTECTION OF JOURNALISTS' SOURCES
9.52 Discussion of statutory qualified privilege raises the question of whether specific protection should be given to journalists’
sources. Attempts by the media to rely on s 22 have usually created a dilemma: should journalists reveal the sources of their information
at trial in order to show that publication was reasonable? Or should journalists adhere to their professional code of ethics, which
states that “In all circumstances they shall respect all confidences received in the course of their calling”?
9.53 Additional conflicts have arisen in the context of whether the media can be forced to reveal sources before trial. The “newspaper
rule” is a discretionary rule of practice which states that the media will not be required to reveal their sources in pre-trial
interrogatories or discovery of documents, unless it is necessary in the interests of justice. However, it has been held not to protect
against preliminary discovery aimed at revealing the identity of the source so that the plaintiff could sue it (rather than suing
the media). This was in a case where the media defendant might well have succeeded on the defence of statutory qualified privilege,
which meant that the plaintiff would be denied an effective remedy against the media defendant. In those circumstances, the defendant
had to abandon the defence of statutory qualified privilege to have the order for preliminary discovery set aside.
The wider issues raised by the question of protecting journalists’ sources
9.54 Arguments for the protection of journalists’ sources are based on promotion of the free flow of information and the public’s
“right to know”. The media’s important role in this process would be compromised if the sources of that information
were not allowed to remain confidential. Information would be less forthcoming, and the public interest would not be served.
9.55 In effect, arguments for “shield laws” to protect journalists from compulsion to disclose sources are seeking a form
professional privilege
. It can be distinguished from other forms of privilege, such as that between lawyers and clients, because it seeks to protect not
the content of the information (which usually already has been published) but its source.
9.56 This complex and difficult issue really relates to the laws of evidence and contempt. The Commission is reviewing what changes
may be desirable to practice and procedure in the law of defamation. In this context, it would be inappropriate to embark on a review
of evidence law (and privileged communications in particular) and contempt of court.
9.57 Extensive work is being done on protection of sources by other bodies. The Western Australia Law Reform Commission (WALRC) has
recently released a Report on Professional Privilege for Confidential Communications, focussing mainly on journalists’ privilege.
In New South Wales, the State Opposition has recently released a Discussion Paper which effectively endorses the recommendations
of the WALRC.
In May 1993, the Federal Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs received a reference on Rights and Obligations
of the Media, requiring an examination of (among other things) “the need for journalists to protect the identity of their sources
of information”. Several proposals have been put to the governments of Queensland
and South Australia.
Specific examination of such an important issue is clearly preferable to an incidental look at it in the course of reviewing defamation
9.58 However, it is necessary to examine the question of protection of sources when any proposals concerning statutory qualified privilege
are discussed. Difficulties arise in two contexts: before trial and at trial.
Protecting sources before trial when statutory qualified privilege is raised
9.59 If statutory qualified privilege becomes more widely available to the media, it seems likely that there will be more preliminary
discovery applications seeking the identity of sources. This is because there will be more cases where the defendant “might
well succeed” on the defence, and so more cases where the media defendant will be in a better position than the source to defend
the action. Thus more plaintiffs will seek to commence defamation proceedings against the source rather than the media defendant.
As has happened in the United States, an expansion of qualified privilege may result in an erosion of the protection of sources.
This issue must be carefully considered when assessing any proposals for relaxing the requirements of s 22 or introducing a new media
Protecting sources at trial
Under the current s 22
9.60 In most cases a media defendant will have to reveal its sources at trial in order for the defence under s 22 to succeed. It will
be difficult for the defendant to show that its conduct in publishing was reasonable in the circumstances without revealing the nature
and source of its information. Even if this can be done, disclosure of the source still may be ordered, because it may be otherwise
impossible for the plaintiff to produce evidence of malice in order to rebut the defence.
9.61 Sources also may have to be revealed where the plaintiff seeks only a judicial declaration, under the remedial regime discussed
in Chapter 2. In such an action the qualified privilege defences are not available. However, if the source is not revealed, a declaration
that the defendant has not been able to substantiate the relevant imputation is likely, if not a declaration that it is false.
9.62 It is thus open to a media defendant to preserve the confidentiality of its sources by, in effect, making itself more vulnerable
in a defamation action. The difficulty is finding a way of making a defence such as s 22 available while still preserving the confidentiality
of sources.
9.63 It may be possible to give judges various options when considering claims for the protection of sources. The WALRC has recommended
that judges be given a discretion to excuse witnesses from answering questions or producing documents in judicial proceedings, where
this would involve a breach of confidence between the witness and a confidant.
The proposed discretion is specifically extended to questions seeking the identity of sources. The court is required to weigh the
public interest in having the evidence before the court against the public interest in preserving confidences between persons in
the relative positions of the witness and the confidant, and in the encouragement of the free flow of information between such persons.
9.64 The court must consider the following matters:
(a) the likely significance of the evidence to the matters in dispute;
(b) the nature of the confidence and the relationship between the witness and the confidant;
(c) the effect of disclosure on any person and the community, taking into account the ethical, moral or religious dictates of certain
professions which demand non-disclosure; and
(d) any means available to the court to limit the adverse consequences of disclosure, and any alternative means of proving relevant
The scope of this discretionary protection is not restricted to journalists’ sources but extends to other professions and vocations.
However, it can be seen that the journalists’ ethical obligation not to disclose sources is a relevant factor.
9.65 Courts have a number of options available to ensure that disclosure is necessary (because the evidence is centrally relevant
and cannot be obtained in any other way), and to limit the adverse consequences of disclosure. A number of these have been discussed
in the United States, where disclosure of sources is usually required in order to give the plaintiff some chance of proving actual
malice under the public figure test (see Chapter 10). Some American states have enacted shield laws to protect sources; in those
which have not, a complex body of case law governing the court’s discretion has developed. When disclosure is requested, options
for the judge include:
(i) deferring the question of confidentiality to assess relevancy;
(ii) requiring all non-confidential sources to be examined first;
(iii) inspecting the journalist’s notes
(iv) ordering limited disclosure only to counsel;
(v) ordering a closed court while the source is revealed; and
(vi) making a suppression order to ensure that the identity of the source is disclosed only to the court and the parties.
9.66 One United States case held that in appropriate circumstances, disclosure of the source will not be required, but that as a consequence
the court may draw the inference that no source existed.
As discussed above, in many cases in New South Wales, it would be very difficult to establish a defence under s 22 if it was assumed
that no source existed.
Under the proposed defence based on s 17(e) of the Defamation Act 1958 (NSW)
9.67 As discussed above, it would not usually be necessary for the media defendant to disclose its sources in order to make out the
elements of this defence. If a plaintiff raised a
prima facie
case of malice (or lack of good faith) which threatened to defeat the defence, the defendant would have the option of revealing its
sources in order to show it did not act with malice.
9.68 The Commission is attracted to the idea of a structured discretion along the lines suggested by the WALRC. Such a discretionary
power in the judge, to decide whether disclosure of confidential information is required, would offer some encouragement for the
free flow of information in the public interest, while ensuring that justice is done as between plaintiff and defendant. Of course,
it is a large question whether such a power should be granted at all. The terms and extent of the power raise equally complex issues.
BASING THE LAW OF DEFAMATION ON NEGLIGENCE
9.69 In oral evidence and written submissions to the New South Wales Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992, Mr Stuart
Littlemore advanced a proposal for simplifying statutory qualified privilege and in fact the whole law of defamation.
This proposal was extensively discussed in other evidence and submissions to the Committee, which concluded:
The Committee is concerned that there may be unperceived consequences of Mr Littlemore’s proposal; the Committee is not in a
position to predict what they might be. However, the Committee is of the view that the proposals are worthy of consideration and
recommends that the Law Reform Commission examine ways by which the law of defamation could be simplified.
The proposal
9.70 Mr Littlemore argued that defences to defamation are extremely complicated. Most members of the community may understand truth
and public interest, and comment, but qualified privilege could be simplified to the
Donoghue v Stevenson
standard of a failure to exercise a duty of care.
9.71 Mr Littlemore proposed that one of two approaches could be taken. One would treat defamation law as involving both intentional
and unintentional torts. It would involve these elements:
1. Intentional defamations would be defined as those publications made with the intention of imputing a defamatory act or condition
to a person.
2. The sole defence to intentional defamation would be
. This would embrace the following defences under the current law:
absolute privilege;
fair and accurate reports of absolutely privileged occasions;
truth and public interest;
fair comment on an appropriate factual basis; and
statutory privileges (reports to/by the Ombudsman, etc).
3. Unintentional defamations would be defined as those where the publisher asserts that it did not intend to make the or any defamatory
imputation.
4. The sole defence to unintentional defamation would be
. This defence would be defined as non-negligent publication. In the case of a mass media defendant, “negligence” would
include breach of the industry code (whether enacted or not) as the equivalent of statutory breach.
5. The remedy awarded would be damages, which would be aggravated by the following factors:
intentional defamation;
failure to apologise / correct / retract at the first opportunity; and
malicious publication.
9.72 The second approach would not distinguish between intentional and unintentional defamations. Defendants would be given a choice
of defences. This alternative structure would be as follows:
A single category of defamation.
Defence of privilege.
Further defence of due care.
Damages (aggravated by failure to apologise / correct / retract at first opportunity, and by malice).
9.73 Mr Littlemore argued that this proposal’s “main effect is to remove the confusion of the competing qualified privilege
defences, replacing them with a concept of negligent publication as the basis of liability.”
Assessment of the proposal
9.74 Many submissions to the Legislation Committee commended the relative simplicity and clarity of the Littlemore proposal, compared
to the common law (as modified by the
Defamation Act
(NSW)). A standard of negligence - the duty of care expected of a reasonable journalist in the circumstances - is much easier for
practitioners to understand and apply. It would thus clarify the obligations of media defendants and individual journalists.
9.75 The proposal was motivated by concern at the complex difficulties present in the common law and statutory forms of qualified
privilege. However it effects an overhaul of the whole law of defamation, almost assimilating it into negligence. This may indeed
have some unintended effects. For example, as was pointed out in evidence by Mr Graham Bates,
the onus is on the plaintiff to establish the elements of the tort of negligence (duty of care; breach of duty; causing damage). In
the tort of defamation as it currently exists, the plaintiff need only prove that the matter was published; which gives rise to an
imputation of and concerning him; and that the imputation is defamatory. Proof of damage is not required; and the burden is on the
defendant to establish defences.
9.76 It is arguable that the current law requires defendants to take reasonable care anyway. They risk failing on the defences of
justification and comment if they do not check the truth of statements of fact. More particularly, the defence of statutory qualified
privilege under
appears to contain the essence of Mr Littlemore’s proposal. The principles formulated by Hunt A-JA with respect to the requirement
that conduct in publishing be reasonable in the circumstances (see above, paragraphs 9.12-9.16) show that reasonable care is at the
heart of the
defence. This Commission originally emphasised care when it formulated matters to be considered in assessing whether the defendant
acted reasonably.
9.77 The criticism of the current
- that it places too much emphasis on whether the defendant can prove truth and belief in truth - is still likely to be levelled
at the defence of due care proposed by Mr Littlemore. This is because:
[a] newspaper with a wide circulation that publishes defamatory comments on untrue facts will in the ordinary course of events have
no light task to satisfy the judge that it was reasonable to do so.
9.78 The truth of the imputations published would thus continue to remain significant under a defence of due care. It would remain
difficult for a media defendant to show that due care was exercised when false and defamatory statements were widely published.
9.79 When assessing whether due care was exercised, the tort of negligence applies the concept of reasonable foreseeability. This
concept is already applied under
when assessing whether the defendant acted reasonably. If an imputation is found to have been conveyed, and it was reasonably foreseeable
that the matter complained of might convey it, a relevant question is whether the defendant considered the possibility that it might
be conveyed by what was published.
9.80 The proposal was advanced as a means of simplifying the qualified privilege defences. Since the defence of statutory qualified
privilege already appears to contain the essence of the proposal, the issue which arises is whether the entire tort should be redefined
as suggested.
9.81 The Commission welcomes submissions on this proposal.
ISSUES ARISING IN CHAPTER 9 - STATUTORY QUALIFIED PRIVILEGE
This chapter looks at the availability to media defendants of a defence of statutory qualified privilege. As interpreted by the courts,
the current
arguably places undue emphasis on proof of truth and belief in truth. This defence has very rarely been successfully pleaded by
media defendants.
1. Should qualified privilege be made more generally available to media defendants?
If so, is this best achieved by:
broadening the requirements for establishing “reasonable conduct” under
Defamation Act
introducing a specific media defence based on
of the repealed
Defamation Act
1958 (NSW), as recommended by the New South Wales Legislation Committee?
introducing a specific media defence based on s 17(e) of the repealed
Defamation Act
1958 (NSW). If so, should such a defence be linked to a reply?
2. Should journalists’ sources be protected when statutory qualified privilege is raised, and if so how should this be done?
3. Should statutory qualified privilege, and in fact the whole law of defamation, be simplified to the
Donoghue v Stevenson
standard of failure to exercise a duty of care, so that negligent publication becomes the basis of liability?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. In Western Australia only the common law defence applies to civil actions; the Code defences apply to criminal prosecutions:
Western Australian Newspapers v Bridge
[1979] HCA 10
(1979) 141 CLR 535.
. Note that the issue of the availability of this defence under the judicial declaration proposal is discussed in Chapter 2.
. A A Henskens “Defamation and investigative journalism in New South Wales: the evolution of statutory qualified privilege”
Australian Bar Review
Barbaro v Amalgamated Television Services Pty Ltd
(1989) 20 NSWLR 493
is one example. The defence was also established at the second trial in
Morgan v John Fairfax & Sons Ltd
(unreported), Supreme Court, NSW, 1 September 1989, Matthews J, CLD 17196/83; this finding was not overturned, although it was held
on appeal that its factual basis had not been properly established. It is not known how many actions may have been settled, or potential
actions deterred, because statutory qualified privilege was available.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
(Report 11, 1971) at 98-101 (paras 101-117).
. Further evidence for this conclusion is given by the Commission’s rejection of a defence based on s 17(h) of the 1958 Act:
see NSWLRC Report 11 at 96-97 (paras 94-96).
. NSWLRC Report 11 at 98 (para 103).
. Henskens at 270-71; Law Council of Australia
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(30 January 1992) at 7-10.
(1991) 23 NSWLR 374
at 387-388.
(1989) 20 NSWLR 493
at 500-501 per Samuels JA (with whom Hope JA and Priestley JA agreed).
(1991) 6 BR 229
at 233-236.
. The actual existence of this proposed defence of statutory qualified privilege could not be decided in advance of trial. It was
not decided at trial, because the jury found that the pleaded imputations were not conveyed:
Collins v Ryan
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, 17 December 1992, Sharpe J, S10959 of 1988.
. NSWLRC Report 11 at 98 (para 105).
. J Fliece “Three men and a discussion paper: a new form of defamation law reform”
Legal Service Bulletin
. A A Henskens
Evidence before NSW Legislation Committee
(19 February 1992) at 15-16; J G Fleming
The Law of Torts
(8th edition, Law Book Company, Sydney 1992) at 572-573.
. S Littlemore
Evidence before NSW Legislation Committee
(18 February 1992) at 106-107. Mr Littlemore proposed that pleading a breach of the Code of Ethics could be a way of showing malice,
rather than lack of reasonableness.
. Attorneys General of Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria
Reform of Defamation Laws - Discussion Paper (No 2)
(February 1991) at paras 6.27-6.31; P Collins
NSW Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
(Legislative Assembly, 14 November 1991) at 4584.
. Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992,
Report on the Defamation Bill 1992
(Legislative Assembly, Parliament of New South Wales, October 1992) at 67-70, 74-77.
. NSW Legislation Committee Report at 77.
. NSWLRC Report 11 at 96-97 (paras 94-95). See also at 8 (para 14).
. NSWLRC Report 11 at 97 (para 96).
. NSWLRC Report 11 at 91 (para 59). See also Fleming at 575.
. NSWLRC Report 11 at 100-101 (paras 113-117).
Barbaro v Amalgamated Television Services Pty Ltd
(1985) 1 NSWLR 30
[1973] 1 NSWLR 550
(NSW Court of Appeal);
[1975] HCA 47
(1975) 135 CLR 321
(High Court).
[1973] 1 NSWLR 550
at 562-563;
[1975] HCA 47
(1975) 135 CLR 321
. P Applegarth “The defamation lottery”
Australian Journalism Review
at 28-30; Henskens at 268-269.
. Applegarth at 31-32.
. See paragraphs 2.62 - 2.65.
. J G Fleming “Retraction and reply: alternative remedies for defamation” (1978) 12
University of British Columbia Law Review
15 at 23, 25; Applegarth at 27-28.
. The New Zealand
Defamation Act
1992 makes the defence of fair report of certain proceedings (which it calls a defence of “qualified privilege”, because
it is defeasible if the defendant is motivated by ill will) conditional on the defendant (being a newspaper or broadcaster) agreeing
to the plaintiff’s request for a reply: s 18(2). Linking replies to the fair report defence has been criticised because the
rationale for this defence is not providing accurate information to the public, but maximising the publicity given to the proceedings;
and because publication of replies may question the integrity of the proceedings: Applegarth at 33.
. Applegarth at 33-34.
. Applegarth at 33.
. Registered Rules of the Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance, Rule 65 (
Journalists’ Code of Ethics
), Item (c).
John Fairfax & Sons Ltd v Cojuangco
[1988] HCA 54
(1988) 165 CLR 346
(High Court); unreported, Supreme Court, NSW, Court of Appeal, 13 November 1990, Kirby P, Mahoney and Handley JJA.
. Western Australia. Law Reform Commission
Report on Professional Privilege for Confidential Communications
(Project No 90, May 1993).
Journalists and their Sources: a NSW Opposition Discussion Paper
(August 1993).
. NSW Legislation Committee Report at 109.
. J Kerin “Improve ethics or no media law reform”,
The Australian
, 11 May 1993, at 4; C Hackett “Law to protect sources tipped”,
The Advertiser
, 11 May 1993, at 8.
. T K Tobin “Disclosure of journalistic sources”, paper presented at the seminar
Latest Developments in Media Law
(Sydney, 4 December 1992), at 15-17.
. WALRC Report (Project 90) at paras 8.38-8.55.
The Law of Defamation in Canada
(Carswell, Toronto 1987), Vol 2, at 1162-1164; WALRC Report (Project 90) at paras 2.1-2.19.
Downing v Monitor Publishing Co
415 A 2d 683
. S Littlemore
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(12 December 1991) at 10;
Evidence before NSW Legislation Committee
(18 February 1992) at 100-105;
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(21 February 1992) at 1-3.
. NSW Legislation Committee Report at 79-90.
[1932] UKHL 100
[1932] AC 562.
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(21 February 1992) at 1-3.
Evidence before NSW Legislation Committee
(27 April 1992) at 12.
Austin v Mirror Newspapers Ltd
(1985) 3 NSWLR 354
at 360 (Privy Council).
Morgan v John Fairfax & Sons Ltd (No 2)
(1991) 23 NSWLR 374
at 387-388 per Hunt A-JA.
Discussion Paper 32 (1993) - Defamation
10. The Public Figure Test
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
10.1 The “public figure test” emerges from United States constitutional law, in particular the First Amendment to the
United States
Constitution
(part of the “Bill of Rights”). That Amendment reads in part “Congress shall make no law...abridging the freedom
of speech, or of the press”. The test was created by the United States Supreme Court in the 1964 case of
New York Times Co v Sullivan
which overturned the prevailing view that the First Amendment had no application to the common law of libel.
Elements of the test also have been applied to other torts recognised in United States law (such as intentional infliction of emotional
The public figure test has been developed and applied in a different legal and social context. However, it embodies policy issues
which are equally relevant to Australia, prompting frequent calls for its introduction into our law, by those who advocate fewer
restraints on a “free press”.
Elements of the Public Figure Test
10.2 The test has radically altered the tort of defamation in the United States. To succeed in a defamation claim, plaintiffs classed
as “public officials” or “public figures” must prove that the defendant acted with “actual malice”
- defined as actual knowledge of the falsity of the published material or reckless disregard as to its truth. This is far more stringent
than the common law concept of malice required to defeat qualified privilege, which includes ill will, spite and improper motive.
“Reckless disregard” exists only where the defendant consciously held doubts about the truth of the matters asserted;
mere indifference to the truth and failure to investigate is insufficient.
Furthermore, the plaintiff must prove actual malice with “convincing clarity”, an onus of proof which goes beyond the
normal “balance of probabilities” used in civil cases.
10.3 The constitutional guarantee of free speech also has altered the position of plaintiffs who are neither public officials nor
public figures. Such “private figures” must prove that the defendant was at least negligent, even where the defendant
knew the material was defamatory and intended to refer to the plaintiff (in such a case, the plaintiff must show negligence in failing
to discover the truth).
This means that all plaintiffs must prove some fault on the defendant’s part. Furthermore, all plaintiffs bear the onus of
proving falsity, as this is an essential element of the tort - actual malice cannot exist if the matter is true, and negligent publication
of truth is a logical inconsistency.
10.4 Finally, all plaintiffs must prove actual malice to recover presumed and punitive damages, unless the plaintiff is a private
figure and the defamation does not relate to a “matter of public concern”, in which case the plaintiff need only show
negligence. In other cases, unless actual malice is shown, a private figure can recover only for actual proven loss.
10.5 The policy rationale for the public figure doctrine is the promotion of free debate on issues of public importance. The First
Amendment must go further than preventing attempts to prohibit free speech - it must ensure there is no “chilling” or
deterrent effect on free speech. Erroneous statements are inevitable in a robust and free debate; the strict liability of common
law libel rules deters the publication even of statements which may be accurate, stifling free debate. The public figure doctrine
provides a constitutional privilege (overriding any inconsistent federal or state law) to publish false statements, provided they
are made without actual malice.
The Commission’s provisional view
10.6 The Commission has concerns over the desirability of introducing a public figure test into New South Wales law. The reasons for
The context in which the test has been developed and applied is very different.
The test does not effectively deter litigation by public figures, or promote free speech.
The test causes undesirable side-effects.
The policy objectives of the test can be achieved by other means.
THE AMERICAN CONTEXT OF THE PUBLIC FIGURE TEST
10.7 The social context in which the public figure test was developed, the constitutional position, and certain important features
of the United States legal system are all very different to the situation in New South Wales. It is necessary to consider both how
the test operates in the United States and how it would operate here if transplanted.
The birth and growth of the doctrine
case “was as much a civil rights case as a libel decision”.
It concerned an inaccurate advertisement in the
New York Times
, which criticised persecution of African-American students and Dr Martin Luther King, and was held by an Alabama state court to have
defamed the Montgomery County police commissioner, Mr Sullivan. The size of the award (US$500,000 in 1964) was clearly excessive
considering that Sullivan was not named or referred to, the factual errors were trivial, and the
distribution in Alabama very limited. Concerned that southern States would use libel law as a weapon to resist the civil rights movement
and mandated integration in particular, the Supreme Court used the only means available to overturn the verdict - a novel interpretation
of the First Amendment.
10.9 The public figure test was thus created at a crucial moment in United States political history. Different circumstances in New
South Wales permit a considered assessment of whether the common law of defamation should be altered in a similar fashion.
the constitutional privilege was applied only to statements criticising the official conduct of public officials. Later cases were
concerned with defining the extent of the privilege, and resulted in its expansion. “Public officials” came to include
candidates for public office,
and also a broad range of government employees “who are in a position significantly to influence the resolution of [public]
“Official conduct” came to include allegations concerning a person’s fitness for office.
10.11 Even more significant was the expansion of the privilege to include “public figures”, on the grounds that many
persons in non-governmental positions have as much if not more influence on public affairs as do government employees.
Defining who is a public figure has proved notoriously difficult (see paragraphs 10.44-10.47). The Supreme Court at one stage favoured
an alternative approach which would have conferred
protection on any statement concerning a matter of public interest, whether the plaintiff was a public figure or not.
However, this approach was eventually rejected.
The lack of a First Amendment in Australia
10.12 In the United States, the specific constitutional protection of free speech and a free press, without any corresponding protection
of reputation, ensures that speech is given a priority it does not automatically have in New South Wales. Our defamation law represents
an attempt to balance these competing interests; the balance must always favour free speech in the United States. The policy judgment
there is that it is better that ten false stories (possibly ruining ten reputations) remain unpunished than one true story be repressed.
10.13 American courts have taken the same policy approach in the criminal law area, carefully scrutinising penal law provisions relating,
for example, to offensive language, obscenity, and racial vilification, in order to determine whether such provisions run foul of
the constitutional protection of free speech. Some restraints are permitted, but only where there is a clear and compelling justification
and the criminal law is drafted as narrowly as possible. In
Terminiello v City of Chicago
, the United States Supreme Court noted that it was improper to prohibit speech merely because it “invites dispute...induces
a condition of unrest, creates dissatisfaction with conditions as they are, or even stirs people to anger.”
Implied guarantee of freedom of communication
10.14 The Australian and New South Wales Constitutions contain no explicit protection of freedom of speech (or of the press). However,
in two recent cases the High Court has held that freedom of communication is implied by the doctrine of representative government
embodied in the Australian
Constitution
. These cases are
Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd v Commonwealth (No 2)
Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Wills
The precise scope of this implied guarantee is yet to be worked out; it was extended (in terms) to freedom of communication on political
matters, although Mason CJ included “public affairs”, and Brennan J extended it to economic matters.
However, this implied guarantee was held to be restricted by the kind of regulation that is consistent with freedom of political
discourse - including the law of defamation.
10.15 The effect of the implied guarantee on the common law of defamation and the balance described above is thus unclear. However,
this issue may soon be decided by the High Court, which recently granted an application for removal of cause by the defendant in
Stephens v West Australian Newspapers Ltd
. The issue to be decided by a full bench of the High Court was whether a proposed defence based on the implied freedom of communication
Constitution
was available. The proposed defence was a qualified privilege for matter criticising Members of Parliament in relation to their performance
as such, where the criticism is reasonable.
10.16 The two free speech cases are a long way from introducing a public figure test. Some of the judges discussed and relied on
American cases (including
), but Mason CJ stated that the First Amendment is “broader in scope than the implied guarantee in the Australian
Constitution
An attempt by an enterprising defendant in the New South Wales Supreme Court to claim that the law of defamation imposes unacceptable
restrictions on the implied guarantee has been rejected.
However, these cases recognise that freedom of communication is necessary to enhance the political process and stimulate performance
in public office - the same policy values relied on by the United States Supreme Court in the line of cases beginning with
. The question is whether those policy values would be best served by the introduction of a public figure test.
International law
10.17 In 1980, Australia ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 1966, Article 19 of which provides a right
to freedom of expression. This right is very similar to the implied guarantee identified by the High Court, in that it recognises
that the right provided may be subject to restrictions which are lawful and necessary “for respect of the rights or reputations
of others” or for protection of national security, public order, public health or morals.
Features of United States law balancing the operation of the public figure test
10.18 Certain aspects of American tort law and costs rules help to restore the balance between protection of reputation and free
speech. These must be considered when assessing the positions of the media and individuals affected by media activities in the United
Tort of privacy
10.19 United States law recognises a comprehensive tort of invasion of privacy. In many cases this has been used to sanction intrusive
practices which are controlled only imperfectly by the tort of defamation in New South Wales. Invasion of privacy is actually a complex
of four related torts:
(1) appropriation for the defendant’s benefit of the plaintiff’s name or likeness;
(2) unreasonable and highly offensive intrusions into the plaintiff’s seclusion;
(3) highly objectionable publicity of private information (even if true); and
(4) putting the plaintiff in a false light in the public eye.
Additionally, the United States Supreme Court has recognised a constitutional right to privacy which can found a tort action (though
this is normally aimed at public officials or State agencies, not the media).
10.20 The defendant’s conduct usually must be found to be offensive to a reasonable person. However, there are very few affirmative
defences to the privacy action.
10.21 The intrusion tort in particular ((2) above) has been used as a sanction against investigative newsgathering by the media.
The First Amendment gives no special protection to newsgathering; it may provide some protection where the injury is caused by publication,
but damages can be recovered for intrusion even without publication. (If publication does take place, it may aggravate the damages).
Significantly, even the public figure doctrine is not clearly applicable to the intrusion tort. The uncertainty surrounding the tort
has had a “chilling” effect on the media, causing some self-censorship (even though libel suits are far more common).
10.22 The existence of this tort gives some protection to plaintiffs who may be affected by media activities, even though the constitutional
privileges embodied in the public figure test would deny relief in a defamation suit. The introduction of a public figure test in
New South Wales, where it would not be balanced by a tort of privacy, may leave individuals without adequate protection.
Tort of intentional infliction of emotional distress
10.23 Similarly, United States media (and other) defendants may be sued for intentional infliction of emotional distress. The public
figure doctrine also applies to this tort, but it is at least available to a range of plaintiffs.
No such action is recognised in New South Wales.
United States costs and fees rules
10.24 Empirical studies have shown that most libel plaintiffs in the United States - even public figures - are represented on a contingency
This ensures that a defamation action will cost a plaintiff very little, even where the chance of victory is small.
10.25 In addition, plaintiffs rarely if ever have to pay the defendant’s legal costs in United States civil litigation; the
“American rule” provides that “attorneys’ fees are not ordinarily recoverable in the absence of a statute
or enforceable contract providing therefor”.
10.26 The prevalence of contingency fees may be thought to disadvantage plaintiffs who are successful, as they will lose a large
part of their award. However, the plaintiff’s attorney fees can effectively be “shifted” to the defendant if the
jury imposes a large punitive damages award.
Punitive damages were abolished in New South Wales by
Defamation Act
10.27 These features of United States law afford some consolation to plaintiffs attempting to prove actual malice on the defendant’s
part. None of them applies in New South Wales.
WEIGHING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE PUBLIC FIGURE TEST
10.28 Although the public figure test is often touted by free speech advocates as an effective and progressive (and unproblematic)
mechanism for ensuring vigorous debate in a democratic society, the reality of American law suggests this is not so clear-cut. The
features of United States law described above, and the practical operation of the public figure test itself, combine to raise doubts
their reputations, but are able to inflict huge costs on defendants, ensuring that free debate remains “chilled”. According
to one commentator:
What the [United States Supreme] Court could not have foreseen was that it might have created the worst of all possible worlds....A
quarter-century of litigation since
New York Times
has led to the ironic situation where the law of libel protects neither the press nor the individual. Libel has become a lose-lose
proposition.
The practical operation of United States libel law
10.29 The public figure test ensures that the central issue in any libel suit in the United States is whether the defendant was malicious
or negligent - not the truth or falsity of the imputations, or the extent of damage to the plaintiff’s reputation. In effect,
when a public figure sues, the test requires that a
onus of proof be satisfied to determine
liability. This focus on the defendant’s state of mind damages the defendant’s reputation without restoring the plaintiff’s,
and ensures that the judgment of truth or falsity (if it occurs at all) is delayed so much that the plaintiff’s name cannot
be cleared.
10.30 Most libel plaintiffs in the United States lose. The Iowa Libel Research Program found that plaintiffs won 13% of all the cases
studied. Private figure plaintiffs won 18% of their cases; the success rate for public officials and public figures was 10%.
Yet public figures are not deterred; they believe that they can benefit simply by suing for libel. If they lose, they can blame the
requirement of proving actual malice. The costs and fees rules discussed above mean there is usually no great financial loss. In
addition, the focus on malice means there is no risk that the truth of defamatory statements will be confirmed, or even much discussed.
Since initiating suit is a public statement of falsity, defamation plaintiffs have nothing to lose.
10.31 Plaintiffs are able to inflict significant harm on defendants, however. The focus on malice causes extensive scrutiny of the
defendant’s thought processes (and editorial processes, in the case of media defendants). Material such as reporter’s
notes is made centrally relevant to the issues in libel trials (ie malice or negligence), and may be ordered to be produced in pre-trial
discovery; journalists and editors may be required to make lengthy depositions even before the trial starts. Protection of sources
is reduced, because information provided by a source may be centrally relevant to the defendant’s state of mind.
Proving actual malice is extremely difficult (which is why most plaintiffs lose); without access to this sort of information, it
would be impossible.
All of this inflates the defendant’s legal costs (which the plaintiff need not pay), and causes even greater loss through diverting
media defendants from their productive work as journalists.
10.32 Because plaintiffs rarely win, damages are rarely incurred; they are estimated to constitute only 20% all costs incurred in
defending libel suits (the remaining 80% goes on attorney’s fees - since media lawyers operate on hourly fee arrangements).
An example of the public figure test in action is provided by
Sharon v Time, Inc
The case subjected
Time Magazine
to extensive and intrusive pre-trial disclosure, cost US$1.5 million in legal fees (and an uncalculated amount in time lost by journalists),
and resulted in a verdict that
had published false and defamatory material (the jury adding a rebuke to
for its gross carelessness). Yet the plaintiff received no remedy, because actual malice was not proved. Both sides claimed victory,
but the real winners appear to be the media lawyers.
10.33 However, should a plaintiff succeed in getting damages, the concentration on the defendant’s malice causes them to be
inflated astronomically. The highest damages award at trial is US$58 million (approximately A$80 million), although the highest amount
upheld on appeal is a “mere” US$3 million.
These figures may be compared to the largest award to a single plaintiff in New South Wales (and Australia) of A$600,000 (since overturned
by the High Court).
United States juries spend much of the trial listening to evidence of the defendant’s allegedly “malicious” state
of mind, which apparently causes them to ignore the
requirements to some extent and decide on the merits - and their opinion of the merits of journalists and media organisations tends
not to be high.
Most awards are reduced or thrown out on appeal, suggesting that juries are not correctly applying the relevant legal standards.
However, a flow of massive verdicts seems likely to affect an appellate court’s assessment of what is excessive.
10.34 The size of jury awards causes libel insurance premiums to rise, imposing a heavy burden on defendants even if the awards are
eventually thrown out.
10.35 The constitutional privileges embodied by the public figure test are thus mainly responsible for the view that neither plaintiffs
nor defendants benefit from libel law in the United States:
Ironically, the constitutional privileges, intended to protect freedom of the press, may actually threaten it. By making fault an
issue, journalistic performance is what is adjudicated in most libel suits....a libel suit is, in effect, an attack on the journalistic
integrity of the news media...The constitutional privileges, intended to protect the media from large damages awards, actually make
libel a serious economic threat to the media.
WHAT EFFECT WOULD A PUBLIC FIGURE TEST HAVE IN NEW SOUTH WALES?
10.36 The Commission must attempt to predict what would happen if a form of public figure test was introduced into New South Wales
defamation law. Since our fees and costs rules are so different, it seems likely that plaintiffs without a strong claim would be
unable, without significant risk, to harass defendants and inflict harm through extensive pre-trial discovery and other procedures.
It seems likely that the “chilling” effect on free speech would be reduced to that extent. However, reputation would
be left almost totally unprotected. If a public figure test was introduced here, the balance between reputation and free speech would
not be as it is in the United States - it would be tilted even further away from defamed individuals.
10.37 Indeed, adoption of fee-shifting rules similar to ours has been proposed in the United States as a way of avoiding the problems
of libel litigation and promoting First Amendment values. Such proposals have received little support:
Litigation may harm the press, but false reporting harms both reputations and public debate. Fee shifting blocks some potential plaintiffs’
already limited access to redress; it would overprotect the press by functionally eliminating even meritorious litigation. It is
a backdoor method of ending libel litigation, and it is hardly surprising that no one takes it seriously except the true believers
in a 100 percent perfect press.
On this view, the introduction of a public figure test into New South Wales would effectively abolish all defamation suits by public
figures. The Commission does not support such a move at this stage.
10.38 Apart from denying a remedy to plaintiffs to an even greater extent than in the United States, it seems likely that a public
figure test would carry into New South Wales many of the problems experienced by defendants in the United States. Where a plaintiff
had a reasonably strong claim and could afford to prosecute to trial, the defendant would suffer intrusive discovery procedures as
the plaintiff attempts to prove malice; protection of sources would be undermined; damages are likely to be inflated; as are costs;
as are insurance premiums (where available). Litigation would be protracted - apart from more extensive discovery, interlocutory
applications for summary judgment (and appeals from these) are common in the United States once a constitutional privilege is claimed;
this seems likely to happen in New South Wales if a similar privilege was available. Appeals from trials would also increase, if
juries behave as they do in the United States and misapply or ignore the legal standards imposed by the public figure test, or impose
increasingly higher damages.
Effect on journalism and reporting of issues by the mass media
10.39 The public figure test removes the “chilling” effect on the media by removing liability for even gross negligence,
where stories about public figures are concerned. The test encourages publication and contribution to the flow of information available
to the public. However, it places little or no value on truth or care, and in fact encourages the dissemination of totally false
information, which the media need not even investigate. The test thus encourages careless and irresponsible journalism and does not
satisfy the public interest in fairness and accuracy.
10.40 This is arguably balanced by the increased freedom of the media to report on issues of vital importance to the public, including
corruption and abuse of power. While the public figure test purports to remove the “chill” of defamation law, there are
other factors which affect the free flow of information to the public. Commercial imperatives - the requirements of advertisers and
the cost of allocating people and resources to lengthy investigations - are likely to affect the media’s ability to report
corruption just as much as legal requirements. (In the defamation context, of course, the pressure imposed on the media
commercial - the threat of large damages).
Would other justifications of the public figure test be persuasive in New South Wales?
Access to channels of communication
10.41 Apart from the promotion of free debate, other justifications have been advanced for the public figure test. One is that public
figures have access to the media (including competitors of the defendant) to publicise their reply to the imputations advanced. This
should ensure that any damage to their reputations should be contained, and the test will thus further promote the free flow of alternative
10.42 However, the United States Supreme Court has acknowledged that a reply rarely has the force of the original defamation, and
thus access to channels of communication is a relevant but hardly sufficient justification.
Furthermore, the extension of the test to a broad and somewhat undefined category of “public figures” means that some
plaintiffs without the opportunity and skills for effective communication are left with inadequate protection for reputation.
10.43 In the New South Wales context, this justification is beset with other problems - chiefly the excessive concentration of ownership
of the Australian media.
The argument is that the small number of media conglomerates are prepared to publish only a limited range of views, severely constraining
the power of individuals to present alternative views. The effects of concentration of media ownership on the free flow of ideas
are not for the Commission to determine, but this is another way in which the New South Wales context differs from that of the United
States, where there is far greater diversity of ownership.
Consent to risk of defamatory statements
10.44 A more persuasive justification is that public figures seek out the approval and attention of the public, and should therefore
accept the risk of public scrutiny and criticism. Although public figures may place great value on their reputations as their chief
asset, and could not be held to consent to gratuitous destruction of it, they must be regarded as accepting the risk of a high degree
of scrutiny and thus of defamatory statements being made about them. This principle as it relates to politicians also has been recognised
and there are statements in Australian and English case law that politicians must expect harsh criticism.
Indeed, in assessing what is defamatory in respect of a politician, the ordinary person is taken to recognise that criticism of them
is expected and commonplace and therefore has less impact.
10.45 This justification in particular was relied on by the United States Supreme Court in
, when it originally formulated the “actual malice” requirement and applied it only to “public officials”.
Since then the test has been expanded to include an amorphous category of “public figures”. The difficulties of defining
who fits within this category are often advanced as a strong reason why the public figure test should not be adopted. The Supreme
Court has recently tried to focus and restrict the concept of “public figures”. The key principles seem to be that plaintiffs
must have voluntarily injected themselves into the resolution of an issue or controversy; which must be a public controversy (in
that it can appreciably affect the general public or some substantial segment of it); and the defamation must have grown out of or
be related to such an issue.
10.46 Despite these principles, much litigation still occurs on who is to be regarded as a public figure, and whether they should
be so defined for all purposes or only in relation to a specific controversy. Even Ronald Dworkin, a keen supporter of free speech
who believes the
test has been ineffective because it has not gone
, describes the difficulties of deciding who is subject to the
requirements, calling this a “hopeless task”.
In relation to the “consent” argument, he states:
It is sometimes said that public figures have chosen to enter the kitchen and must not complain of its heat. But that argument has
grown progressively weaker as the Court has expanded the range of plaintiffs who fall under the
rule, from public officials to public figures who are defined in some other way. In any case, the argument begs the question: public
officials have consented to a greater risk of being libeled only if there is some
reason why people in that position should have less protection than more private people.
10.47 His proposed solution is to require
plaintiffs to prove falsity and actual malice, so that all plaintiffs are treated equally. However, he notes that this would magnify
the problems of the public figure test discussed above, because those problems would now beset all plaintiffs and defendants. This,
he argues, would provide greater incentive for the radical reform of United States libel law. He endorses proposals for remedial
and procedural reforms which are similar to those being explored by the Commission.
From the New South Wales perspective (which Dworkin, of course, was not discussing), it makes no sense to adopt a public figure test
in order to provide an incentive to abandon it subsequently.
Statutory limitation of the public figure test.
One proposal is that a public figure test could be tightly defined by limiting it to Federal, State and Territory politicians.
In the United States context, it has been suggested that the “assumption of risk” argument carries a special weight with
respect to politicians. This is due to the style of American politics, which concentrates more on the personal characteristics of
candidates than generally has been the rule in Britain, where the focus is on policies, rather than the qualifications of those who
will implement them:
By entering the world of politics in the United States, a world in which personalities and personal attacks are the rule rather than
the exception, a person puts his reputation “at risk”, and he accepts the risk of inaccuracy that inevitably exists.
It is true that even in America some may wish to enter public life solely on the basis of their ideas, their policies, and their
public activities. Such individuals are left without an effective remedy for defamatory statements going to the more private aspects
of their life. But this is not the prevailing style of American politics, and these people are in a sense sacrificed to the more
dominant openness.
Opinions may differ over whether this very broad analysis of political styles is accurate, and if so whether Australian politics is
(or should be) conducted more along “British” or “American” lines. The analysis does, however, illustrate
the particular social context in which the public figure test has been applied, emphasising the need for careful analysis before
proposing its introduction into New South Wales.
10.49 An empirical study of defamation litigation in New South Wales concluded that, contrary to popular perceptions, politicians
here do not sue excessively considering the amount of media attention devoted to them, and they tend not to be successful when they
In the United States, it has been argued that a public figure test limited to politicians would be unnecessary given their low rates
of suit, and the real significance of the American approach is its extension beyond “public officials” to entrepreneurs
and television personalities. Those who argue that defamation law is a weapon of the famous and elite to stifle criticism would agree
that many public figures are more quick-writted than politicians. The problem then is finding a rationale for treating such people
differently to others in the community - it is not sufficient to rely on theories of official accountability or capacity to influence
public policy, since such individuals may not have any such capacity.
10.50 Indeed, the theory that the public figure test strengthens political democracy by improving performance in public office can
be countered by the theory that reduced protection for personal reputation deters otherwise competent people from seeking public
office, thus weakening political democracy. This would apply to a public figure test limited to politicians.
10.51 One suggested justification for applying a public figure test to politicians is that they are protected by absolute privilege
for statements made in Parliament, and so it is only fair that others should have a similar freedom to express ideas. A public figure
test would thus bring defamation suits
politicians into parity with defamation suits
politicians. The immunity from defamation granted to high public officials for statements made in connection with their official
duties reinforces the protection available to (some) politicians, and increases the inequity between them and others where defamation
is concerned. (The immunity granted to high public officials in the United States appears to be broader than that available in Australia).
However, parliamentary privilege does not provide a personal benefit to politicians, but is designed to serve the public interest
in free debate of issues in Parliament. It is extended to politicians as representatives of the people, and is subject to the control
of Parliament and the ultimate sanction of the ballot box.
10.52 Furthermore, parliamentary privilege has a vital role to play in allowing allegations of corruption or malpractice to be publicly
aired. Any statements made in Parliament may be repeated in the media, and protected if a fair report. The same protection is available
for reports of official investigative agencies, such as the Independent Commission Against Corruption. These bodies perform some
of the functions which the media has taken on in the United States. It has not been shown that it would be more effective for the
media to be the primary investigative mechanism, rather than an essential adjunct to the work of such bodies.
10.53 Thus, while limiting the test to politicians would avoid the definitional uncertainties applying in the United States, other
problems of the public figure test would remain.
Other justifications for the public figure test
10.54 The public figure test does help to reconcile defamation with other torts. In the United States, there is no strict liability
for defamation, as all plaintiffs must prove some fault on the part of the defendant. Furthermore, presumed damages cannot be recovered
simply by proving the fact of publication. The application of the First Amendment has removed the historical oddity of tort law which
allows recovery of damages in defamation without proof of fault or actual loss.
10.55 The proposals for alternative remedies discussed in Chapter 2 do suggest that plaintiffs bear the onus of proving falsity if
they wish to recover damages. This will make defamation more like other torts, with the onus on the plaintiff for most vital elements.
The problems of the public figure test spring mainly from the requirement of probing the defendant’s mental state, which must
be done to show actual malice, rather than the requirement of proving the falsity of the publication in question.
10.56 Although the removal of strict liability in defamation does remove a legal oddity, the public figure test arguably flouts another
legal principle - equality before the law. However, supporters of the test argue that public figures have special characteristics
which justify special treatment - such as consent to risk of defamation and access to channels of communication (as discussed above).
IS THE PUBLIC FIGURE TEST NECESSARY?
10.57 The Commission believes there are other ways of achieving the aspirations of the public figure test: promoting free debate
on issues in the public interest, improving performance in public office, removing the excess “chilling” effect of defamation
law on free speech, promoting the ability of the media to investigate and convey information. While New South Wales retains a defamation
law, however, it must be remembered that such a law is designed to inhibit the publication of indefensible material, in order to
protect reputation.
How are “public figures” treated by the current law?
10.58 Apart from the suggestions in the case law that politicians must expect criticism (see paragraph 10.44 above), no special substantive
rules currently apply to public figures. Plaintiffs in the Supreme Court may request a jury of 12 rather than the usual four used
in civil cases, and the public prominence of the plaintiff is a highly relevant (though neither necessary nor sufficient) factor
in deciding such a request. Other factors include the extent of the public interest raised by the issues of fact, the divisiveness
of the issue, and the likelihood of prejudice to the prominent figure because she or he has identified with one side of the issue.
However, this does not give public figures any unfair advantages - empirical studies have shown that public figures (especially politicians)
actually seem to do worse before juries than other plaintiffs.
It is arguable that politicians in New South Wales do not appear to sue very frequently, even considering their relatively small
numbers, given the extensive media attention they receive; and they tend not to be particularly successful when they do sue. In addition,
media defendants do significantly better at trial than most other defendants, and this is not due to a willingness to settle strong
claims - in fact media defendants appear
likely to settle, because the outcome of the suit not only has financial consequences but also amounts to a comment on the quality
of their work and their professional ethics.
10.59 It appears that a de facto public figure test may apply in the practical operation of the current law: politicians do not succeed
very often, perhaps indicating public belief that they should accept criticism; media defendants do often prevail, perhaps indicating
public recognition of the value of free speech.
Defences available under the current law
10.60 The concept of “public interest” is an element of most defences, making them more easily available for most statements
concerning public figures. Two examples are:
Expressions of opinion concerning the behaviour of prominent figures will usually be in the public interest, and so protected as
comment if based on facts which can be proved substantially true (though such proof is not required if the facts are contained in
a protected report).
Qualified Privilege.
While common law qualified privilege usually will not be available to the mass media, statutory qualified privilege under
Defamation Act
may be. The defence has been successfully pleaded by the media on occasion, although it is quite difficult to satisfy. The prominence
of the plaintiff and the strength of the public interest in the story are relevant factors in assessing whether publication is “reasonable”
s 22(1)(c).
Alternatives to the public figure test
10.61 The preliminary view of the Commission is that a formal public figure test, requiring a focus on the defendant’s mental
state, is undesirable. The major problem with defamation litigation is the emphasis on damages, and the length and cost of proceedings.
The public figure test appears only to exacerbate these problems. To some extent, of course, these problems affect all civil litigation;
however, it may be possible to simplify and hasten the resolution of disputes involving such important interests as free speech,
individual reputation, and the public’s right to know.
10.62 A better way of promoting free speech is to remove the chilling prospect of large awards, while providing remedies which ensure
that reputation is sufficiently protected and false material can be corrected. The Commission has proposed a number of possible measures
in this Discussion Paper. All involve shifting the emphasis in defamation actions away from providing monetary compensation for injury
to feelings and reputation.
ISSUES ARISING IN CHAPTER 10 - THE PUBLIC FIGURE TEST
Should New South Wales society and law adopt the same values as those prevailing in the United States of America - giving an automatic
priority to free speech over protection of reputation?
Would introducing a public figure test into New South Wales defamation law be the best way of implementing the implied guarantee of
freedom of communication in the Australian
Constitution
Would the introduction of a public figure test into New South Wales law place individuals affected by media activities in too vulnerable
a position?
Are there more effective ways of promoting free speech than introducing a formal public figure test?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Select bibliography
Table of contents
[1964] USSC 40
Beauharnais v Illinois
[1952] USSC 75
Near v Minnesota
[1931] USSC 154
Hustler Magazine v Falwell
[1988] USSC 24
Horrocks v Lowe
[1975] AC 135
McKenzie v Mergen Holdings Pty Ltd
(1990) 20 NSWLR 42.
St Amant v Thompson
[1968] USSC 79
Beckley Newspapers Corp v Hanks
[1967] USSC 225
(1967) at 84.
New York Times Co v Sullivan
[1964] USSC 40
(1964), at 385-386.
Gertz v Robert Welch, Inc
[1974] USSC 144
Philadelphia Newspapers, Inc v Hepps
[1986] USSC 73
Gertz v Robert Welch
Dun & Bradstreet, Inc v Greenmoss Builders, Inc
[1985] USSC 173
. J A Hemphill “Libel-proof plaintiffs and the question of injury”
Texas Law Review
. F Schauer “Social foundations of the law of defamation: a comparative analysis” (1980) 1
Journal of Media Law and Practice
3 at 5, 20; L Davies “The ‘public figures’ defence - a subversion of democracy”
Law Institute Journal
at 1196; T E F Hughes “Defaming public figures”
Australian Law Journal
Monitor Patriot Co v Roy
[1971] USSC 32
Rosenblatt v Baer
[1966] USSC 25
Monitor Patriot Co v Roy
Curtis Publishing Co v Butts
[1967] USSC 200
Time Inc v Hill
[1967] USSC 11
Rosenbloom v Metromedia Inc
[1971] USSC 120
Gertz v Robert Welch
. Schauer (1980) at 12-13.
[1949] USSC 77
, at 4 (1949). See D Brown, D Farrier, D Neal and D Weisbrot
Criminal Laws
(Federation Press, Sydney, 1990) at 1046-1048.
[1992] HCA 45
(1992) 108 ALR 577.
[1992] HCA 46
(1992) 108 ALR 681.
Australian Capital Television
, at 594 per Mason CJ, 603 per Brennan J.
Australian Capital Television
, at 597, 603, 618, 656, 669-671;
Nationwide News
, at 706, 726-727, 740-741.
Stephens v West Australian Newspapers Ltd
(application for removal of cause, 30 April 1993, Sydney Registry, No
of 1993). The issue may also be examined soon by the NSW Court of Appeal. On 9 July 1993 Levine J referred two cases to that Court,
pursuant to
Supreme Court Rules
Council of the Shire of Ballina v Ringland
(CLD 11565/93) the defendant claims that the plaintiff cannot bring a defamation claim because there is a right of free speech concerning
government, including local government (relying on
Derbyshire County Council v Times Newspapers Ltd
(1993) 2 WLR 449). In
Armitage v Double Bay Newspapers
(CLD 13056/91) the plaintiff (an alderman) sought to have struck out a defence pleading that the
Defamation Act
ultra vires
Constitution
of New South Wales in that it prevents free speech.
Australian Capital Television
, at 598; see also Brennan J at 610. McHugh J (at 674) saw the First Amendment as a valid analogy, but he restricted the implied guarantee
to freedom of communication “in relation to federal elections” (at 664).
Collins v Ryan
(unreported) Supreme Court, NSW, 24 November 1992, Smart J, CLD 10959/88; see A Def R [50,055].
. This summary of the tort(s) of privacy is taken from W P Keeton (ed)
Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts
(5th ed, West Publishing Co, St Paul, 1984) at 851-868.
. L C Barnett “Intrusion and the investigative reporter”
Texas Law Review
at 435-437, 445-447.
. Hemphill at 422.
. The Iowa Libel Research Project, the largest empirical study conducted into US defamation law, found that 73% of plaintiffs have
a contingency fee arrangement; an additional 12.7% have a partial contingency fee arrangement. R P Bezanson, G Cranberg and J Soloski
Libel Law and the Press: Myth and Reality
(Free Press, New York, 1987) at 69.
Summit Valley Industries, Inc v Local 112, United Brotherhood of Carpenters
[1982] USSC 107
(1982) at 721.
. N Strossen “A defence of the aspirations - but not the achievements - of the US rules limiting defamation actions by public
officials or public figures”
[1986] MelbULawRw 1
Melbourne University Law Review
The Fourth Estate and the
Constitution
: Freedom of the Press in America
(University of California Press, Berkeley, 1991) at 120-121.
. R L Wissler, R P Bezanson, G Cranberg and J Soloski “Resolving libel cases out of court”
at 198-199;
Masson v New Yorker Magazine, Inc
[1991] USSC 111
111 SCt 2419
(1991) at 2436; D A Barrett “Declaratory judgments for libel: a better alternative”
California Law Review
at 853-863.
. Bezanson, Cranberg and Soloski (1987) at 119.
. Strossen at 430-431; R P Bezanson “The libel suit in retrospect: what plaintiffs want and what plaintiffs get”
California Law Review
at 799-800.
. See R Brown
The Law of Defamation in Canada
(Carswell, Toronto 1987), Vol 2 at 1163-1164.
Herbert v Lando
[1979] USSC 71
(1979); Strossen at 430; Powe at 118-119, 125-126; G G Ashdown “Of public figures and public interest - the libel law conundrum”
William and Mary Law Review
937 at 945.
. Strossen at 428; Powe at 117; J Soloski and R L Wissler “The Libel Dispute Resolution Program: a way to resolve disputes out
of court” in R T Kaplar (ed)
Beyond the Courtroom: Alternatives for Resolving Press Disputes
(The Media Institute, Washington, 1991) at 85.
599 F Supp 538
(SDNY 1984); discussed in Wissler, Bezanson, Cranberg and Soloski (1988) at 197.
. Hemphill at 401. A report by the US Libel Defence Resource Centre states that in the two-year period ending in December 1991, the
average jury award against media defendants exceeded US$9 million: Minter Ellison Morris Fletcher,
Media Law 1992: Defamation / Contempt: Case Reports
(Sydney, 1992) at 2.
v John Fairfax & Sons Ltd
[1993] HCA 31
(1993) 67 ALJR 634.
. Hemphill at 401; Hughes at 485; Strossen at 424, 429-430. Ironically, juries in the US were once regarded as the protectors of free
speech, not as threats to the “correct” safeguards imposed by judges: F Schauer “The role of the people in First
Amendment theory”
California Law Review
at 765-768.
. Bezanson, Cranberg and Soloski (1987) at 142-143; G L Spence “The sale of the First Amendment” (March 1989) 75
American Bar Association Journal
52 at 58; Hughes at 485.
. F Schauer “Uncoupling free speech”
Columbia Law Review
at 1339-1340; Soloski and Wissler in Kaplar (ed) (1991) at 100.
. Soloski and Wissler in Kaplar (ed) (1991) at 86. The additional social costs of the US system must also be noted: “Because
truth has become almost irrelevant in libel actions, the press has lost credibility; political leaders and public figures have lost
respect; and the legal system is viewed as having elevated technicality over principle.” Barrett at 861-862.
. Powe at 128-129.
. Comparison of empirical data in NSW and in the US reveals that appeals - both before and after trial - are much more prevalent in
the US: M Newcity “The sociology of defamation in Australia and the United States”
Texas International Law Journal
. Australia. Law Reform Commission
Unfair Publication: Defamation and Privacy
(Report 11, 1979) at para 37; J McClelland “Libel law and liberty: Tax free benefits for the rich” (1989) 21
Australian Author
19 at 21-22; B Edgeworth and M Newcity “Politicians, defamation law and the ‘public figure’ defence” (1992)
Law in Context
39 at 61; J C Gibson (ed)
Aspects of the Law of Defamation in NSW
(Young Lawyers Section, Law Society of NSW, Sydney, 1990) at 143-144. Interestingly, the media themselves claim that financial pressure
from advertisers does not affect the content of their stories, but the comparatively weak pressure of defamation damages is capable
of completely paralysing their operations. “
New York Times
was premised on the media’s denial of one of its own central principles....the standard ‘chilling effect’ rhetoric
is premised on an obeisance to financial pressures that in other contexts the press is in such pains to deny” (Schauer (1992)
at 1335, 1329-1332).
Curtis Publishing Co v Butts
[1967] USSC 200
(1967) at 154-155.
Gertz v Robert Welch, Inc
[1974] USSC 144
(1974) at 344.
. A more unfortunate example is a rape victim who testified at the trial of her alleged attackers. She was held to have “voluntarily
thrust herself into the forefront of [a] public controversy”, because she “gave press interviews and actively promoted
her version of the case outside of her actual courtroom testimony”. Forty years later she sued for libel over a television
drama in which she was depicted as having consented to intercourse and perjured herself. She was held to always remain a “public
figure” for the purposes of the “controversy” of her alleged rape:
Street v National Broadcasting Co.
[1981] USCA6 294
645 F 2d 1227
. Newcity at 24; J Fliece “Three men and a discussion paper: A new form of defamation law reform”
Legal Service Bulletin
at 259. A 1988 report of the UK-based free speech group Article 19 stated that “By far the greatest legal restriction on communication
in Australia is private defamation law”, and was generally critical of the restrictiveness and complexity of that law. However,
it went on to state:
“Despite the burden of defamation law, the current legal restrictions are not considered the greatest threat to free communication
in Australia. Rather it is the concentration of ownership of mass media in the hands of a small number of large private corporations.
There is only minimal suppression of any material advocating any viewpoints. The difficulty is rather that there are not many publishers
with a motive to produce it.”
Information, Freedom and Censorship: The Article 19 World Report 1988
(Longman, Essex 1988) at 282, 286.
Lingens Case
[European Court of Human Rights, Lingens judgment of 8 July, 1986 Series A No 163].
Australian Consolidated Press v Uren
[1966] HCA 37
(1966) 117 CLR 185
at 210 per Windeyer J;
Davies v Shepstone
(1886) 11 AC 187 at 190 per Lord Herschell LC.
Gorton v Australian Broadcasting Commission
(1973) 22 FLR 181
at 189 per Fox J.
. Keeton at 806; cf C Danziger “The right of reply in the United States and Europe” (1986) 19
New York University Journal of International Law and Politics
171 at 172-173. On the “voluntariness” requirement, see
Street v NBC
(note 52 above).
. R Dworkin “The coming battles over free speech”
New York Review of Books
, 11 June 1992, at 63.
. Dworkin at 63.
. Dworkin at 63-65.
. Law Institute of Victoria
Submission to NSW Legislation Committee
(14 February 1992 - first drafted 28 September 1990) at 46-52.
. Schauer (1980) at 15-16.
. Edgeworth and Newcity at 57. This conclusion does depend on interpretations of rough data concerning the amount of media attention
received by politicians.
. Schauer (1980) at 16-17; F Schauer “Public figures” (1984) 25
William and Mary Law Review
905 at 917-919, 929-931. Schauer concludes that there may be other rationales for extending less protection to public figures, but
does not explore these in any detail. One possible justification is that the personal freedom to express ideas is vital to humans
in a democracy and should be allowed free reign in the absence of compelling justifications to the contrary: D M Daniels “Public
figures revisited” (1984) 25
William and Mary Law Review
957 at 965-966; Dworkin at 56-57. The issue, of course, is to decide what contrary justifications should be accepted as “compelling”,
and whether a public figure test achieves this goal.
. Strossen at 421; Keeton at 821-823; R Todd “In the shadows of defamation” (1990-91) 4
Directions in Government
28 at 29. See Chapter 7.
. Edgeworth and Newcity at 57-59.
Hawke v Tamworth Newspaper Co Ltd
[1983] 1 NSWLR 699
(where an application for a jury of 12 by the Prime Minister of Australia was refused).
. Edgeworth and Newcity at 57-60.
. The Edgeworth and Newcity study found that politicians comprised 12.4% of all plaintiffs; public officials (many of whom are not
prominent, eg police officers) 13.2%; business persons and corporations 13.7%; professionals 11.3%. (A similar study by Sourdin found
that politicians were 14.8% of all plaintiffs). The media comprised 68.5% of all defendants (Sourdin 68.1%), but 88.2% of all defendants
at trial - indicating more actions against non-media defendants were settled or discontinued. 60.3% of politicians got neither a
settlement nor a trial; only one of eight politicians at trial won; all four politicians who appealed lost. Media defendants won
in 40.5% of the cases against them which reached trial; the success rate for other defendants was 23.5%. Edgeworth and Newcity at
42-44, 51-56; Newcity at 55; T Sourdin
Defamation Study: A study of defamation proceedings commenced in the New South Wales Supreme Court for the period 1/1/1987 to 31/12/1988
(unpublished paper, University of New South Wales, 1990) at 5-6, 15-16.
. T K Tobin in Gibson (ed) at 77-78.
Discussion Paper 32 (1993) - Defamation
11. Innocent Publication
History of this Reference (Digest)
INTRODUCTION
11.1 This chapter examines ways of protecting distributors and other persons innocently involved in the publication of defamatory
11.2 The focus of this chapter is on whether a special defence should be available to innocent publishers. Several proposals on this
issue involve procedural reforms which are similar to those explored in Chapter 2. That chapter discussed various reforms of defences,
remedies and procedure designed to reduce the emphasis on damages in defamation cases.
Innocent publication at common law
11.3 At common law liability for defamation is imposed on all persons involved in the publication or distribution of defamatory matter.
It is irrelevant whether they intended to defame or even refer to the plaintiff. The act of publication itself, however, must have
been either intentional or negligent.
11.4 A limited defence exists to protect innocent distributors, where:
they do not know that the material distributed contained defamatory matter;
they had no grounds to suppose it was likely to contain defamatory matter; and
this lack of knowledge is not due to their own negligence.
The offer of amends defence
11.5 Additional protection is given by Division 8 of
Defamation Act
(NSW), which provides a defence when publication is “innocent”. This requires that the publisher and its servants and
agents concerned with the matter in question or its publication:
do not intend the matter to be defamatory of the plaintiff;
do not know of circumstances by reason of which the matter is or may be defamatory of the plaintiff; and
exercise reasonable care in relation to the matter in question and its publication.
11.6 This statutory defence requires the defendant to make an “offer of amends” to the plaintiff, which must include an
offer to publish, or join in publishing, a reasonable “correction” and apology.
Problems with these defences
11.7 Both the common law and the statutory defences impose very strict tests on booksellers, libraries, news dealers and similar distributors.
Avoiding negligence or exercising reasonable care may be interpreted as requiring them to check every publication they handle to
assess whether it is defamatory. Publications known to be defamatory may be seen as too much of a risk to be worth handling. This
imposes unfair burdens on persons not actually responsible for the harm done to the plaintiff, and may stifle freedom of expression
by closing channels of distribution. Plaintiffs may threaten legal action against distributors, causing them to withdraw the publication
from sale and so restrict free speech without any court order to that effect.
11.8 The offer of amends defence suffers not only from very restricted availability, but from excessively cumbersome and technical
requirements. The defendant must make the offer of amends promptly, but at the same time furnish to the plaintiff particulars of
the facts which show the publication was innocent. Investigating these facts will inevitably delay making the offer.
Relationship between the offer of amends defence and the correction defence discussed in Chapter 2
11.9 The rationale of the offer of amends defence is that plaintiffs are sufficiently vindicated by publication of a correction and
apology - but only where the defamation is unintentional and not careless. Given this, if steps are taken to prevent dissemination
of the defamatory matter and the costs and expenses of the plaintiff are paid, no damages - even for actual pecuniary loss - are
11.10 The correction defence discussed in Chapter 2 would be available even where this strict test of innocent publication is not
satisfied. However, at most the correction defence would only bar general damages. That defence is based on the premise that a rapid
correction of defamatory statements is more effective to restore reputation than an award of general damages. Actual pecuniary loss
caused by the defamatory matter should still be recoverable.
11.11 While the correction defence should protect many unintentional defamers, there are practical problems with making it available
to distributors. Most distributors would not have continued access to the medium in which the defamatory matter was published, and
so would find it more difficult to publish a correction than, for example, a newspaper proprietor. If these problems can be overcome,
the importance to distributors of the offer of amends defence may decline.
The Defamation Bill 1992
Defamation Bill
1992 (NSW) reproduced without change the offer of amends provisions of the
Defamation Act
11.13 Submissions to the Legislation Committee on the Bill were highly critical of the fact that no effort was made to liberalise
these provisions and make the defence more widely available.
11.14 The Committee recommended that an offer of amends defence be available in the case of innocent publication, and that the relevant
provisions be reviewed to ensure that the defence is applicable to booksellers, libraries, news dealers and similar distributors.
METHODS OF PROTECTING INNOCENT PUBLISHERS
11.15 The common law rule imposing liability on those who have no reason to believe they are publishing defamatory material can be
unjust to innocent publishers. On the other hand, innocent plaintiffs need some way of protecting and restoring their reputation.
Two alternatives for better reconciling these concerns will be explored. The first is a blanket protection for innocent distributors,
where another defendant may afford a complete remedy to the plaintiff. The second is simplifying the offer of amends procedure and
making it easier for defendants to use, subject to their being willing to pay damages to be assessed by a judge.
Option One: Defence of innocent dissemination
11.16 The Australian Law Reform Commission proposed that certain disseminators be granted a defence for publishing defamatory matter
solely in their capacity as disseminators. The protected categories included libraries, news-vendors, retailers, wholesalers and
printers (or other reproducers). The defence was not available if the defendant determined, or was involved in the determination
of, the contents of the matter, or imported it into Australia.
11.17 Damages could then only be sought from the person primarily responsible for harm to reputation - such as the author or publisher
of the defamatory matter. This primary defendant would be the importer where the author or publisher was located overseas.
11.18 An injunction would still be available to restrain distribution of the matter. This would ensure that plaintiffs could safeguard
their reputations, but without forcing disseminators to check the contents of material through fear of liability in damages.
11.19 This defence, coupled with the correction defence discussed in Chapter 2, should sharply reduce the need for the offer of amends
provisions.
Option Two: Liberalising the offer of amends defence
11.20 This would provide less extensive protection to distributors than the blanket defence discussed above. However, the offer of
amends defence is not restricted to distributors; it can also protect other defendants such as newspaper publishers.
The proposals of the Neill Committee
11.21 In England, a Working Group of the Supreme Court Procedure Committee, chaired by Lord Justice Neill, issued a Report on Practice
and Procedure in Defamation in July 1991. The Neill Committee examined the English ancestor of our offer of amends defence (in s
Defamation Act
1952 (UK)). The Committee recommended that a more streamlined defence of offer of amends be available, where the defendant has acted
fairly and reasonably after publishing the defamatory matter.
11.22 Their proposals for liberalising the defence were as follows.
Remove obligation on defendant, where not the author of the defamatory matter, to prove an absence of ill will on the part of the
Under the current system, where the offer of amends is not accepted by the plaintiff, the defendant is protected from any damages
award where certain conditions are satisfied. One of these is that the defendant, not being the author of the defamatory matter,
proves that “the author was not actuated by ill will to the offeree”.
11.24 This requirement is quite onerous for those who only provide a forum for others to express their opinions, such as editors
who publish a letters page, or broadcasters who broadcast the words of independent program-makers. It is also quite difficult for
defendants to prove a negative (no ill-will) on the part of the author in such circumstances. Accordingly, the Neill Committee recommended
that this requirement be dropped.
Put the onus on the plaintiff to show that the defendant was not “innocent”.
The Neill Committee recommended that defendants be permitted to rely on an offer of amends defence unless the plaintiff pleads and
proves that the defendant knew or was reckless with respect to the following matters:
(i) that the words referred to the plaintiff or were likely to be understood as referring to some identifiable person;
(ii) that they were defamatory; and
(iii) that they were false.
“Reckless” was defined as “having a genuine indifference to truth or falsity”.
11.26 This would reconcile offer of amends to other defences (such as qualified privilege) where the plaintiff must prove a “guilty”
state of mind (such as malice) to overcome the defence.
Relax time limit on making offer.
The current requirement is that the offer be made “as soon as practicable” after the defendant becomes aware that the
matter is or may be defamatory. The Neill Committee recommended allowing it to be made any time up to, or at the time of, serving
the defence. This would give the defendant time to establish the facts which will be relied on to show the publication was innocent.
Require defendant to indicate willingness to pay damages.
Perhaps to compensate plaintiffs for making the defence more readily available, the Neill Committee recommended that defendants indicate,
as part of their offer of amends, a willingness to pay such general and / or special damages as might be fixed by a judge. The judge
would sit in open court, decide the meaning of the defamatory matter (or in New South Wales, whether the pleaded imputations were
conveyed), and listen to evidence on damages. The defendant’s willingness to make an offer of amends would be taken into account
as a mitigating factor.
11.29 The Neill Committee noted that this would be an open-ended commitment for defendants. However, they argued that often defendants
are willing to pay reasonable damages, but fear that the damages awarded at trial will be excessive and disproportionate.
11.30 An offer of amends would thus no longer provide a complete defence to damages. If the defence succeeds, damages will be assessed
by a judge. If not (for example, because the plaintiff proves the guilty state of mind discussed at para 11.25 above), the case will
go to trial as normal, where the jury (if any) will assess damages.
Assessment of these changes
11.31 The changes recommended by the Neill Committee would promote the use of the offer of amends procedure and the rapid publication
of corrections. They would also give plaintiffs damages as well, although these would be expected to be modest. Costs and delays
would be reduced for both parties.
11.32 The changes would also erode the jury’s role in defamation litigation by allowing the judge to decide whether the pleaded
imputations were conveyed and were defamatory, and to assess damages. These measures would achieve most of the benefits sought by
Justice Hoffman’s summary procedure for defamation claims (see Chapter 2).
Acceptance of the Neill Committee’s recommendations
11.33 In England, the Lord Chancellor proposed several reforms of defamation law in December 1992, drawing on the Neill Committee’s
recommendations. These include the new procedure for offer of amends discussed above.
11.34 Reaction to the proposals has been varied. Some commentators have noted that both parties should be able to avoid exorbitant
legal costs. Others have criticised the heavy burden placed on plaintiffs of proving what the defendant’s state of mind was
when committing the tort.
However, plaintiffs need only prove this where they do not accept the offer and want to go to a full jury trial.
ISSUES ARISING IN CHAPTER 11 - INNOCENT PUBLICATION
The common law and statutory defences impose very strict tests on book sellers, libraries, news dealers and similar distributors.
1. Should innocent distributors receive greater protection?
2. If so, is this best achieved by:
providing blanket protection for innocent distributors in cases where another defendant may afford a complete remedy to the plaintiff;
liberalising the offer of amends defence by:
(a) removing the obligation on the defendant (where not the author of the defamatory matter) to prove an absence of ill will on the
part of the author;
(b) placing the onus on the plaintiff to show that the defendant was not “innocent”;
(c) relaxing the time limit on making the offer; and
(d) requiring the defendant to indicate a willingness to pay damages.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. J G Fleming
The Law of Torts
(8th edition, LBC, Sydney 1992) at 543.
Emmens v Pottle
(1885) 16 QBD 354.
. These problems are discussed in Australia. Law Reform Commission
Unfair Publication: Defamation and Privacy
(Report 11, 1979) at paras 182-189. Actual examples of such cases are discussed at paras 183-184. The most famous example is
Goldsmith v Sperrings Ltd
[1977] 1 WLR 478. A more recent example is a case involving a book alleging corruption in a NSW statutory body: see “Removed
book is libellous, says NPWS”,
Sydney Morning Herald
, 16 June 1993, at 2.
. ALRC Report 11 at paras 85-88.
. New South Wales. Law Reform Commission
(Report 11, 1971) at 115 (para 212).
. Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992,
Report on the Defamation Bill 1992
(Legislative Assembly, Parliament of New South Wales, October 1992) at 113-116.
. ALRC Report 11 at paras 186-189; Draft Bill cl 17. Note that legislation in Tasmania, Queensland and Western Australia provides
varying degrees of protection for vendors, which is defeasible if the defendant has some knowledge that the publication is defamatory:
see T K Tobin and M G Sexton
Australian Defamation Law and Practice
(looseleaf, Butterworths, Sydney 1991) at para [16,040].
. England and Wales. Supreme Court Procedure Committee
Report on Practice and Procedure in Defamation
(July 1991) at 62-80.
Defamation Act
(NSW) s 43(1)(d)). The English provision requires the defendant to prove that “the words were written by the author without
Defamation Act
1952, s 4(6).
. Following Lord Diplock in
Horrocks v Lowe
[1975] AC 135.
. J McLeod “Proposals could close down ‘libel Las Vegas’”,
Guardian Gazette
, 6 January 1993, at 6; R Ackland “Confusion reigns in defamation law”,
Australian Financial Review
, 7 January 1993, P Gorman “Lord Chancellor’s defamation reforms”,
Solicitor’s Journal
, 22 January 1993, at 48.
Discussion Paper 32 (1993) - Defamation
Select Bibliography
History of this Reference (Digest)
APPLEGARTH, P “The defamation lottery”
Australian Journalism Review
ARMSTRONG, M, BLAKENEY, M and WATTERSON, R
Media Law in Australia: A Manual
(2nd edition, OUP, Melbourne 1988)
ARTICLE 19.
Information, Freedom and Censorship: The Article 19 World Report 1988
(Longman, Essex 1988)
AUSTRALIA. LAW REFORM COMMISSION
(Report 35, 1987)
AUSTRALIA. LAW REFORM COMMISSION
(Report 22, 1983)
AUSTRALIA. LAW REFORM COMMISSION
Unfair Publication: Defamation and Privacy
(Report 11, 1979)
AUSTRALIAN PRESS COUNCIL
Annual Report No. 16
(Sydney, 30 June 1992)
BARNETT, L C “Intrusion and the investigative reporter”
Texas Law Review
BARRETT, D A “Declaratory judgments for libel: a better alternative”
California Law Review
BEZANSON, R P, CRANBERG, G and SOLOSKI, J
Libel Law and the Press: Myth and Reality
(Free Press, New York, 1987)
The Law of Defamation in Canada
(Carswell, Ontario 1987)
CARTER-RUCK, P F, WALKER, R, and STARTE, H N A
Carter-Ruck on Libel and Slander
(4th edition, Butterworths, London 1992)
CLARKE, M J R “No comment - it’s sub judice”, paper presented at the seminar
Latest Developments in Media Law
(Sydney, 4 December 1992)
DWORKIN, R “The coming battles over free speech”
New York Review of Books
, 11 June 1992, at 55
EDGEWORTH, B and NEWCITY, M “Politicians, defamation law and the ‘public figure’ defence” (1992) 10
Law in Context
ENGLAND AND WALES. Supreme Court Procedure Committee
Report on Practice and Procedure in Defamation
(July 1991)
FLEMING, J G “Retraction and reply: alternative remedies for defamation” (1978) 12
University of British Columbia Law Review
FLEMING, J G
The Law of Torts
(8th edition, LBC, Sydney 1992)
FLIECE, J “Three men and a discussion paper: a new form of defamation law reform”
Legal Service Bulletin
FRANKLIN, M A “A declaratory judgment alternative to current libel law”
California Law Review
FREE SPEECH COMMITTEE
Discussion Paper on Defamation Law Reform
(Sydney, September 1990)
GEORGE, P T “Congruency: unravelling the defamation action”
Australian Bar Review
GIBSON, J C (ed)
Aspects of the Law of Defamation in New South Wales
(Young Lawyers Section, Law Society of NSW, Sydney 1990)
HENSKENS, A A “Defamation and investigative journalism in New South Wales: the evolution of statutory qualified privilege”
Australian Bar Review
HUGHES, T E F “Defaming public figures”
Australian Law Journal
KAPLAR, R T (ed)
Beyond the Courtroom: Alternatives for Resolving Press Disputes
(The Media Institute, Washington 1991)
KEETON, W P (ed)
Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts
(5th edition, West Publishing Co, St Paul 1984)
MEDIA, ENTERTAINMENT AND ARTS ALLIANCE Registered Rules, Rule 65 (Journalists’ Code of Ethics)
NEW SOUTH WALES. LAW REFORM COMMISSION
(Report 11, 1971)
NEW SOUTH WALES. LAW REFORM COMMISSION
Training and Accreditation of Mediators
(Report 67, 1991)
NEW SOUTH WALES. Legislation and Policy Division of the Attorney General’s Department
Discussion Paper on Parliamentary Privilege in New South Wales
NEW SOUTH WALES. Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992
Report on the Defamation Bill 1992
(Legislative Assembly, Parliament of New South Wales, October 1992)
NEW SOUTH WALES. Legislation Committee on the Defamation Bill 1992
Discussion Paper
(Legislative Assembly, Parliament of New South Wales, May 1992)
NEWCITY, M “The sociology of defamation in Australia and the United States”
Texas International Law Journal
The Fourth Estate and the
Constitution
: Freedom of the Press in America
(University of California Press, Berkeley, 1991)
QUEENSLAND, NEW SOUTH WALES and VICTORIA. Attorneys General
Discussion Paper on Reform of Defamation Law (No. 1)
(August 1990)
QUEENSLAND, NEW SOUTH WALES and VICTORIA. Attorneys General
Reform of Defamation Laws - Discussion Paper (No 2)
(January 1991)
SCHAUER, F “Social foundations of the law of defamation: a comparative analysis” (1980) 1
Journal of Media Law and Practice
SCHAUER, F “Uncoupling free speech”
Columbia Law Review
SCHAUER, F “Public figures” (1984) 25
William and Mary Law Review
SOLOSKI, J and BEZANSON, R P (eds)
Reforming Libel Law
(Guilford Press, New York 1992)
Defamation Study: A study of defamation proceedings commenced in the New South Wales Supreme Court for the period 1/1/1987 to 31/12/1988
(unpublished paper, University of New South Wales, 1990)
STROSSEN, N “A defence of the aspirations - but not the achievements - of the US rules limiting defamation actions by public
officials or public figures”
[1986] MelbULawRw 1
Melbourne University Law Review
TOBIN, T K and SEXTON, M G
Australian Defamation Law and Practice
(looseleaf, Butterworths, Sydney 1991)
TODD, R “In the shadows of defamation” (1990-91) 4
Directions in Government
WALKER, S “Defamation and parliamentarians”
Communications Law Bulletin
WHEELHOUSE, S “A NSW perspective on the discussion paper” (1990)
Gazette of Law and Journalism
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter