URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCDP/1992/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:36:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Personal Property Securities - Discussion Paper [1992] NSWLRCDP 28
Discussion Paper 28 (1992) - Personal Property Securities
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
Participants
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Introduction
Scope of the project - what are personal property securities?
Present laws complex and different
Overseas experience.
This paper - call for submissions
The Commissions' approach
Submissions sought
CHAPTER 2. THE EXISTING SITUATION AND THE NEED FOR REFORM
Introduction
What types of personal property can be taken as security?
What kinds of security are there?
Introduction
The mortgage
Possessory liens
Non-possessory liens
What types of borrowing arrangements give rise to securities?
Introduction
Assignments and transfers of intangible property
Sale of goods subject to title retention
Is the property already being used as security
Introduction
Different registers for different kinds of property
Many different registers for specific kinds of property
Other registers for property generally
Different registers for different legal categories
The Australian Register of Company Charges - company property
Overlapping registers
Not all securities can be registered
Bills of sale registers
Australian Register of Company Charges
Priorities: what is the lender's position?
Introduction
The common law and equity
Priority under statutes
Statutory modifications
Bills of sale
Chattel securities laws
Corporations Law
Overlapping laws - an example
Consequences of not registering the security
Introduction
Civil consequences
Criminal consequences
Registering the security
Procedure and time limits
Renewing registration
The need for reform
CHAPTER 3. DIRECTIONS FOR REFORM
Introduction
Policy goals
Overseas models
United States versions
The Uniform Commercial Code
Functional definition
Priority rules
Canadian versions
The Western Provinces
United Kingdom proposed versions
New Zealand proposed version
Principles to guide reform
Does Article 9 meet policy objectives?
Meeting policy objectives in an Australian context
CHAPTER 4. PROPOSALS
Introduction
A single national legal regime
Introduction
Provisional proposal
Regime to apply to functional securities only
Functional definition
Form not conclusive
Overseas models
Kinds of borrowing arrangements to be covered
Introduction
The United States
New Zealand
United Kingdom
Application of the proposed regime to specific forms of transaction
Introduction
Overseas models
Accounts receivable and chattel paper
Overseas models
Overseas models
Provisional proposal
Consignments
Introduction
Overseas models
Provisional proposal
Title retention arrangements (including Romalpa clauses)
Introduction
Purchase money securities
Other title retention transactions
Provisional proposal
Bills of lading and other documents of title
Introduction
Overseas models
Provisional proposal
Factoring agreements
Introduction
Overseas models
Provisional proposal
Assignments of debt and declarations of trust
Rental bond money for residential premises
Statutory securities
Creation and enforcement
Security agreements to be in writing
Introduction
Overseas models
Provisional proposal
Enforceability
Enforceability as between the parties
Enforceability as against third parties
Enforceability as against a liquidator or trustee in bankruptcy
Introduction
General rules
Overseas models
Provisional proposal
Possession of secured property
Overseas models
Provisional proposal
Notice is irrelevant
Relevant date
Floating charges and after acquired property
Introduction
Overseas models
The Corporations Law
Provisional proposal
Future advances
Introduction
Overseas models
Provisional proposal
Accessioned, commingled and processed goods
What are accessioned, commingled and processed goods?
The problem
Accessioned goods - overseas models
Accessions - provisional proposal
Commingled goods - overseas models
Commingled goods - provisional proposal
Processed goods
Why fixtures present difficulties
Overseas models
Provisional proposal
Introduction
Overseas models
Provisional proposal
Returned, repossessed or detached goods
Introduction
Overseas models
Provisional proposal
What are proceeds?
Overseas models
Provisional proposal
Purchase money securities
What are purchase money securities?
The problem
Overseas models
Transfers and variations of priority of security rights
Introduction
Overseas models
Provisional proposal
Introduction
Overseas models
Provisional proposal
Effect of purchasers' rule
Valuable property
Consumer goods and transactions involving small amounts of credit
Consumer goods
The problem
Provisional proposal
Transactions involving small amounts of credit
The problem
Rights and duties upon default
Introduction
Overseas models
United States and Canada
New Zealand and United Kingdom
Provisional proposal
CHAPTER 5. IMPLEMENTATION
Introduction
The process of registration
Financing statements
Financing statement, not full documentation
Amount of money
Provisional registration
Provisional registration needed
Financing statement not signed
Financing statement otherwise defective
Changes in securities
Events affecting securities
Notice to be filed
Discharge of security
Register searches
Secured party to provide information
The Register
The desirability of a single personal property securities register
Introduction
Industry-specific security enquiries
Existing national registers
National REVs scheme proposal
Consultant's analysis - cost of establishing a register
Building on an existing register
Provisional proposal
Asset- or name-based register?
Introduction
Limitations of each type of register
Provisional proposal
The legal framework
Introduction
Possible option
Introduction
Commonwealth and State/Territory uniform legislation
The Corporations Law
Scheme of the Law
Effect of Pt 3.5 on securities over property of a company
Policy considerations
A possible resolution - repeal of Pt 3.5?
The Commissions' view
Modification of Pt 3.5 to achieve both sets of policies
Companies to register securities that they give
Time for registration
Notifying exercise of security rights
Later debentures need not be registered
Avoiding preferences
Other existing laws
Discussion Paper 28 (1992) - Personal Property Securities
Terms of Reference and Participants
History of this Reference (Digest)
New South Wales
Attorney General
Law Reform Commission of NSW
Level 12, ADC Building
189 Kent Street
SYDNEY NSW 2000
Dear Mr Hope
I refer to correspondence from the Commission's Executive Director requesting that the Commission be given a reference to examine
reform of the law relating to securities over personal property and intangibles.
I agree that this topic is of sufficient importance to warrant a formal examination by the Commission in co-operation with the Australian
Law Reform Commission and the Victorian Law Reform Commission, and having regard to the work of the Law Commission of New Zealand.
I also understand that the Commission will be in a position to report to me prior to 30 June, 1991.
Accordingly, I am happy to refer to the Law Reform Commission the following matters for inquiry and report:
(1) Whether any changes should be made to the law relating to securities over personal property and intangibles in New South Wales
and in what respect;
(2) Any related matter.
Yours faithfully
(John Dowd)
Attorney General
14 November 1990
PERSONAL PROPERTY SECURITIES
1. I, MICHAEL DUFFY, Attorney-General of Australia, noting:
the provisions of Commonwealth, State and Territory laws dealing with corporations and securities;
the Memorandum of Understanding on the Harmonisation of Business Laws entered into between Australia and New Zealand; and
the report of the Law Commission of New Zealand on a Personal Property Securities Act for that country;
refer to the Law Reform Commission for review and report under
Law Reform Commission Act
(a) whether the laws to which that Act applies which deal with the creation and enforcement of security interests in personal property,
particularly by or against trading or financial corporations, are adequate and appropriate to modem conditions; and
(b) any related matter.
2. The Commission is to:
consult relevant Federal, State and Territory government departments and authorities, including the Commonwealth Attorney-General's
Department and the Australian Securities Commission, the National Companies and Securities Commission, the Law Commission of New
Zealand, representatives of credit providers and users of such other persons and bodies as it thinks fit;
consider the desirability of uniformity between relevant laws to which the
Law Reform Commission Act
applies and other Australian laws; and
have regard to relevant law and experience of other countries.
3. The Commission is to co-operate with the Law Reform Commission of Victoria.
4. The Commission is to draft the legislation necessary to give effect to its recommendations and the appropriate explanatory memorandum.
5. The Commission is to report by 31 December 1990.
DATED: 8 June 1990.
Michael Duffy
Attorney-General
PARTICIPANTS
Australian Law Reform Commission
The Division of the Commission constituted under the
Law Reform Commission Act
for the purpose of this reference comprised the following members of the Commission
Justice Elizabeth Evatt, AO, LLB (Syd), LLM (Harv) (President)
John Greenwell (Deputy President)
Professor John Goldring, BA, LLB (Syd), LLM (Columbia) (Commissioner)
Stephen Mason, BA, LLB, MTCP (Syd) (Commissioner)
Christopher Sidoti, BA, LLB (Syd) (Commissioner)
Senior Law Reform Officer
Joanna Krygier BA (Hons) (Syd), LLB (NSW) (to 13 March 1992)
Senior Research Officer
Andrew Naylor (from 6 March 1992)
Joanna Longley, BA (Lib) (CCAE)
Louise Levido
Anna Hayduk
New South Wales Law Reform Commission
The Law Reform Commission is established by the
Law Reform Commission Act
(NSW). Pursuant to
of the Act, the Chairman has constituted a Division for the purposes of conducting this reference. The members of the Division are
The Hon RM Hope QC, AC, CMG (Chairman)
Mr Hal Sperling QC, LLB (Syd)
Mr Peter Reid, BA, LLB (Syd)
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy LLB (WA), BEc (ANU)
Research and Writing
Ms Suwanee Dharmalingam BComm, LLB (NSW)
ALRC reference: ALRC DP 52.
NSWLRC reference: DP 28.
Terms of reference | Participants |
1. INTRODUCTION
2. THE EXISTING SITUATION
AND THE NEED FOR REFORM
3. DIRECTIONS FOR REFORM
4. PROPOSALS
5. IMPLEMENTATION
Table of Contents
Discussion Paper 28 (1992) - Personal Property Securities
1. Introduction
History of this Reference (Digest)
Introduction
1.1 This paper is being circulated by the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) and the New South Wales Law Reform Commission (NSWLRC)
as part of a project that aims to rationalise and reform the law about taking security over personal property.
The views and provisional proposals presented here do not represent the Commissions’ final views. They are designed to stimulate
comment and debate. The Commissions will reconsider the provisional proposals in the light of submissions and consultations.
Scope of the project - what are personal property securities?
1.2 Anyone who lends money takes a risk that it will not be repaid. To reduce that risk, lenders often take security over some asset
belonging to or controlled by the borrower. The most common form of security is the house mortgage. Here, the bank or building society
advances money to the purchaser in return for which the purchaser agrees that, if the money is not repaid in accordance with the
agreement, the lender can sell the house to recover its money. The house is security. Personal property, such as cars, industrial
equipment, shares, crops, aircraft, ships, copyright and stock-in-trade, may all be taken as security. There is a wide variety of
security arrangements used with personal property. They are all characterised by a transfer of possession or ownership rights. A
creditor may, for example, take a security by keeping possession of the property concerned, under a lien or pledge. Possession gives
a measure of protection. Alternatively, the borrower may have possession of the goods, but give a security over them to the lender,
by way of mortgage or charge. Repayment of a loan is not the only obligation that can be secured in these ways. Security is often
demanded to ensure payment of the purchase price when goods are sold. The borrower may be a trader in the goods which are the security
or may borrow to become the owner of the goods. Other examples in which a security can be given include securing compliance with
a trust deed, guarantee or indemnity. When the borrower has possession the security interest is not obvious and questions of protection
and priority arise. These issues are central to this discussion paper.
Present laws complex and different
1.3 Existing Australian law about taking security over personal property is difficult, complex and cumbersome. It is a mixture of
common law, State and Territory legislation and federal legislation. It varies widely from jurisdiction to jurisdiction and is considered
by many to be out of touch with commercial reality.
The common law in particular draws fine legal distinctions between different kinds of borrowing and security arrangements. Priority
rights between lenders depend on the intricacies and technicalities of these distinctions. These distinctions have little commercial
justification and fail to reflect the purpose or intention of the security arrangements. The result is that
lenders who lend nationally have to contend with nine different sets of laws
the priority that a lender has under the law of one jurisdiction may be different from the priority that it has for the same security
under the law of another jurisdiction
borrowers that are corporations are subject to different requirements from those that are not
borrowers have to pay the increased costs associated with lenders having to follow these inconsistent and sometimes overlapping laws
there is no easy way for a prospective lender to find out whether particular property is free of earlier securities
people who want to purchase personal property may not be adequately protected if the property is already being used as security.
The uncertainties and complexities of the law add to the risks and the costs of lending thereby impeding commercial activity.
Overseas experience
1.4 These difficulties are not peculiar to Australia. New Zealand has a similar patchwork quilt arrangement of common law and statute
on these questions, as does the United Kingdom. But the problems are particularly acute here because Australia is a federation with
nine separate jurisdictions. As federations, Canada and the United States have experienced the same types of problems as Australia.
Changes have been made to the law in each of these jurisdictions. Similar proposals for reform have been advanced in New Zealand
and the United Kingdom. The philosophy of each of these overseas models is a desire for the law to reflect the purpose of the security
arrangement. Each of these models is discussed in greater detail in chapter 3.
This paper - call for submissions
The Commissions ‘approach
1.5 In May 1991 a set of draft proposals for reform of the law relating to personal property securities (including draft legislation)
was circulated among the consultants and other interested parties with a view to obtaining advice on the proposed reforms. Submissions
were received in response to these draft proposals. Based upon an assessment of these submissions, other consultations and the Commissions’
own research, the draft proposals have been re-cast in the form of the provisional proposals for reform contained in this discussion
Submissions sought
1.6 The Commissions seeks submissions in relation to the provisional proposals contained in this discussion paper. The Commissions
will also undertake further consultation.
Terms of reference
Participants
| 1. INTRODUCTION
2. THE EXISTING SITUATION
AND THE NEED FOR REFORM
3. DIRECTIONS FOR REFORM
4. PROPOSALS
5. IMPLEMENTATION
Table of Contents
. The Victorian Law Reform Commission (VLRC) and the Queensland Law Reform Commission (QLRC) also have references on personal property
security law and have been in consultation with the ALRC and the NSWLRC. The views and proposals put forward here, however, are those
of the ALRC and the NSWLRC.
. State Bank Tasmania
30 July 1990; State Bank Victoria
29 August 1990; Australian Federation of Credit Unions Limited
7 September 1990; St George Building Society
14 January 1991; Ministry of Consumer Affairs (Victoria)
17 July 1991; S Begg
13 May 1992.
Discussion Paper 28 (1992) - Personal Property Securities
2. The Existing Situation and the Need for Reform
History of this Reference (Digest)
Introduction
2.1 This chapter explains aspects of the present law of personal property securities in Australia. The questions it deals with are
what types of property can be taken as security?
what kinds of security are there?
what kinds of arrangements can give rise to a security?
is the property already being used as security?
what priority can the lender get for the security against other lenders?
The need for reform is reflected in the inadequacy of the answers provided to these questions by the existing law. Possession, registration
and their effects are critical issues that are not presently treated consistently. The degree to which potential lenders can rely
upon existing registers and possession affects how investment decisions are taken - investors will not take security if the existing
law cannot guarantee their priority in the event that the borrower defaults.
What types of personal property can be taken as security?
2.2 There are very few, if any, restrictions on what type of personal property can be used as security: anything commercially acceptable
as security can be used if the lender and borrower so agree.
Security can be taken over tangible and intangible property,
including intellectual property such as copyright. Sometimes the law itself prescribes the type of property which is to be taken
as security. For example, the law has long recognised that repairers who are asked to repair goods, and carriers who are asked to
transport goods from place to place, can keep the goods concerned as security for payment of their charges.
What kinds of security are there?
Introduction
2.3 Securities are characterised by a transfer of either possession or rights of ownership (legal or equitable). There are many kinds
of securities that can be taken over personal property. The paragraphs which follow discuss the four main types of securities - the
mortgage, the charge, the lien and the pledge. The differences between these securities are reflected in the way that possession
or ownership rights are transferred. Issues to be borne in mind in this analysis are
Whether the lender or the borrower has title to the goods
which party is in possession of the goods
what effect the security has against third parties.
The mortgage
2.4 A mortgage gives the creditor ownership rights over the mortgaged property, although the debtor will normally keep possession
of the property. In a legal mortgage, the creditor becomes the legal owner of the property (subject to an equity of redemption
). For an equitable mortgage, the debtor keeps the legal title, and the creditor gets an equitable right, that is, a right to full
ownership if the debtor defaults.
2.5 In a charge the debtor gives neither legal nor equitable title to the property, and keeps possession of it. The debtor contracts
with the creditor that it will not deal with the property in a way which is inconsistent with the creditor’s rights. Although
title is not transferred, the contract qualifies the debtor’s title and creates an equitable interest in the property.
Unlike the mortgage (where title is transferred), a creditor in whose favour a charge has been given must take legal action to enforce
its rights. A fixed charge affects specified property, while a floating charge affects property in the debtor’s hands for the
time being, and generally becomes fixed
when some specified event occurs, such as default. Only when a charge becomes fixed can the creditor exercise its rights over the
Possessory liens
. A lien is a security that arises by operation of the common law, by statute or in equity as a consequence of a contract between
parties. At common law the lienholder has a right to keep possession of property that comes into its possession in connection with
the contract (for example, an innkeeper can keep possession of goods left by a guest who leaves without paying the bill). Statutes
have extended the lienholder’s right, to allow the lienholder to sell, and pass good title to, the goods once the statutory
time period has elapsed. These statutes cover warehoused goods, crops, wool, sugar cane, fruit and stock.
Non-possessory liens
Liens can also arise in situations where the lienholder does not have possession of the secured property. There are five types of
non-possessory liens,
equitable liens
Equitable liens may be governed by statute or they may arise by operation of the general law (for example, a trustee has a lien for
his or her expenses over the trust property
). Where the security arises by statute it is termed a statutory equitable lien (for example, a worker is given a charge for the money
due to him or her for work upon moneys due to a contractor or sub-contractor in respect of the relevant contract and likewise a sub-contractor
is given a charge for the money due to him or her on the sub-contract for any money payable to the contractor or sub-contractor under
whom he or she has contracted
). Equitable liens “give the lienee a right to take possession of another person’s property in certain circumstances and
to retain the property or sell it to pay off a debt”
. Equitable liens only confer a right to have a specific claim satisfied out of specific property. The right does not depend on possession,
nor does it confer a right to possession. The right can only be enforced by a judicial sale.
maritime liens
Maritime liens do not require possession. Recognised maritime liens currently include damage done by a ship, salvage, seaman’s
wages, master’s wages and disbursements, bottomry and respondentia.
partner’s liens
A partner has a lien over the property of the partnership.
preferable liens
An example of a preferable lien is the interest created by the
Liens on Crops and Wool and Stock Mortgages Act 1892
(NSW). This Act confers a preferable lien on mortgages of growing crops, wool and stock.
statutory liens
An example of a statutory lien is the interest created by the
Warehouseman’s Liens Act 1935
(NSW). It gives the warehouse owner the power to retain possession of goods stored in its warehouse if the storage costs have not
been paid for.
2.8 The most common example of a pledge
is the pawn. Pawns are characterised by a transfer of possession from the borrower to the lender while the borrower retains full
ownership of the pledged goods. If the borrower does not redeem the pawn within a specified time, then, at common law, the pawnbroker
can sell the goods and pass good title. This common law right to dispose of uncollected goods has been enshrined in legislation.
What types of borrowing arrangements give rise to securities?
Introduction
2.9 The categories of security arrangements are not closed. A transaction may have the effect of creating a security even though it
cannot be characterised as a mortgage, charge, lien or pledge. The contract may relate to borrowings or to sales, either to traders
or to the ultimate consumer. Common forms of arrangement that create security include assignments and transfers, leases, factoring
arrangements and sales of goods subject to title retention. These arrangements are often documented in a bill of sale. Federal, State
and Territory legislation, including the Corporations Law, makes extensive provision about the validity, form and content of bills
of sale, and whether they are to be publicly registered.
Assignments and transfers of intangible property
2.10 ‘Assignment’ is the expression most commonly used to refer to the transfer of interests in intangible property such
as book debts, shares, intellectual property and life insurance policies. For example, a company may assign its book debts to a bank
to secure a loan from a bank. If the company defaults on the loan, the bank can exercise full rights of ownership over the debts
and collect them as if it were the company.
2.11 Leases are generally used to allow the lessee to possess and use property that it does not own. The lessor transfers possession
in return for payment of a fee. The traditional lessee does not, and never intends to, own the property - there is no intention that
the property be used as security for the performance of either party’s obligations under the arrangement. Leases can, however,
be used as a means of financing a transaction, the ultimate goal of which is a sale. It is often tax-effective to do so. The lease
payments are worked out so that when the lease expires the lessee has paid what he or she would have paid to buy the goods in the
first place, plus interest.
The lease may include a provision for the transfer of ownership to the lessee at the end of the period of the lease. To the extent
that a lease has the effect of transferring title in order to secure the performance of an obligation, it will be a security.
2.12 A factoring arrangement is, in essence, the sale of ownership of book debts. The buyer does not account to the seller for any
of the debts collected, and can write them off or deal with them as it chooses. Traders enter into these arrangements to raise capital,
for commercial convenience or as a way of securing loans. Where a factoring agreement transfers title in book debts for the purpose
of securing performance of an obligation then it will give rise to a security.
Sale of goods subject to title retention
2.13 A title retention clause is a provision in a contract of sale of goods under which the seller keeps the title to the property
until some defined event occurs. For example, in the case of a sale of goods from a supplier to a retailer as stock in trade, or
from a manufacturer to one of its customers, the event may be full payment of the price to the supplier. In the case of a consignment,
where the supplier keeps title until the sale of the goods by the retailer to the consumer, the event will usually be the completion
of the sale. Here, the supplier’s ownership interest in the goods continues into the proceeds of the sale, because the retailer
is considered to be the agent of the supplier for resale. In the case of a hire-purchase arrangement, the event will usually be payment
of all instalments and exercise of the option to buy.
Is the property already being used as security?
Introduction
2.14 These kinds of arrangements give rise to situations where goods in the possession of one party are in fact owned by another or
subject to a security in favour of another. If the party in possession of the goods seeks to use them as security a careful potential
lender will want to know whether the goods are already being used as security. It can, of course, ask the borrower. But few lenders
would be prepared to rely on this alone. Most will want to check on some public register to see who is the owner or whether the goods
are already encumbered. But this is more difficult than it seems. There are different registers for different kinds of property,
different registers for different kinds of security and different registers for different kinds of borrowing arrangements. Sometimes,
these registers overlap. At other times, there will no relevant register. The difficulty in determining whether property is already
being used as security is the most significant single deficiency in the existing law.
Different registers for different kinds of property
Many different registers for specific kinds of property
. There are different registers for different kinds of property. Some are national, others are State registers. For example, it is
not difficult to find out whether a motor vehicle is being used as security. All Australian jurisdictions have registers for this
But to be certain the search would have to extend to all States and Territories. The States and Territories are proposing to establish
a uniform national Register of Encumbered Vehicles (REVs).
For other kinds of property, however, the matter is not so simple.
If the proposed security is a ship, the relevant register is the Australian Register of Ships.
Intellectual property
If it is the design of an article, a trademark or a patent, the Register of Designs, or of Trademarks or of Patents will be the relevant
There is no register specifically for copyright.
Life insurance policies
Each life insurance company is required by law to keep a register of life insurance policies. A mortgage of the policy need not be
noted on the policy document itself but, to be valid, an assignment must be registered in the company’s register.
Crops, wool and livestock
Queensland has a special register of liens on sugar cane crops.
South Australia has one for fruit crops.
New South Wales, Tasmania and South Australia have special registers for interests in growing crops, wool and stock.
Other registers for property generally
the security is a bill of sale and there is no specific register for the property to which the bill applies, the property might well
fall within the definitions of ‘chattels’ or ‘personal chattels’ in the bills of sale legislation in each
State and Territory.
If the security is not a bill of sale, the property may fall within the definition of ‘goods’ contained in the chattel
securities legislation.
Generally speaking, in those States and Territories which have enacted chattel securities legislation, the defintion of ‘goods’
excludes interests in unshorn wool, stock and growing crops because these are covered by the bills of sale or instruments legislation.
This distinction between growing wool and crops and shorn wool or harvested crops arises out of the common law rule that growing
produce is only a ‘personal chattel’ within the meaning of the bills of sale legislation if it is separately bailed,
assigned or charged.
If the produce is assigned together with an interest in the land upon which the produce is being grown it is not a ‘personal
chattel’ within the meaning of the bills of sale legislation. The lender will have to search these registers in each jurisdiction
where it thinks a bill of sale or chattel security might have been registered. The definitions of ‘chattels’, ‘personal
chattels’ and ‘goods’ differ slightly from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. For example,
interests in book debts are covered in the Queensland legislation but not elsewhere
interests in horses and cattle are covered in some, but not all, jurisdictions,
and the South Australian legislation expressly excludes ‘more than ten horses or more than ten head of cattle belonging to
one owner’.
Different registers for different legal categories
2.17 Which register is used may depend not only upon the type of property secured but also the legal categorisation of the security
or the borrowing arrange-ment. All bills of sale Acts cover ‘assignments’,
‘assurances’ and other modes of transferring the legal title to goods, as well as licences authorising possession of
goods to be transferred as security. Some jurisdictions add to this another legal category of arrangements: ‘charges’
over property.
Queensland deems hire-purchase agreements
to be bills of sale within the meaning and purpose of the
Bills of Sale and Other Instruments Act 1955
(Qld) whereas other jurisdictions do not. New South Wales legislation expressly extends the term ‘bills of sale’ to include
equitable rights over property.
The Australian Register of Company Charges - company property
2.18 If a company creates a charge over any or all of its property, and the charge is of a kind covered by
of the Corporations Law, the company must ensure that the charge is registered with the Australian Securities Commission (ASC) on
the Australian Register of Company Charges (ARCC).
This requirement applies whether or not the charge can be, or must be, registered in another register, for example, a bills of sale
Overlapping registers
2.19 Existing registers are not mutually exclusive: there may be two or more laws requiring or allowing registration of the same security
in different registers. Laws may overlap between jurisdictions or within the same jurisdiction. For example, a lien or mortgage taken
over livestock, wool or crops which is registrable under the
Liens on Crops and Wool and Stock Mortgages Act 1898
(NSW) must also be registered on the New South Wales bills of sale register if the interest is assigned without an interest in the
land upon which the livestock, wool or crops is being grown.
If the interest is registrable on the bills of sale register in New South Wales it may also be able to be registered on the goods
register created by the
Registration of Interests in Goods Act 1986
. However, the need for dual registration disappears when the security is a charge over company property which must be registered
under the Corporations Law on the ARCC. The Corporations Law provides that, where registration of a security - such as a crop or
wool lien, or a stock mortgage - is required on more than one register, registra-tion of the charge under the Corporations Law will
have the effect of the security also being duly registered under the other law.
Comments in a recent decision of the Supreme Court of Queensland suggest that, even if a secured party takes advantage of these provisions
under the Corporations Law and does not register its interests on the relevant State register at all, or fails to comply with all
the registration requirements, registration or deemed registration will not protect the secured party against third parties.
This is further discussed at paragraph 4.44.
Not all securities can be registered
Bills of sale registers
Some securities cannot be registered at all. The bills of sale legislation expressly excludes some security arrangements. For example,
securities that arise under a marriage settlement, or under a transfer of goods in the ordinary course of business, and bills of
sale of goods in foreign parts or at sea, cannot be registered under the New South Wales Act.
Australian Register of Company Charges
More comprehensive coverage is achieved under the Corporations Law. Under that Law, a company must register specified kinds of legal
or equitable charges that it creates over its property. Charge includes a mortgage and an agreement to give or execute a charge or
There are, however, several other kinds of security arrangement that do not fall within the traditional notions of charge or mortgage
and are not registrable. Examples include the security created under hire-purchase agreements, reservation of title clauses and conditional
sale agreements.
Priorities: what is the lender’s position?
Introduction
2.22 Borrowers do not always repay the money they borrow, and can use property as security more than once. A lender will therefore
want to know how its claim to the property (if secured) will stand as against other secured creditors’ claims in the event
that the borrower defaults and the rights of secured parties are activated. The legal rules that answer this question are the priority
rules. They are rules of the common law and of equity although legislation has modified them significantly, or created new, statutory
priority rules. The problem with priorities is that it is very difficult to know in advance with any degree of certainty what the
applicable priority rules are and which creditor will have priority in the event of default.
The common law and equity
2.23 The common law and equity rules about priority are complicated, technical and difficult to understand and apply. Whether a lender’s
security will get priority depends principally on two factors, namely
whether the interest the security gives is one the law characterises as a legal interest or as one enforceable only in equity
the order in which the competing securities arose.
If both competing security interests are ‘legal’ or both are ‘equitable’, the earlier will (generally speaking)
have priority over the later. If the earlier interest is the equitable one and the later the legal one, the legal will prevail unless
the later creditor was aware of the earlier equitable interest. Overlaying these rules are two of more general application. The first
is that a person who buys the property in good faith and without knowing about the earlier security can have clear title to it, unaffected
by the security.
The second covers cases where there has been fraud. Fraud will either mean that the security is invalid from the start
or it will prevent the fraudulent party from taking the benefit of the security to the same extent as it would have been able to
without the fraud.
Beyond this, there are several detailed and complex exceptions, based on technical legal distinctions, that may apply in particular
Priority under statutes
Statutory modifications.
These common law rules have been altered or modified by many statutes covering personal property securities. Some of these statutes,
however, do not deal with priorities. In these cases, the general law as to priorities applies. In statutes that do address priority
questions, a consistent approach is not always taken.
Bills of sale.
Even the form in which priority rules are couched can be confusing. Some bills of sale legislation clearly provides that the priority
order of bills of sale is to be governed by the date the bills were registered.
Other legislation is more complicated. In the Northern Territory, for example,
in default of registration ... the bill of sale shall be null and void, to all intents and purposes whatsoever ....
The practical effect of this provision is that the date of registration governs the priority order. Again, some bills of sale laws
invalidate a bill that has not been registered, but only against specified people, or only in certain circumstances.
These provisions operate in the same way as priority rules. In these cases, in the appropriate circumstances, the date of execution
governs the priority order against all parties save the specified ones. There is no uniformity of approach. Nor is there uniformity
on the question whether a bill of sale is effective to protect against third parties. In some jurisdictions, there is no protection
until after the bill is registered.
In other jurisdictions, a bill is invalid until registered but once registered it is retrospectively validated back to the time when
it was signed.
Chattel securities laws
. Recent chattel securities laws also exhibit diversity in their approach toward priority rules. Some of these laws regulate priorities
as between securities, but only if the securities are registered under those laws. The priority of unregistered securities must be
determined under the general law.
In other jurisdictions, the chattel securities law simply does not address priority questions at all.
Again, the common law must be applied.
Corporations Law
The Corporations Law has detailed rules
governing priorities of securities over companies’ property. It ignores the common law distinction between equitable charges
and legal charges. Instead, priority depends primarily on
the date of registration of the charge and
whether the creditor seeking priority had notice of the earlier charge.
However, there are still significant gaps in the Corporations Law’s coverage of priorities. The Corporations Law does not affect
the operation of several federal laws that could affect priorities,
and it does not cover some kinds of charge at all.
Priorities as between these charges must be worked out according to the common law rules or the rules in the particular federal law
(if there are any).
Overlapping laws - an example
2.28 The application of this patchwork of overlapping and not always consistent priority rules can cause confusion, even in courts.
A recent case illustrates the point.
A credit union had taken a bill of sale over a motor vehicle. The bill was registered under the local chattel security law. A bank
later took out an equitable charge over the whole of the assets of a company and registered it under the Companies Code, the then
equivalent of the Corporations Law. The charge included the particular motor vehicle. When the car was sold, there was a dispute
between the credit union and the bank about which had priority to claim the proceeds of sale. The trial court found for the credit
union on the basis, principally, that the bank had ‘constructive notice’ of the credit union’s security because
the credit union had registered its bill of sale. It found that there was ‘obvious conflict’ between the two sets of
rules. On appeal, however, the South Australia Supreme Court held that the bank was not affected by constructive notice, holding
that the Companies Code did not require lenders to search all the other registers on which a charge might be registered. Accordingly,
registration under the Companies Code was enough to protect the bank fully.
The fact that the trial court had considerable difficulty working out the relationship between the two sets of law illustrates the
confusion and cost that overlapping priority laws can cause. The result itself - that the later security prevailed over the earlier
one, and that the later secured party did not, in the circumstances, have to search any register - illustrates the need for a single
Consequences of not registering the security
Introduction
2.29 Generally speaking, if the lender does not have possession of the property being used as a security, it will need to take active
steps to publicly notify its security if it wants the security to be fully effective against other lenders on the same property.
Earlier in this chapter the kinds of securities that can be registered in each existing register was discussed.
The following paragraphs set out some of the other consequences of failing to register.
Civil consequences
2.30 There are number of civil consequences that attach to failure to register a security where the borrower keeps possession of the
property. The security may be invalid, giving the lender no rights at all against the property.
Alternatively, the lender’s security may be invalid against an official receiver or trustee in bankruptcy. Finally, the unregistered
security could be ranked behind registered ones, that is, the holders of registered securities will be entitled to be satisfied out
of the property before the holders of the unregistered ones. In a particular case, two or more of these consequences may follow.
Criminal consequences
2.31 Whenever a company creates a ‘registrable charge’ over its property, it ‘shall ensure that there is lodged’
with the ASC a notice of the charge. The same applies when a company acquires property subject to a charge or a charge is varied
to increase the debt or create a negative pledge.
Not to lodge such a notice is a contravention of the Corporations Law - a criminal offence. The debtor company, not the creditor,
is guilty of the offence. The Corporations Law makes ‘any officer of the company who is in default’ guilty as well.
The penalty is a fine of up to $500.
Registering the security
Procedure and time limits
2.32 The procedures for registering securities vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction and from register to register. Under the New
South Wales bills of sale legislation, different procedures are prescribed for ‘traders’ bills of sale’ and ordinary
bills. An ordinary bill must be lodged within 30 days. For trader’s bills, however, the time limit is 15 days, and registration
cannot occur until a further 14 days have passed. During that time, anyone can lodge a caveat against registration.
This distinction between traders’ and other bills is not reflected in other jurisdictions, although in Tasmania a procedure
similar to the caveat procedure applies to all bills. The time limits within which bills must be lodged vary throughout the country
from 15 to 30 days, to (in Western Australia) times that depend on how far the place of execution is from Perth. No time is prescribed
in the Northern Territory. Under the Corporations Law, the time limit is 45 days.
In Queensland, there is a further special problem: there are different bills of sale registers and where a bill is to be registered
depends on where the property being used as security is situated.
Renewing registration
2.33 Except in the Australian Capital Territory, a bill of sale, once registered, must be regularly re-registered. In some jurisdictions
registration must be renewed every 5 years; in others, the time limit is 4 years, 3 years or 12 months.
The consequences of not renewing registration also vary. In all jurisdictions except New South Wales, failure to renew registration
invalidates the bill. In New South Wales failure to comply with renewal requirements only causes the bill to become invalid as against
an official assignee or trustee of a bankrupt’s estate.
The need for reform
2.34 There are many defects in the present law about taking security over personal property. One of these defects is a preoccupation
with the technical form of transactions and a lack of regard for whether transactions subject to existing personal property security
regimes are in fact intended to create security rights over personal property. Important types of securities are not covered by the
existing regimes. As well, the priority rules which apply to each of the schemes are often confusing and difficult to apply. These
criticisms are compounded by a lack of uniformity of rules between similar schemes in different jurisdictions and by a multiplicity
of registers in each jurisdiction. Prudent potential investors or lenders who are interested in the level of secured debt of an individual
or company must be prepared to search registers not only in their own jurisdiction but in all other jurisdictions as well. This task
is made all the more cumbersome by the fact that in each jurisdiction different registers exist for different types of property,
different legal categories of securities and different types of borrowing arrangements. The high costs associated with these searches
are inevitably passed on to borrowers in the form of higher interest rates and additional charges. There is a great need for reform
of Australian personal property security laws.
Terms of reference
Participants
1. INTRODUCTION
2. THE EXISTING SITUATION
AND THE NEED FOR REFORM
3. DIRECTIONS FOR REFORM
4. PROPOSALS
5. IMPLEMENTATION
Table of Contents
. There are some restrictions on particular persons giving security over personal (or other) property: eg, superannuation funds cannot
lawfully borrow even if security is given: see
Occupational Superannuation Standards Regulations
(Cth) reg 16(1)(b).
. In relation to the taking of security over deposit accounts, the Australian Bankers’ Association (ABA) note that the English
Court of Appeal decision in
Re Charge Card
and the New South Wales Supreme Court decision in
Broad v Commissioner of Stamp Duties
have cast considerable doubt over the efficacy of a charge taken by a bank over a deposit account of a customer as security for other
. These types of interests are known as liens: see paragraph 2.6.
. This is a right to compel the creditor to give the ownership of the property back when the debtor has performed all its obligations
under the arrangement.
. Professor Sykes has argued that security rights which arise only upon default embody the concept of hypothecation: El Sykes The
Law of Securities, 4th ed, 1986, Law Book Co, Sydney, 19. The NZLC cites Salmond as describing the security interest created by an
hypothecation as’.. . merely a shadow cast by the debt upon the property of the debtor . . . ‘ and comments that ‘
. . . this [interpretation] may overstate the case in the sense that not all charges are hypothecations.... [Al floating charge,
a fixed equitable charge over chattels create an interest before default . . . ‘: NZLC PP6, Reform of Personal Property Security
Law: A report to the Law Commission by Professor John H Farrar and Mark A O’Regan, 1988, Wellington, NZ, 17.
. A floating charge is said to ‘crystallise’ when it attaches to specific property.
. Warehoused goods:
Warehouseman’s Liens Act 1935
Warehouseman’s Liens Act 1958
Warehouseman’s Liens Act 1973 (Qld), Warehouseman’s Liens Act 1941
Warehouseman’s Act 1952
(WA) s 7 and
Warehouseman’s Liens Act
(NT); crops:
Liens on Crops and
Wool and Stock Mortgages Act 1898
(NSW); wool:
Liens on Crops and Wool and Stock Mortgages
Act 1898 (NSW);
Stock Mortgages and Wool Liens Act 1924
(SA).; sugar cane:
Liens on Crops of
Sugar Cane Act 1931
(Qld); fruit:
Fruit Act 1923
(SA); stock:
Liens on Crops and Wool and
Stock Mortgages Act 1898 (NSW); Liens on Crops and Wool and Stock Mortgages Act 1898
Stock Mortgages and Wool Liens Act 1924
(SA); uncollected goods:
Disposal of Uncollected Goods
Act 1966 (NSW);
Disposal of Uncollected Goods Act 1967
Disposal of Uncollected Goods Act
Disposal of Uncollected Goods Act 1970
(WA); Disposal of Uncollected Goods Act 1976
. For further information see W Carter, P Lane, CJ Tolhurst and EM Peden, Helmore’s Commercial Law and Personal Property in
New South Wales, 10th ed, 1992, Law Book Co, Sydney, 126-136.
. El Sykes, op cit, 68.
. El Sykes, op cit, 707. For an example, see
the Workmen’s Liens Act 1893
. JW Carter, P Lane, GJ Tolhurst and EM Peden, op cit, 10th ed, 1992, Law Book Co, Sydney, 127.
. El Sykes, op cit, 667; EA Francis & Kj Thomas, Mortgages and Securities, 3rd ed, 1986, Butterworths, Sydney, 88.
. This should not be confused with the so called ‘negative pledge’, which s a contractual obligation not to use the property
as security again without the consent of the occured party. It gives no interest in the property of itself, but is normally associated
with a floating charge, which does.
Pawnbrokers’ Act 1902
(NSW); Pawnbrokers’ Act 1984 (Qld); Pawnbrokers’ Act 1888 (SA); Pawnbrokers’ Act 1860 (WA); Pawnbrokers’
(Tas); ACT:
Pawnbrokers’ Act 1900
(NSW) as amended for the ACT OOP 33 of 1990 905078X. Victoria has repealed its Act.
. Corporations Law;
Bills of Sale Act 1898
Chattel Securities Act 1987
Bills of Sale
and Other Instruments
Bills of Sale Act 1886
Bills of Sale Act 1899
Bills of Sale Act 1900
Instruments Act 1933
(ACT); Instruments Act 1980
. Interest charges paid on an operating lease are tax deductible except where the operating lease is made unlawful by the terms of
Part III, Division 16D of the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
Registration of Interests in Goods Act 1986
Chattel Securities Act 1987
(Vic); Motor
Vehicle Securities Act 1986 (Qld);
Goods Securities Act 1986
Chattel Securities Act 1987
(WA); Motor Vehicle Securities Act 1984 (Tas); Registration of Interests in Motor Vehicles and
Other Goods Act 1989 (NT);
Registration of Interests in Goods Act 1990
The national REVs scheme.
In brief, the national REVs scheme will involve the establishment of a central database accessible by communication facilities situated
throughout Australia. It is envisaged that the database will be administered by a separate legal entity jointly owned by the States
and Territories. The local State and Territory agencies currently administering the individual State and Territory schemes will retain
responsibility for administration of the national scheme within their own respective jurisdictions. It is hoped that the national
REVs scheme will assist in the alleviation of difficulties encountered by motor dealers and financial institutions which have suffered
significant financial loss in the past as a result of, for
example, the cross-border movement of vehicles. In an effort to ensure individual privacy, there has been strong opposition to using
the scheme to record information that would identify individual debtors. This development is fully discussed in Research Paper 1.
Shipping Registration Act 1981
Designs Act 1906
(Cth) s 38A;
Trade Marks Act 1955
(Cth) s 53;
Patents Act 1990
Life Insurance Act 1945
(Cth) s 87(1)-(2), 88, 117.
Liens on Crops of Sugar Cane Act 1931
(Qld) s 4(3).
Liens on Fruit Act 1923
Liens on Crops and Wool and Stock Mortgages Act 1898 (NSW);
Stock, Wool and Crop Mortgages
(Tas) (applies to chattel mortgages, not liens);
Stock, Mortgages and Wool Liens Act 1924
(SA) (does not apply to hen interests in fruit crops: see footnote 7).
Bills of Sale Act 1898
Instruments Act 1958
Bills of Sale and Other Instruments
Bills of Sale Act 1886
Bills of Sale Act 1899
lls of Sale
(Tas) s 4(1);
Instruments Act 1980
(NT) s 8(1);
Instruments Act 1933
Chattel Securities Act 1987
Chattel Securities Act 1987
Registration of
Interests in Motor Vehicles and Other Goods Act 1989 (NT);
Registration of Interests in Goods Act
(NSW). The Victorian Act covers all chattel securities other than bills of exchange regulated by the
Instruments Act 1958
(Vic), securities over choses in action and money, securities over ships, aircraft, livestock, unshorn wool and growing crops, securities
over shorn wool and harvested crops which are not covered by the
Instruments Act
and securities over documents of title (eg bills of lading). The WA and NT Acts by and large reflect these provisions. However, there
are no specific provision about excluding securities in aircraft and ships in the NT legislation. The
Securities Act 1986
(SA) and the
Registration of Interests in Goods Act 1990
(ACT) make provision for goods to be prescribed to come within the scope of the legislation but they are mainly directed towards interests
in motor vehicles. The New South Wales Act applies to interests taken in respect of any personal property other than choses in action
and money and interests which are registrable under the
Liens on Crops and Wool and Stock Mortgages Act 1898
(NSW). This necessarily implies that interests arising out of a bill of sale created in New South Wales can be noted on two registers.
See paragraph 2.19 in relation to overlapping registers.
Ex parte Daglish
[1873] LR 8 Ch 1072.
Bills of Sale and Other Instruments Act 1955
Bills of Sale Act 1898
the Instruments Act 1935
(NT) s 8(1) exclude choses in action (which includes book debts) from the definition of ‘personal chattels’.
. eg horses are included in the definition of ‘personal chattels’ in the South Australian Act but excluded from the scope
of operation of the Queensland Act.
. They are included in, eg,
Bills of Sale Act 1889
(WA) s 5; the SA legislation is the
Bills of Sale
Under the SA Act, the position where there are joint owners is unclear.
. Assignments do not include (1) assignments for the benefit of the creditors of the person giving the assignment; (2) assignments
of any ship or vessel or any share thereof:
Bills of Sale Act 1899
Instruments Act 1958
Bills of Sale and Other Instruments Act 1955
Bills of Sale Act 1886
Bills of Sale Act 1899
Bills of Sale Act 1900
Instruments Act 1980
Instruments Act 1933
Bills of Sale and Other Instruments Act 1955
Bills of Sale Act 1886
Sale Act 1899
. Except hire-purchase agreements where the owner is a person who ordinarily sells, or hires under hire-purchase agreements, chattels
of the same class and the agreement is made in the ordinary course of businesses:
Bills of Sale and Other Instruments Act 1955
Bills of Sale Act 1898
, definition of a ‘bill of sale’.
. Corporations Law s 262, 265: the Law defines a ‘charge’ as including a mortgage and an agreement to give or execute
a charge or mortgage.. . ‘: Corporations Law
, definition of ‘charge’. The Corporations Law s 262(1) identifies the types of charges that must be registered; the remaining
subsections set out exceptions to the general requirement to register.
. The test for whether growing crops are ‘personal chattels, within the meaning of the bills of sale Acts is the same for fixtures:
growing crops are ‘personal chattels’ when separately assigned or charged, but not when assigned together with an interest
in the land on which they grow:
See paragraph 2.20.
. Corporations Law s 273.
Re Bauer Securities Pty Ltd & Anor; Austral Mining Construction Pty Ltd v NZI Capital
Corporation Ltd & Anor
(1991) 4 ACSR 328.
See chapter 4, footnote 68.
Bills of Sale Act 1898
. Corporations Law
, definition of ‘charge’.
. The distinction may be appreciated by example: in a mortgage, the legal title to the goods is given to the mortgagee subject to
its agreement to give it back when the debt is paid. If title or possession do not pass, the creditor will likely have an equitable
interest: one that arises, not because the creditor has an ownership interest in the goods, but because the creditor’s rights
only arise because of the contract between the two.
. This is an exception to the fundamental common law doctrine of dependent title. This doctrine states that a person who does not
have a good title cannot transfer one
- memo dat quod non habet.
. Either because it will be stopped from relying on the security or it will have to rank after other secured creditors.
. An example is the rule called the rule in
Hall, which applies only to choses in action and makes the priority order dependent on the order in which notice of the security arrangement
is given to the debtor. it is unclear, in Australia, whether the rule extends beyond choses in action to equitable interests generally.
Sale and Other Instruments Act
Instruments Act
1935 (NT) s 9(2).
invalid against execution creditors, trustees in bankruptcy and trustees under deeds of assignment for the benefit of creditors.
Sale Act 1898
(NSW) s SC (but only for a trader’s bill of sale);
Instruments
Chattel Securities Act 1987
; Motor Vehicle Securities Act 1986
(Qld) s 12;
Securities Act 1986
Registration of Interests in Goods Act 1986
Registration of Interests in Goods Act 1990
(ACT); Registration of Interests in Motor Vehicles and Other Goods Act 1989
. Corporations Law ss 279-82.
. Including constructive notice. A person who could reasonably have known of a charge has constructive notice even if he or she did
not in fact know.
(Cth), Designs Act 1906 (Cth), Life Insurance Act 1945 (Cth),
Patents Act 1990
Trade Marks Act 1955
(Cth): see Corporations Law s 273(1)(b).
. eg a pledge, deposit, letter of hypothecation or trust receipt in relation to a negotiable instrument or to a document of title
to goods: Corporations Law s 262(2)(c).
Australian Central Credit Union v Commonwealth Bank of Australia
(1990) ASC 55-987.
Australian Central Credit Union
Commonwealth Bank
(unreported) Supreme Court of South Australia, 27 February 1991.
. See paragraphs 2.14 - 2.21.
. The lender will still, generally, be able to sue the debtor personally to recover the debt; in these cases, the lender will not
have recourse to the property.
. The possibility exists that, because registration under the Corporations Law is compulsory, a failures to register may amount to
misleading or deceptive conduct in trade or commerce. If someone else, say, a later lender or (if the borrower is a company) an investor
or shareholder, loses money because it is not aware of the earlier security, an action for damages for the loss may be available
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) or State and Territory fair trading legislation:
Practices Act 1974
(Vic) s 11, 37;
Fair Trading Act
, There is, as yet, no reported case where this argument has been used.
. Corporations Law s 263, 264, 268(2).
. Corporations Law s 270(2); for definition of ‘officer in default’ see
. Corporations Law s 1313. The ‘penalty notice’ provision, under which the ASC can impose an administrative penalty for
contraventions, is not available for these contraventions. In any event, the maximum penalty that can be imposed under the penalty
notice scheme is only $250.
. If a caveat is lodged, the bill cannot be registered until the caveat is withdrawn or removed.
. Corporations Law s 263(1).
Sale and Other Instruments Act
. eg 5 yews:
Sale and Other
Instruments Act 1955
Instruments Act
1935 (NT) s 9A(2); 4 years:
Sale Act 1900 (Tas) s 18; 3 years:
Sale Act 1899
; 12 months:
Discussion Paper 28 (1992) - Personal Property Securities
3. Directions for Reform
History of this Reference (Digest)
Introduction
3.1 This chapter examines the way forward. The need for reform in Australia is set against a background of personal property securities
law reform in a number of overseas common law jurisdictions - notably the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom and New Zealand.
They have all encountered similar problems and have found similar solutions. The essence of all of the reforms proposed or enacted
in these jurisdictions involves the establishment of a single personal property securities regime to determine priorities and the
use of a functional definition of a security. Under a functional approach, transactions come within the regime only if they are for
a security purpose. Where a transaction is for a security purpose - that is, it does purport to give the secured party rights over
the goods secured - the secured party may perfect the security. This is ordinarily achieved by registering the security on the appropriate
register or by taking possession of it. Perfection gives the secured party priority as against all unregistered securities as well
as securities registered later in time. Examining overseas regimes contributes to an understanding of what might meet policy goals
and needs in Australia - of what might work.
Policy goals
3.2 The objects of personal property security law reform should be
to overcome the present difficulties of complex laws which are at times inconsistent and inadequate by providing a single legal regime
for the regulation of personal property securities in Australia
to provide a regime which is able to apply to all kinds of transactions intended to create security but which does not regulate other
kinds of transactions
to provide a regime which resolves priority disputes as between competing secured parties equitably, easily and efficiently
to provide a regime which protects innocent purchasers of encumbered property
to provide a system of notice of encumbrances over personal property to provide a regime which is readily accessible, simple to apply
and cheap to use.
Overseas models
United States versions
The Uniform Commercial Code
The commercial laws of the United States governing personal property securities contained deficiencies not dissimilar to those which
continue to persist in Australia. This first prompted reform efforts in North America in the early 1940s. In 1951 the National Conference
of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws and the American Law Institute published the United States Uniform Commercial Code (the ‘Code’)
as model legislation to be enacted by individual States. The Code was first enacted in 1953 by Pennsylvania as a law of its own jurisdiction.
Since then all States have adopted the Code
though minor differences exist between each State’s laws.
. Article 9 of the Uniform Commercial Code regulates secured transactions where the security is taken over items of personal property.
The personal property which is the subject of the agreement
giving rise to the security interest is defined for the purposes of the Code as ‘collateral’. Collateral
may include tangible and intangible property.
The point at which the collateral becomes subject to a security interest is the point of attachment. It occurs when a security interest
becomes enforceable against a debtor or a party to the security transaction. A security interest is not enforceable against a debtor,
and therefore does not attach, unless
the secured party has possession of the collateral, or the debtor has signed a security agreement which contains a description of
the collateral and, in addition, when the security covers crops growing or to be grown or timber to be cut, a description of the
land concerned
value has been given and
the debtor has rights in the collateral.
Functional definition
The Code takes a functional approach to determining whether a transaction creates a security. The Code defines a security interest
as ... an interest in personal property or fixtures which secures payment or performance of an obligation’.
If a transaction does have a security purpose, the secured party - that is, the party which, as a result of the transaction, acquires
rights over the goods secured - may elect to perfect this security thereby acquiring the protections afforded by the regime. A security
interest becomes ‘perfected’ when it has attached and the secured party has taken all the steps required by the Article.
This is generally accomplished either
possession (when the secured party obtains or retains possession of the collateral
, such as in the case of a pledge or lien) or by registration (when a written notice of the security interest is filed).
This registrable written notice
referred to as a financing statement.
If any of these steps are taken before the security attaches, the security
perfected at the time when it attaches. A perfected security is enforceable against all third parties who have not registered. Perfected
security interests are notice to all the world
of an encumbrance in the secured property. This necessarily implies that secret security interests - which are, by definition, not
perfected - cannot defeat perfected securities or unperfected securities which attached earlier in time.
If the transaction does not have a security purpose then it cannot be registered or, if registered, registration has no effect. The
Code creates a number of exceptions to the functional definition by exempting specific types of transactions from the regime even
though they do have a security purpose. The rationale for these exceptions would seem to be based upon practicalities, as it is considered
too cumbersome to have to register certain types of commonly created securities.
The exceptions to the Article 9 regime are discussed in chapter 4.
Priority rules
Where a security is not exempted and can be registered, the decision to register is entirely voluntary. However, there is an incentive
to register. This incentive is the priority which the secured party’s interest acquires as against other lenders which have
an interest in the debtor’s assets. The priority given to a perfected security is determined according to a set of special
and residuary or general rules. The special rules apply to specific types of transactions. They are applied first, if appropriate,
while the general rules serve as the fallback position and are to be applied where the circumstances are not otherwise regulated
by the special rules. The effect of each of the special rules is dealt with in the next chapter in the context of the types of instruments
and property to which they are applied.
An example of a special rule is the rule which applies to purchasers:
purchasers of encumbered property who take for value without notice have priority even as against securities which have been perfected
earlier in time. The general rules provide that
all perfected securities have priority over all unperfected securities
securities perfected earlier in time prevail over securities perfected later in time
securities which attach earlier in time prevail over securities which attach later in time.
Canadian versions
Ontario was the first Canadian province to adopt an Article 9 approach to personal property security law reform. Following an inquiry
and report by the Catzman Committee, Ontario enacted its
Personal Property Security Act
(PPSA 1967) in 1967 but the law did not come into full force until 1 April 1976. The Act distinguished between corporate and non-corporate
securities, excluding corporate securities from its scope of operation. Professor Jacob Ziegal writes that
[t]his exclusion was based on a recommendation of the Ontario Law Reform Commission and resulted from trust company concerns that
the inclusion of corporate securities would create difficulties for them as trustees under bond and debenture issues that had not
been properly addressed in the Act.
Corporate securities were regulated by a separate law - the
Corporations Securities
Registration Act
(CSRA). Difficulties were encountered because the definition of chattels in the CSRA did not cover certain types of corporate securities.
These particular securities therefore did not come within the scope of either regime. This lacuna led to a practice of dual registration.
These inadequacies created sufficient controversy to persuade the Ontario Government in 1976 to revive the Catzman Committee. Legislation
amending the PPSA was then introduced. It was designed to encourage registration solely under the PPSA. However, these piecemeal
reform efforts were clearly not achieving their policy objectives.
In 1983 the Committee recommended that the PPSA and the CSRA be completely repealed and that a single regime replace these dual registers.
These recommendations were put into effect by the
Personal Property Security Act
(the PPSA 1989).
This Act commenced operation on 9
October 1991.
The Western Provinces
Canada’s four western provinces - Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta and British Columbia - have also each enacted personal property
security legislation along the lines of Article 9. The Manitoba legislation
- which commenced operation on 1 September 1978 - was principally based upon the Model Uniform Personal Property Security Act adopted
by the Canadian Bar Association in 1970 although it contains elements of the original Ontario Act. The Conference of Commissioners
for Uniformity of Legislation in Canada adopted a similar draft Act in 1971 - the Uniform Personal Property Security Act (UPPSA).
The Saskatchewan Act
is also a blend of the Model Act and the original Ontario Act but differs insofar as it incorporates many of the amendments which
were made to Article 9 in 1972. The Manitoba Act does not reflect these amendments. The personal property security legislation which
has been adopted by Alberta and British Columbia is even more recent than the Saskatchewan Act. These Acts
are based upon a relatively new Model Western Canada Personal Property Security Act (WCPPSA). The WCPPSA is in turn based upon the
Saskatchewan Act and the revised Ontario Act. Like the revised Ontario Act, the Western Province regimes
regulate corporate and non-corporate securities.
Remarking generally about personal property security law reform in Canada, Professor Mclaren notes that
[t]he primary aim of the [legislation] is to provide rules under which commercial transactions can be concluded with reasonable simplicity
and certainty. It achieves this objective by recognising that all security devices regardless of form have the purpose of securing
payment of a debt. This common objective then leads to the creation of precise rights and obligations all within the concept of a
security interest ... [T]he [legislation] abolishes the multiplicity of former devices and registration systems. The single notion
of a security interest will enable new security devices to emerge as quickly and easily as businessmen can conceive them. It will
forever free security devices from having to be poured into restrictive statutory moulds in order to obtain legal sanction.
United Kingdom proposed versions
In 1968, just after the first version of Ontario’s personal property security legislation was enacted, the Crowther Committee
was established. Its terms of reference principally involved recommendations for reforms to the consumer credit laws existing at
the time. However, this task also necessitated an examination of English chattel security law. The Committee recommended the adoption
of an Article 9 type regime but its recommendations
were never acted upon. More recently Professor Aubrey Diamond, in a report comn-tissioned by the Department of Trade and Industry,
has again advanced the need for similar reforms.
Professor Diamond advocates the need for a single register of personal property security interests as the centrepiece of a regime
which determines priority of interests by registration. He recommends, in keeping with earlier reforms in overseas jurisdictions,
that the new regime should apply to security interests ‘. . . created by companies, partnerships and individuals in the course
of their businessl.
The British Parliament has not yet acted upon Professor Diamond’s recommendations.
The Crowther Report prompted a similar investigation by the Scottish Law Commission under the auspices of Professor J M Halliday.
The Halliday Working Party reported in 1983. This report was published by the Scottish Law Commission in 1986. The Working Party
recommended that
[t]here should be a new system of security over moveable property based upon the establishment of a register of security interests
with notice filing. There would be no requirement of possession of the security subjects by the creditor.
However, the Working Party also formed the view that much of the existing law at the time was adequate and therefore did not require
amendment. In particular it proposed to exclude from the new regime consumer goods, small amounts of credit, assets with existing
registers, corporate securities, commercial paper, non-commercial assets, floating charges and pledges. In contrast to Article 9
and the recommendations of the Crowther Committee, the Halliday Working Party was of the view that the purposive approach - which
gave recognition to the intention of the parties to the security arrangement despite the form which the transaction took - should
be tempered against a desire to have standard form loan agreements wherever appropriate. The Working Party also took the view, contrary
to Crowther and Article 9, that financing statements which did not comply with all requirements of form should not be able to be
registered. The Scottish Law Commission has suspended its reference on taking security over personal property until such time as
the British Government decides what is to be done about Professor Diamond’s recommendations.
New Zealand proposed version
In 1988 the New Zealand Law Commission released a preliminary paper proposing the reform of New Zealand’s personal property
securities law along similar lines to the United States and Canada.
These reforms are most closely modelled upon the British Columbia Act - a version of the Western Canada Model Act.
This paper was followed in 1989 by a report recommending the enactment of a Personal Property Securities Act.
The draft legislation contained in this report has not yet been enacted.
Principles to guide reform
Does Article 9 meet policy objectives?
The Article 9 approach is attractive in its simplicity and almost universal applicability. Its use of a functional definition - which
looks to the purpose of the transaction and not the form -negates the need to set up complicated and confusing definitions of security
transactions. By establishing a single regime for personal property securities, archaic common law priority rules can be dispensed
with in favour of a more streamlined set of priority rules. Perfection is a voluntary act but there is incentive to register since
priority as against third parties cannot be assured without perfection. A single regime overcomes the difficulties which currently
persist as between the States and Territories associated with searching many different registers in many different jurisdictions.
This helps to prevent further unaffordable commitment by debtors whose property is already secured. Debtors should also benefit from
lower credit costs achieved through reduced costs of searching and perfecting. It is also arguable that, if they feel safe in the
knowledge that their investment is secured and recognised as such, creditors will become more confident about lending and the pool
of funds available for investment will increase.
The Article 9 approach would also seem to provide a regime which
is able to apply to all kinds of security without regulating other kinds of transactions
resolves priority disputes as between competing secured parties equitably, efficiently and easily
protects innocent purchasers of encumbered property and
is readily accessible, simple to apply and cheap to use.
In short, the Article 9 approach would seem to satisfy all of the policy objectives for reform set out in paragraph 3.2.
Meeting policy objectives in an Australian context
The Article 9 approach, then, seems likely to meet the needs of Australian personal property securities law and to correct the deficiencies
in existing law. The following chapters develop a regime based on the Article 9 approach but adapted to meet the particular needs
of Australian jurisdictions. Some specific issues are discussed
and provisional proposals made in relation to registration and priorities.
Terms of reference
Participants
1. INTRODUCTION
2. THE EXISTING SITUATION
AND THE NEED FOR REFORM
3. DIRECTIONS FOR REFORM |
4. PROPOSALS
5. IMPLEMENTATION
Table of Contents
. Louisiana has adopted the Code but, unlike the other States, it is a civil law jurisdiction.
. ‘Security agreement’ is defined in s 9-105.
. See s 9-105.
. Tangibles are classified into four categories, namely consumer goods. inventory. farm equipment and equipment. Intangibles are classified
into five categories, namely instruments, documents, chattel paper. accounts receivable and general intangibles.
. Section 9-203(1).
. Section 1-201.
. Section 9-303.
. Where the collateral consists of goods, money, documents, instruments or chattel paper which is in the possession of the secured
party (the creditor): Section 9-305. Where the collateral consists of accounts receivable and general intangibles, possession will
generally not achieve perfection since these assets are regarded as non-possessable.
. A security may also be perfected where, for example
a security interest is created by an assignment of a bemficial interest in a trust or deceased’s estate - section 9-302(1)(c).
a purchase money security interest is created over consumer goods - except for motor vehicles where notice filing is required: section
9-302(1)(d).
an assignment of accounts does not transfer a significant part of the outstanding accounts of the assignor - section 9-302(1)(e).
it is deemed to be temporarily perfected - section 9-304 instruments or documents without delivery; section 9-306 proceeds for a 10
day period: section 9-302(1)(b).
it is deemed to be continuously perfected - section 9-303(2).
See generally sections 9-302, 9-304, 9-305 and 9-306. Sections 9-304 and 9-305 describe how particular types of security can be perfected.
. Section 9-302.
purchasers for value without notice: see section 9-307. This exception highlights the fact that the common law doctrine of constructive
notice is no longer applicable in relation to public chattel registers of this nature. In relation to Australian law, Professor Sykes
notes that ‘ ... it seems that the doctrine of constructive notice does not apply to chattels, insofar as such notice is alleged
to arise from failure to search a register where such a register exists.’ (EI Sykes. op cit, 735.) The policy behind this rule
is summed up by the New Zealand Law Commission when it notes that ‘[t]o introduce doctrines whose implications are unclear
runs the risk of jeopardising the whole system’. (New Zealand Law Commission PP6, op cit, 67.) See paragraphs 4.86-4.90.
. eg leases for less than one year.
. See paragraph 4.10.
. See paragraphs 4.46-4.48.
. 1976 (50) c73.
. Professor J S Ziegal,
The New Provincial Chattel Securities Regimes,
(1991) 70 Canadian Bar Review 704-705.
. 1980 (RSO) c 94.
. Professor J S Ziegal, op cit,,687.
. 1989 (SO) c 16.
. Personal Property Security Act 1973 (Man) c 102.
. Personal Property Security Act 1979-80 (SS) c P-6.1.
. Personal Property Security Act 1988 (SA) c P-4.05 and Personal Property Security Act 1989 (SBC) c 36.
. Except Manitoba.
. The Ontario and Western Province regimes diverge on the issue
whether commercial consignments and leases for more than one year should be included in the regime. The Western Canada Model Act includes
these instruments if they are for a specific purpose; the 1989 Ontario Act specifically excludes them. Professor Ziegal points out
that ‘[t]here is no evidence that Ontario is ready to fall into line with the Western Canada version’ (Professor J S
Ziegal, op cit, 720). This will be discussed in greater detail at paragraphs 4.21-4.26.
. Professor RH McLaren, Secured Transactions in Personal Property in Canada, 1979, Carswell Co, Toronto, Vol 1, 1-3.
. Report of the Committee on Consumer Credit (Cmnd 4596, 1971), Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
. Professor A L Diamond, A Review of Security Interests in Property, Department of Trade and Industry, 1989, London, Her Majesty’s
Stationery Office.
. Ibid paragraph 1.12.
. Scottish Law Commission, Report by Working Party on Security over Moveable Property, (1986), 93.
. New Zealand Law Commission, Preliminary Paper No 6 (NZLC PP6), Reform of Personal Property Security Law, 1988, Wellington.
. The New Zealand proposals along with the Uniform Commercial Code, Western Canada Model Act (WCMA), and the Saskatchewan Act (the
basis for the WCMA) also provide for registration of security interests in negotiable instruments such as bills of exchange. It would
seem that these instruments need to be registered to acquire priority status and that possession alone is insufficient except where
the assignment is absolute and not made conditional upon the assignor retaining control over the intangible: see
Draft Personal Property Securities Act
1989 (NZ) s 4(5)(b)(iv). See footnote 8 in relation to the definition of collateral under Article 9.
. New Zealand Law Commission, Report No 8, A Personal Property Securities Act for New Zealand (NZLC R8), 1989, Wellington.
. See Professor J S Ziegal (1991), op cit, 701-702 and Professor AL Diamond, op cit, paragraph 8.1.6
. eg the use of special priority rules for particular types of property and particular types of security.
Discussion Paper 28 (1992) - Personal Property Securities
4. Proposals
History of this Reference (Digest)
Introduction
4.1 In this chapter the Commissions provisionally propose the adoption of a single legal regime, which includes registration, for
all personal property securities. The chapter goes on to discuss the coverage of this regime in greater detail by looking at the
chapter also discusses the priority rules which should be applied in the event that a number of securities are taken over the same
piece of property. The position of purchasers who take for value without notice of prior encumbrances is also addressed. The final
chapter considers how to bring existing registers within the new regime and what to do about company charges.
A single national legal regime
4.2 Existing personal property securities laws are inconsistent and cause confusion for prudent potential lenders and other persons
interested to determine whether a piece of personal property over which it is intended to take security is already encumbered. Each
to determine once and for all, without the need for searches to be made in every jurisdiction in Australia, whether a piece of personal
property is already encumbered. They should also be able to determine quickly and easily what priority any particular security will
have. In preceding chapters the Commissions identified the need for reform of existing Australian personal property securities law.
It concluded that the Article 9 approach is a suitable principle to guide reform. The principal reason for favouring this approach
is that it incorporates a functional definition of a security within a single legal regime. If a similar approach were embodied in
the law in Australia, it would help to resolve difficulties that arise through the use of often vastly different systems of regulation
between and within Australian jurisdictions. To achieve this uniformity there should be a single comprehensive legal regime which
covers all interests that are in substance personal property securities, which enables priorities to be determined between competing
interests and which includes a system of registration.
There should be a single comprehensive legal regime for all Australian jurisdictions covering all types of personal property securities.
The regime should make provision for the priority of competing securities and the priority of purchasers of secured property and
should provide for the registration of securities.
Introduction
4.3 One of the principal defects of the current law is that it applies differently to different kinds of property. The types of property
covered by each of the bills of sale registers, for example, differs between each jurisdiction.
There is also a lack of uniformity in relation to the types of ‘goods’ covered by each jurisdiction’s chattel securities
legislation.
Provisional proposal
4.4 To achieve the goals of a single, comprehensive regime and to dispel confusion created by a multiplicity of registration systems,
the new regime should apply to all types of personal property - both tangible and intangible.
The new regime should apply to all types of personal property.
Regime to apply to functional securities only
Functional definition
4.5 Under the current law, registration requirements often regulate instruments rather than security transactions. The approaches
adopted by the laws of the various Australian jurisdictions lack direction and uniformity. At present, instruments are registered
not because they are necessarily associated with a security purpose but because legislation requires instruments of that type to
be registered. Conversely, the legislation excludes other types of instrument from the requirement to register because the instrument
fails to meet the formal require-ments for registrable instruments. The present laws’ deficiencies can be overcome by establishing
a new legislative regime which applies to security transactions on the basis of the purpose of the transaction rather than the form
or kind of the instrument. This would ensure that lenders can be certain of their priority through notice of all encumbrances over
personal property which may affect them. This approach is taken in Article 9 of the US Uniform Commercial Code, the various Canadian
models, and the New Zealand and United Kingdom proposals, all of which apply a purposive or functional definition to determine what
should be classified as a security.
Form not conclusive
4.6 Provided that a security purpose is evident in a transaction and a security interest is created the regime should apply and registration
should be possible, regardless of the form of the instrument creating the security interests. This is the effect of the functional
approach. The intention of the parties to the security arrangement is what is important. The form of the transaction may be of assistance
in determining the intention of the parties but it is not conclusive. For example, it is hard to imagine a fixed or floating charge,
a mortgage, an unpaid vendor’s lien, a conditional sale agreement (including an agreement to sell subject to retention of title),
a hire-purchase agreement or a pledge not having a security purpose but the form which these instruments take may not be definitive
of their purpose. The proposals are not aimed at discouraging or limiting the kinds of transactions which are currently in use or
which may be invented in the future; they are designed only to regulate the legal consequences of security transactions.
Overseas models
4.7 This approach is consistent with the approaches adopted in overseas jurisdictions. Professor Diamond, for instance, notes in relation
to the reforms suggested for the United Kingdom that
... the intention to create a security interest is all-important ... [I]t does not matter what form of agreement is used provided
that the intention is manifested.
I would not envisage the legislation as prohibiting any form of agreement the parties wish to use, and the interference with the form
of agreement chosen should be kept to a minimum.
The regime should apply to arrangements which are intended to create securities. That is to say, if the transaction is one that creates
an interest in, or enables a person to exercise a right over, personal property, and the purpose of the arrangement is to secure
the performance of an obligation, the transaction should be subject to the new regime.
The form which the transaction takes and its legal character (for example, as a mortgage, charge or lien) should be relevant to determining
the purpose of the transaction but should not be conclusive.
Kinds of borrowing arrangements to be covered
Introduction
4.8 Some types of borrowing arrangements
are either specifically included or specifically excluded from overseas personal property security models even though they have a
security purpose. One rationale for these exceptions from the general rule is a desire to maintain some degree of certainty about
the scope of operation of the regimes set up by these models since creating statutory exceptions avoids the need to determine the
more fundamental issue of whether the transaction does in fact have a security purpose. Many of the transactions which are specifically
excluded from a regime are very common transactions. Thus, another reason for excluding these transactions from a regime involves
a desire to avoid the cost and delay associated with many transactions which may not have any commercial significance whatsoever.
This section briefly examines the scope of each overseas model. It points out where these models diverge and concludes with provisional
proposals for the type of borrowing arrangements that should be included within and excluded from the proposed regime.
The United States
Article 9 applies to
any transaction (regardless of its form) which is intended to create a security interest in personal property or fixtures including
goods, documents, instruments, general intangibles, chattel paper or accounts
any sale of accounts or chattel paper
security interests created by pledges, assignments, chattels mortgages, chattel trusts, trust deeds, factor’s liens, conditional
sales, trust receipts, other lien or title retention devices and leases or consignments intended as security
. The following interests are excluded from the Article 9 system and therefore cannot be registered
security interests which are subject to any statute of the United States which governs the rights of parties to and third parties
affected by transactions in particular types of property
interests in sales of accounts or chattel paper which form part of the assets of a business which is up for sale
transfers of an interest in, or a claim in or under, any policy of insurance transfers of an interest in a deposit account
a landlord’s lien
any other lien given by statute or rule of law except as provided by section 9-310 (priority of certain liens arising by operation
transfer of a claim for wages, salary or other compensation of an employee
transfer by a government or governmental subdivision or agency
right represented by a judgment (other than a judgment taken on a right to payment which was collateral)
rights to set-off
except as provided in section 9-313 (fixtures),
the creation or transfer of a real interest
transfer in whole or in part of any claim arising out of tort.
The general pattern of these provisions would seem to be the exclusion of non-consensual security interests in contingent or non-vested
Inclusions.
Ontario and the Western Provinces have each adopted Article 9 type personal property security regimes. Subject to some exceptions,
transactions are registrable, and therefore subject to the rights and duties imposed by the regimes, if they have a security purpose.
In relation to the Ontario Act Professor McLaren notes that
... the Act applies to every transaction
that in substance creates a security interest, without regard to title or to form. The concept eliminates the former need to categorise
security devices by the form of the transaction. It is designed to remain flexible and clearly reproduces the conventional understanding
of a security interest in personal property that is at the heart of every secured transaction.
This logic is applied to assignments, leases and consignments.
... all transactions that are given the legal clothing of an assignment, lease or consignment, but are actually a disguise for a
transaction that is in substance a security assignment or purchase-money transaction, are to be considered within the scope of the
The issue is whether the transaction was ‘intended as security’.
In Manitoba, mortgages, leases and charges come within the operation of the Act notwithstanding that the collateral is real property.
The rationale for this policy is that these types of instruments have dual characters. For example, a lease of land is an interest
in real property from the point of view of the lessee who acquires exclusive possession of the leased property. From the lessor’s
point of view the lease agreement creates personal property: the right to receive rent. In practice, the Manitoba Act only requires
that these types of interest be subject to the regime established by the Act if the assignment is for the purpose of securing an
obligation. Therefore a lease, for example, will only have to be registered when it is assigned for the purposes of securing a loan;
it need not be registered where it is an absolute assignment. A lessor’s right to be paid rent is not secured by the tenant’s
occupation. However, if the lessor took a loan from a bank and produced as collateral its right to receive rent then the bank’s
interest in the lease is a security interest for the purposes of the Act.
Saskatchewan, Alberta and British Columbia.
Saskatchewan’s Act was a forerunner to the Western Canada Model Act. The latter has been adopted by Alberta and British Columbia.
The regimes set up under Saskatchewan’s Act and the Western Canada Model Act are fundamentally different from the Ontario Act
in that the former regimes specifically include commercial consignments, leases for more than one year and interests arising from
an assignment of accounts or a transfer of chattel paper whether or not they have a security purpose.
They opt for certainty over the functional approach.
The Ontario Act excludes the following types of interests from the operation of its personal property securities regime
- liens given by statute or law, with the exception of liens on real and personal property obtained by judicial process (s 36 and
37 of the Act) and artisans’ liens (s 32)
- transfers of interests or claims in or under any policy of insurance or contract of annuity
- any transaction regulated by the
Pawnbrokers Act 1980
- mortgages, charges or assignments whose registration is provided for in the
Corporation Securities Registration Act 1980
- assignments of an interest (including a mortgage, charge or lease) in real property.
The Manitoba Act excludes the same types of interests as those listed above for Ontario with the exception of corporate securities
- these are included in the Manitoba regime. The latter regime also adds to this list of exclusions the following
- interests in life insurance contracts
- assignments of wages
- security interests in property of the Crown or any of its emanations buyers’ and sellers’ rights under the
Sale of Goods Act
1980 (RSO) c 462
Saskatchewan, Alberta and British Columbia
The type of transactions excluded from the Saskatchewan Act are largely the same as in the Ontario Act. The only difference is that
insurance proceeds, which are excluded from the Ontario Act, are covered by the Saskatchewan Act.
New Zealand
The New Zealand Law Commission proposals were modelled upon the Western Canada Model. It is therefore hardly surprising that they
specifically include
assignments of accounts receivable or chattel paper
leases for more than one year and
commercial consignments
even if the assignment, lease or transfer does not secure the payment or performance of an obligation. The functional approach otherwise
The personal property securities regime which the New Zealand Law Commission proposes specifically excludes the following interests
a lien, charge or other interest created by any other Act or rule of law
a transfer of an interest or a claim in or under a contract of annuity or policy of insurance, except as provided by the Act with
respect to proceeds and priorities in proceeds
interests in sales of accounts or chattel paper which form part of the assets of a business which is up for sale
unless the vendor remains in apparent control after the sale
(emphasis added)
the assignment of an accounts receivable
made solely to facilitate the collection of the accounts receivable on behalf of the person making the assignment (the assignor)
(emphasis added)
transfers of present or future wages, salary, pay, commission or any other compensation for labour or personal services
a transfer of an unearned right to payment under a contract to a person who is to perform the transferor’s obligation under
the contract
assignments for the general benefit of creditors of the person making the assignment
a transfer, or assignment, or mortgage, or assignment of a mortgage, of any ship or vessel or any share of any ship or vessel if at
the time of execution of the instrument the ship or vessel is registered or is required to be registered under the provisions of
Part XII of the
Shipping and Seamen Act
the creation or transfer of an interest in land
a transfer of a right to payment that arises in connection with an interest in land, including a transfer of rental payments under
a lease of, or licence to occupy, land unless the right to payment is evidenced by a security
a transfer of a right to damages in tort.
United Kingdom
Professor Diamond argues that any new legislation governing personal property securities should be based closely on the models set
out above. He concurs that only consensual security interests should be subject to the operation of any new regime and defines security
interests as
mortgages, charges and security in the strict sense but also any other transfer or retention of any interest in or rights over property
other than land which secures the payment of money or the performance of any other obligation.
Title retention contracts, possessory security rights, corporate securities and consumer transactions should all come within the scope
of the regime in the United Kingdom, according to Professor Diamond, notwithstanding that the interests created by these types of
transactions may not need to be registered. Professor Diamond’s proposal concerning possessory security rights is consistent
with other overseas models: security rights acquired by virtue of possession need not be registered to ensure priority because possession
itself confers sufficient rights on the secured party without the need for statutory protections. Notwithstanding this Professor
Diamond maintains that possessory security rights should be registrable and able to be brought within the scope of the regime if
... so that future generations of lawyers would have to learn and apply just one law of security interests and not two or three different
sets of laws ....
Encouraging holders of possessory security rights to register their interests also benefits potential creditors and other interested
parties since the register becomes a more complete record of all securities over a particular piece of property. The register is
therefore able to serve much better as a notice device. Similarly, he suggests that a number of other types of interests should be
included in the scope of the Act but excluded from the requirement to file. Presumably these interests are then perfected without
registration. These interests are as follows
interests in consumer goods (other than interests in motor vehicles, caravans, trailers and vessels not registered under the
Merchant Shipping Act
1894 (UK))�interests in small transactions
purchase money security interests and
transfers in the ordinary course of business.
. Professor Diamond’s functional definition of security interests is carefully qualified to
obligations
which could be said to ‘secure’ payment or performance such as guarantees, indemnity policies or performance bonds, for
these do not involve an interest in or right over property.
Application of the proposed regime to specific forms of transaction
Introduction
4.17 The intention to create a security interest is the touchstone for determining whether an interest is registrable under Article
9 and is the basis of the’ proposed regime. This approach differs from the traditional definition of a security which is dependent
upon the form of the transaction. Implicit in the functional approach is a requirement that the parties intend to create a security.
In this section specific types of transaction are considered to determine whether any specific rule is necessary in addition to the
functional definition or purposive approach.
Overseas models
4.18 The overseas models which have adopted the functional approach have not held consistently to it but have departed from it by
making specific exceptions. Each, at times, deems certain transactions to be, or not to be, subject to the regime on the basis of
their form whether or not they have the effect of creating securities. These deeming provisions most often relate to transfers of
accounts receivable and chattel paper, leases for more than one year and commercial consignments. Article 9, the Western Canada Model
Act and the New Zealand proposals all make provision for these interests to be specifically included in their personal property security
regimes even if they do not secure the payment or performance of an obligation. These deeming provisions are intended to cover transactions
which to a third party look like securities even if they do not secure the payment or performance of an obligation. The Ontario Act
compounds the inconsistency by following the other overseas models in part only. Assignments of book debts are brought within the
regime but commercial consignments and leases are not. This inconsistency has drawn criticism from a number of quarters. It extends,
however, to various types of arrangement in different rnodels.
Accounts receivable and chattel paper
Overseas models
United States
Chattel paper and accounts are included in section 9-102(1)(a) and (2) of Article 9 as assignment interests unless they
- are assigned for the purpose of collection only or
- involve the transfer of a right to payment where the assignment contract stipulates that the assignee is the party whose performance
is wanting or
- involve the transfer of a single account to an assignee in whole or partial satisfaction of a pre-existing indebtedness
- are assigned as part of the sale of a business.
Canada and New Zealand
There are similar exceptions in the Ontario and Western Canada Model Acts and the New Zealand proposals.
Provisional proposal
The deeming provision in the overseas models is a departure from the functional basis of the regime. Its complexity and detail reflect
the fact that assignments of accounts receivable and chattel paper may create securities but need not. The overseas desire for certainty
is a legitimate policy consideration but it is pursued at the cost of consistency and compromises the effectiveness of the proposed
regime. It appears to be both unnecessary and undesirable.
There should be no provision deeming sales of accounts receivable or of chattel paper to be, or not to be, subject to the regime.
The functional definition should be applied.
Overseas models
United States and Canada
Equipment leases, referred to in section 9-102(2), have always proved to be somewhat of a thorn in the side of the Article 9 system
... the line separating a functional security from a short term rental is peculiarly difficult to discover.
There are three options available for remedying this problem.
The matter can be left open to be determined by [the] courts on a case-by-case basis, which is the position in Ontario [PPSA 1989
s 2(a)(ii)(“a lease ... that secures payment or performance of an obligation”)]. Or the distinction can be based on a
sophisticated list of criteria including the life expectancy of the goods and the existence of an option or of an obligation to renew,
which may be seen in the 1988 edition of the Uniform Commercial Code [Section 1-201(37)]. Thirdly, an arbitrary period in excess
of which a transaction is deemed to be a security lease may be enacted. The period of more than one year was chosen by Saskatchewan
[Personal Property Security Act 1979-80 (SS) c P-6.1 ss 2(y), 3(a)]
though Professor Diamond thought that too short and recommended instead a term of between three and five years [Professor AL Diamond,
A Review of Security Interests in Property, 1989, Department of Trade and Industry, London, 38-42].
New Zealand
Interests created under lease agreements, the duration of which is more than one year, are specifically included in the proposals
of the New Zealand Law Commission,
even though the actual interests pursuant to the individual agreements may create no security rights. The New Zealand Law Commission
reasons that
[i]n practical and legal effect many commercial leases are indistin-guishable from hire-purchase agreements. They create the same
degree of apparent ownership which justifies the traditional regulation of chattel mortgages and charges as well as the proposed
regulation of title-based securities and assignments . . .
In the interests of certainty ... [l]eases for more than one year serve as devices for financing acquisition of effective ownership
of an asset [and therefore should be] ... automatically subject to the statute ... Such a lease will seldom be attractive, for tax
or accounting purposes, unless it extends over a period longer than one year computed by reference to the original term plus the
possibility of renewal or de facto extension. The one year requirement will also exclude most operating leases the terms of which
are usually measured in days or weeks . . . [This] automatic treatment applies only to those recurring situations where leases are
employed by suppliers and acquirers of goods as an alternative to hire-purchase or conditional sale agreements . . .
Where a lease outside this definition serves as a means for financing acquisition of goods, it remains potentially subject to the
statute. . .
The New Zealand Law Commission recommendation for the inclusion of leases for more than one year appears to hinge upon a desire to
avoid uncertainty in the application of the substantive approach. The New Zealand proposals are largely modelled upon the Western
Provinces Model Act
which also specifically includes leases for more than one year - even if they do not have a security purpose. However, it is important
to note that the protections offered by the legislation do not apply in their entirety to these leasehold interests. Those parts
of the legislation that deal with priorities, including registration, are applicable to these types of interest but the provisions
that deal with rights and remedies upon default only apply to security interests. Leases which do not secure payment or performance
of an obligation therefore cannot attract the rights offered by these provisions in spite of the fact that they do attract other
rights given in the legislation. In order to place emphasis on the importance of the definition of security, Professor Diamond states
that he was initially inclined not to include leases expressly in the UK regime. However, this would leave the courts to decide whether
or not a lease was in fact a security, without legislative guidance. He proposes therefore that leases should be included. Professor
Diamond would not, however, follow the Canadian example strictly. He considers that one year is too short, making too many leases
registrable. Instead, he recommends that those parts of the legislation which deal with priorities, including registration, should
be applied to leases of three years or more. Whether a lease has a security purpose sufficient to attract the remedies provisions
is a question which would still require resolution by reference to the definition of security interest and factors including whether
the lease was a long term arrangement with an option to purchase. An option to purchase may attract the title-retention provisions.
(Professor Diamond is of the view that all title-retention agreements should be subject to the regime since they do in fact create
security interests.
Provisional proposal
The Canadian model and the Diamond recommendations therefore deem certain leases to be securities and others not to be securities
but only for certain specified purposes. Other provisions still depend on the application of the functional definition. This approach
may be founded in business practice and in the desire for certainty. However, it introduces artificial distinctions while still leaving
the fundamental question (that is, whether the lease is in fact a security) to be determined for a number of purposes. The basis
of the regime should be maintained: agreements should not be included in or excluded from the regime simply because of their form.
There should be no provision deeming leases to be, or not to be, subject to the regime. The functional definition should be applied.
Consignments
Introduction
A consignment is traditionally an arrangement whereby goods are supplied, say, by a producer to a retailer on the condition that the
producer retains title in the goods until they are sold or otherwise disposed of in a way which is authorised by the producer. When
the goods are sold by the retailer the producer’s title in the goods continues into the proceeds. If the goods are not sold,
title in the goods remains with the producer. Therefore, under the traditional or /pure’ consignment arrangement, the retailer
acts as the producer’s agent. Technically, this relationship does not give rise to a security but to all the world, which sees
the stock-in-trade in the retailer’s possession, the producer’s title is not evident. The question therefore arises whether
the consignment should be deemed to be a security for the purposes of the notice provision of the regime.
Overseas models
United States
Under section 9-102(2) of Article 9 consignment agreements which are intended to create a security interest are registrable. Consignment
agreements which are not intended to create security agreements are subject to other provisions in Article 9 which in fact impose
the same or similar requirements for notice and registration if their priority is to be protected.
New Zealand
The New Zealand Law Commission’s proposals follow the Article
approach and deem commercial consignments to be subject to the regime even if they do not have a security purpose.
The only exception is where the interest is the interest of a seller or a seller’s agent who has shipped goods to a buyer under
a negotiable bill of lading or its equivalent and the parties have evidenced an intention to create or provide a security interest
in the goods other than by way of the bill of lading agreement.
The New Zealand Law Commission reasoned that commercial consignments should be specifically included in the regime on the basis that
a retailer’s ostensible ownership of goods which are taken on consigrument may mislead subsequent creditors in their evaluation
of the credit worthiness of the retailer if this interest is not registered.
Unlike Article 9 the Ontario Act does not make express provision for consignments, leaving their inclusion or exclusion to be determined
by the functional definition. Saunders J of the Ontario Supreme Court has proposed a two-stage test in keeping with the purposive
approach for determining whether a commercial consignment creates a registrable security right. The first leg of this test is whether
the transaction in dispute is a sale or a consignment; the second leg poses the question whether, if the transaction is a consignment,
it was intended to create a security interest. If the transaction is a sale or conditional sale it is, by definition, a security
transaction since the supplier has an interest (often a purchase money security interest) in the goods if the debtor defaults or
otherwise fails to comply with its obligations under the contract of sale. If, however, the transaction is treated as a consignment,
the consignee has the option to return the goods supplied by the consignor if they are not used or disposed of. True consignment
agreements are not security agreements since there is no obligation on the consignee to pay for unsold items. Speaking of the
Personal Property Security Act 1973
(Ont) Saunders J notes that
[i]n order for a consignment arrangement to come within the [Act], it must create a security interest within the meaning of s 1(y)
and, in my view, in the context of the statute, such an agreement must be intended to secure the payment or performance of an obligation
on the part of the consignee.
Provisional proposal
Clearly there are quite distinct consequences flowing from whether a consignment is or is not a security. The distinction is not insignifi-cant
or artificial. Under conventional “pure’ consignment agreements the consignee is not obligated to pay the consignor for
unsold items but can instead return them. A consignor in this situation may have no security interest if it retains title to the
goods on consignment and re-taking possession is not likely to be associated with profound difficulties. There is no basis therefore
for the introduction of deeming provisions to include or exclude all consignment agreements from the regime on the basis of their
form. This approach is consistent with the provisions about consignments adopted in the Ontario Act. In this context, Saunders J’s
test provides a suitable means of determining whether a consignment creates a security.
There should be no provision deeming consignments to be, or not to be, subject to the regime. The functional definition should be
Title retention arrangements (including Romalpa clauses)
Introduction.
Title-retention arrangements are contractual provisions which permit the seller under a commercial contract for the sale of goods
and the creditor under a hire-purchase agreement to retain title in the goods sold or hired until such time as the conditions of
the sale are complied with by the buyer or the hirer completes payment of all hire-purchase instalments.
Professor Diamond considers that conditional sales and hire-purchase agreements do in fact create security interests within the terms
of his definition
where they are arrangements which secure payment of the purchase money. On this basis, he proposes that title-retention agreements
should be subject to the regime.
Purchase money securities
In these two examples (conditional sales and hire-purchase agreements) the vendor retains title only until such time as the debtor’s
obligations have been met. The title retention device may therefore be characterised as a purchase money security interest, that
is, an interest taken by the seller of goods to secure payment of their price or by a lender of money used to pay for them.
Title-retention clauses may also have another effect, giving the vendor a claim to receive the price to which it is entitled where
this claim is to be met out of the proceeds of the good’s resale by the buyer. A more difficult issue arises from claims arising
out of so-called “all-monies” clauses where title does not pass until all outstanding monies have been received by the
vendor irrespective of the source of the debt.
Professor Diamond notes that in Scotland these all-monies clauses do not create a security and go beyond a mere retention of title.
Insofar as the position in England and Wales is concerned, Professor Diamond notes that their status is ‘uncertain’ though
[u]nder the proposed new legislation it would of course be a valid security interest, but would clearly go beyond a purchase money
security interest: it appears on the face of the clause that title is retained until money other than the price of the particular
goods is paid.
Other title retention transactions
Another type of title-retention clause is that which purports to claim title in respect of goods or materials which the vendor did
not supply or which it no longer supplies. Professor Diamond applies similar reasoning to this situation as to that for all-monies
clauses, while noting that they are not in fact purchase money security interests.
Provisional proposal
Title-retention arrangements are not intrinsically different from other forms of borrowing arrangements which are capable of being
used as security. The regime should apply to them without specific provision being made for the inclusion or exclusion of particular
The new regime should make it clear that title-retention agreements, including those involving Romalpa clauses, are subject to the
regime if the functional definition is satisfied.
Bills of Wing and other documents of title
Introduction.
Bills of lading are documents of title in the same way as ‘ ... warehouse receipts, dock warrants and any other writing which
specifically states the bailee’s obligation to deliver to a named person or its transferee’.
In other words, bills of lading and other documents of title are proxies for the goods which appear on the bill. They are as capable
of being secured as the property itself.
One type of title-retention device which, in Professor Diamond’s opinion, should be excluded from the regime is that where
... the seller of goods ships goods to the buyer under a bill of lading and either has the bill of lading made out to the seller
(Sale of Goods Act 1989
(UK) s 19(2)) or has the bill of lading made out to the buyer but retains the right to possession of it until payment, perhaps by
means of a documentary bill of exchange
(Sale of Goods Act
1979 s 19(3)) or by using the machinery of a banker’s commercial credit. These all involve the retention of title by the seller,
but are such well-established types of commercial transactions that it would be unwise to interfere with them.
Overseas models
Both the Saskatchewan reforms
and the New Zealand proposed reforms adopt the same approach in respect of title-retention devices pursuant to bills of lading. Bills
of lading are excluded from both regimes.
Provisional proposal
There is no good reason to exclude bills of lading and other documents of title from the regime. If there is a security in the bill
it should be subject to the regime; if there is no security it is unnecessary to explicitly exclude it.
There should be no provision deeming bills of lading and other documents of title to be, or not to be, subject to the regime. The
functional definition should apply.
Factoring agreements
Introduction
Professor Goode describes a true factoring agreement as a sale of an accounts receivable or a debt.
This type of transaction attracts the purchaser priority rules.
For the most part factoring agreements will not be security transactions but there may be situations where the agreement does secure
the performance of obligations.
Overseas models
United States, Canada and the United Kingdom
Both Article 9 and the Canadian Uniform Personal Property Security Act apply to assignments and sales of accounts receivable even
if they are not for a security purpose.
As Professor Diamond notes,
the explanation for this is given in the Official Comment to Section 9-102 of the Uniform Commercial Code, which says that
Commercial financing on the basis of accounts ... is often so conducted that the distinction between a security transfer and a sale
is blurred, and a sale of such property is therefore covered ... whether intended for security or not ... The buyer is then treated
as a secured party, and his interest as a security interest.
Professor Diamond concludes that a factoring agreement would be treated as a security by these regimes even if it was not for a security
purpose. He notes the difficulty of distinguishing between an assignment of accounts receivable and a secured loan of accounts receivable
“which contemplates an outright assignment for cash coupled with an obligation to repurchase the account if the debtor whose
debt was assigned fails to pay the assignee”.
Added to this difficulty is the fact that it is an expensive and time-consuming process for debtors to determine whether their debt
has been assigned. For these reasons, Professor Diamond prefers the Article 9 approach.
New Zealand
The New Zealand Law Commission’s proposal excludes factoring agreements
upon the basis that a true factoring agreement is not a security transaction within the meaning of the draft legislation since it
does not create an interest in property conferring rights exercisable for a security purpose.
Provisional proposal
The regime should not deem a transfer of property to be a security if the instrument does not, in fact, secure the performance of
consensual obligations, even where there is some confusion as to how to distinguish an assignment from a factor. If a factoring agreement
involves recourse to the original assignor, it may in reality be a security device, in which case it should be registered; if it
does not create security it should not be subject to the regime. The functional definition should apply.
There should be no provision deeming factoring agreements to be, or not to be, subject to the regime. The functional definition should
be applied.
Assignments of debt and declarations of trust
The New Zealand Law Commission also specifically excludes assignments given for the general benefit of the creditors of the assignor.
The New Zealand Law Commission reasons that, although these assignments do create rights, they are not ‘created ... to secure
the performance of a specified obligation’. Rather, the assignment is a means of enforcing rights. Again, the determining factor
should not be what form the transaction takes but what rights are derived from the interests created by the transaction. Similar
issues arise in respect of declarations of trust.
Proposal 10
There should be no provision deeming assignments of debt or declarations of trust to be, or not to be, subject to the regime. The
functional definition should be applied.
Rental bond money for residential premises
Both Article 9
and the New Zealand Law Commission’s proposals
exclude from their respective regimes a lessor’s right to rent for residential premises. No proposal is made at this stage
in relation to a lessor’s right to rent on residential premises. However, the Commission has considered the right of a lessor
to rental bond money. This right is a non-possessory security right in the sense that the money is held not by the lessors themselves
but the Rental Bond Board or equivalent authority or another as stakeholder on trust for the parties. The money is in fact accumulated
with other bond moneys and held in a trust account. A lessor has an absolute right to claim an amount equivalent to the amount paid
as bond should a tenant breach the tenancy agreement in any of the ways prescribed by the agreement. This conditional right combined
with the fact that the moneys are already allocated - they do not have to be claimed from the tenant upon default - means that the
interests in the bond would be unlikely to come within the functional definition for the purposes of the regime. In any event, in
this case, for the sake of certainty there is sufficient justification for specifically excluding the interest from the regime.
Proposal 11
The right of a lessor of residential premises to rental bond money should be expressly excluded from the regime.
Statutory securities
4.39 Article 9
and the approaches adopted or proposed in Canada, the United Kingdom and New Zealand
specifically exclude rights created by operation of law, on the grounds that these interests are non-consensual and that holders
of these types of securities are already given sufficient protection. These rights fall into two general groups: those which concern
private interests and those which concern public moneys. The former are securities created by law and often enhanced by statute to
protect certain categories of business from defaulting customers. An example of such a right is a lien. The ALRC sees no reason to
exclude such private rights from the regime: the priorities of these creditors should be determined on the same basis as other creditors.
As the holders of these kinds of securities are usually in possession of the property they will already benefit from the priority
given to possessory rights.
Statutory securities which concern public moneys, on the other hand, are created to ensure the payment to the State or to public
authorities of duties, taxes, charges and other levies pursuant to public policy requirements. The ALRC considers that these securities
should be exempted from the regime and be accorded such priority as the Parliament may determine in the legislation in question.
The NSWLRC, in line with the approaches of overseas regimes, considers that all securities arising by law should be excluded from
the regime because they are non-consensual.
Proposal 12
ALRC: Securities created by statutes to secure the payment of duties, taxes or other charges to public authorities should be expressly
excluded from the regime. Other securities created by operation of law, however, should not be expressly excluded but the functional
definition and the usual rules should be applied.
NSWLRC: Securities arising by law should be excluded from the regime.
Creation and enforcement
Security agreements to be in writing
Introduction
An agreement which creates security rights may be an oral or a written agreement. Should securities be included in the proposed regime
regardless of whether the agreement was written or oral? There seems little need for writing where the property secured is in the
possession of the creditor since possession itself is evidence of the creditor’s interest in the property. That kind of evidence
may not be available, however, where the security is non-possessory unless the agreement is in writing.
Overseas models
In all major overseas models a security agreement falling within the regimes is not enforceable as against third parties unless it
is in writing. Article 9, the New Zealand proposals and the United Kingdom proposals require that the agreement be in writing for
all purposes, even for enforcement as between the parties. Canadian legislation, however, does not require that the agreement be
in writing for validity as between the creditor and the debtor. Professor Diamond presents a number of reasons for requiring a security
agreement to be in writing
writing is evidentiary in nature and therefore minimises the opportunities for dispute as to whether a security was created and what
property is affected by the security, and the potential for fraud
writing imports a solemnity to what is essentially a property transaction and not a mere contract
in a commercial environment individual consumers may have little bargaining power. Writing therefore helps to protect less powerful
parties to the transaction.
Provisional proposal
The giving and taking of security over property is a contractual arrangement that has consequences for the parties to the transaction
and third parties. For a creditor it provides protection for the performance of obligations. For a debtor it places at risk the debtor’s
interest in the property secured. It can also affect a third party’s interest in or claim to the same property. To avoid fraud
and promote certainty existing legislation requires that interests in and transfers of real property be evidenced by writing. A degree
of formality is also appropriate and necessary when dealing with personal property, especially in relation to secured debts, for
the same purposes - to avoid fraud and to promote certainty. A written security arrangement protects the parties to the transaction
and interested third parties.
Proposal 13
The new regime should require that the creation of a non-possessory security be by writing and signed by the debtor. The consequence
of non-compliance should be that the debt becomes unsecured (that is, the security fails but the debt remains valid) and is not enforceable
against secured third parties.
Enforceability
Enforceability as between the parties
The existing law governing enforceability of security agreements as between the parties is inconsistent and confusing. Some statutes
require registration for validity, making unregistered agreements void and unenforceable as between the parties - but for the registration
and form provisions in these statutes, these security arrangements would be enforceable as between the parties under the common law.
Other statutes
provide for registration but do not require it for validity. The effect of failure to register is loss of priority. In the absence
of statutory provision the general law applies to the validity and enforceability of concluded agreements as between the parties.
Under Article 9 the security interest is said to ‘attach’ once it becomes enforceable as between the parties. The general
law - common law and the rules of equity -governs the validity of the agreement as between the parties. The proposed regime is not
the vehicle to re-define rules of enforceability between the parties. Where a security is not registered or is unable to be registered,
the general law should apply: if the security agreement is not valid as between the parties then it will not be enforceable as between
the parties except where the rules of equity provide otherwise.
Enforceability as against third parties
If a similar arrangement were adopted, agreements not enforceable between the parties would not be enforceable against third parties.
Under the existing law, where the security is registrable and has, in fact, been registered, it will be enforceable against third
parties provided it complies with relevant statutory requirements as to form.
A failure to comply with other legislative requirements regarding the formalities for a security agreement should not defeat the
validity of the security - and the priority it acquires - as against third parties where the security is registered and the third
party, which has an interest in the same property, has registered its interest later in time or not at all. The new regime should
let the general law determine validity and should allow for securities to be provisionally registered where the agreements are incomplete
as to a matter of form.
Enforceability as against a liquidator or trustee in bankruptcy
The New Zealand Law Commission has proposed that a secured creditor whose security was not registered should be able to enforce this
security against a liquidator or trustee in bankruptcy on insolvency. The Commissions disagree with this approach. In keeping with
the policy that the regime should make no exceptions about the validity of a security, a failure to register should render a security
unenforceable not only against third parties but against a liquidator and trustee in bankruptcy as well. The priority rules, dealt
with at paragraphs 4.46 - 4.85, are based upon the policy that, so far as those searching or relying upon the register are concerned,
a secured creditor who could have registered the security but chose not to is in the same position as an unsecured creditor. On an
insolvency, its access to the debtor’s property should therefore be the same as the access of an unsecured creditor.
It is therefore provisionally proposed that a security should not be enforceable against a liquidator, official trustee in bankruptcy
or official manager of a company if it is unregistered. It is further proposed that in the case of a possessory security right
the security should only be enforceable by a liquidator, official trustee in bankruptcy or official manager if possession was not
obtained within 28 days after the relevant security transaction occurred.
Proposal 14
The new regime should make no provision about the validity of a security agreement - the general law should apply. Where a security
is a valid security the general law should also apply to the enforceability of this security as between the parties. Where a security
is a valid security the regime should determine the enforceability of this security as against third parties. There should be no
special exception to the rule for non-possessory securities where the debtor has been declared bankrupt or has gone into liquidation:
securities should not be enforceable against liquidators, trustees in bankruptcy or official managers where they would be otherwise
unenforceable because they are not registered. For possessory securities, the security should only be enforceable against a liquidator,
trustee in bankruptcy or official manager if possession was not obtained within 28 days after the security transaction took place.
Introduction
4.46 A clear, simple and rational priority order, which accords with and supports sound commercial practice, is essential when there
is more than one secured creditor with a claim over a debtor’s assets. The establishment of clear priority rules is a primary
objective of reform of personal property securities laws.
General rules
Overseas models
Overseas models and, to some extent, the Corporations Law provide a number of special rules to cover particular types of security
arrangements as well as a series of general rules. The special rules are applied first if appropriate, for example, if fixtures are
If the special rules are inapplicable because the regime makes no provision for the security arrangement under consideration, the
general priority rules are applied. For this reason the general priority rules are sometimes referred to as residual priority rules.
The following residual rules apply or are proposed in the United States, Canada, New Zealand and the United Kingdom
a perfected security
interest ranks ahead of an unperfected security interest
a perfected security interest which is perfected earlier in time prevails over a perfected security interest perfected later in time
an unperfected security interest which attaches
earlier in time prevails over an unperfected security interest which attaches later in time.
These rules replace the common law principle that a security acquired in good faith and without notice of existing encumbrances has
priority. Under the Article 9 approach only
purchasers for value without notice - those to whom title in the goods is transferred and not simply a security interest
- are able to make use of the ‘for value without notice’ principle in relation to personal property.
Provisional Proposal
. An alternative and simpler approach discussed in the following paragraphs is to use only one set of rules. This has the advantage
of negating the need to determine whether a special rule has to be applied first. The provisional proposals concerning special types
of security arrangements (for example, floating charges) or special types of property (for example, commingled goods) should be considered
as rules about when to apply the general priority rules rather than as special priority rules.
Proposal 15
The new regime should provide three general rules to determine priority as between competing creditors
a registered security prevails over an unregistered one
a security which is registered earlier in time prevails over a security which is registered later in time
an unregistered security which is created earlier in time prevails over an unregistered security created later in time.
Possession of secured property
Overseas models
Under Article 9 a security attracts the protections (and obligations) of the regime if it has been perfected. Perfection is achieved
either by filing or, in the case of possessory securities, by possession. Some property (for example, money and negotiable instruments
such as cheques) cannot be perfected by filing and therefore can only be perfected by possession. A secured party normally only has
possession of the secured property in the case of a pledge (or pawn) or a lien. A creditor in possession of secured property acquires
the rights and obligations accorded by the regime automatically. The stated reason for the possessory security being exempted from
the normal filing requirement is that possession is considered sufficient notice to all the world that a security exists over the
possessed property. The Halliday and Crowther Reports have affirmed the Article 9 approach: a notice of a possessory security should
not have to be filed. Professor Diamond also agrees that this is the correct approach but adds the proviso that filing is not necessary
so long as the goods remain with the secured party. The argument for holders of possessory securities having to file is that there
is a need for a public record of all financial dealings. That is to say, the register should be a complete source of information.
Professor Diamond does not find this argument terribly convincing.
Provisional proposal
The question which therefore arises is whether persons in possession of secured property acquire all the benefits of the regime (for
example, priority) automatically without having to register or should they also have to register if they want priority status. In
keeping with the overseas models, it is provisionally proposed that persons in possession of secured property should acquire all
the benefits of the regime automatically without having to register. Persons not in possession of secured property, even if they
have a possessory security, should not acquire priority without registration. (For example, this may occur where the secured party
releases the goods to the custody of the debtor for a temporary purpose.) The proposed regime is not designed to establish a public
record of all financial dealings. Such a goal may contravene privacy considerations where individuals are concerned. The primary
goal of the register is to establish priority between competing security interests. There are, however, two conditions
the possession must be an essential part of the security arrangement, as, for example, in a pledge
possession gained as the result of enforcing a security is not included as it is a result of the failure to perform an obligation
under a security right.
Proposal 16
Provided that the goods are in the possession of the secured party, a possessory security prevails over a non-possessory security
unless the non-possessory security is registered before possession is acquired.
Notice is irrelevant
4.51 Under the existing law, a secured party is not deemed to have notice of securities registered earlier in time. The doctrine of
constructive notice therefore has no application to registrable securities which have in fact been registered.
However, existing personal property security regimes continue to rely upon the doctrine of actual notice - a security will be subordinated
to an earlier security if the secured party has notice of the earlier security at the time the later security was created. This encourages
potential lenders not to check whether property is already encumbered. The concept of notice - whether actual or constructive -should
be irrelevant, in the absence of fraud, in relation to security interests under the proposed regime. Under the provisional proposals
a registered security interest will prevail over an unregistered security interest whether or not the holder of the registered security
interest had actual or constructive notice of the earlier unregistered interest. The proposed regime therefore continues to exclude
the operation of the doctrine of constructive notice in relation to personal property securities. As well, it provides that holders
of later registered security interests will not be prejudiced by actual notice of any unfiled security interest created earlier in
Proposal 17
The new regime should make it clear that notice (actual or constructive) is irrelevant, in the absence of fraud, to the determination
of priorities between creditors.
Relevant date
4.52 The proposed general rules determine priority according to a relevant date. That date will differ according to whether the security
is registered or unregistered. For a registered security the relevant date is the date of registration. When attachment occurs after
registration, the relevant date is the date of attachment. For an unregistered security the relevant date is the date on which the
security was created and for a possessory security the relevant date is the date on which possession is acquired.
Proposal 18
For a registered security the relevant date is the date of registration. When attachment occurs after registration, the relevant date
is the date of attachment. For an unregistered security the relevant date is the date on which the security was created and for a
possessory security the relevant date is the date on which possession is acquired.
Floating charges and after acquired property
Introduction
floating charge is a security taken over a debtor’s present and future property that
..... creates an immediate security interest but until crystallisation no specific asset is appropriated to the security and the
debtor company is therefore free to deal with the asset in the ordinary course of business ....
by, for example, selling or charging the asset. The point at which the charge is activated, or crystallised, depends upon the terms
of the contract creating the charge but ordinarily
... the charge will crystallise if the company ceases to trade, whether it does so voluntarily or in response to a winding-up petition
or other external cause. The fact that the directors retain theoretical powers of management does not prevent crystallisation.
The exercise of a chargee’s power to appoint a receiver, external borrowing which exceeds a stated figure or judgment against
the debtor may also cause a floating charge to crystallise. A charge may crystallise over the entire assets of the debtor or may
be confined to assets named in the agreement creating or defining the charge. Often, the charge agreement will contain a negative
pledge clause. This clause has the effect of limiting the extent to which the chargor can deal with the assets over which the floating
charge is taken by preventing the chargor from charging the assets in the future without the authority of the floating chargee.
Overseas models
United States
Under the UCC section 9-204 security agreements may provide that any or all of the obligations covered by the agreement are to be
secured by property acquired by the debtor after the security agreement
The security interests of creditors with floating charges are then ranked ahead of those of later creditors including creditors with
a direct interest in the after-acquired property, for example, a creditor with a fixed charge.
United Kingdom
Professor Diamond points out that
... the really important difference between the British floating charge and the security interest on shifting assets under the Uniform
Commercial Code is that the latter does not use the concept of ‘crystallisation’. Under an American-style security agreement
a time may come when the debtor is no longer free to dispose of the property which is subject to the security interest, but that
time does not determine the priority position of the secured party. His priority will depend on the ordinary rules in Article 9,
and will normally date from the filing of the financing statement.
This may put the American holder of a security interest on floating assets in a stronger position than his British counterpart, but
these days a British-style floating charge usually contains a ‘negative pledge clause’ - a provision which prohibits
or restricts the company’s power to grant further charges, mortgages or other securities ranking in priority to, or
with, the floating charge. If that charge is effective as against subsequent secured parties it effectively gives priority to the
floating charge long before it crystallises.
Under the new scheme, the essence of what is now referred to as a floating charge would be preserved. The security agreement, whether
expressly or by using the term ‘floating charge’, would permit the debtor to dispose of the property in the ordinary
course of business and would attach to after-acquired property which falls within the description of the property in the agreement.
Perfection in accordance with the new scheme will be required, which means filing in the new register of security interests. For
the purposes of priorities the important date would be the date of filing and the notion of crystallisation would lose all or most
of its importance.
.... [T]he time of filing of a financing statement [in relation to a floating charge] will not interfere with the special priority
to be granted to later purchase money security interests. Their special priority is justified on policy grounds.
Canada and New Zealand
Canadian and New Zealand regimes also allow for the registration of floating charges and future advances in such a way that the concept
of crystallisation is made redundant and the charge is, for the purposes of the regime, effectively made fixed once perfected by
registration.
The Corporations Law
The Corporations Law provides a different approach to determining priorities when there is a floating charge. The floating chargee
is deemed to have consented to postponing its priority unless the charge makes specific provision to the contrary (in which case
the charge has priority from the date of registration).
If the floating charge does restrict or prohibit further charging of the property, there is no policy reason to favour later chargees.
The situation is only a problem if the property is not worth enough to satisfy both debts, and if the debtor cannot satisfy them
out of other assets. Because the Corporations Law requires the earlier charge to be registered, the later lender will be aware of
its existence and its terms, in particular the term precluding later borrowings. In those circumstances, the later lender has made
a commercial decision to take the risk of not being repaid and has taken it with the knowledge needed to assess the risk properly.
Some submissions
have cautioned against allowing a floating chargee to have priority from the time of registration of the charge. They argue that
to do so would tend to place debtors under the control of the floating chargee - the debtor would be locked into a single source
of finance. Others see no problem in this, arguing that the only borrowers who should find their access to finance restricted will
be those whose credit worthiness is less reliable in the sense that lenders who require security on credit grounds will not be satisfied
that the debtor’s security is adequate.
Provisional proposal.
The overseas models provide special rules for floating charges rather than subjecting them to the general rules of the regime. They
introduce unnecessary complications and detract from the simplicity that is a major objective of the proposed regime. The approach
taken by the overseas models should not be adopted. The approach of the Corporations Law is preferable but its use of deeming provisions
is contrary to the basic proposition of the proposed regime that the regime should be applied on a functional basis. Deeming provisions
should be avoided. It is artificial and very often contrary to the intention of the arrangement to presume consent to the postponement
of a security on the part of the earlier creditor. In keeping with the functional approach of the proposed regime, it is proposed
that if the agreement between the parties is such that the floating charge should be postponed then the regime should reflect this
intention. Similarly, if the debtor agrees not to create further securities over the property then that obligation should also be
reflected. The important issue in the application of the rules then becomes the relevant date.
Proposal 19
In the case of a floating charge which is registered before it crystallises, the relevant date for the purpose of applying the general
rules should be the date upon which the charge crystallises.
In the case of a floating charge which is registered after it crystallises, the relevant date for the purpose of applying the general
rules is the date of registration.
In the case of a registered floating charge to which a negative pledge applies, the relevant date for the purposes of applying the
general rules should be the date of registration.
In the case of a floating charge which is not registered, the relevant date for the purposes of applying the general rules is the
date of crystallisation.
In the case of an unregistered floating charge to which a negative pledge applies, the relevant date for the purposes of applying
the general rules in relation to unregistered securities should be the date of creation.
Future advances
Introduction
Security can be taken - in the form of a floating charge - over property to be acquired at some time in the future by the debtor from
a person other than the creditor or supplier in whose favour the floating charge is held. Security can also be taken to secure repayment
of money to be advanced or payment for goods to be supplied by the supplier or creditor at some stage in the future. Thus, a single
security agreement can, for example, cover many loans or advances made to a debtor in the future.
Overseas models
United States
Section 9-204 of Article 9 specifically provides that a security agreement may include provisions with respect to future advances
of finance by the lender.
The Article provides that, if future advances are made while a security interest is perfected by filing or taking possession, the
security interest has the same priority with respect to the future advance as it does with respect to the first advance.
In relation to the position of future advances in Saskatchewan, lenders with a perfected security interest in future advances (where
perfection was effected before any subsequent security interest was perfected) enjoy priority status ahead of other secured parties
which have perfected between advances.
[T]his rule, explicit in s35(4),
is probably implicit in the Ontario and Manitoba Acts because of the concept of future advances and the structure of the principles
of priority.
New Zealand
The New Zealand Law Commission’s proposals contemplate the concept of future advances within the more general notion of a floating
security interest.
The priority determined by the date of registration will extend to future advances even where those advances are made with knowledge
that other creditors have provided credit or acquired interests in the debtor’s property.
Provisional proposal
There are two ways in which a security arrangement could address future advances. It could provide that moneys are to be advanced
up to a specified maximum or it could provide generally for future advances without any limit. Different provisions will be needed
in each case to protect both the original lender and future lenders. Where the agreement sets a maximum amount to be secured, the
lender should have priority from the time of registration according to the general rules for whatever amount may be outstanding from
time to time up to that maximum. Where the agreement does not set a maximum, the lender should have the priority it would have had
up to the amount outstanding at the date any later security was arranged.
Proposal 20
The new regime should provide that, if a security transaction makes provision for future advances, it should take priority as follows
if the instrument creating the security provides a maximum on the amount to be advanced - the security takes priority for the amount
outstanding up to that amount
if the instrument creating the security does not so provide - the security takes priority for the amount outstanding at the time of
the creation of the subordinate security.
Accessioned, commingled and processed goods
What are accessioned, commingled and processed goods?
Accessioned goods are goods which are comprised of smaller goods, each of which is individually recognisable. An example of accessioned
goods is a motor vehicle. It is comprised of components, the natures of which do not change after attachment or accessioning. Commingled
and processed goods, unlike accessioned goods, are chattels which are comprised of unrecognisable individual parts - the identity
of the original goods is lost in the mass or product. An example of commingled goods is the grain held in a silo which is owned by
a farmers’ co-operative. The silo may contain grain harvested from many different farms. Once each of the individual portions
from each farm is put into the silo, it is impossible to differentiate precisely one grower’s grain from that of another. However,
providing that the silo is used to store only one type of grain, each farmer at least has the opportunity to recover an amount of
grain equivalent to that which was put into the silo. Processed goods differ from commingled goods insofar as the individual parts
of the whole can never be recovered. An example of processed goods is a milkshake: the individual ingredients (milk, ice cream and
flavouring) lose their individual identities and take on an entirely new identity through processing.
The problem.
The problem with accessioned, processed and commingled goods arises when property over which a security has been taken later becomes
accessioned, processed or commingled and the security has not been discharged at the time of accessioning, processing or commingling.
Accessioned goods - overseas models
Under Article 9
and each of the Canadian Acts, a holder of a security interest in property (such as a component) which is used in the composition
of accessioned goods has priority over the claims of all persons who have interests in the whole
unless there is an interest in the whole accessioned property held by
subsequent purchasers for value
a creditor with a lien as a result of judicial proceedings
a creditor with a prior perfected security interest in the whole to the extent that the creditor makes subsequent advances.
The holder of the security interest in the component may, upon the borrower’s default (and subject to other provisions of the
Code), remove its collateral from the whole providing it makes good any damage to other parts of the property or provides compensation
for that damage to owners of the whole who are not debtors and to any others who hold securities over the whole or any other part
of the whole, unless they have otherwise agreed for the cost of repair.
A person entitled to reimbursement may refuse permission to remove until the secured party gives adequate security for the performance
of this obligation.
The New Zealand Law Commission recommends that the holder of a security over a component must give at least 10 working days notice
to the possessor of the whole accessioned property that it is intends to remove the individual secured part.
Accessions - provisional proposal
The provisions in the overseas models are not satisfactory. It is likely that the removal of individual components will devalue the
whole more than proportionately. This loss cannot be compensated under the terms of the overseas legislation. The legislation also
has the disadvantage that it impliedly condones unauthorised dealings with property owned by others. In one sense, it does no more
than authorise secured parties to take the law into their own hands and seek their own remedies at the expense of owners and other
interested parties. An alternative approach is for the security in the part to be transposed into a security in the whole. This approach
ensures that property is not damaged or devalued to the detriment of owners and other secured parties. Maintaining the property as
a whole will assist to maximise its value for the benefit of all with an interest in it. This approach also encourages secured parties
with interests in parts of the whole to seek a remedy amenable to all other interested parties.
Proposal 21
The new regime should provide that a security over property that becomes a component of accessioned goods (that is, is attached to
other goods without losing its separate identity), by force of the regime, becomes a security over the whole and that the priority
of competing securities over the whole is then determined by the general rules. However, if the component part in question is subsequently
detached, the original security in it should revive and the security over the whole be extinguished.
Commingled goods - overseas models
United States
Under Article 9, a perfected security interest in uncommingled goods (for example, crops which have just been harvested but not yet
added to the silo) continues even though the goods are commingled with others. Where the goods are commingled with others, the security
interests in the mass rank equally: each security interest holder shares in the mass according to the proportion of the cost of the
goods contributed.
Ontario, Manitoba and Saskatchewan generally adopt the same approach to commingled goods, as well as accessioned goods, as that taken
by Article 9. The Canadian Acts further provide that, where a competition develops between a purchase money security and a security
in a fixture or in an accessioned or commingled good, the latter shall prevail unless the parties otherwise decide.
New Zealand
The New Zealand proposals are generally the same as the American and Canadian regimes. They provide that
[a] perfected security interest in goods that subsequently become part of a product or mass continues in the product or mass if the
goods are so manufactured, processed, assembled or commingled that their identity is lost in the product or the mass
[i]f more than one perfected security interest continues in the product or mass ... the security interests rank equally according
to the ratio that the cost of the goods to which each interest originally attached bears to the cost of the total product or mass.
Commingled goods - provisional proposal
Unlike accessioned goods, commingled goods are composed of parts which resemble each other. The value of each part is proportional
to the percentage volume which the part occupies in the whole. Accordingly, where the value of the whole is insufficient to satisfy
all interests in it, the value of the security is the proportion of the value of the whole equal to the proportion that the volume
of the good bears to the volume or quantity of the whole.
Proposal 22
The new regime should provide that, if the goods over which there is a security are commingled with like goods so as to lose their
separate identity, the security, by force of the regime, becomes a security to the same value over the whole. Where the value of
the whole is insufficient to satisfy all interests in it, the value of each security is the proportion of the value of the whole
equal to the proportion that the volume of the goods subject to that security bears to the volume or quantity of the whole.
Processed goods
Once goods are mixed with other goods and processed, they not only lose their separate identities but they are inseparable. The final
product is distinct from all the goods that went to make it. There is therefore no question of detaching or otherwise separating
out the original or equivalent goods. Further, as the goods mixed were themselves different there is no easy way to rank competing
securities according to proportional contributions to the product. An accessions-type approach - where a security in the part is
extended to a security in the whole -seems most appropriate. Priorities among the securities in the whole are then determined according
to the general rules. The overseas models treat processed goods as commingled goods and accordingly apply the relevant priority rule
governing commingled goods.
Proposal 23
The new regime should provide that a security over property that is processed into other goods, by force of the regime, becomes a
security over the whole product processed and that the priorities of competing securities over the same product then are to be determined
by the general rules.
Why fixtures present difficulties
Fixtures are (originally moveable) items of personal property which are attached or affixed to land or buildings. Fixtures may, for
example, include light fittings and bathroom taps. The common law is somewhat ambivalent about the definition it prescribes for fixtures.
Fixtures may constitute real property or personal property depending upon the circumstances. Where real property including fixtures
is transferred or mortgaged without specific agreement in respect of the fixtures, the assignee, transferee or mortgagee obtains,
as if by default, absolute rights over the fixtures, including the right to sever them. Where, however, the fixtures are attached
by a tenant, and the tenancy agreement specifically provides for the tenant to affix and remove fixtures, a mortgagee acquires no
rights in respect of the fixtures. They remain the property of the tenant. Ex
parte Daglish
affirmed that
... a mortgage deed is registrable as a bill of sale if it gives the mortgagee a power to realize separately on the fixtures, ie,
if it gives him power to sever the fixtures and sell them separately from the freehold.
However, the mere fact that fixtures can be sold by the mortgagee as part and parcel of the power to sell land is not sufficient in
itself to classify the mortgage deed as a bill of sale.
The question which arises in the personal property security context is whether a security over property which becomes a fixture before
the security is discharged entitles the secured party to an interest in the realty equal to the value of the security.
Overseas models
United States
Section 9-313 of the Uniform Commercial Code provides that
... a security interest may be created in goods which are fixtures or may continue in goods which become fixtures, but no security
interest exists under this Article in ordinary building materials incorporated into an improvement on land.
It further provides that
... the creation of a security interest does not prevent creation of an encumbrance upon fixtures pursuant to real estate law
that is, the creation of a caveatable real interest. The remainder of the section provides rules whereby security interests take
priority over real interests and vice-versa.
Canadian legislation, by and large, reflects the same approach.
United Kingdom
Professor Diamond favours the Article 9-Canadian approach. He notes the analysis by Professors Cuming and Wood of the Saskatchewan
Act s36 that this approach has two primary functions, namely
(1) it reverses the common law principle that chattels affixed to realty lose their separate identity as personal property and become
part of the realty to which they are affixed; and (2) it provides a system through which persons acquiring interests in realty can
be forewarned of the existence of a chattel security interest in goods affixed to realty in which they are acquiring an interest.
New Zealand
At first glance, the New Zealand Law Commission’s propo-sals go beyond the ambit of the rules contained in the Article 9 approach
insofar as they provide that, even if personalty in which a security interest is held is fixed to any land or building, the secured
party retains the right to remove the secured items, providing that
- the owner or other person in possession of the land or building is given not less than 10 working days notice of the secured party’s
intention to remove the goods and
- in removing the goods the secured party causes no greater damage or injury to the land or building or other property situated on
the land, and that he or she puts the owner or occupier to no greater inconvenience, than is necessarily incidental to the removal
of the goods.
Provisional proposal
. The right to remove is not inconsistent with the existing common law in Australia. A tenancy agreement, for example, can specifically
provide that the tenant has the right to affix and remove fixtures and that the landlord or mortgagee may not sever and realise these
assets. The New Zealand approach may simply be reflecting this position, in which case it fails to provide for situations where there
is no specific agreement about removal of the fixtures in question. Alternatively the New Zealand Commission may be proposing a new
rule to cover the field, which would remove the existing common law rights of transferees, assignees and mortgagees to sever and
realise the fixtures where the tenant or previous occupier did not otherwise make provision for their disposal. There is no convincing
need to remove existing common law rights. On the contrary, specific provisions on fixtures in the new regime may restrict the ability
of the parties to make such provision as to fixtures as they wish. It is therefore proposed that the new regime not apply to fixtures.
Proposal 24
The new regime should not make any special provision in relation to fixtures. The common law and the general rules should be applied.
Accordingly, when secured property becomes a fixture, the security is extinguished. However, if the property is subsequently detached
the security should revive.
Introduction
Growing crops are treated by the common law as fixtures. In many jurisdictions, including Australian jurisdictions, statutes provide
for the taking of security over growing crops as if they were personal property. The ability of farmers to give such security has
been important for financing the rural sector. It has enabled farmers to raise necessary capital on future yields of unrealised assets.
Overseas models
United States
Article 9 makes special provision for the giving and taking of security over growing crops. It also makes other changes to common
law rules. Generally speaking, purchasers in the ordinary course of business who take goods for value without notice take free of
encumbrances in the goods existing at the time of purchase. Under Article 9,
‘ . . . a person buying farm products from a person engaged in farming operations . . . ‘ does not have the benefit of
the operation of this general rule. That is to say, holders of securities in a crop which, since the taking of security, has been
harvested and sold, retain these interests even though the purchaser may have had no knowledge of the securities at the time of the
Crops are therefore treated as an exception to the purchasers’ rule.
The Article 9 approach to securities taken over crops differs from the Canadian approach insofar as the latter treats these securities
not as an exception to the purchasers’ rule but as a species of purchase money security interest rule. This is done to ensure
that a secured party who gives consideration for the purpose of enabling the farmer (debtor) to produce his or her crops is rewarded
with a special priority over the secured assets.
Therefore, under both the Canadian and United States models, a security over growing crops is given super-priority.
New Zealand
The approach to crop securities adopted by the New Zealand Law Commission is similar to the Canadian approach. The essence of the
Draft Personal Property Securities Act
1989 (NZ) s 30 is that a security which is taken over a growing crop continues in respect of that crop even though the land upon
which the crop is being grown is assigned, transferred or mortgaged. The draft legislation further provides that a security will
be invalid if it is taken over a crop which is to be harvested more than a year after the date upon which the security is taken.
It is therefore only a partial reform of the common law.
Provisional proposal
The ability to give and take security over growing crops is an important part of rural financing arrangements in Australia. This is
reflected in the crop mortgage legislation enacted in all Australian jurisdictions. Personal property security laws should not restrict
the ability of farmers to raise money. It is therefore proposed that the new regime provide the greatest possible scope for including
growing crops. To this end, growing crops over which security is taken should be considered as personal property for the purposes
of the regime.
Proposal 25
Growing crops should be regarded as personal property for the purposes of the regime.
Returned, repossessed or detached goods
Introduction
When secured goods are sold and subsequently returned to, or repossessed by, the vendor, the questions naturally arise whether the
security (or that portion thereof) which is outstanding upon its return or repossession revives and, if so, what priority status
it acquires. Motor vehicle trading provides a good example of the problem. Assume that a motor vehicle dealer receives a vehicle
from the manufacturer on consignment. The dealer becomes liable to the manufacturer for the wholesale value of the motor vehicle
once it is sold. The vehicle is sold by the dealer to a
purchaser for value in the ordinary course of business thereby acquiring an unencumbered title in the vehicle. Assume that this purchase
is made on credit and the dealer sells or factors the debt to a third party (transferee of accounts receivable
). If the vehicle is later returned by the purchaser, or repossessed by the vendor following a default upon loan repayments, which
security interest is to be satisfied first - the consignor’s or that of the transferee of accounts receivable? Similar issues
arise in relation to accessioned goods or goods which become fixtures, in the event that they are detached.
Overseas models
Under the law of Ontario, where the interests of the consignor (inventory financier) and the chattel paper assignee are both perfected
(ie financing statements are filed) the inventory financier’s security prevails. This happens in spite of the fact that the
inventory financier’s interest has been extinguished by the sale in the ordinary course of business to the
purchaser for value without notice. The law provides that return or repossession revives or reattaches the interest.
Where the inventory financier’s security has not been perfected but the security of the chattel paper assignee has, the latter
interest will prevail according to the general priority rules: perfected interests prevail over unperfected interests even if the
unperfected interest was acquired earlier in time. The interest of the chattel paper assignee prevails over the interest of the vendor
without any action on the assignee’s part. Manitoba
and Saskatchewan
provide similar special priority rules.
New Zealand
Section 23 of the
Draft Personal Property Securities Act
1989 (NZ) establishes the same priority rules as the Canadian legislation. Subsection 1 applies the purchasers’ rule: a buyer
or lessee in good faith for value without notice takes free of securities incumbent at the time of sale. However, these securities
will re-attach if the goods are returned or repossessed at a time when the obligation secured remains unpaid. A security interest
in returned or repossessed goods which re-attaches in this way, or a security acquired by a transferee of chattel paper, has priority
over a perfected security interest in those goods acquired by a transferee of an accounts receivable.
Moreover, a security given by a purchaser or lessee prior to the return or repossession has priority over any of the security interests
held by either the inventory financier, the vendor or the assignee of chattel paper or accounts receivable if the security attached
while the goods were in possession of the buyer and the interest was perfected at the time of the return or repossession.
United States
Article 9 makes no provision for a secured party’s priority in relation to returned, repossessed or seised goods.
Provisional proposal
The approaches adopted by the overseas models which allow securities to revive where the secured property is returned or repossessed
are fair and reasonable and should be followed in the proposed regime. This provisional proposal does not affect the protection
of bona fide
purchasers who take for value without notice or in the ordinary course of business. For similar reasons, the New Zealand model should
be followed. This would give priority over any security created before the purchase to a security created by a purchaser or lessee
prior to the return or repossession of the goods provided that the later security became enforceable against third parties while
the goods were in the possession of the purchaser or lessee. Similar considerations lead to similar provisions to revive securities
in goods which become accessions or fixtures and are later detached.
Proposal 26
When goods are returned to or repossessed by a debtor from a
purchaser from the debtor without notice or when goods which become accessions or fixtures are detached, any security in the goods
given by the debtor prior to purchase, accessioning or attaching should revive. Where a purchaser, while in possession of the goods,
gives a security over those goods and the secured party has the benefit of possession or registration, that security will have priority,
if the goods are returned or repossessed over any security created before their original sale.
What are proceeds?
For policy reasons,
purchasers who take for value without notice or in the ordinary course of business acquire good title even though the property may
have been already encumbered at the time of sale.
The questions which arise here are whether the secured party has any claim on the collateral received as the proceeds of the sale
and, if so, to what priority the secured party becomes entitled. Ordinarily, these proceeds will be cash proceeds, for example, money
or cheques. However, sometimes the proceeds will not be in the form of cash, as in the case of a motor vehicle trade-in.
Overseas models
United States
Section 9-306 of the Uniform Commercial Code provides that the holder of the security will not have an interest in the proceeds of
a disposition if the disposition was authorised by the secured party in the security agreement.
Where the disposition was not authorised but the proceeds are identifiable cash, including money, cheques and bank accounts, provided
the original property was covered by a registered financing statement, the security interest in the original collateral remains continuously
perfected in the cash proceeds. A security interest also remains continuously perfected where the collateral described in the original
filed financing statement indicates the type of property which has been purchased with any cash proceeds. Where the disposition was
not authorised and the proceeds are either non-identifiable cash or not cash at all, a security interest in the original collateral
will continue but, if perfected, it will become unperfected if after 10 days a new financing statement describing the proceeds in
which an interest continues is not filed.
Special rules apply where goods are disposed of as a result of insolvency proceedings instituted by or against the debtor.
If a sale of goods results in the transfer of an account or chattel paper from the seller to a secured party, and if the goods are
returned to or are repossessed by the seller or the secured party, sub-section (5) determines priorities.
The Canadian legislation is, generally speaking, in line with the Article 9 approach: a security interest in original collateral is
continuously perfected if the interest in the proceeds of an unauthorised disposition is registrable and registered within 10 days
(15 days in the Saskatchewan Act
) of the disposal of the original collateral and the reaping of the pro-ceeds therefrom. Between the date of disposal or destruction
and the expiry of the statutory time limit 10 days later, the security in the proceeds is deemed to be perfected by operation of
law, not by registration. A security interest in proceeds that allegedly arises from a security interest in the original collateral
will not be registrable (and therefore not be able to be perfected) if the proceeds are not identifiable within the terms of the
Acts. This condition also applies in Article 9. In Ontario, Manitoba and Saskatchewan, proceeds, for the purposes of each of the
respective personal property security Acts, are defined to include personal property in any form or fixtures and any other payments
as indemnity or compensation for loss of or damage to the collateral. Saskatchewan expressly also includes in the definition money,
cheques and deposit accounts.
The Canadian legislation similarly adopts the position that an interest in proceeds will not arise from an interest in the original
collateral if the disposal was authorised by the security holder.
New Zealand
Like the American and Canadian regimes, the
Draft Personal Property Security Act
provides for an interest in the proceeds of the disposition of an asset to be continued if the disposal is not authorised by the security
holder. The interest is similarly continuously perfected if a financing statement describing the interest in the proceeds is registered
within 10 days of the disposal of the original collateral. If the interest is not registered by lodging a financing statement within
10 days then the interest becomes unperfected at the end of this period. The interest that remains is the same as the interest which
would remain in the same circumstances in the other jurisdictions already referred to: the security is unperfected but remains attached.
It is therefore enforceable under the general law (for example, the law of contract) as between the parties.
United Kingdom
Professor Diamond prefers the approach contained in the Canadian
Uniform Personal Property Security Act.
He argues that the Article 9 model
.... seems to be unduly complicated, and in the most common cases it probably does not produce a result different from that under
the Canadian legislation.
Provisional proposal
The approach taken by the overseas models is consistent with the policy objectives of the proposed regime. It is therefore provisionally
proposed that similar provisions should be adopted in the new regime. The proposal relates in particular to situations where the
disposition occurs without the consent of the holder of the security. In those cases the security would continue in the proceeds
of the sale or other disposition. The proposal makes allowance for other arrangements by agreement between the parties and for the
consent not to be unreasonably withheld.
Proposal 27
The new regime should provide that, when a debtor disposes of property without the consent of the secured party, a security to the
same value as the security in the property attaches automatically to the proceeds in the hands of the debtor. A registered security
in the original collateral should continue as a registered security in the proceeds. A registered security continues provided that
a new financing statement is lodged within a prescribed period.
Purchase money securities
What are purchase money securities?
When a vendor supplies goods to a retailer the vendor may take a security over the goods to ensure payment of the purchase price.
The interest acquired in the goods supplied by the vendor is called a purchase money security because it secures the payment of the
purchase price. A purchase money security may be created in respect of a single sale or in relation to a continuing series of transactions
by which goods are supplied on a regular basis. It may apply to property supplied in the past and to future advances. Purchase money
securities are, in this respect, a type of after-acquired property arrangement, with the distinctive feature that they apply only
to specific property supplied by the secured financier or vendor. A purchase money security may therefore be created notwithstanding
the existence of other prior security interests over property not supplied by the vendor or financier who holds the purchase money
The problem
. A simple application of the general priority rules to purchase money securities would conceivably result in vendors being compelled
to refuse further supply of goods to debtors on credit until such time as all previous obligations had been satisfied. One commentator
notes that the policy behind a rule giving priority to purchase money securities is one of ensuring that the debtor is always able
to obtain credit from a new financier if it wishes to make additional purchases of property.
Another policy objective involves a need to overcome the impracticality caused if regular suppliers are forced to register a new
security every time a new shipment is delivered.
Overseas models
The United States
Under Article 9, providing
the purchase money security interest is perfected at the time the debtor receives possession of the inventory
notification is given by the holder of the purchase money security interest to the holder of the conflicting registered security interest
in accordance with the requirements set out in section 9-312(3)(b)-(d)
the holder of the purchase money security interest has priority over any other party who may claim a non-purchase money security
interest in the same property pursuant to an after-acquired property clause in a preexisting security transaction.
The Ontario, Manitoba and Saskatchewan Acts give the holder of a purchase money security a priority over any party who may claim an
interest in the secured collateral by operation of an after-acquired property clause. Professor McLaren describes the rationale for
this special priority rule as follows.
The purchase money financier is adding to the debtor’s pool of assets in which the earlier secured parties have an interest
... [A]t the time [the loans were given by these earlier secured parties, they were] satisfied with the security base without the
inclusion of any after-acquired (new) collateral. Thus, the new financier is given priority in recognition of the fact that it is
his money which has enabled the debtor to increase his pool of assets. The special rule then enables the creditor to look to the
collateral which he has financed as security for his loan before anyone else’s claim to that collateral.
New Zealand
The New Zealand Law Commission’s Draft
Personal Property Securities Act
1989 (NZ) s27
adopts the same approach as that taken in the United States and Canada. Holders of purchase money security interests - whether they
are sellers, lessors or consignors of the collateral - are given priority over other security interests in the same collateral if,
in the case of inventory, the purchase money security interest is perfected and a financing statement is filed before the debtor
or another person at the request of the debtor first obtains possession of the collateral. In the case of intangibles, a purchase
money security interest is given priority over any other security interest in the intangible given by the debtor if the purchase
money security interest is perfected not later than 10 working days after the day on which it attaches to the intangible. The general
priority rules are applied in combination with these rules to determine the priority of two competing security interests.
United Kingdom
Professor Diamond agrees with the need to give purchase money securities special priority but diverges from the approaches adopted
by the other overseas models. He says that, while such interests ought to be registrable and covered by the regime, there ought to
be no requirement mandating their registration nor presumably should any penalties be imposed for failure to register.
It seems that under the United Kingdom approach purchase money securities would gain their special status even without the need to
perfect by registration.
Provisional proposal
The special rules adopted in overseas models effectively give purchase money securities a ‘super priority’ over all other
securities with which they conflict. This does not seem desirable or even necessary. The regime proposed already has provisions which
apply to floating charges
and to after-acquired property. These are the most common forms of transaction which create purchase money securities. The proposals
for these kinds of securities are different from the provisions in the overseas models and remove the need for any special priority
for purchase money securities. They are sufficient to resolve, within the context of the general rules, any difficulties which may
arise in relation to further advances of goods subject to a security.
Proposal 28
The new regime need make no special provisions for purchase money securities.
Transfers and variations of priority of security rights
Introduction
There is no policy reason why the priority order advanced above should be immutable. In fact, a legislative direction that the priority
order was immutable is likely to offend against the principle of freedom to contract. Parties may wish to vary the order, either
by modifying it in some way or by substituting an entirely new order, where the circumstances demand and there is agreement as to
the variations.
Overseas models
. Each of the overseas models contains provisions allowing the parties to consensually vary the statutory priority order. Article
9 refers to these agreements as subordination agreements.
The draft New Zealand Act provides that a transfer of a security interest, once registered, gives the transferee the same right as
the original secured party (the transferor) in relation to the collateral (or part thereof) which is the subject of the security
agreement. It further provides that, where two or more secured parties agree to vary their respective priorities, this will only
be effective as between the parties if a financing statement is registered recording the agreed order of priorities and, if relevant,
the duration of the agreement.
Provisional proposal
. Parties should, by consent, be able to vary the order of priorities provided by statute as between the parties themselves. A consensual
instrument out of which security rights arise need not be registered for the purposes of resolving a conflict in priorities as between
these parties. It may be argued on this basis that an instrument which varies priority rights as between the parties should not have
to be in writing, nor should it have to be registered. Even if there should be no compulsion for the instrument to be in writing
and registered, it would nonetheless be prudent to do so. On balance, the instrument effecting this variation of priority of security
rights should have to be in writing. It should also have to be registered. The instrument effecting this variation of priority of
security rights should only be enforceable as between the consenting parties; it should not be enforceable as against third parties.
Finally, as the agreement to alter priorities may be made between two competing creditors without the involvement of the debtor,
it should also be necessary for the debtor to be notified of any such variation.
Proposal 29
The new regime should provide that secured parties should be able to vary by consent the order of priorities provided by the new regime
as between the parties themselves. The instrument effecting this variation of priority of security rights should have to be in writing
and registered.
It should only be enforceable as between the consenting parties; it should not be enforceable against third parties. The debtor should
have to be notified.
Introduction
4.86 The priority rules advanced above for the proposed regime are designed to resolve competitions which develop between competing
securities. Where, however, title in secured property is transferred (that is, the property is sold), other considerations apply.
An old common law rule holds that a person cannot transfer to another a better title to property than he or she in fact has.
However, in equity a
purchaser for value without notice is able to take a good title, irrespective of whether the vendor is competent at common law to
dispose of the property. In the context of personal property securities, this means that purchasers who take for value and in good
faith should take free of all existing security interests (whether perfected or not) of which they have no notice. Under the rule,
the purchaser will not get good title if he or she is aware of the existing security (that is, has actual notice) or does not give
reasonable consideration for the property. Where the purchase is made in the ordinary course of business, however, even if the purchaser
does have notice of a prior interest, the sale will give the purchaser valid title since the dealer has actual - or at the minimum
ostensible - authority to sell.
Overseas models
4.87 The common law rule has been incorporated, wholly or partially, into the legislation in each of the overseas jurisdictions.
United States and New Zealand
Article 9 and the New Zealand Law Commission’s proposals significantly modify the rule, however, by introducing a provision
for constructive notice affecting buyers of consumer goods from a seller who is not a trader. These buyers only take free of existing
security interests if they buy
- without knowledge of the security interest
- for value - for their own personal, family or household purposes and
- prior to a financing statement being filed.
Under these models, buyers of consumer goods from private sellers are not protected if they have actual knowledge of an existing security
interest, whether perfected or unperfected, or if they purchase after a financing statement is filed (that is, they are deemed to
have constructive notice of a registered security). When the purchase is made in the ordinary course of business, the protection
only extends to securities created by the seller who sold the secured property in the ordinary course of business.
United Kingdom
The Crowther Committee and Diamond proposals prefer a purchasers’ rule which protects innocent purchasers not only against securities
created by the seller in the ordinary course of business, but securities created by others as well. In fact, Professor Diamond would
like to see even more far-reaching proposals to protect innocent purchasers. He proposes that the protection currently given to purchasers
in the ordinary course of business be extended to other purchasers.
He argues that innocent
(bona fide)
purchasers, if they are truly innocent, will not become guilty simply because their purchase was not made in the ordinary course of
business. Where there is competition between an innocent purchaser who takes for value without notice and another person who retains
title pursuant to some form of title-retention clause, Professor Diamond’s approach favours the innocent purchaser.
Provisional proposal
The new regime, like the present law and the overseas models, should give protection to purchasers in good faith who buy in the ordinary
course of business from a dealer. The protection should extend not only to securities created by the seller but to securities created
by others as well. Such a purchaser should not need to make further enquiries, such as searching any register. For other purchasers,
the position is different. Where a unique identifier has been developed for the kind of property concerned (as has been done with
motor vehicles), an asset-based index can be used. This is particularly helpful where the vendor is not a dealer in the goods being
purchased. In those circumstances it is not unreasonable to expect a purchaser to search the asset register before completing a private
purchase. A clear search result will be conclusive evidence that the property is unaffected by a registered security right and will
enable the purchaser to take good title. In other cases, that is where there is no register for uniquely identifiable property, the
purchaser should be protected whether or not the purchase was from a dealer in the ordinary course of business.
Proposal 30
The new regime should provide that purchasers who
take for value in good faith and without notice or
take for value in good faith and in the ordinary course of business from a person who, in the ordinary course of his or her business,
sells property of the relevant kind
should take free of a security, whether or not it is registered. Purchasers who take for value in good faith and without notice but
not in the ordinary course of business should not, however, take free of encumbrances where these encumbrances are registered upon
a uniquely identifiable asset-based register.
Effect of purchasers’ rule
The interest acquired by a purchaser who takes in accordance with the provisions as set out above should have the effect of extinguishing
any securities over the property itself at the time the purchase was made. This does not mean, however, that secured creditors lose
their interests. The effect of the proceeds rule
is to ensure that their interest in the original collateral continues in the proceeds received from the sale by the debtor. If the
property is returned to or repossessed by the debtor, the creditor’s security interest will revive in accordance with the proposal
made earlier.
Valuable property
One submission
received by the ALRC argues that there should be an exception to the purchasers’ rule where the property secured is ‘valuable
property’. The submission defines ‘valuable property’ by use of an arbitrary monetary amount, for example, $40
000. It is argued that such an exception would give the holder of an existing security over ‘valuable property’ priority
as against a
purchaser who takes the encumbered property for value either without notice or in the ordinary course of business. Since as many as
90% of security agreements are drafted in a commercial environment and therefore are often associated with large amounts of money,
imposing a threshold of, for example, $40 000 may have the effect, in practice, of making the exception to the rule the rule in more
cases than not. It is difficult to support proposals which have the effect of, by and large, displacing the operation of the head
rule. No proposal is made in relation to the suggestion of a ‘valuable property’ exception at this stage. Submissions
are invited in respect of whether there should be such an exception to the purchasers’ rule and, if so, what should be the
threshold definition of “valuable property’.
Consumer goods and transactions involving small amounts of credit
Consumer goods
The problem
Consumer goods may be goods used or acquired primarily for personal, family or household purposes, such as fridges, washing machines
and stereo systems. Goods which are subject to registration under the chattel securities or registration of interests in goods legislation
may also be acquired in a consumer context. If the priority of a security interest in consumer goods depended upon registration,
while there may be many creditors who perhaps would not avail themselves of the opportunity to do so, it could lead to a large number
of entries in the register with no useful purpose being served. In addition, customers of retail stores who are not party to any
consensual agreements for security in relation to the goods purchased (for example, consumer credit transactions) may object if they
were required by the retailer to sign financing statements.
The NSWLRC takes the view that the registration of security interests in consumer goods other than those which are subject to chattel
securities or registration of interests in goods legislation should not be necessary to ensure priority. The fact that the sums of
money normally involved in consumer transactions are relatively small is another persuasive reason for not encouraging registration.
Provisional proposal
The NSWLRC provisionally proposes that the priority scheme outlined in this paper should apply to security interests in consumer goods
(other than those the subject of registration under the chattel securities legislation and registration of interests in motor vehicles)
on the basis that a security over goods in a consumer transaction has the same effect as a possessory security or a registered security
for the purpose of determining priorities. Whether goods are consumer goods would depend not on the nature of the goods but on the
purpose for which they were used or acquired: goods would be consumer goods if they were used or acquired primarily for personal,
family or household purposes. Thus, the same goods in the hands of the retailer would not be consumer goods.
Submissions are sought on how consumer goods and consumer transactions should be defined.
Proposal 31
NSWLRC: With the exception of securities registrable under the chattel securities legislation (for example, securities over motor
vehicles) the regime should apply to securities taken over consumer goods. These securities should gain priority and become enforceable
against third parties without a financing statement having to be filed in the same way that possessory securities acquire priority
and become enforceable against third parties.
Transactions involving small amounts of credit
The problem
It can also be argued that transactions involving relatively small amounts of money (for example, $2 000 or less) should not need
to be registered. This helps to avoid cluttering up the register.
If the scheme were nevertheless able to apply to small transactions, the issue seems to be why a security interest other than in
consumer goods should be valid in bankruptcy or liquidation if no publicity has been given to it. Further, although the ‘cut-off’,
whatever the chosen sum is, may be said to be ‘small’, it may represent a significant proportion of the total assets,
particularly if there are frequent “small’ transactions.
Since registration is not compulsory, there may be creditors who would not bother to file a one-off transaction if a small amount
is involved. This may reduce the incidence of filing. These creditors would consequently lose priority in the event of the bankruptcy
or liquidation of the debtor. It would be a commercial decision whether registration would be justified. The NSWLRC is of the tentative
view that if security interests in consumer goods are not able to be registered, it may be necessary to allow ‘small’
transactions to be similarly treated. The Commissions make no proposal at present but seek submissions on whether there is a need
to register ‘small’ transactions and, if so, what should be the appropriate ‘cut-off’ amount.
Rights and duties upon default
Introduction
Default occurs when the debtor fails to pay or otherwise perform the obligation secured when due or when any event takes place whereupon,
under the terms of the security agreement, the security becomes enforceable.
Where the debtor has possession of the secured property prior to default, it is incumbent upon the debtor to ensure that the property
is not improperly disposed of. In this sense, the debtor owes a duty of care to the secured party. If the property is improperly
disposed of (for example, disposed of without the knowledge of the secured party) the secured party’s interest in the original
collateral is likely to continue in the proceeds reaped by the debtor from the disposition.
Upon default by the debtor, the secured party with first priority becomes entitled to deal with the secured property in the way provided
for in the security agreement. Most often, the secured party will become entitled to sell the secured property in order to recoup
its interest out of the proceeds of the sale. Generally speaking, in the overseas models, if the agreement does not prescribe rights,
the law will. These statutory rights are examined below in the context of each jurisdiction.
Overseas models
United States and Canada
Article 9 and the Canadian Acts each provide for the following three basic remedies upon default
sale or other disposition of the collateral
retention of the collateral in full satisfaction of the debt
an action to recover the debt
Saskatchewan adds another: the right to the appointment of a receiver. In most jurisdictions the exercise of these rights carries
with it certain duties, for example, an obligation of commercial reasonableness, an obligation to give notice of the disposition
and an obligation to care for the collateral. There is also a duty on the secured party to serve notice upon the debtor that the
right is being exercised. The Saskatchewan, Ontario and Manitoba regimes each contain provisions requiring the secured party to give
notice of the exercise of a security right upon a debtor’s default. For example, the Saskatchewan legislation provides that
this notice is to be served upon
any other person known by the secured party to be an owner of the collateral
secured creditors with subordinate security interests perfected by registration and
other persons with an interest in the collateral who have given the secured party notice of their interests.
New Zealand and United Kingdom
The New Zealand Law Commission’s proposals make provision for an entitlement to damages where a party fails to discharge any
duty or obligation statutorily imposed upon it, the fulfilment of which another party could reasonably have been expected to have
relied upon.
Neither the New Zealand draft legislation nor the United Kingdom proposals prescribe statutory rights upon default in the same way
as the American and Canadian legislation.
Provisional proposal
The approach adopted by the United Kingdom and New Zealand - whereby rights are not conferred upon secured parties by statute - should
be followed. This ensures that no restriction is imposed by the proposals upon the circumstances in which a secured party may exercise
a security right. It should be up to the parties to the agreement which creates the security to determine when and how the rights
which arise out of this security are to be exercised. Other laws, such as consumer credit laws, will impose their own restrictions.
It is not intended that these proposals should affect these existing laws.
Proposal 32
The new regime should not confer rights and duties upon the secured party.
Terms of reference
Participants
1. INTRODUCTION
2. THE EXISTING SITUATION
AND THE NEED FOR REFORM
3. DIRECTIONS FOR REFORM
| 4. PROPOSALS
5. IMPLEMENTATION
Table of Contents
. See paragraph 5.38.
. See paragraphs 2.14-2.21.
. See paragraph 2.16.
. The rule in Ex
parte Daglish
should still apply in relation to the difference between personal property and real property.
. Professor AL Diamond, op cit, 52.
. Mortgages, charges, pledges and liens are, by definition, securities although it is conceivable that an instrument which is called
a mortgage may not, in fact, be a mortgage or have a security purpose. Conversely, an instrument may be a mortgage but be called
something else. The term ‘borrowing arrangement’ refers to all types of instruments whether or not they are securities.
. Section 9-102(1)(a).
. Section 9-102(1)(b).
. Section 9-102(2).
. The purported reason for this exception lies in the fact that without it there would be a requirement on businesses to register
all assignments upon transfer of ownership or being wound up. See paragraphs 4.17-4.20.
. Article 9 does not apply to statutory liens except those acquired in the ordinary course of business: section 9-310. The policy
behind this exclusion is that these security interests are possessory and therefore do not need to be registered to protect the holder’s
. See paragraphs 4.67-4.69.
. Section 9-306.
. It was held in Re Doxtater
(1984) 3 PPSAC 246
(Ont SC) that the Act does not apply to the Crown.
. Professor RH McLaren and K de Jong, op cit 1-4-1-4-1.
. Professor RH McLaren and K de Jong, op dt, 1-9-1-10.
. See paragraphs 4.17-4.20.
. Interests in policies of insurance other than life insurance contracts can be brought within the regime if an insurance payout is
subject to a proceeds clause.
. These right are rights to take action
against the goods rather than suing for the contract price. They consist of (a) the unpaid seller’s lien when in possession
of the goods; (b) the unpaid seller’s right to stoppage
in transitu
when the buyer has become insolvent; and (c) the seller’s right to dispose of goods when they have been shipped by a bill of
lading indicating delivery is to be to the seller: Professor RH McLaren and K de Jong, op dt, 1-40.1.
. This interest is a qualified inclusion. Where the assignment of accounts receivable or chattel paper forms part of the sale of a
business, the assignment will only become subject to the regime provided the vendor remains in apparent control of the business after
the transfer. Where the business does not remain in the apparent control of the vendor after the sale takes place the accounts receivable
or chattel paper interest is deemed not to be a security and therefore cannot acquire the protections afforded by the regime. This
qualification also applies under Article 9: s 9-306. From one point of view, this exception for assignments of accounts receivable
and chattel paper that form part of the sale of a business might be more simply characterised as an example of the purchasers’
rule in action: a person taking the business for value acquires the purchaser protection in respect of all parts of that business,
including accounts receivable and chattel paper that attach to the sale. The New Zealand proposals to deem transfers of accounts
receivable and chattel paper as securities for the purpose of the regime is also qualified to the extent that, where the transfer
is merely an assignment of accounts receivable made solely to facilitate their collection on behalf of the assignor, the assignment
does not come within the scope of operation of the proposals.
. Excluding the interest of a seller who has shipped goods to a buyer under a negotiable bill of lading (or the equivalent thereof)
without other evidence of an intention to create or provide a security interest in the goods.
Draft Personal Property Securities Act
1989 (NZ) s 4(5).
. Professor AL Diamond, op cit, 35.
. Ibid 59-63.
. Professor Ziegal, for example, notes that ‘ ... [t]hose who opposed the inclusion of one-year plus leases in Canada did so
on the ground that it would convert the PPS Acts into “security and registration” Acts and thus muddy and confuse the
purpose of the original legislation. This reasoning overlooked the fact that from the beginning the provincial Acts have applied
to absolute as well as security assignments of receivables and that they now also apply to straight transfers of chattel paper. This
shows that the legislation was never confined to “pure” security interests. The opponents also argued that lessors should
be free to decide for themselves whether they wished to register a non-security lease and to suffer the consequences if they decide
wrongly’: Professor J S Ziegal,
The New Provincial Chattel Security Regimes
(1991) 70 Canadian Bar Review 706.
. Section 9-104(f).
. Section 9-102(2): see footnote 9.
. Professor MC Bridge, Form,
Substance and Innovation in Personal Property Security Law,
in [1982] Journal of Business Law 11 (UK).
. A period of more than one year was also chosen by the New Zealand Law Commission in their more recent
Draft Personal Property Securities Act
1989 s 4(4)(c): see New , Zealand Law Commission, Report No 8 (NZLC R8), A Personal Property Securities Act for New Zealand, 1989,
Wellington, 31.
. Professor MC Bridge, op cit, 11.
. See Draft Personal Property Securities Act 1989 (NZ) s 2(1). 34. New Zealand Law Commission, Report 8, op cit, 89-90. 35. Uniform
Personal Property Security Act 1982.
. New Zealand Law Commission, Report 8, op cit, 89-90.
Uniform Personal Property Security Act
. See paragraphs 4.27-4.30.
. Section 9-114. ‘[W]here goods are furnished to a merchant under the arrangement known as consignment rather than in a security
transaction, the consignor must, in order to protect his position as against an inventory secured party of the consignee, give to
that party the same notice and at the same time that he would give to that party if that party had filed first with respect to inventory
and if the consignor were furnishing the goods under an inventory security agreement instead of under a consignment.’ -1972
Official Comment on Section 9-114 in 3 Uniform Laws Annotated: Uniform Commercial Code, 1981, West Publishing, Minnesota, 222.
. See Draft Personal Property Securities Act 1989 (NZ) s 4(4)(c).
. Draft Personal Property Securities Act 1989 (NZ) cl 4(4).
Re Stephenian’s Persian Carpets
1 PPSAC 119
, 124 cited in Professor R H McLaren and K de Jong, op cit, 1-20.
. A Romalpa clause is a special type of title-retention device. Where goods which are held subject to a Romalpa clause are sold, the
owner of the goods continues as the owner of the proceeds received from the sale of the goods:
Aluminium Industrie Vaasen BV v Romalpa Aluminium Ltd
[1976] 1 WLR 676. The issue of interests in proceeds is discussed in paragraphs 4.76- 4.78.
. See paragraph 4.28.
. See paragraphs 4.79- 4.82 in relation to priority of purchase money security interests.
. See Professor AL Diamond, op cit, 88-89.
Deutz Engines Ltd v Terex Ltd
[1984] SLT 273
Emerald Stainless Steel Ltd v South Side Distribution Ltd
[1983] SLT 162.
. Professor AL Diamond, op cit, 89.
. New Zealand Law Commission, Report 8, op cit, 85.
. For discussion of status of transfer of documents of title, see El Sykes, op cit, 764-765.
. Professor AL Diamond, op cit, 90.
. See Professors RCC Cuming and RJ Wood, A Handbook on the Saskatchewan Personal Property Security Act, 1987, Law Reform Commission
of Saskatchewan.
. RM Goode, Commercial Law, 1982, Penguin, 858.
. See paragraphs 4.86-4.90.
. Article 9 also covers sales and assignments of chattel paper.
. Professor AL Diamond, op cit, paragraph 18.2.3.
. Professor AL Diamond, op cit, paragraph 18.2.4.
. ‘An assignment of accounts receivable made solely to facilitate the collection of the accounts receivable on behalf of the
person making the assignment’:
Draft Personal Property Securities Act
1989 (NZ) s 4(5)(b)(iv); see also Section 9-104(f).
. Draft Personal Property Securities Act 1989 (NZ) s 4(5)(v).
. Section 9-104(b).
. Draft Personal Property Securities Act 1989 (NZ) cl 4(5)(ix).
. Section 9-303: see paragraph 4.10.
Draft Personal Property Securities Act
1989 (NZ) s 4(5)(a).
. See paragraphs 4.49-4.50.
. This would also appear to be the rationale behind the requirement under the
Conveyancing Act 1919
that all contracts dealing with land be in writing.
. Professor AL Diamond, op cit, 43. Diamond also concludes that the absence of writing should make the security interest unenforceable:
. The Commissions seek submissions in relation to the stamp duty consequences of this proposal. See A J Duggan, S W Begg and E V Lanyon,
Regulated Credit: The Credit and Security Aspects, 1989 Law Book Co, Sydney, paragraph 6.2.11 in relation to receivables.
Bills of Sale and Other Instruments Act
Instruments Act
Chattel Securities Act
Re Bauer Securities Pty Ltd & Anor; Austral Mining Construction Pty Ltd v NZI Capital Corporation Ltd & Anor
(1991) 4 ACSR 328
(Sup Ct Qld) was a case which involved the registration of a deed of mortgage under the
Bill of Sales and Other Instruments Act 1955
(Qld). The mortgage was also registered with the ASC on the ARCC. However, the mortgage did not comply with the formalities requirements
of the Queensland Act. McPherson J ruled that the deed of mortgage was in fact a debenture and was therefore not an instrument within
the meaning of the Act.
Obiter dicta
of Mc Pherson J suggested that even if the mortgage did fall within the category of instruments regulated by the State Act it would
not be valid as against third parties, in spite of the fact that it was registered on the ARCC, because it did not comply with formalities
requirements of the Act.
. See paragraphs 5.5-5.8.
. See New Zealand Law Commission, Report 8, op cit, 115. The Commissions’ provisional proposal is supported by the Insolvency
and Trustee Service Australia
15 April 1992.
. See paragraphs 4.49- 4.50. 72. eg see Section 9-313.
. eg. see Section 9-313.
. See paragraph 3.5.
. Section 9-312.
. Chattel paper is a document of title in the property named thereon: see paragraphs 4.31-4.33. A transferee of chattel paper is therefore
a purchaser for the purposes of the Article.
. See chapter 3, footnote 11
. Professor RM Goode, op cit, (1982), 789.
. Ibid, 796.
. Section 9-204(2).
. Professor AL Diamond, op cit, 84-85.
. Corporations Law s 279(3).
. eg Professor RCC Cumming Submission 17 December 1990.
. Section 9-204(3).
. Section 9-312(7).
Personal Property Security Act
1979-80 (SS) c P-6.1.
. In spite of the fact that the Ontario and Manitoba Acts do not explicitly provide special priority for future advances: Prof RH
McLaren and K de Jong, op cit, (1987), 6-52.
. New Zealand Law Commission, Report 8, op cit, 87.
. Section 9-314.
. Sub-section (1).
. Sub-section (3)(a).
. Sub-section (3)(b).
. Sub-section (3)(c).
. Compensation relates to damage only and does not include any decrease in the value of the whole caused by the absence of the goods
removed or any necessity for replacing them.
. Sub-section (4).
. See paragraphs 4.60-4.65.
. (1873) LR 8 Ch 1072.
. Professor El Sykes, op cit, 550.
. Sub-section (2).
. Sub-section (3).
. Professors RCC Cuming and RJ Wood, A Handbook on the Saskatchewan Personal Property Security Act, 1987, Law Reform Commission of
Saskatchewan, 207.
Draft Personal Property Securities Act
1989 (NZ) s 29.
. Section 9-307(1).
. A danger always exists with growing crops that there will be no yield if the crop is subjected, for instance, to hail damage, locusts
or other natural catastrophe. Discharge of a security over a growing crop is therefore contingent upon a yield being produced. Harvested
crops risk perishing before the vendor is able to recoup the cost of the crop and reimburse the grower. Therefore even discharge
of a security over a harvested brut unsold crop is a contingent interest.
. See paragraphs 4.86-4.90
. eg Personal Property Security Act 1980 (RSO) c 94 s 34(1).
. An accounts receivable represents a legal chose in action. Unlike an accounts receivable, chattel paper is a document of title:
see paragraphs 4.19-4.20.
. Ibid s 29.
Personal Property Security Act
1973 (Man) c 102 s 29.
Personal Property Security Act
1979-80 (SS) c P-6.1 s 29.
. See paragraphs 4.86- 4.90.
. Sub-section (2).
. Sub-section (3).
. Sub-section (4).
. Personal Property Security Act 1980 (RSO) c 94 ss 23, 27, 35: see Professor RH McLaren and K de jong, op cit 6-6.3.
. Personal Property Security Act 1979-80 (SS) c P6.1 ss 28,35(3): see Professor RH McLaren and K de Jong op cit, 6-51.
Central Refrigeration & Restaurant Services Inc (Trustee of)
(1986) 5 PPSAC 262
(Sask CA) discussed in McLaren RH and de Jong K, op cit, 4-11.
Draft Personal Property Securities Act
1989 (NZ) s 22.
. Professor AL Diamond, op cit, 81.
. Professor RH McLarm and K de Jong op cit, 1-34.
. Section 9-312(3)(a).
. Sub-sections 9-312(3) and (4).
. McLaren RH and de Jong K, op cit, 6-11.
. Professor AL Diamond, op cit, 90 (paragraph 17.17)
. See paragraphs 4.53-4.56.
. Section 9-316.
Draft Personal Property Securities Act
1989 (NZ) s39.
. The Commissions seek submissions in relation to the sump duty consequences of this proposal.
rule: see paragraph 2.23.
. Sub-section (2). Buyers of consumer goods will not be subject to future advances under existing security interests at the time of
purchase unless the secured party, without knowledge of the purchase, entered into an agreement providing for future advances within
forty-five days from the date of purchase.
. Professor AL Diamond op cit, 76-77 (paragraphs 13.6.1-13.6.10).
. See paragraph 4.78.
. See paragraph 4.75.
. Simon Begg, Solicitor, Corrs Chambers Westgarth, Melbourne, Submission
13 May 1992.
. See paragraph 5.2.
. See Professor AL Diamond, op cit, paragraph 6.9.
. Ibid, paragraph 11.5.15.
. Ibid, paragraph 11.5.16.
Personal Property Security Act
1980 (RSO) c94 s 1(h).
. See paragraph 4.78.
. Section 9-504.
. Section 9-505.
. Section 9-501(1).
Personal Property Security Act
1979-80 (SS) c P-6.1.
Draft Personal Property Securities Act
1989 (NZ) s 52.
Discussion Paper 28 (1992) - Personal Property Securities
5. Implementation
History of this Reference (Digest)
Introduction
5.1 This chapter considers how, in the Australian context, the proposals advanced in chapter 4 for a single national personal property
securities regime should be implemented.
It discusses the process by which securities over personal property are registered, and the way in which the existing series of registers
can be rationalised. The special considerations which apply to company charges are also addressed.
The process of registration
Financing statements
Financing statement, not full documentation
Consistent with the Article 9 scheme and with the proposals of the New Zealand Law Commission, registration of a security should be
able to be effected quickly and simply. This can be more easily achieved if a simple summary of the key points of the security transaction
is lodged with the registering authority rather than the entire security instrument. This summary should be referred to as a financing
statement. Registration should be effected when the registering authority enters the details contained in the financing statement
into the register. This would have the effect of giving the secured party priority from the time the financing statement was accepted
for lodgment by the registering authority. It is provisionally proposed that financing statements give details of the following particulars
the names and addresses of the parties
the date of the transaction giving rise to the security
a short description of the property
the amount of money to be repaid, or how to work it out
if stamp duty is payable, whether it has been paid.
If further particulars are needed, regulations made under the law should be able to prescribe these requirements. The financing statement
should have to be signed by the debtor before being registered.
Amount of money
. Including a statement of the amount of money owing in relation to a secured loan enables potential lenders to assess more accurately
their priority position in the event that the borrower defaults. The need for lenders to be given this opportunity is especially
important where registered securities provide for further advances or where they attach to after-acquired property.
financing statement should disclose whether or not stamp duty payable on the underlying transaction has been paid. If stamp duty is
due but has not been paid, the security should be able to be provisionally registered.
Because of the importance of stamp duty to State and Territory budgets, it is important to ensure that this matter is examined when
a benefit is being conferred on parties to dutiable arrangements.
Proposal 33
Registration should be effected by lodging a financing statement, signed by
the debtor, which should contain
the names and addresses of the parties
the date of the transaction that gives rise to the security
a short description of the property
the amount of money to be repaid, or how to work it out
if stamp duty is payable, whether it has been paid
any other information prescribed.
Provisional registration
Provisional registration needed
Where a secured party fails to strictly comply with the requirements for registration, the security should be provisionally registrable.
The effect of provisional registration should be to give the secured party priority which, upon the registration being completed,
back-dates to the date on which the security was provisionally registered. Provisional registration should be available where
registration is effected before the security transaction comes into operation
the financing statement is not signed by the debtor, or is otherwise incomplete
there is a question about the payment of stamp duty.
Proposal 34
Provisional registration should be available where
registration is effected before the security transaction comes into operation
the financing statement is not signed by the debtor, or is otherwise incomplete
there is a question about the payment of stamp duty.
Provisionally registered securities should entitle the secured party to priority, upon full registration, from the date of provisional
registration.
Financing statement not signed
It is provisionally proposed that financing statements should have to be signed by the debtor. However, a debtor should not be able
to defeat a creditor’s priority merely by refusing to sign the financing statement. This should be so even if there is a genuine
dispute about the correctness of the financing statement. Instead, the creditor should be able to have the financing statement registered
even if it is not signed by the debtor. In such a case, the creditor should have to certify that the financing statement is, the
signature apart, accurate. Registration should be provisional. The registering authority should have to notify the debtor of the
fact of provisional registration, giving the debtor a short time, say, 28 days, within which to object to registration or commence
proceedings to have registration avoided. If it does neither of these, registration should cease to be provisional and lose effect
at the end of the 28 days.
Financing statement otherwise defective
Under some bills of sale legis-lation, a technical or minor error in the documents lodged may totally invalidate the bill. This is
unsatisfactory. It will be less likely to occur under these provisional proposals because less information is required for a financing
statement than is necessary for valid registration of a bill of sale. However, to reduce further the risk of technical invalidity,
provisional registration should be available - as it is under the Corporations Law - for incomplete financing statements. The registering
authority should have a discretion to register an incomplete financing statement, thereby giving the creditor the benefit of registration
at the earliest possible date. However, it should notify the creditor that the statement is defective, and why, and allow a reasonable
time (not less than, say, 28 days) for the matter to be rectified. Once the deficiency is rectified, registration should cease to
be provisional. If it is not rectified, the creditor should get no benefit from registration at all.
lodging party should not have to certify that the documents comprising the security transaction have been duly stamped. To require
this would, in some cases, be to make the lodging party certify as to both liability for and amount of duty - questions that may
be in dispute with the stamp authorities. The lodging party should have the benefit of registration, subject to satisfactory resolution
of stamp duty issues, where it appears to the registering authority that there is or may be a liability for duty. The registering
authority should have to register unstamped documents provisionally until evidence of stamping is produced.
Proposal 35
A financing statement should be able to be registered provisionally if the financing statement
is lodged for registration before the security transaction comes into operation or
is not signed by the debtor or
is otherwise incomplete or
there is a question about the payment of stamp duty.
Where the financing statement is not signed by the debtor, the creditor should have to certify that the financing statement is, the
signature apart, accurate, but the registering authority should have to notify the debtor of the fact of provisional registration,
giving the debtor 28 days to act.
Where the financing statement is signed by the debtor but is otherwise incomplete, the registering authority should have a discretion
to register the statement provisionally, but should notify the creditor that the statement is defective, and why, and allow 28 days
for the matter to be rectified. The registering authority should have a discretion to extend the period for rectification i the circumstances
warrant such an extension.
Changes in securities
5.9 Some alterations to security arrangements agreed on between the parties could, technically, involve the creation of a new security.
It will be necessary to ensure that lenders who enter into such alterations do not lose their priority for this reason alone. It
is therefore provisionally proposed that the following alterations should not affect the lender’s priority position, and therefore
should not need to be registered
a change in the period of registration
a change in the identity of the secured party
a change in the priority order
an increase in the amount owing that represents further advances in accordance with the security transaction, or that represents interest.
All other kinds of alterations should be treated as new security arrangements for the purposes of the regime. Lenders who desire the
protections afforded by the regime should have to lodge new financing statements in these circumstances.
Proposal 36
A new financing statement should not need to be registered for an alteration to a security arrangement that is merely one of the following
a change in the period of registration
a change in the identity of the secured party
a change in the priority order
an increase in the amount owing that represents further advances in accordance with the security transaction, or that represents interest.
Events affecting securities
Notice to be filed
. While there should be no requirement for a registered secured party to lodge a new financing statement in the situations identified
above the secured party should nevertheless be required to file a notice if and when
a floating charge crystallises, or
a security right is exercised.
Proposal 37
A secured party should be required to file a notice if and when
a floating charge crystallises, or
a security right is exercised.
Discharge of security
5.11 The Corporations Law allows a debtor to obtain at any stage from the secured party a statement that the security is wholly or
partly discharged. This facility should also be included in these proposals for a new personal property securities regime: a statement
that the security has been wholly discharged should be able to be registered by the debtor. In addition, once a registered security
has been wholly discharged, the secured party should have to lodge a notice to this effect. This will help to ensure that, so far
as practicable, the register reflects accurately the position of the security.
Proposal 38
The creditor under a registered security should have to give to the debtor, on written demand, a statement that the security is wholly
or partly discharged. If partly discharged, the extent to which it is discharged should have to be specified.
Proposal 39
Such a statement, if it shows that the security has been wholly discharged, should be able to be registered by the debtor.
Proposal 40
The secured party should have to lodge for registration a notice of discharge when the security is fully discharged.
Register searches
5.12 The purpose of the proposed personal property securities register is to give notice of existing encumbrances over specified property
so that future potential lenders are better able to assess their priority position if finances are advanced and the borrower defaults.
To achieve this aim the proposed regime must provide an appropriate search procedure. The provisional proposals are based on the
Corporations Law s 272 and assume that electronic searching of the register will be possible. Anybody should be entitled to search
the register. Upon application being made to make such a search, the applicant should be issued with a ‘record of search’.
This document should be admissible as evidence of its contents and should be able to be relied upon by the applicant as the position
of the register. It should therefore be conclusive as to registration at the time the search is made. If a security is provisionally
registered, the search record should reflect this. Apart from this, it is proposed to leave the administration of searching to the
registering authority, in the light of the technology available.
So far as is practicable, searchers should be able to search either by name or by asset. Computerisation of the register will make
it easier for on-line access to the register. On-line searching facilities should be made available to those who have the technology
to use it. Regulations should cover matters such as the mode of searching and fees.
Proposal 41
There should be provision for the register to be searched by any member of the public. A ‘record of search’ should be
issued on application, and should, if properly authenticated, be admissible as evidence of its contents and conclusive as to registration
of the securities it discloses.
Secured party to provide information on request subject to privacy considerations
5.13 A financing statement is designed to contain the minimum amount of information necessary to indicate the existence of the security,
and whether the amount that it secures is likely to increase otherwise than on account of interest. Because so little information
to register their securities to provide copies of the security instruments where any reasonable request is made. The lender should
be able to charge a reasonable fee for meeting this request. To some extent, this undercuts the rationale of a public register as
relieving those who search it from the cost of doing their own investigations with the parties to the transaction. However, it is
also important to protect the privacy of arrangements where the debtor is a natural person. Requiring security instruments contracted
by an individual to be made available without the debtor’s consent is contrary to the policy behind the recent credit provider
amendments to the
To achieve this balance between the need for information and the need for privacy it is provisionally proposed that corporate secured
lenders should have to provide to anyone who asks for it, and pays the prescribed fee, a copy of the relevant security documents.
Where, however, the debtor is a natural person the debtor’s consent must be obtained before the documents can be released.
Proposal 42
Creditors under a registered security should have to provide a copy of the relevant security document to anyone who makes a reasonable
request for it and pays the prescribed fee. Where the debtor is a natural person, the debtor’s consent in writing should first
be obtained.
The Register
The desirability of a single personal property securities register
Introduction
new personal property securities regime which resolves priority disputes between competing secured parties equitably, quickly and
cheaply is best achieved by replacing the multitude of existing registers with a single register. This solution has the advantage
that lenders and other persons who need to find out the extent to which property is already encumbered can have their enquiries dealt
with expeditiously without having to resort, in an environment of more than one register, to a time-consuming search for the most
appropriate register. However, a regime with a single register also poses a number of difficulties.
Industry-specific security enquiries
Persons whose security enquiries are confined to a particular industry (for example, merchant shipping) may prefer a register that
only records securities in relation to a particular type of property (for example, ships). Registers such as those which record security
interests over ships
have an important function from the point of view of the industry concerned. It is conceivably much easier for a stevedore, for example,
to access a single register which contains all security interests over ships than to have to access a register which holds interests
over all types of personal property. The ease with which the stevedore is able to locate existing encumbrances is further improved
if the point of access is the peak body of the industry concerned. Overseas parties interested to learn whether an asset such as
a ship is already encumbered will be more inclined to contact the industry directly; it may not occur to them immediately that the
security information which they seek is listed on a register which holds information not only about ships but about all other types
of personal property as well, and that this register is administered by, for instance, a government department rather than the shipping
authorities themselves.
Existing national registers
. A number of national registers already exist, for example, for ships, designs, patents and company charges. These registers do not
exhibit the problems currently associated with Stated-based registers. Hence, there may be no need to change systems of registration
that are administered on a national basis.
National REVs scheme proposal
. The question whether there should be a single personal property securities register has been further complicated by moves by the
States and Territories to establish a uniform national Register of Encumbered Vehicles (REVs). Given the already significant investment
in the establishment of the national REVs scheme. the REVs proposal should not be further deferred by any proposals to include motor
vehicle encumbrances in a single national register of personal property securities.
Consultant’s analysis - cost of establishing a register
. The final reason why a single register may not be appropriate is essentially an economic one. The cost of establishing a single
register for all personal property securities is likely to be high - a fact demonstrated by the significant investment in the establishment
of the Australian Securities Commission’s national computerised database.
This cost is likely to be particularly high if all existing registers have to be collapsed into it. Whether the benefits which will
be derived from such a register outweigh the cost associated with its implementation is a vital consideration.
Building on an existing register
. An alternative to establishing an entirely new register is to use an existing register as the basis of the new database. The Credit
Reference Association of Australia Ltd (CRAA), for example, has a computerised register that contains credit information on many
individuals and some corporations. The CRAA is, however, a private body and its operations are not subject to Parliamentary scrutiny.
The Australian Register of Company Charges (ARCC) administered by the Australian Securities Commission (ASC) is also a national database.
Unlike the CRAA, the ASC is subject to Parliamentary scrutiny. The ARCC commenced operation on 1 January 1991. It is a national computerised
ASCOT - a summary of information submitted to companies
DOCIMAGE - which allows users to see an electronic image of any company document submitted to the ASC.
This facility would seem to be the logical basis for a national register of securities. It is already established as a single, national
centres. Using the ARCC is likely to be the option of least expense to enable registration of securities over individually-owned
personal property as well as company property.
Provisional proposal
5.20 It is provisionally proposed that existing national registers should be preserved. Where a security is unable to be registered
on an existing national register, it should be able to be recorded on a new personal property securities register. These proposals
should not affect current endeavours by the States and Territories in relation to the establishment of a national REVs scheme for
interests in motor vehicles - this proposal should continue to be developed unless further evidence reveals that it would be more
economic to assimilate it within the national personal property securities register. The proposed register, other national registers
and the national REVs should be able to be linked in such a way that persons searching one register will be able to readily access
the other registers. The effect of this will be to create a comprehensive single register for personal property securities in keeping
with the provisional proposals for a single, national personal property securities regime. Regulations should prescribe the registers
which should be linked to the proposed national personal property securities register.
Proposal 43
Existing national registers (for example, ARCC and the national REVs scheme proposal) should be continued. Other existing national
registers for specifc forms of property should be reviewed. A new national register should be established for all personal property
securities other than those covered by continuing registers. All registers should be linked in such a way that persons searching
on one register will be able to readily access information contained on the other registers. Regulations should prescribe the registers
which should be linked to the proposed national personal property securities register.
Asset- or name-based register?
Introduction
The Register of Encumbered Vehicles established under the chattel securities legislation in each relevant State and Territory is an
example of an asset-based register. Persons interested to learn whether a particular vehicle is already encumbered are able to search
the register using information which uniquely identifies the asset in question, for example, the car’s engine serial number
and/or the car chassis number. Name-based registers function by identifying individual debtors and other parties to a security arrangement.
Most existing registers are arranged under the names of the parties to the security arrangement involved.
Limitations of each type of register
It is important to consider when deciding how to establish a national register whether the register should be administered on the
basis of the type of asset secured, the names of the parties to the security arrangement, or both. The difficulty in establishing
asset-based registers is that many kinds of property cannot be uniquely identified.
As Simon Begg notes
[t]his information - of value to creditors or, more accurately, intending creditors - is only provided by a name-indexed registration
A further limitation of asset-based registers is that security agreements which create rights to chattels where at the date of the
agreement the chattels have not been ascertained cannot be registered.
Provisional proposal
The personal property securities register should be flexible enough to accommodate both kinds of index. In relation to existing registers,
it is provisionally proposed that in the event of a conflict between a name-based index and an asset-indexed register, the asset-indexed
register should prevail.
Proposal 44
The proposed national personal property securities register should be both asset- and name-based. In relation to existing registers,
in the event of a conflict between a name-based and an asset-based register, the asset-based register should prevail.
The legal framework
Introduction
5.24 A legal regime must be devised that will support the establishment of a national registration system for all personal property
securities. An essential criterion of the legal regime is that it must validly regulate security rights which arise out of contracts
between non-corporate entities or individuals. Security rights which arise out of contracts where a company is the borrower would
seem to be already covered by the ARCC, although amendments to the Corporations Law are desirable for consistent and comprehensive
Possible option
Introduction
In consultation with the VLRC and the QLRC, the Commissions considered a number of possible options for implementing the proposed
personal property securities regime. One of these options involved using the Corporations Law
as the vehicle to provide the legal framework necessary for the new regime. Although the focus of the Corporations Law is the corporate
sector, it could be extended to provide for a single regime for all security arrangements involving personal property, including
personal property of individuals (natural persons) and of bodies corporate not presently covered by the Corporations Law. This is
made possible by the scheme of the Law.
However, the Commissions has resolved not to proceed with this option at this stage. Instead, it is provisionally proposed that uniform
Commonwealth, State and Territory legislation should provide the legislative vehicle for implementing the proposed regime.
Commonwealth and State/Territory uniform legislation
One option for the establishment of a personal property securities regime is the enactment of uniform Commonwealth and State and Territory
laws. The Corporations Law
could be amended to provide the model which would apply as presently to all securities over corporate property. This model legislation
could then be enacted by each of the States and Territories.
The Corporations Law
Scheme of the Law
The Corporations Law is a unique, and uniquely Australian, inter-governmental arrangement. Its scheme is as follows:
Corporations Act
(Cth) is the core law. It is made by the federal Parliament.
Corporations Act 1989
reads ‘The Corporations Law is as follows:’. The full text of the Corporations Law then follows. In effect, the whole
of the Corporations Law is contained within
Corporations Act
gives the Corporations Law in
effect as a law of the Australian Capital Territory.
Each State and the Northern Territory has applied the Corporations Law in the
Corporations Act
as a law of the particular State or Territory. The Corporations Law is, therefore, a national law but at the same time it is a ‘law
of this jurisdiction’.
on securities over property of a company
The Corporations Law
already makes extensive provision for securities given by companies over their property. It provides that each company that gives
a charge of a specified kind over specified kinds of its property must, within 45 days, register the charge with the ASC.
Policy considerations
A key policy behind
in particular and modem corporate regulatory regimes (such as the Corporations Law) in general has been an increased onus on management
to provide relevant information. This reflects a growing community desire to ensure that directors act with shareholders’ best
interests in mind by requiring disclosure of information as a basis for investment and credit assessment. The Corporations Law now
requires - for the benefit of shareholders, creditors and potential creditors - public notification of the extent to which companies
raise money on the security of their property. This generally enhanced emphasis on disclosure was the subject of a recent report
by the Companies and Securities Advisory Committee (CASAC)
wherein it was proposed that companies should be required to disclose to the ASC and to the market all material changes in their
situation. The recent shift from annual reporting to more frequent reporting
and stricter requirements in relation to form and content of prospectuses
are reflections of this increased emphasis on disclosure and the importance of the duties owed by managers to shareholders, creditors
and the market in general. Public disclosure in a register of whether, and the extent to which, the property of a company is being
used as security is therefore consistent with long standing policy in relation to corporate regulation.
A possible resolution - repeal of
Professor A Duggan
has suggested that the Corporations Law
be wholly repealed and that the proposed uniform State and Territory laws be the only laws that deal with security given by companies
over their property.
The suggestion does not apparently preclude compulsory registration by a company of a security over its property if that were required
for reasons of corporate regulation.
However, the creditor’s priority would be governed, not by the company’s registering under such a requirement, but by
the creditor’s registering in a different register under the uniform State and Territory legislation. The proposal is aimed
at bringing all personal property securities under a single regime, with a single register. This would lead to uniformity and avoid
the need to marry up the Corporations Law and laws relating to personal property securities. To this end, Professor Duggan’s
suggestion achieves the objectives of simplicity by overcoming present difficulties which arise out of complex and inconsistent regimes
between each of the States and Territories.
The Commissions’ view
However, there are significant difficulties with this suggestion. Its principal advantage is also a disadvantage - by ignoring the
current Corporations Law and its application in this area it fails to deal with the overlap and the need to resolve inconsistencies
arising from the different purposes of the laws. First, it would involve, for all but the smallest securities, two registrations,
one by the creditor, the other by the debtor company. This would simply increase the cost of borrowing without discernible benefit.
Second, anomalous and unfair results could ensue. For example, if the first lender has chosen not to register its security in the
uniform State and Territory register, but the debtor company has registered the security in the ARCC as required by the Corporations
Law, a later lender who searches the ARCC could take priority over the earlier lender although it was fully aware of the earlier
security. In spite of such concerns comment on Professor Duggan’s suggestion is sought.
Modification of
to achieve both sets of policies
The better approach seems to be to modify
so that both the policy objectives that it presently pursues, and the objectives of the proposals made elsewhere in this Discussion
Paper, are achieved. This would be accomplished by amending
to make it consistent with the provisional proposals in chapter 4. However, a number of modifications would be needed in the application
of those proposals to securities over property of a company, to ensure that both sets of policy objectives can be met. These modifications
are discussed in the following paragraphs.
Companies to register securities that they give
The principal modification needed is to preserve and extend the requirement in
that a company that gives a security over its property register the security with the ASC in the ARCC.
should be extended to cover all kinds of securities, over all of the kinds of property (if of a company), that the tentative proposals
in chapter 4 contemplate. Registration by the debtor company should give the creditor the protection that registration by the creditor
affords under the proposals in chapter 4. This will eliminate the need for dual registration. The present requirement in the Corporations
that the documents and instruments constituting the security transaction be lodged should not be disturbed, although the financing
statement should also have to be lodged. Any officer of the company nominated for this purpose should be able to sign the financing
Time for registration
Given that the debtor company is to be compelled to register the security it gives over its property, a time limit will need to be
fixed. Paragraph 2.31 described the different time limits for registering securities under the existing law. The Corporations Law
presently gives 45 days. This is clearly too long. The time should be fixed at 15 business days after the security transaction concerned
takes effect. A security can, under the draft proposals, be registered before the security transaction takes effect. Late lodgments
should, however, be accepted and registered, but would only take priority from the time of lodgment, and whatever liability flowed
from the contravention involved in the failure to register would not be affected.
Notifying exercise of security rights
A secured party that exercises a security right should have to register notice of the exercise. The ASC should then be able to notify
the secured party that it will remove registration unless advised that the obligation secured is still unperformed.
Later debentures need not be registered
The Corporations Law
and (6) provides that securities issued in a series, such as debentures, be registered, but that those after the first need not be
registered. Priority dates from the time the notice relating to the first debenture is registered. This provision is clearly sensible,
and avoids cluttering up the register with many instances of the same kind of security. It should be continued.
Avoiding preferences
One other provision will need to be kept in
It prevents avoidance of the preference provisions of the Corporations Law.
Proposal 45
The Corporations Law
should be amended to make it consistent with the tentative proposals in chapter 4 with the following modifications:
the requirement in
that a company that gives a security over its property be required to register the security with the ASC in the ARCC should be preserved
registration of a security by the debtor company should give the creditor the protection that registration by the creditor affords
under the proposals in chapter 4
the documents and instruments constituting the security transaction should have to be lodged, as well as a financing statement
the time limit for registration should be 15 business days after the security transaction concerned takes effect
late lodgments should be accepted and registered, but should take priority from the time of lodgment, and should not affect liability
for failure to lodge
only the first of securities issued in a series, such as debentures, need be registered
the secured party that exercises a security right should have to register notice of the exercise
the Corporations Law
should be retained.
Other existing laws
5.38 It will be necessary to undertake a review of other existing Federal, State and Territory laws relating to personal property
securities to ensure their consistency with the new regime. Provisions which are no longer necessary should be repealed. Any provisions
which are to continue should conform to these proposals as to priorities. It will be necessary for this review to be undertaken within
each jurisdiction.
Terms of reference
Participants
1. INTRODUCTION
2. THE EXISTING SITUATION
AND THE NEED FOR REFORM
3. DIRECTIONS FOR REFORM
4. PROPOSALS
5. IMPLEMENTATION
Table of Contents
. In October 1991 Mr John Dufley, one of the ALRC’s consultants, presented to the ALRC a research paper discussing the technical
and practical aspects of implementing a single national registration system for personal property securities. The Commissions gratefully
acknowledge Mr DuBey’s assistance.
. See paragraph 5.8.
. See paragraph 5.20 for the provisional proposal in relation to the form of the register, and paragraph 5.23 as to whether it should
be asset-based or name-based.
Amendment Act 1990
(Cth). This Act commenced operation on 24 September 1991.
. Aircraft, like ships and most modes of transport, are examples of personalty which do not remain stationary in any particular jurisdiction
for a prolonged period of time. A register, administered by the Civil Aviation Authority, currently exists for liens over aircraft.
The reliability of this register is apparently in doubt. The ALRC is informed that the existing legislation establishing this register
fails to permit registration of securities which cannot be classified as liens. Further it cannot be relied upon as an accurate record
of all lien interests over aircraft because registration of these types of interests is not compulsory.
. At a meeting held in Adelaide in November 1992, the Premiers and Chief Ministers agreed to develop a national vehicle security registers
as soon as possible. They resolved that “[a]ll Australian jurisdictions operate security systems but there is no national system
or linkage of the separate databases, nor is there uniform legislation. The fragmentation of the present system has contributed to
widespread lossess incurred by consumers, the motor trade and the finance industry. Premiers and Chief Ministers now wish to accelerate
work to establish a national vehicle securities register. The register, which would have the potential to be expanded to cover other
consumer items, would operate on a full cost-recovery basis. Its establishment costs could be recouped from the motor vehicle and
finance industries. With the hill support of Premiers and Chief Ministers it is anticipated that this important proposal will be
given high priority and can be operational at an early date.
. These issues are examined in greater depth in the Research Paper produced by one of the ALRC’s consultants, Mr John Dulley.
. eg bulk items such as grain.
The Registration of Security Interests in Chattels,
(1981) 55 ALJ 649
. See paragraph 5.27.
. Property excluded includes choses in action, land and fixtures. The kinds of charges excluded include pledges, deposits etc and
securities that are not charges or mortgages: see Corporations Law ss 262 and 9 (definition of ‘charge).
. Companies and Securities Advisory Committee (CASAC), Report on an Enhanced Statutory Disclosure System, September 1991,21.
. The Companies and Securities Advisory Committee (CASAC) has advised that while there could be considerable merit in quarterly reporting,
as matter of policy there should be no mandatory quarterly reporting requirement at this stage: CASAC, op cit, September 1991, 27.
. See generally Corporations Law s 1022.
. Henry Bourne Higgins Professor of Law at Monash University.
. Professor A Duggan Submission 17 July 1992. Professor Duggan is in favour of a uniform State and Territory legislative approach.
. However, the submission suggests that such requirements are unnecessary, and that disclosure of the security in the accounts in
the company’s annual report should be enough.
. Presently in Corporations Law s 267(1); it prevents an officer of a company from enforcing a security in his or her favour within
6 months without leave of the Court.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter