URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCDP/1995/37.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:36:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Directed Verdicts of Acquittal - Discussion Paper [1995] NSWLRCDP 37
Discussion Paper 37 (1995) - Directed Verdicts of Acquittal
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
1. INTRODUCTION
THE COMMISSION'S REFERENCE
THE STRUCTURE OF THIS PAPER
2. THE LAW IN NEW SOUTH WALES
THE GENERAL RULE
THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE RULE IN AUSTRALIA
THE BASIS OF THE RULE: SUFFICIENCY OR SATISFACTION?
The narrower view
Rationale of the narrower view
Objection to the narrower view
The broader view
Objection of the broader view
The narrower view prevails
3. STATUTORY RIGHTS OF APPEAL IN TASMANIA AND WESTERN AUSTRALIA
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
4. SHOULD THERE BE A RIGHT OF CROWN APPEAL IN NEW SOUTH WALES?
MATTERS FOR INITAL RESOLUTION
The focus: the general direction of the criminal law or the individual case?
Retrial: the necessary outcome of a successful appeal?
ARGUMENTS AGAINST A CROWN RIGHT OF APPEAL
Double jeopardy
THE RIGHTS OF THE ACCUSED
THE INCIDENCE OF DIRECTED VERDICTS IN NEW SOUTH WALES
Provisional proposal
Discussion Paper 37 (1995) - Directed Verdicts of Acquittal
Terms of Reference, Participants and Submissions
History of this Reference (Digest)
Terms of Reference
Persuant to
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
(NSW), the then Attorney General, the Honourable J P Hannaford MLC, referred by letter dated 17 March 1995, the following matter to
the Law Reform Commission:
whether the Crown should have a right of appeal where there is a directed verdict of acquittal.
In conducting this review the Commission should have regard to:
the incidence of directed verdicts of acquittal;
the double jeopardy rule and the rights of the accused person;
the impact on the administration of justice and on public confidence in the judiciary of any proposals for reform; and
any related matter.
Participants
The Law Reform Commission is constituted by the
Law Reform Commission Act 1967
. For the purpose of this reference, the Chairman, in accordance with the Act, established a Division comprising the following members
of the Commission:
The Hon G J Samuels AC QC
Professor Michael Tilbury
Professor David Weisbrot
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Research and Writing
Mr Bruce Fischer
The Hon G J Samuels AC QC
Ms Beverley Caska
Desktop Publishing
Ms Julie Freeman
Administrative Assistance
Ms Zoya Howes
Ms Bronwyn Spiteri
Submissions
The Commission invites submissions on the issues raised in this Discussion Paper. Submissions and comments must reach the Commission
31 August 1995
Suggestions for further issues which should be considered are welcome.
All enquiries and submissions should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
GPO Box 5199
SYDNEY NSW 2001
[DX 1227 SYDNEY]
Phone: (02) 252 3855
Fax: (02) 247 1054
Current contact details for the Law Reform Commission
Who can make a submission?
Anyone can make a submission or comment. If you have an opinion on the matters under review or personal experience of the issues involved,
the Commission would like to hear from you. You do not need legal qualifications to make a submission, although the Commission welcomes
input from the legal community.
Use of submissions and confidentiality
Submissions may be used by the Commission in two ways:
1. Because the law reform process is a public one, copies of submissions are normally made available by the Commission on request
to other persons or organisations. If you would like your submission to be treated as confidential, please indicate this on your
written submission or oral comments. Any request for a copy of a submission marked"confidential" will be determined in
accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
2. In preparing its Report, the Commission will make reference to submissions made in response to this Discussion Paper. However,
a request for confidentiality will be respected by the Commission in relation to the publication of submissions.
Thus, if you would like your submission treated as confidential, please indicate this on your written submission or when making oral
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
Discussion Paper 37 (1995) - Directed Verdicts of Acquittal
1. Introduction
History of this Reference (Digest)
1.1 The common law rule that there is no appeal against a directed verdict of not guilty applies in New South Wales.
Statutory inroads have been made into the common law rule in Tasmania and Western Australia where the Crown has a right of appeal
against an acquittal in cases involving an error of law.
The issue addressed in this Discussion Paper is whether there should be a similar right of appeal against an acquittal by direction
of the judge in New South Wales.
THE COMMISSION'S REFERENCE
1.2 On 17 March 1995 the then Attorney-General, the Hon John P Hannaford MLC, referred to the Commission the question whether there
should be a right of appeal in New South Wales against an acquittal by direction of the judge. In conducting the review, the Commission
was directed to have regard to:
the incidence of directed verdicts of acquittal;
the double jeopardy rule and the rights of an accused person;
the impact on the administration of justice and on public confidence in the judiciary of any proposals for reform; and
any related issues.
THE STRUCTURE OF THIS PAPER
1.3 This Discussion Paper adopts the following structure:
Chapter 1 states the issue and sets out the Commission’s terms of reference.
Chapter 2 outlines the law in New South Wales.
Chapter 3 analyses the law in Tasmania and Western Australia where the Crown has a limited statutory right of appeal against an acquittal.
Chapter 4 addresses the issue whether the law of New South Wales should be changed to allow a right of appeal against a directed verdict
of acquittal and contains the Commission’s proposal.
The Appendix contains data on directed verdicts in New South Wales in 1992.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
. See para 2.1.
. See Chapter 3.
Discussion Paper 37 (1995) - Directed Verdicts of Acquittal
2. The Law in New South Wales
History of this Reference (Digest)
THE GENERAL RULE
2.1 At common law, there is no appeal against an acquittal by a court of competent jurisdiction after a trial on the merits of a criminal
This is the case however the acquittal arises: whether upon consideration of the evidence by the jury, or upon the jury’s being
directed by the judge to return a verdict of not guilty, and whether or not such an outcome arises from an error of law.
Section 5A(2)(a)
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
(NSW) allows the Attorney General or Director of Public Prosecutions to submit to the Court of Criminal Appeal “any question
of law arising at or in connection with the trial” where that question is one of general importance for future trials in New
South Wales. However, any determination by the Court is treated as precedent only. It does not affect the verdict or outcome of the
trial from which the question originated. It should be noted that “[t]he mere fact that the trial judge has made an error of
law will not be sufficient” to bring the section into operation.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE RULE IN AUSTRALIA
2.3 In Australia, prior to federation, there were minor deviations from the general rule that a person acquitted of a criminal charge
cannot be retried. For example, except where renounced by statute or charter, there remained the inherent prerogative of the Crown
in Council to hear appeals from colonial courts on any matter (civil or criminal). However, in relation to criminal matters, this
unless that verdict had been imposed by an appellate court reversing a conviction at trial, within a series of appeals begun by the
Departures from the principle existed (and in some cases still exist) in the statutory rights of Crown appeal against the decision
of a justice which are available in Queensland,
and the Australian Capital Territory.
2.4 After federation, there was some uncertainty over the extent of jurisdiction provided by s 73 of the Commonwealth
Constitution
. That section confers upon the High Court “jurisdiction, with such exceptions and subject to such regulations as the Parliament
prescribes, to hear and determine appeals from all judgments, decrees, orders and sentences” of any justice or justices exercising
the original jurisdiction of the High Court, of any court exercising federal jurisdiction, and any Supreme Court from which at the
time of federation an appeal lay to the Queen in Council.
A series of cases
established that
provided only a limited right of Crown appeal against acquittal:
[a]n application for special leave to appeal from a judgment of acquittal is a rare thing ... [T]he terms of the
Constitution
are sufficiently wide to enable us to entertain an appeal from a judgment of acquittal. The judgment of acquittal in this case is
the judgment of a court of criminal appeal and is contrary to the verdict of the jury and not in accordance with the verdict of the
jury. We would not, of course, go behind a verdict of not guilty.
THE BASIS OF THE RULE: SUFFICIENCY OR SATISFACTION?
2.5 A direction of acquittal may be given by a trial judge at any time during the trial, but most commonly occurs at the close of
the Crown case in response to a submission by the accused that there is no case to answer. In the absence of such a submission, the
judge is not bound to withdraw the case from the jury unless it is patently clear that the trial should be stopped because a fundamental
ingredient of the charge is missing.
2.6 There has been some dispute both in Australia and in England as to the basis upon which such a submission may be founded. Although
the law is now settled in Australia by the decision of the High Court in
it is helpful to consider the nature of the contending propositions.
The narrower view
2.7 What has been called the “narrower” view
(which has now prevailed) is that a submission of “no case to answer” can succeed only where the evidence for the Crown,
taken alone and at its highest, is insufficient to establish beyond reasonable doubt the guilt of the accused.
In determining such an application the judge will assume that the jury will accept the whole of the proofs in favour of the Crown
which the evidence on its face is capable of establishing.
It is irrelevant that a witness upon whose evidence reliance is placed in order to sustain the Crown’s case may have been discredited
in cross examination; or that there is evidence central to the Crown’s case which is inconsistent with other evidence which
may seem more persuasive. The determination of whether there is evidence, excluding any evidence militating in favour of the accused,
which is capable of satisfying the jury beyond reasonable doubt of the accused’s guilt is a question of law for the trial judge,
whose direction the jury is bound to accept.
The judge must not pay any regard to the quality of the evidence or venture any finding or opinion about its plausibility or persuasive
force, for these are matters dealing not with sufficiency but with satisfaction, and therefore of fact and for the jury.
Rationale of the narrower view
2.8 The decision of the judge to withdraw a case from the jury on the grounds that there is insufficient evidence to justify a conviction,
is an example of the traditional control exercised by judges over juries. In this context, that control operates, in the interests
of both the community and accused person, to prevent a jury’s consideration of proofs which are in law insufficient.
Its justification lies in the distinction between the judicial function and that of the jury. It is true that an ultimate question
of fact may be withdrawn from the jury and vested in the trial judge “under the pretence that it [is] a question of law”.
But absent any rule of this kind there is a relatively clear demarcation between the functions of judge and jury:
The judge does not decide which facts have been proved, but assumes that all evidence favouring the prosecution has been accepted;
that all facts capable of being proved by that evidence have been proved; and that all inferences capable of being drawn from those
facts have been drawn so as to prove further facts; and
The judge does not ask whether he or she is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether the hypothetical reasonable juror could
upon the prosecution’s evidence be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt. The judge’s assessment of the evidence is not
the only reasonable response to it, and it may be reasonable for the jury to be satisfied in either direction where the judge would
not be satisfied in any.
The satisfaction of the reasonable juror is assessed by “[pitching] the requirements of the test at the lowest level at which
a reasonable man may achieve satisfaction to the requisite degree”.
Objection to the narrower view
2.9 The narrower view has been regarded with a degree of caution because its strict application means that judges must reject a submission
of no case to answer even where they are convinced that the evidence, although sufficient, is unreliable. For example, the prosecution’s
case may rest on evidence of identification whose quality is poor (eg because it depends on a fleeting glance). Rigid application
of the narrower view means that the judge must nevertheless allow the jury to determine the weight of such evidence. Although this
preserves the function of the jury, it may unfairly put a person to trial or even result in an unjust conviction.
The broader view
2.10 The apprehension that evidence which is sufficient but unsatisfactory may result in a miscarriage of justice by dint of an unjust
conviction by the jury, underpins the view that the trial judge is authorised to direct a verdict of acquittal when the evidence
is considered to be so unsatisfactory, in point, for example, of credibility or cogency, that a conviction founded upon it would
Until rejected in several decisions in various States,
the view that a trial judge can direct an acquittal other than in circumstances where the evidence will not support a verdict of
guilty tended to be put on one of two bases:
the trial judge can stop the case where there is but a “scintilla” of evidence;
the trial judge can stop the case where a verdict of guilty would be unsafe or unsatisfactory.
The second of these two approaches was described in
as “a more robust view” than the former and appears to have developed in England following the passage of the
Criminal Appeal Act 1966
which allowed for the setting aside, on appeal, of unsafe or unsatisfactory verdicts.
2.11 The broader view was rejected in favour of the narrower view in England in
and in New South Wales in
Both cases admit the possibility of difficulty with the narrower view at the “borderland”, that is, where it is practically
difficult to draw a clear distinction between the existence of evidence and the reliability of evidence, as (for example) between
the fact of identification and the quality of identification. But the difficulty depends entirely on the trial judge’s first
coming to a conclusion about the weight or character of the evidence for the Crown, such as that it is weak, or inconsistent or tenuous
or otherwise of poor quality; and these are all judgments about the facts which are forbidden to the trial judge since they fall
squarely within the province of fact and are thus reserved to the jury. Once it is plain that in determining whether a submission
of “no case” is made out the judge must resolutely avoid any determination about the character or plausibility of the
evidence, there should not be any considerable difficulty in applying the test which the High Court has now established.
Objection to the broader view
2.12 Moreover, once it is appreciated that independent power may be exercised by an appellate court to set aside a jury’s verdict
on the grounds that is it unsafe or unsatisfactory,
the foundation of the broader view fails. In
Mason CJ restated the test he and Gibbs CJ had formulated in
Chamberlain
that a finding by a court of criminal appeal that a conviction is unsafe or dangerous requires the Court to make an independent assessment
of the evidence, and to overturn the verdict not when it disagrees with the jury’s conclusion but when it concludes that on
that evidence a reasonable jury ought to have had a reasonable doubt. This is a question of fact. In
Deane, Toohey and Gaudron JJ stated that the question of whether a verdict is unsafe or unsatisfactory:
involves a Court of Criminal Appeal undertaking an independent examination of the relevant evidence to determine whether it was open
to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as to the guilt of the accused. That function is not discharged merely by a consideration
of whether there was a sufficiency of evidence to sustain a conviction, for it is clear that a verdict may be unsafe or unsatisfactory
notwithstanding that there was evidence sufficient to entitle a reasonable jury to convict ... A Court of Criminal Appeal must make
an independent assessment of the evidence, both as to its sufficiency and its quality.
2.13 At both the trial and appeal stages, the test of sufficiency of evidence is the same: the capacity of the evidence to satisfy
a reasonable jury beyond a reasonable doubt.
If there is sufficient evidence, the decision at trial as to whether the evidence is satisfactory to the requisite degree is a matter
for the jury. Whether the jury
have been satisfied to the requisite degree is a matter for the appeal court. Hence, the appeal court stands in a different position
from the trial judge, in that it reassesses the totality of the evidence according to a test encompassing, but wider than, the sufficiency
The usurpation of the jury’s function of weighing evidence is contrary to accepted principle governing jury trials. Although
that proposition has been eroded to the extent that three judges on appeal may now say that a conviction though open on the evidence
would be unsafe, it would not be warranted to confide that power to a single judge guided only by his own unaided and uncorrected
assessment of the testimonial weight.
The narrower view prevails
the High Court expressed the principle thus:
[I]f there is evidence (even if tenuous or inherently weak or vague) which can be taken into account by the jury in its deliberations
and that evidence is capable of supporting a verdict of guilty, the matter must be left to the jury for its decision. Or, to put
the matter in more usual terms, a verdict of not guilty may be directed only if there is a defect in the evidence such that, taken
at its highest, it will not sustain a verdict of guilty.
2.15 The High Court went on to point out that the power reserved to a court of criminal appeal to set aside a verdict on the grounds
that it is unsafe or unsatisfactory, does not involve an interference with the traditional division of functions between judge and
jury in a criminal trial; and that there are no grounds for adding that power to the armoury of a trial judge.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
Thomson v MasterTouch TV Service Pty Ltd
[1978] FCA 24
(1978) 38 FLR 397
at 403 per Deane J.
(1987) 9 NSWLR 615
at 616 per Lee J.
Thomson v MasterTouch TV Service Pty Ltd
[1978] FCA 24
(1978) 38 FLR 397
at 403-404.
Justices Act 1886
(Qld) s 209(1) and
Justices Act 1958
(Vic) s 155 (1) and (4).
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Thomson v MasterTouch TV Service Pty Ltd
[1978] FCA 24
(1978) 38 FLR 397
Attorney General for New South Wales v Jackson
[1906] HCA 90
(1906) 3 CLR 730
[1915] HCA 90
(1915) 20 CLR 315.
[1948] HCA 22
(1948) 77 CLR 511
at 526 per Dixon J.
R v Trotter
(1979) 22 SASR 64
(1990) 171 CLR 27.
. So described by Gleeson CJ in
(1989) 18 NSWLR 74
at 77. And see
R v Galbraith
[1981] 1 WLR 1039;
(1979) 23 SASR 161
Attorney-General’s Reference (No 1 of 1983)
[1983] 2 VR 410.
R v Trotter
(1979) 22 SASR 64.
[1990] HCA 51
(1990) 171 CLR 207
(1985) 4 NSWLR 42
(1987) 49 SASR 192.
((1979) 23 SASR 161
at 162, 163 per King CJ.
. H Glass, "The Insufficiency of Evidence to Raise a Case to Answer"
Australian Law Journal
at 844, citing amongst others
[1963] HCA 44
(1963) 110 CLR 234
[1958] HCA 30
(1958) 99 CLR 346
Justices Act 1902
Wentworth v Rogers
[1984] 2 NSWLR 422
Carlin v Thawat Chidkhunthod
(1985) 4 NSWLR 182.
Salmond on the Law of Torts
(15th ed, Sweet & Maxwell, 1969) at 553, dealing with proof of the absence of reasonable and probable cause in the tort of malicious
prosecution. Another example was s 23 of the
Defamation Act 1974
(NSW), omitted by clause (5) of Schedule 1 of the
Defamation (Amendment) Act 1994
(NSW), which provided that whether there was a defence of qualified privilege was to be determined by the court. However, in such
cases, any primary facts in dispute are to be decided by the jury, if the jury is the tribunal of fact in the case.
. Glass at 851-852.
. Glass at 852.
R v Galbraith
[1981] 1 WLR 1039 at 1040.
R v Falconer-Atlee
(1974) 58 Cr App R 349;
R v Mansfield
[1977] 1 WLR 1102.
(1979) 23 SASR 161
Attorney General's Reference
(No. 1 of 1983)
[1983] 2 VR 410;
(1989) 18 NSWLR 74.
. See for example R Kidston, "Invitations to 'Stop the Case'"
Australian Law Journal
[1990] HCA 51
(1990) 171 CLR 207
. [19181] 1 WLR 1039.
(1989) 18 NSWLR 74.
. See especially
Mezzo v The Queen
(1986) 27 CCC (3d) 97
at 130-132 per Wilson J.
Chamberlain v R
[1984] HCA 7
(1984) 153 CLR 521:
[1987] HCA 50
(1987) 163 CLR 454.
Chamberlain
. Glass at 846-847.
. Glass at 845.
at 214-215.
Discussion Paper 37 (1995) - Directed Verdicts of Acquittal
3. Statutory Rights of Appeal in Tasmania and Western Australia
History of this Reference (Digest)
3.1 There are two statutory departures in Australia from the common law principle that no appeal lies against an acquittal: one in
Tasmania, the other in Western Australia.
3.2 Section 401(2) of the
Criminal Code Act
(Tas) provides that:
The Attorney General may appeal to the Court -
(a) against an order arresting judgment;
(b) by leave of the Court or upon the certificate of the judge of the court of trial that it is a fit case for appeal against an acquittal
on a question of law alone; or
(c) by leave of the Court, against the sentence.
3.3 Section 402 provides that:
(1) On an appeal the Court shall allow the appeal if it is of the opinion that the verdict of the jury should be set aside on the
ground that it is unreasonable, or cannot be supported having regard to the evidence, or that the judgment or order of the court
of trial should be set aside on the ground of the wrong decision of any question of law, or that on any ground whatsoever there was
a miscarriage of justice, and in any other case shall dismiss the appeal...
3.4 Section 401(2) has been narrowly interpreted. In
R v Jenkins
the Tasmanian Court of Criminal Appeal stated that the term “a question of law alone” excludes questions of mixed fact
under the Tasmanian formula ... there would seem to be great difficulties in the way of entertaining an appeal by the Crown against
the exercise of a judicial discretion where the question involved is not so much the existence of a discretion but the question of
its exercise in relation to the facts of a particular case.
3.5 The Court also interpreted the section as allowing leave to appeal only when the issue in question is one of importance for the
administration of the criminal law generally, rather than for the particular case at hand.
3.6 Later, in
R v Jessop,
a differently constituted Court took a wider view of the section. Crawford J considered that the discretion to grant leave is unfettered,
and that the importance of the appeal question to the administration of the criminal law may be one, but not the only, relevant factor
in deciding whether to grant leave:
... it is in the public interest that a grave error by a trial judge which may well have resulted in an acquittal should not be allowed
to have the necessary result that the acquittal stand. It may be that not only the seriousness of the error, but also the seriousness
of the crime of which an accused has been acquitted should in some cases be a relevant matter.
Nettlefold J also considered that the section was not restricted to questions of general importance.
3.7 Chambers J, dissenting, considered that the discretion to grant leave is unfettered, but also that it was a legitimate function
of the Court to lay down broad guidelines as to when leave should be granted.
He considered that only rarely - when the case was “a serious case of more than average public importance where there had been
a fundamental error in the conduct or course of the trial” - should leave be granted to hear a question which had importance
only to a particular case.
3.8 In relation to the import of the term “a question of law alone”, Nettlefold J looked to cases under a similar provision
in the Canadian
Criminal Code
, and considered that: “[a] conclusion of mixed law and fact may be challenged by the Attorney-General on appeal where that
conclusion proceeds from a misdirection in law”.
This was the basis for Nettlefold J’s rejection of the narrow general interest basis for allowing an appeal, as the recognition
of questions of mixed fact and law could give rise to a miscarriage of justice as easily as a question of law alone in an individual
Williams v R
the Crown appealed on the grounds that the trial judge had erred in law in refusing to admit (as evidence for the prosecution) records
of interview and in exercising a discretion to admit or reject that evidence. The Tasmanian Court of Criminal Appeal had followed
the judgment of Nettlefold J in
and allowed the appeal on the ground that the question was of law alone even though of mixed fact and law. The High Court (consisting
of Gibbs CJ, Mason, Wilson, Brennan and Dawson JJ), rejected the appeal on the basis that both grounds of appeal involved questions
of mixed fact and law, and so were not questions of law alone:
An appeal on the ground of the wrongful rejection of evidence by a trial judge in the exercise of a discretion is not an appeal on
a question of law alone. The manner in which a discretion is exercised depends upon the judge’s appreciation of all the facts
of the case, so that an error of law which leads the judge wrongly to hold that he has a discretion is not the only factor which
contributes to his decision to reject the evidence.
3.10 It should be noted that s 401(2)(b) was amended in 1987, by the removal of the word “alone”.
However, the word “alone” was also removed from the provision conferring a right of appeal, on a question of law, against
conviction (s 401(1)(a)). Given that questions of fact and mixed fact and law (s 401(1)(b)) are expressly separated from those of
law in relation to appeals against conviction, it is suggested that the amendment of s 401(2)(b) does not by implication increase
its ambit to include questions of mixed fact and law in relation to Crown appeals.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
3.11 Section 688(2)(b) of the
Criminal Code Act 1913
(WA) provides:
(2) An appeal may be made to the Court of Criminal Appeal on the part of the prosecution -
(a) against any decision allowing a demurrer to an indictment or arresting judgment on an indictment or quashing an indictment; or
(b) against any verdict of acquittal on an indictment and any judgment founded thereon when such verdict has been found by direction
of the Judge or other authority entitled to give directions on law to the jury at the trial; or
(c) against any judgment (including any verdict on which the same is founded) given on a plea to the jurisdiction of a Court to try
an accused person for an offence alleged in an indictment; or
(d) against any punishment imposed or order made in respect of a person convicted on indictment or convicted by a court of summary
3.12 Section 690(3) of the Code provides that:
(3) On any appeal against an acquittal by direction or on an appeal against any judgment given on a plea to the jurisdiction, the
Court, if it allows the appeal, may reverse any judgment, decision, or verdict, the correctness of which was in question in the appeal,
and may order a new trial or that the accused shall stand his trial, as the case may require.
R v Udechuku
the appeal was concerned with a directed verdict arising from the refusal of an interlocutory application. At the commencement of
the trial the Crown had applied for an adjournment so that two Crown witnesses could be found. That application was refused (it appeared
on appeal that the trial judge had misunderstood the importance of the witnesses to the Crown case). The trial continued, jurors
were sworn, and the Crown opened its case sufficiently to inform the jury that no evidence would be led against the accused. In the
absence of Crown evidence, the jury were directed to acquit.
3.14 Wickham J, dissenting, considered that s 688(2)(b) and 690(3) seemed to allow an appeal only where “the trial judge has
directed an acquittal because of erroneous understanding of the law, whether it be on a motion of no case because of insufficient
evidence or in some other context”.
The only available grounds of appeal under the sections were said to be the verdict of acquittal or a judgment arising from it. Even
if the trial judge’s refusal of the Crown’s interlocutory application could be classified as a judgment, it was not a
judgment founded on a verdict of acquittal, and so was not appealable.
Further, as the Crown had led no evidence, the direction to acquit was the only lawful course to follow, and there could be no mistake
In deciding whether the trial judge’s refusal of the interlocutory application was a “decision” which the Court
is empowered to reverse under s 690(3), Wickham J considered that the word “decision” in that section relates to only
those decisions set out in s 688(2)(a), and that, in any event, it was not a direction in law given to the jury.
3.15 The majority (Wallace and Jones JJ) considered that the section:
is a qualification to the rule against double jeopardy where it is alleged that an order based upon the erroneous exercise of a judicial
discretion has been given even though such an order may result in a direction in itself unappealable.
The trial judge’s refusal to grant an adjournment was said to be
an improper exercise of the trial judge’s discretion;
a “decision” reversible under s 690(3); and
a “direction” upon which a verdict of acquittal (itself unimpugnable) was founded (as required by s 688(2)(b)).
Alternatively, the erroneous exercise of the discretion nullified all subsequent proceedings, and so there had been no “trial”
under the Code.
R v Hyman and French
the section was considered again. The trial judge had intimated to the Crown prosecutor that evidence of the nature outlined in the
Crown’s opening address would not be sufficient to make out a case. The Crown chose to lead no evidence, and a directed verdict
resulted. The Supreme Court of Western Australia was asked to adopt the reasoning of Wickham J in
. The Court considered that Wickham J was incorrect in his assertion that the word “decision” in s 690(3) relates only
to that described in s 688(2)(a); rather, s 690(3) deals only with decisions relating to an acquittal by direction or a judgment
given on a plea to the jurisdiction. In any event, there was no need to determine the coverage of “decision” in s 690(3),
or the correctness of
, for the trial judge’s intimation to the Crown did not amount to “a judicial determination as the final and definite
result of examining a question”
- the minimum requirement for classification as a “decision”. The acquittal followed a correct decision to direct the
acquittal. There had been no incorrect decision against which to appeal.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
[1970] Tas SR 13.
at 15 per Crisp J.
at 15 per Crisp J.
. See also paras 4.4-4.6.
[1974] Tas SR 64.
at 70 per Crawford J.
at 70 per Crawford J.
at 83 per Chambers J.
at 86 per Chambers J.
at 89, citing
Wild v The Queen
(1970) 4 Can Cr Cas 40 and
[1932] 2 DLR 88
[1986] HCA 88
(1986) 161 CLR 278.
at 301-302 per Mason and Brennan JJ.
Criminal Code Amendment Act 1987
(Tas) s 7. Section 401(2)(b) is set out in para 3.2.
[1982] WAR 21.
at 25 per Wickham J.
. The Crown can only appeal against "any decision allowing a demurer to an indictment or arresting judgment on an indictment
or quashing an indictment":
Criminal Code Act 1913
(WA) s 688(2)(a).
at 25-26 per Wickham J.
at 28-29 per Wallace J.
(1990) 2 WAR 222.
Winter and Calder v Winter
(1933) 52 NZLR 289, cited in
R v Hyman and French
(1990) 2 WAR 222
Discussion Paper 37 (1995) - Directed Verdicts of Acquittal
4. Should there be a right of crown appeal in New South Wales?
History of this Reference (Digest)
4.1 Because there is no right of Crown appeal against an acquittal in New South Wales, an erroneous direction to acquit, or a correct
direction to acquit founded upon an error of law (such as the erroneous rejection of Crown evidence upon which a conviction might
have been procured) stands as final. This raises the question whether there should be a right of appeal in the Crown against acquittals
generally, or directed acquittals in particular, where there has been an error of law. The policy basis of such a right would be
the importance to the community of ensuring that serious criminal matters are dealt with fully according to law, and that the full
process of criminal justice is not impeded by “technical” legal irregularities.
4.2 In coming to a provisional conclusion on whether or not this policy justifies granting a right of appeal to the Crown in this
context, the Commission has weighed a number of factors. First, we have borne in mind the necessity of resolving two initial considerations
before a right of Crown appeal should be conceded. Secondly, we have considered the arguments against a right of Crown appeal. Thirdly,
we have had regard to the incidence of directed verdicts of acquittal in New South Wales.
MATTERS FOR INITIAL RESOLUTION
4.3 The Commission is of the view that a right of Crown appeal should be granted only in the context of a clear resolution of two
initial questions. First, are appeals to be had when the issue in question is one of importance for the administration of the criminal
law generally or for the particular case at hand or for both? Secondly, must a successful appeal necessarily result in a retrial?
The focus: the general direction of the criminal law or the individual case?
4.4 Speaking of s 401 of the
Criminal Code Act
Dixon J said in
Vallance v R
I confess that an appeal under s 401 by the Crown against an acquittal strikes me as standing on a different footing from an appeal
against conviction. It is evident that the policy which guided the legislature was rather concern in the operation of the criminal
law than of correcting verdicts of acquittal to which the Crown objected.
R v Jenkins
, the Tasmanian Court of Criminal Appeal stated, in relation to that same section, that:
Obviously a matter complained of must have a wider and deeper significance in the administration of the criminal law than its application
to a particular case. But it is unwise I think by definition further to attempt to elaborate the principles which the court should
apply. The court has a discretion, that is plain. It is a discretion which is to be guided by a concern for the administration of
the criminal law of which the Code is the statutory expression, and this concern will be in general directed more to the consequences
of the decision assailed in other cases than to the case in hand.
4.6 The same Court subsequently took a broader approach in
when it stated that the resolution of issues pertinent to a particular case may be as relevant as issues of a general interest nature,
and may in fact be of general interest. Whatever the outcome of a trial:
a minimum requirement with which a criminal trial should comply is that the law is correctly interpreted and applied, or, in other
that justice is done according to law ...
The public interest may require that an error on a question of law alone should be corrected despite the fact that the decision is
not likely to be followed in subsequent cases. For example, serious cases like murder, “pack rape” and armed robbery
often cause feelings of grave concern in the community. And the public interest requires, in my opinion, that the Crown should be
entitled to seek leave to appeal if an error of law has been made even though it is a patent error which will not be followed in
later cases. For, in such a case, the error may be so serious that it may be said correctly that justice has not been done according
Retrial: the necessary outcome of a successful appeal?
Chambers J considered that there is a great difference between granting an appeal against conviction and acquittal:
If the judge makes a mistake in the course of the trial and the accused is subsequently convicted, it is proper that he should have
a fresh trial ... If the judge makes a mistake and the accused is acquitted, then the setting aside of the verdict may involve the
accused in the emotional ordeal of going through it all again, although the mistake was something over which he had no control.
Vallance v R,
Dixon and Kitto JJ, respectively, considered the appropriateness of ordering a retrial upon a successful appeal under s 401 of the
Criminal Code
. Their comments also are relevant to a further issue - the importance of evidence the rejection of which forms the basis of the appeal:
I think that I should have let the verdict of acquittal stand on the ground that the departure in the learned judge’s direction
to the jury from what I considered the true position was not on the whole case a probable explanation of the verdict of the jury.
If a direction to the jury along correct lines would not have been likely to make any difference in the result, a new trial ought
not to be had.
4.9 Similarly, in
Williams v R
the High Court stated that:
Even where a rejection of prosecution evidence may be attributable to a question of law alone, a particular caution should be exercised
in giving leave to the Attorney-General to appeal against an acquittal on that ground. Where the prosecution bears the onus of proof
of the issue to which the rejected evidence is relevant, it is not enough for the Attorney-General to show that the evidence ought
to have been admitted. Regard must be had to the standard of proof in a criminal trial and to the likelihood that, had the rejected
evidence been admitted, the jury would have convicted ...
Their Honours’ respective emphases upon “probable” and “likely” contrast with the approach taken to
the erroneous rejection of evidence in civil cases. In
Balenzuela v De Gail
the High Court acknowledged that it was not for the court to determine what a jury would or should have made of wrongly rejected
evidence, had it been admitted, but rather:
a new trial must be granted unless we can say that the jury, proceeding according to law and within the bounds of reason, could not
have been led by the rejected evidence, if it had been before them, to find a verdict for the plaintiff.
4.10 Clearly, in criminal cases, the emphasis is upon sparing an accused a retrial unless the wrongfully rejected evidence is considered
to be such as would have made a significant difference to the jury’s deliberation; whereas in civil cases the emphasis is upon
allowing a retrial unless the rejected evidence, had it been admitted, could have made little or no difference to the result.
ARGUMENTS AGAINST A CROWN RIGHT OF APPEAL
4.11 There are clear arguments opposing a Crown right of appeal against acquittal. These arguments focus on the notion of double jeopardy
and on the rights of the accused.
Double jeopardy
4.12 It might be said that the Crown should not be given the chance to put an accused in double jeopardy: “[t]he effect of such
a departure would be that double jeopardy was at the whim of a disgruntled prosecutor even after acquittal in a trial on the merits
in a superior court”.
The exercise of the right would depend on the discretion of the Director of Public Prosecutions. In the absence of a test of overriding
public interest, the discretion to bring appeals might not be subject to criteria of adequate precision. Additionally, cases may
arise where the exercise of a judicial discretion is made necessary by Crown incompetence or unpreparedness, such as where witnesses
are absent from the trial. Any provision, if adopted, should not act to remedy deficiencies in the Crown’s case or its conduct.
The rights of the accused
4.13 It may be argued that vague or even specified concerns for the community interest, as the basis for a right of appeal, cannot
override the common law’s traditional concern for the rights of the accused. Currently:
the appellate court may allow an appeal on account of a wrong decision on any point of law, or because there was a miscarriage of
justice, and these provisions are, of course, wide enough to cover any wrongful admission or rejection of evidence by the judge,
as well as an irregularity in his summing up.
4.14 The width of this power reflects the law’s recognition of the powerlessness of the accused relative to the Crown. It cannot
be assumed that affording the Crown an equivalent avenue of redress against judicial error would provide equal or even adequate benefits.
Should there be any infringement of the traditional protection of the accused, it should be defined precisely:
[t]o recognize how drastic such a departure from a time-honoured principle of the common law would be is not to question the legislative
competence of ... Parliament to enact provisions having that effect. Such recognition does, however, indicate the need to examine
the relevant provisions with care before concluding that the legislative intent properly to be found within them is that the general
words used should be so construed.
In addition, the infringement may have to be restricted to ensure that it remains subordinate to the law’s protection of the
THE INCIDENCE OF DIRECTED VERDICTS IN NEW SOUTH WALES
4.15 At the request of the Commission, the New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research compiled data on the number of
acquittals by directed verdict in the District Court and Supreme Court in 1992. That data is set out in the Appendix to this Discussion
4.16 During 1992, 1,344 persons were tried on 9,197 charges in the District and Supreme Court. Directed verdicts of not guilty were
made on 187 of these charges (2.03%). There was a directed verdict of at least one charge in 155 trials. In 63 of these trials (40.65%)
the charges were disposed of completely by directed verdict. In an additional 26 of the trials (16.77%) there was a finding of charge
not appropriate and/or no further proceedings.
4.17 Clearly the number of directed verdicts of not guilty in New South Wales is small. It is not possible to draw from the data any
conclusions as to the reasonableness of this number of acquittals or of the reasons for such acquittals.
4.18 Given the small number of cases arising from the Tasmanian
and Western Australian Code provisions, and the statistics relating to directed verdicts in New South Wales,
appeals by the Crown based upon an error of law in the giving of directed verdicts would probably be rare. However, given the breadth
of matters at trial which may directly or indirectly give rise to and impinge upon an appeal, and the difficulty of reconciling Crown
powers with traditional legal protection of the accused, the limited value of a right of Crown appeal may be outweighed by the difficulties
associated with drafting, interpretation and implementation.
4.19 The Commission is asked to consider only appeals from erroneous verdicts by direction, and thus appeals from errors of law. The
Crown clearly has the right to bring up questions of law for appellate scrutiny, provided that the question is one of general importance.
That provision and the construction placed upon it in
would sit uneasily with the proposed more general right of appeal, which is not required in order to provide a means of preventing
the criminal law from being corrupted by error. In the Commission’s view, therefore there is little in favour of abandoning
a long standing and still generally accepted principle of the common law, and much to be said on the other side in favour of preserving
the rule against double jeopardy.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
. The section is extracted in para 3.2.
Vallance v R
[1961] HCA 42
(1961) 108 CLR 56
[1970] Tas SR 13
[1974] Tas SR 64.
See paras 3.6-3.7.
at 94-95 per Nettlefold J.
at 86 per Chambers J (dissenting).
[1961] HCA 42
(1961) 108 CLR 56.
at 62 per Dixon J.
at 66 per Kitto J.
[1986] HCA 88
(1986) 161 CLR 278.
at 302-303 per Mason and Brennan JJ.
[1959] HCA 1
(1958) 101 CLR 226.
Balenzuela v De Gail
[1959] HCA 1
(1958) 101 CLR 226
at 237 per Kitto J, see also Dixon CJ at 236.
Thomson v MasterTouch TV Service Pty Ltd
[1978] FCA 24
(1978) 38 FLR 397
at 408 per Deane J.
. D Byrne and J Heydon (eds)
Cross on Evidence
(3rd Aus ed, Butterworths, Sydney, 1986) at 304.
Thomson v MasterTouch TV Service Pty Ltd (No. 3)
[1978] FCA 24
(1978) 38 FLR 397
at 408 per Deane J.
R v Jenkins
[1970] Tas SR 13
it was noted that counsel's research had uncovered only two appeals by the Crown against acquittal in the previous 20 years.
. See Appendix.
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
(2)(a). See para 2.2.
(1987) 9 NSWLR 615.
Discussion Paper 37 (1995) - Directed Verdicts of Acquittal
History of this Reference (Digest)
DATA ON DIRECTED VERDICTS IN NEW SOUTH WALES IN 1992
The following data from the New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research indicates the extent of acquittals by directed
verdict in the District Court and Supreme Court of New South Wales during 1992. Of relevance is the total number of directed verdicts,
the proportion of verdicts in that total which occur in cases of one or two charges only, and the incidence of directed verdicts
as compared to findings of “inappropriate charge” or “guilty by verdict”. The data does not indicate the
judges’ reasons for directing acquittal, and so the proportion of the directed acquittals which were wrong in law, if any,
is unknown. Hence the data does not reflect accurately the number of decisions against which the Crown might bring an appeal if an
appeal avenue was put into place.
In the Supreme Court and District Court of New South Wales during 1992, total number of:
persons tried: 1,334
charges: 9,197.
directed verdicts of not guilty: 187 (2.03% of) charges.
trials in which at least one directed verdict was given: 155
charges in trials where at least one directed verdict given: 378.
Of the 155 trials in which a directed verdict accounted for at least one charge:
63 (40.65%) were disposed of completely by directed verdict.
89 (57.42%) resulted in directed verdict and charge not appropriate and/or no further proceedings.
26 (16.77%) resulted in charge not appropriate and/or no further proceedings.
39 (25.16%) resulted in at least one finding of guilt or an intra-trial plea of guilty
In the 92 trials where not all charges resulted in directed verdict of not guilty:
38 (41.30%) of trials resulted in a finding of guilt or an intra-trial plea of guilty.
87/297 (29.29%) of charges were dismissed as not appropriate or resulted in no further proceedings.
Of the 378 charges laid in all trials involving one or more directed verdicts:
187 (49.47%) resulted in directed verdicts.
87 (23.02%) were dismissed as not appropriate or resulted in no further proceedings.
54 (14.29%) resulted in a finding of guilt or an intra-trial plea of guilty.
The figures show that directed verdicts accounted for 2.03% of all charges heard in New South Wales District and Supreme Courts in
1992, and comprised the sole outcome in only 63 trials of which 46 involved only one charge. In trials where there was a further
outcome, a finding and/or plea of guilt resulted in over 25% of cases. This would suggest that directed verdicts occur on a minor
scale overall, and do not reduce trial results significantly.
Table 1: Key
Not Guilty by Direction
Not Guilty by Verdict
Charge Determined Not Appropriate
No Further Proceedings Direction
No Further Proceedings Direction: Crown Application
Plea Accepted in Full Discharge of Indictment
Guilty Plea Within Trial
Guilty by Verdict
Table 2: Incidence of directed verdicts per number of charges
Table 3: Incidence of all outcomes per number of charges
Table 4: Incidence of all outcomes other than the first directed verdict
Where two charges brought (55 matters)
Where three charges brought (26 matters)
Where four charges brought (13 matters)
Where five charges brought (8 matters)
Where six charges brought (2 matters)
Where seven charges brought (3 matter)
Where eight charges brought (1 matter)
Where eleven charges brought (1 matter)
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter