URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ACTCLRC/1995/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:29:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Domestic Violence [1995] ACTCLRC 9
Domestic Violence
Chapter 1 - Introduction
CHAPTER 2: KEY THEMES
CHAPTER 3: POLICY
CHAPTER 4: BEST PRACTICE CRIMINAL JUSTICE RESPONSE TO DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
CHAPTER 5: CRIMINAL JUSTICE RESPONSE IN THE ACT
Chapter 6: OTHER ISSUES RELATING TO THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE RESPONSE
CHAPTER 7: THE ACT DOMESTIC VIOLENCE INTERVENTION PROJECT- BOTTOM UP COORDINATION
CHAPTER 8: PERPETRATOR PROGRAMS
Domestic Violence
1 - Introduction
INTRODUCTION
The Committee has dealt with its Reference on domestic violence by dividing its
task into two distinct areas. The first deals with
reform of the criminal
justice system and the agencies dealing with domestic violence in that system,
and is the subject of Part
I of this Report. The second is a review of the
civil system for securing protection from violence or harassment and is dealt
in Part II of this Report, which is forthcoming.
The Committee hopes that the recommendations in this Report form a blueprint
for change in the way in which the community deals with
domestic violence. The
Committee believes that the effect of the proposed changes will be a steady
decline in the incidence of domestic
violence in the ACT community.
Domestic violence has been acknowledged as a serious problem within most communities.
There is no doubting the serious consequences
for victims of domestic violence.
Studies indicate that between 25% and 31% of homicides in Australia occur in
a domestic context.
A 1990 study found that
21% of homicides occurred within a spousal relationship. The victims of 85%
of these homicides were
In a report prepared for the Commonwealth Department of Health, Housing and
Community Services, domestic violence has been specifically
identified as a
public health issue and a target has been set to reduce "morbidity" resulting
from domestic violence, with
women as a priority population.
It is well beyond the scope of the Committee's reference and resources to
conduct its own research into the incidence of domestic
violence in our community.
The prevalence of domestic violence as well as the extent to which victims are
typically women (and children) and offenders
men, has been the subject of public
debate within the community in recent times. The Committee notes that the Australian
of Statistics is currently undertaking a nationwide study on many aspects
of domestic violence and that the results of this study
will be available in
The Committee has also noted the results of a number of studies on the prevalence
of domestic violence and domestic homicide,
including information on the gender
of victims and offenders. The Monash University Accident Research Centre conducted
of presentations to the emergency departments of 5 Victorian hospitals.
This found that 83% of confirmed domestic violence presentations
were women.
Coroner's data was reviewed and indicated that women made up 90% of deaths arising
from domestic violence.
Canadian research found that 29% of women who have ever been married or in
a de facto relationship have experienced violence by
their partner.
The 1992 British Crime Survey found that 190
000 women and 60 000 men experienced one or more domestic violence incidents
1991. The definition of domestic violence excluded sexual assaults or threats
of harm but included all other acts that involved
some degree of physical force.
Controversial research conducted in America by Strauss and Gelles reported
"gender parity" in domestic violence, that is, husbands
and wives initiating
similar acts of violence against each other.
Easteal notes that American studies of domestic homicides have found greater
gender parity than any studies or data in Australia.
The Strauss and Gelles research has been the
subject of considerable criticism with respect to its methodology.
Critics have also pointed to what are seen as the essential differences between
male and female violence:
"Studies of actual cases lend no support to the facile claim that
husbands and wives initiate similar acts of violence. Men often
kill wives after
lengthy periods of prolonged physical violence accompanied by other forms of
abuse and coercion: the roles
in such cases are seldom if ever reversed. Men
perpetrate familicidal massacres, killing spouse and kids together, women do
not. Men commonly hunt down and kill wives who have left them, women hardly
ever behave similarly. Men kill in response to revelations
of wifely infidelity:
women almost never respond similarly though their mates are more often adulterous.
Evidence is almost
overwhelmingly that a large proportion of spouse killings
perpetrated by wives, but almost none perpetrated by husbands, are acts
defence. Unlike men, women kill male partners after years of suffering physical
violence, exhausted all available sources
of assistance, trapped in fear of
their lives."
Easteal's study of homicides between sexual intimates in Australia lends support
to the accuracy of the above comment. Of the approximately
13 deaths in the ACT
as a result of domestic violence, all but one have been women.
Criticisms can and have been levelled at nearly all studies of domestic violence,
mostly with respect to methodology, definitions
of domestic violence used, size
and randomness of the sample. Some writers are of the view that "no method is
available to
systemically measure the incidence and prevalence of domestic violence
in the wider community."
Levels of under
reporting of domestic violence have been estimated to be as high as 70%.
The Committee accepts that domestic violence is a serious problem in the ACT
and believes that the overwhelmingly majority of
victims are women and children.
This is not to say that men are never the victims of domestic violence.
The Committee has not dealt in this report with the situation of children
as victims of domestic violence.
The Committee
acknowledges the serious consequences that domestic violence can have for children,
even where they may not be
the direct victims of violence, but witnesses to
it. This is the subject of increased research and public comment in Australia
and overseas. As the aim of this report is to reduce the occurrence of domestic
violence, and in the long run to combat it,
children, the indirect victims will
hopefully become the indirect beneficiaries.
Nor has the Committee in this Report dealt separately with the situation of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders or people from
a non English speaking
background. The Committee acknowledges that these and other groups within the
community may have differing
needs and views on this issue. The Committee
believes that it is the role of the ACT Domestic Violence Intervention Project,
in this Report, to work with all groups in the community to identify
the special needs of victims of domestic violence who are Aboriginal
Strait Islanders or people from a non English speaking background.
Lastly, the Committee has relied extensively on the many submissions, both
public and confidential, made to it during the course
of this Reference. The
submissions were almost unanimous in their view that the criminal justice
response to domestic violence in
the ACT was deficient and should be
strengthened. The Committee wishes to thank all the organisations and
individuals who contributed
to this Report.
of Domestic Violence R
Law Reform Commission's
Recommendations.
In May 1984 the Australian Law Reform Commission, under its Community Law Reform
Program for the ACT, commenced an inquiry into
domestic violence laws and related
matters in the ACT.
At that time the ACT was
not self-governing and did not have its own law reform body.
It became quite clear that the existing response to domestic violence was
inadequate. Family Court injunctions were difficult to
obtain quickly and the
procedure was complex. Only married people could apply. Keep the Peace orders
were also cumbersome and neither
remedy attracted criminal sanctions for
After wide consultation with the ACT community, the Law Reform Commission
released its report in early 1986. The two most significant
recommendations in
that report were:
That a civil system of protection orders be available through the
Magistrates Court, with scope for urgent interim orders covering
a wide variety
of behaviour, containing wide prohibitions and attracting criminal penalties
for breach;
That a domestic violence unit be established
for victim support.
Domestic Violence Act 1986
In October 1986 the Domestic Violence Act 1986 became law. It adopted virtually
all of the recommendations made by the Law Reform
Commission. The Act was broad
in its scope and in the power it gave to the court to grant urgent interim
protection orders on the
evidence of the victim alone.
In accordance with the Law Reform Commission's recommendations, the Act
specifically provided that the most important considerations
in making a
Protection Order were the safety and welfare of the applicant and any children.
The Act also gave magistrates the power
to order that the alleged offender be
excluded from the home. Magistrates were willing to exercise this power,
accepting that in
most situations of violence it should not be the victim and
children who should have to leave and find alternative accommodation.
Domestic Violence Crisis Service
In 1988 the Domestic Violence Crisis Service (the DVCS) was established as a 24
hour, 7 day a week crisis intervention service. The
Service, whilst government
funded, was located outside of government and operated on a feminist philosophy
that was built into its
constitution. The DVCS far exceeded what was
contemplated by the Law Reform Commission.
The DVCS is unique because of the above factors, and also because it attends at
domestic violence call-outs with the police. Briefly,
when the police are
notified of a domestic violence incident they call the DVCS who drive to the
scene and, if invited to do so,
go into the house and speak with the victim.
This is true crisis intervention and a credit to the cooperation that has been
between the police and the DVCS.
Recommendations
The Law Reform Commission recommended training for police. Whilst some police
training is undertaken, it is not as extensive as contemplated
Commission. The Law Reform Commission also recommended a core group of "expert"
police (though not a specialist domestic violence
unit) and the completion by
police of special reports for statistical purposes. Those recommendations are
again made in this report.
The Law Reform Commission recommended that spouses be compellable, that is,
that a wife can be forced by the court to give evidence
against her husband.
This has become law.
The Law Reform Commission also recommended that a wide range of sentencing
options be available to Magistrates when dealing with
breaches of protection
orders. A program for offenders was one of the suggestions. This was not
adopted by the Law Reform Commission
but is a recommendation of this report.
The Commission recommended the cancellation of weapons licenses where a
protection order was issued. This was achieved by an amendment
to the Domestic
Violence Act in 1991.
situation in the ACT
The ACT now has quite a comprehensive civil system for protection from domestic
violence. The Domestic Violence Act has been amended
on a number of occasions
to increase its coverage. An applicant is now able to seek an order against a
household member or a relative,
not just their spouse. An amendment was inserted
to allow children to apply for orders without the need to have a guardian or some
other representative. A new part was inserted into the Magistrates Court Act to
cover violence in non domestic situations, most
notably, between a couple who
do not live together.
Legislation has been introduced to allow for
the reciprocal enforcement of protection orders in other jurisdictions.
The DVCS continues to operate successfully and its model for crisis intervention,
in cooperation with the police, has yet to be
improved upon. It is considered,
even on an international level, to be a "best practise model.".
The Domestic Violence Interagency is a group of many organisations with an
interest in the issue of domestic violence. It was
established in 1985 and was
influential in the creation of the DVCS.
It continues to meet regularly, to exchange information, to monitor issues and
to lobby for change.
Approximately one year after the introduction of the Domestic Violence Act, it
became apparent that applicants often needed assistance
when applying for
orders and appearing in court to give their evidence. Staff at the Magistrates
Court had been providing this assistance
but the volume of orders granted,
especially in the first year, was quite overwhelming. In response to this need
the ACT Legal Aid
Office stationed a duty lawyer at the Magistrates Court to
act on behalf of applicants. There are now two full-time Legal Aid solicitors
stationed at the court for this purpose.
Magistrates Court records indicate that approximately 95% of final protection
orders are obtained by consent. This means that the
application is not
contested in court - the victim does not have to give further evidence. This
high settlement rate has occurred
with the evolution of a "conferencing"
procedure, not to be mistaken for mediation. A form of "shuttle negotiation" is
by a senior court officer between the respondent to the application
in one room, and the applicant in another. The applicant is almost
represented by the Legal Aid duty lawyer and is often supported by a DVCS
worker. The aim of this exercise is to obtain the
respondent's agreement to the
order being made for twelve months.
Many commentators were concerned that an enhanced civil system of protection
orders would detract from the criminal response to
domestic violence and have
a "decriminalising" effect. Jocelynne Scutt argued:
"that the reforms legitimated police claims that they lacked
powers to deal with domestic violence...that the first assault, that
provided the basis for a complainant seeking an order, would go unpenalised and
that it was the breach of the subsequent court
order, rather than the assault
on the woman, which would invoke police action; that the civil orders
reinforced the notion that domestic
violence is a civil matter and not a
criminal offence..."
The Law Reform Commission, after wide community consultation, commented that one
of the two most frequent complaints related to
a "perceived reluctance of police
to attend 'domestics', take complainants seriously or follow complaints up by
arrest and prosecution".
The other related to the inadequacy of the civil
system to offer protection "and that court injunctions against violence can be
ignored with impunity or, at least, with little fear of serious consequence."
Nearly 10 years later, concern about police practices in relation to arrest and
charging for criminal offences committed in a domestic
context was one of the
strongest themes in the submissions received by the ACT Community Law Reform
It is arguable that an improved civil response to domestic violence has
hindered the development of the criminal response to domestic
violence in the
ACT. Protection orders are not and were never intended to be a substitute for
enforcement of the criminal law. Protection
orders do not, and are not designed
to, confront the criminality of the behaviour.
Domestic violence issues have been prominent on the agenda for the Standing
Committee of Attorney Generals, and the implementation
of the National Strategy
on Violence Against Women was placed on the agenda of the Council of Australian
Governments. The previous
ACT government adopted the objectives and recommendations
of the National Strategy on Violence Against Women.
The new Government, through its Chief Minister
Kate Carnell, has recognised the National Strategy as playing an important role
in raising awareness of domestic violence issues across the country.
of the current reference
The current reference is the first review of the effectiveness of the civil and
criminal justice system's response to domestic violence
in the ACT since the
report of the Australian Law Reform Commission.
The Committee's first step on this reference was to produce a Discussion Paper
on Domestic Violence. This was released in 1992. It
raised issues and called
for submissions.
The Committee received thirty nine written public submissions. Four public
hearings were held by the Committee, at which verbal submissions
were presented
by agencies and individuals, many of whom also made written submissions. The
issues raised in the public hearings
were substantially the same as those
raised in the written submissions.
The Committee received seven confidential written submissions and heard from a
number of people in confidence. These submissions
were predominantly from
victims of domestic violence. The Committee's insight into domestic violence
and the response of the criminal
justice system was greatly assisted by these
submissions.
In 1992 the Committee commissioned the Australian Institute of Criminology to
conduct research on domestic violence in the ACT. The
results of this research
were published in 1993 in
Research paper No.1: Domestic Violence
recommendations
In the early stages of this reference two issues emerged which the Committee
believed warranted urgent attention.
- the provision of information by the AFP to the
The first was the need for amendments to the Domestic Violence Act 1986 arising
out of the application of the
(Cth) to the operations of the
AFP and the DVCS. Specifically, it related to the established practice of the
AFP notifying the DVCS
immediately of any call-out to a domestic violence
incident and the name and address of the caller. This allowed the DVCS workers
to attend the incident and wait outside until the police had ascertained that
the situation was safe. The police would then ask the
victim if the DVCS was
required and, if so,the workers entered the home.
In early 1992 the AFP was advised that the practice of informing the DVCS of
the names and addresses of people who made domestic
violence complaints
contravened the Commonwealth's privacy legislation, except in narrow
circumstances. As a result, the AFP would
only advise the DVCS that there was a
call-out and the suburb of the callout until the victim advised that the DVCS
was required.
This made the work of the DVCS more difficult and less
Following the recommendations of the Committee, the Domestic Violence
(Amendment) Act 1992 was passed by the ACT Legislative Assembly,
information to be disclosed by the police to an approved crisis support
organisation. As provided for in that Act, the DVCS
was notified as an approved
crisis support organisation on 8 July 1992.
of weapons.
The second issue was the need for amendments to section 349D of the
, concerning seizure of weapons by police, to give victims and the police
more effective protection.
The Committee proposed a number of amendments extending the scope of the
allowing the police to seize any weapon on the premises where an alleged
domestic violence incident is being investigated, irrespective
of whether the
owner of the weapon is known or connected with the circumstances giving rise to
entry of the police on to the premises;
allowing weapons to be seized "in or on" motor vehicles under the control
of the person whose conduct is being investigated;
allowing the police to search premises and motor vehicles for weapons in
circumstances where the police would be able to seize the
weapon, and to use
such force as is necessary;
providing for return of the weapon after 60 days unless criminal
proceedings have been instituted or an application for a domestic
protection order has been made.
The Crimes (Amendment) Act 1992,
incorporating the Committee's recommendations in full, became law on 8 July
of submissions received
Submissions commenting on terms of reference that relate to the civil, rather
than the criminal response, to domestic violence are
summarised in Part II of
this report. These are terms of reference (a) and (f) relating to duration of
protection orders and the
automatic cancellation of custody and access orders
when protection orders are breached and death threats have been made.
Most submissions commented specifically on the terms of reference issued to the
Committee by the Attorney General. These comments
have been summarised under
headings corresponding with the terms of reference. Additional comments on
other issues have also been
of reference (b): Arrest and court procedures having regard to a broadly held
public view that the charging of offenders is the
responsibility of the
This was the subject of comment in most of the submissions. There was unanimous
agreement in the submissions that domestic violence
should be treated as a
criminal matter.
Most submissions called for either mandatory arrest or a pro-arrest policy.
There was agreement that the decision about arrest and
charging should be that
of the police and should not in any way involve the victim. It was noted that
many victims were vulnerable
and often in a state of fear or great anxiety as a
result of the violence, and this operated as a constraint in taking action,
particularly
in terms of taking responsibility for laying criminal charges.
The following passage sums up the comments in many of the submissions:
"However clients have reported to us that police officers have
asked them whether they want the perpetrators charged. We do not
believe that
this situation would arise with any other form of assault. It does not acknowledge
or recognise the powerlessness
and fear victims commonly experience living in
a situation in which they are abused. At the very least they are in fear of
retribution should they request the perpetrator be charged. They are often confused,
ashamed, in shock and in fear for their and
their children's lives. This situation
also clearly gives victims and perpetrators an ambiguous message that domestic
is not a crime."
Some submissions discussed
the difficulty of proceeding with an arrest and charge where the victim was
indicating that she would
not give evidence, despite the fact that she could be
legally compelled to do so. Other submissions noted the educative effect on
community of a pro-arrest policy in sending a message that domestic violence is
criminal and will not be sanctioned.
of reference (c): The collection of statistics on domestic violence in the
Most submissions commented on this term of reference. All agreed that accurate
statistics on domestic violence were necessary to
reduce reliance on "anecdotal
evidence" and to develop policy and programs. Many submissions acknowledged the
unreliability of statistical
information given the suspected levels of
under-reporting of domestic violence.
Tracing victims from first police contact through the civil and criminal
justice system was thought to be important to assist in
determining areas where
the system may be failing.
The need for data collection to be standardised across agencies (such as the
police, the DVCS and the courts) was recognised,
as was the need for a body
to collate, monitor and evaluate the statistics. The Australian Institute of
Criminology was suggested
for that purpose.
It was recognised that confidentiality and privacy considerations may restrict
the sharing of data between agencies.
Inclusion in the data of information on groups with specific needs, for
example, persons from non English speaking backgrounds and
indigenous people
was called for. There was seen to be a need to provide a profile of domestic
violence in our community and the
response to that violence.
of reference (d): The implementation of automatic preventive detention or
refusal of bail to violent offenders
This was addressed in nearly all the submissions. The majority were prefaced by
statements that victim safety must be paramount.
Some submissions favoured the
insertion of this principle in all relevant legislation. Most submissions felt
that victim safety should
always take precedence over civil liberties issues.
Other submissions commented that civil liberties arguments ignore the victim's
rights to free movement and safety in society.
Some submissions recommended a distinction between minor offences where police
bail could be granted, and serious offences where
only the court could consider
bail. Other submissions considered that police should not be able to grant bail
for domestic violence
offences. A number of the submissions suggested that bail
should not be available for serious offences. Breach of protection orders
given as an example of an offence for which bail should not be available. Many
submissions called for a reversal of the presumption
in favour of granting
There were strong views for and against preventive detention in the
submissions, however many submissions did not differentiate between
without charge or detention following charge.
Many of the submissions referred to the need for a "cooling off" period,
varying between 12 and 24 hours. Some submissions referred
"moral-educative" effect of a night in the cells.
Concern was expressed in some submissions that victims were not being informed
when the offender was released on bail, and that this
was essential to allow
victims time to take steps to ensure their safety, for example, to pack and
move and/or to seek a protection
of reference(e): The implementation of mandatory arrest and custodial detention
of violent offenders
Mandatory arrest was called for in some submissions and strongly opposed in
others. The submissions universally interpreted 'mandatory
'automatic arrest'. Those who favoured mandatory arrest argued that police
should be required to arrest if there is sufficient
evidence that an offence
has been committed. Other submissions stopped short of mandatory arrest but
considered that a pro-arrest
policy should be implemented, so that police had a
limited discretion but were directed that arrest was appropriate in most
The thrust of the majority of the submissions was that police were not
exercising their current powers of arrest in domestic violence
matters. As a
result, many submissions expressed concern about leaving police with any
discretion in this area, on the basis that
the discretion may not ensure an
appropriate police response. Arrest was seen to be an appropriate response to
domestic violence,
in most cases, because of the need to act immediately to
ensure the safety of the victim.
Comments about custodial detention were generally not made under this term of
reference, having been addressed under the previous
term of reference on
preventive detention.
of reference (g): The need for awareness training for
magistrates
In the Committee's
Discussion Paper No 2: Domestic Violence
acknowledged that this term of reference was equally applicable to all
professionals working in the field of domestic violence.
The vast majority of
submissions supported training for all legal professionals but some stressed
the need for specific training
for magistrates and judges because of the
influential role they perform.
Comment was made that domestic violence needs to be understood not just in its
legal context but that training should also deal with
the causes, patterns and
consequences of domestic violence. "Awareness" training and attendance at
conferences was thought not to
be enough. Several submissions stated that
training should be consistent with the recommendations of the National
Committee on Violence
Against Women.
One submission suggested that a training committee be formed to co-ordinate
training of all persons working in this area. Another
submission commented on
the need to include cross cultural awareness and the use of interpreters in any
training of magistrates and
the judiciary. Some submissions expressed the view
that it was inappropriate to dictate to any branch of the judiciary how to
training or what it should include, whilst others felt that it was very
important to prescribe the content and style of the course.
of reference (h): The provision of background information to the Court to
assist in determining penalties for breaches of protection
Approximately half of the submissions discussed this term of reference, with
many seeing a need to appraise the court of any history
of previous violence,
even if this had not been the subject of criminal action. Comment was made that
victims often endure violence
for years before reporting an incident to police,
and that the court needs such information to see the offence before it in
It was suggested that records of previous interventions by the DVCS should be
admissible in court, with the victim's consent, as
well as records of other
agencies who have had prior relevant contact with the victim, for example,
refuges and doctors.
It was noted that Adult Corrective Services prepares pre-sentence Reports on
offenders. These reports can only refer to previous
accounts of abuse as
"allegations."
The use of closed-circuit television for victims to provide a history of
previous violence to the court was supported.
of reference (i): The need for a specialist domestic violence unit within the
police service
Generally, most submissions thought that a specialist police unit was
desirable, especially as a significant percentage of police
work involves
domestic violence. There were differing ideas about the work to be undertaken
by such a unit. Some submissions envisaged
the unit as being solely responsible
for police work involving domestic violence, including all call-outs, although
the practicality
of this option was raised. Many submissions however, viewed
the unit as providing a coordinated police response and consistent approach
domestic violence cases, including the provision of training to other police
officers, monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness
of the police response,
and data collection.
Other submissions suggested that there should be a domestic violence liaison
officer in each station in the ACT.
Submissions commented that care should be taken to ensure that the police
officers appointed to a specialist police unit or as a
liaison officer have the
appropriate qualifications.
of reference(j): The use of Behavioural Change programs as sentencing options
for violent offenders convicted of criminal
Whilst many submissions expressed reservations about the effectiveness of
behavioural change programs for violent offenders, there
was general acceptance
that such programs should be offered as part of an integrated criminal justice
response. It was noted that
there are dangers of behavioural change programs
being seen as a `soft' sentencing option, and of the community getting a wrong
that domestic violence is a `counselling problem' rather than a crime.
Many of the submissions thought that attitudinal change was
an important
objective but only after conviction of the offender and as part of a larger
sentencing package.
The "Duluth model"
was referred to in
a number of the submissions as providing the favoured approach to programs for
violent offenders. Those
submissions agreed that the programs must emphasise
the criminal nature of domestic violence and the responsibility of the offender,
whilst maintaining a focus on the safety of the victim. The aim of the Duluth
model, to ensure consistent treatment of the
offender by all agencies, was supported.
It was noted in the submissions that Adult Corrective Services continues to run
a violent offenders program, although this program
deals with all violent
Other comments made on this term of reference were:
resource issues must be considered given that victims' services are still
inadequate;
domestic violence offenders should have separate behavioural change
programs, and cannot simply be included in other violent offenders
behavioural change programs should be culturally and linguistically
appropriate for offenders of non-English speaking background;
court counsellors should be appointed to provide services from crisis
intervention to referral;
non-mandatory behavioural change programs should be available;
victim support and safety should be monitored by a community agency.
of reference (k): The facilitation of information exchange between agencies
with due regard to privacy provisions
The majority of submissions commented on this term of reference. All agreed
that there was room for improvement. The general view
was that inter-agency
liaison and exchange of information is a vital part of the response to domestic
violence. An uncoordinated
inter-agency response can and has, put the lives of
victims in danger. It was noted that if the Duluth model were adopted, it would
facilitate inter-agency co-operation.
There were a number of suggestions about the way in which inter-agency
cooperation and the exchange of information could be enhanced.
Primarily, the
submissions discussed the establishment of an inter-agency committee which
could coordinate services, develop integrated
policies and make recommendations
to government on policy and behavioural change programs. All acknowledged that
confidentiality
and privacy issues need to be clearly agreed and defined at the
Some submissions suggested that an inter-agency committee should comprise
representatives of all concerned community agencies, under
the auspices of a
neutral body. Others proposed that the committee should be a mixture of
government and non-government representatives
and answerable to government.
Several submissions stated that men's groups and representatives should be
represented so that men
can become involved in the solution to the problem of
domestic violence.
issues raised in the submissions:
Other issues included:
the need for a domestic violence advocate to support victims through any
court processes and in re-establishing themselves;
the need for support for children who are victims of or witnesses to
domestic violence;
the need for more survivor support groups;
the characteristics of victims who have lived with violence;
effects of violence on victims, effect of verbal abuse, need to understand
the cycle of violence and abuse;
the effects of psychiatric treatments on victims and how this can
perpetuate the cycle of abuse: the link between psychiatric drugs
and violence
needs to be further explored;
many victims of violence do not wish to separate;
the legal system touches only a small proportion of people living in
violent situations; the law in the ACT is not stopping domestic
the beneficial effect of the DVCS, particularly for victims who have
difficulty accessing the legal protections available;
criticisms of DVCS;
the employment of male crisis workers by the DVCS (this was proposed in one
submission and opposed in another);
domestic violence should not be seen as a gender specific issue (this was
implicitly disagreed with in most submissions);
the extent of violence committed against men;
violence by women against children;
juvenile domestic violence offenders, especially young sons assaulting
their mothers;
bias by police and courts where domestic violence allegations are made by
sex workers;
the need for a refuge for men;
need for more assistance for NESB men;
establishment of a Family Crisis Centre to provide crisis support,
conciliation and counselling to all family members (this was proposed
submission and opposed in another);
community's response to domestic violence needs to be flexible and broad
based without detracting from its criminal status;
need for stalking legislation;
inadequacy of enforcement of protection orders, criticism of police
aiding and abetting breaches of orders;
increased penalty for breach of protection order;
simplifying the definition of domestic violence;
pro-prosecution policy to be adopted by DPP;
physical aspects of the Magistrates Court, for example, lack of space,
need for attitudinal change;
establishment of a Judicial Commission for complaints about non-legal
issues concerning magistrates and judges;
Parole Board granting early release without consultation with victims and
lack of enforcement of parole requirements;
whether some of the changes proposed in the Discussion Paper pose a threat
to individuals rights and may be contrary to international
conventions;
preventive education in schools;
debriefing for workers and police after domestic violence incidents;
communicating any changes arising out of this reference to the public.
Summary of findings of the Research Paper
The Research Paper was released in March 1993. The findings in the paper with
respect to the workings of the Domestic Violence Act
1986 and the civil system
generally will be outlined in Part II of this report.
The researchers reviewed recent literature on domestic violence and set out
research findings on community ambivalence about intervention
in domestic
violence, the need for attitudinal change and the role and responses of the
police, the prosecutors and the courts. These
research findings are noted
throughout the report.
It was originally planned that the researchers would undertake a tracking
exercise by taking a sample of domestic violence cases
within a specified time
period and following them through from initial police intervention to
sentencing. The tracking exercise would
have included information on protection
orders as well as criminal assaults and breaches. The aim was to provide a
profile in relation
to the combined civil and criminal justice response to
domestic violence. It was not possible to undertake the tracking exercise
originally envisaged because information about protection orders was not on the
AFP data bases and not linked to criminal records.
Instead, two analyses were undertaken. The first was to collect data on police
call outs to domestic violence cases for the three
month period March to May
1991 in order to track cases from initial police intervention to court
sentencing. The aim was to establish
how many such interventions occurred and
how many of these survived various stages through to police charging and
conviction in court.
As this did not cover protection orders, the second analysis was based on the
155 applications for protection orders for the same
3 month period, March to
May 1991. The researchers looked at breaches of those orders from police
intervention to court sentencing
as well as the criminal histories of all
respondents to the protection orders.
The Research Paper also detailed the results of a survey of police conducted by
questionnaire, of which 159 were completed.
The Research Paper then proceeded to set out the results of in depth interviews
with police officers, magistrates, lawyers, DVCS
workers and court staff.
In the concluding chapters all the information gathered throughout the course
of the project was discussed and a series of recommendations
were made. These
recommendations are discussed further in this report.
Perhaps the most startling information arising out of this research project was
the disparity between the number of police call outs
(347) and the number of
charges laid(21). This meant that police charged in 6% of cases that they
attended. If the tracking exercise
had been successful it may have been able to
provide explanations for the comparatively small number of charges laid, for
whether there was insufficient evidence, whether the police acceded to
the wishes of the victim not to proceed, or whether police
did not charge
because of other reasons.
There is no real way of telling, from the information in the Research Paper,
whether police response was appropriate to the cases
in question. The research
did not include an analysis of police records in terms of attempting to
determine the appropriateness of
police action.
Similarly, there is no way of telling from the information in the Research
Paper whether the prosecution or court response was appropriate.
For example,
there was no comparison of domestic violence prosecution success rates compared
to prosecution success rates for other
offences and no comparison of the
penalties imposed by the courts for domestic violence offences compared with
penalties in other
criminal matters.
The scope of the Research Paper was also limited by the inability of the researchers
to interview victims of domestic violence.
The researchers did not conduct interviews with
prosecutors or Corrections officers, nor were the records of the Director of
Public Prosecutions or ACT Corrective Services analysed. These are two agencies
identified in this report as essential players
in the criminal justice system's
response to domestic violence.
A major thrust of the Research Paper was the need for greater co-ordination
between the agencies working with domestic violence,
especially with respect to
the collection of statistics and monitoring of cases.
2: KEY THEMES
There is now general agreement at an international and national level about the
central elements involved in designing a comprehensive
domestic violence system
and legal responses.
The themes which are outlined
in this section provide the backdrop and framework for the Committee's work on
this reference.
before the law
It is axiomatic that all are entitled to equality before the law.
This fundamental human right is recited in a number
of international instruments including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural rights
which are together referred to
as the International Bill of Rights.
The concept of equality before the law has much wider importance than simply
requiring that black letter law should, on its face,
be fair and non-discriminatory.
It also has relevance to the way the law is applied, the way the legal system
operates, the
way laws are enforced and overcoming barriers which affect access
to justice.
Sometimes special measures are needed to achieve equality before the law,
to overcome barriers to access to justice or to correct
practices which have
crept in and are distorting the operation of the law.
of the person
Security of the person is also a fundamental human right.
The ultimate means by which security of the person
is guaranteed is by application and enforcement of the law.
of domestic violence
The fundamental flaw in legal responses, particularly criminal justice
responses, to domestic violence in the past has been that
insufficient
attention has been paid to the nature, causes and consequences of the violence.
"In this offence, unlike an attack by a stranger, the victim's
ability to assist or even co-operate with the criminal justice system
impaired. Frequently, the victim cannot avoid the violence. It is not possible
to just walk away."
is unrealistic to place reliance on victims as the main strategy to hold
perpetrators accountable. Domestic violence is different
and specific measures
are needed to ensure that cases are brought into the criminal justice system
and successfully prosecuted.
Public/private
As a community we draw distinctions between the public and the private. We all
feel concern about 'interfering' with other peoples'
business and we want our
own privacy respected.
However, respect for privacy in the case of domestic violence has different
consequences for the victim and the perpetrator.
"The perpetrators, not the victims are benefiting from our concern
is more likely
to stay stuck... we have to replace our concern for privacy with a fundamental
concern for safety.
The public/private dichotomy
is at the heart of the difficulty the community and the legal system have had
in addressing domestic
violence. There is no doubt that the criminal law has
been applied with more latitude in domestic/spousal assault cases than other
assault cases and that the law and police response has reflected the broader
community's confusion about the issues.
The public/private dichotomy is played through into our criminal and civil law.
is involved in domestic violence in the ACT, it is most
often at the initiative of the victim, rather than the police, and the legal
'intervention' is a civil protection order rather than a criminal charge.
As noted above, law reform in relation to domestic violence in the ACT (and
other jurisdictions in Australia) has largely concentrated
on the civil law
response to domestic violence and the criminal justice response has lagged
behind. This tendency is being challenged
around Australia and reform
attention, in relation to domestic violence responses, is shifting to the
criminal justice system.
We have to ensure, as far as possible, that the system responses to domestic violence
do not further victimise the victim, institutionalise
injustice or collude with
perpetrators of domestic violence. The recent reports by the Australian Law Reform
Commission on
Equality Before the Law
have many examples of how the legal
system has abused victims of domestic violence and minimised and trivialised their
The Australian Law Reform Commission commented on the
in Australia in relation to issues of domestic violence.
Responsibility
and criminality
Our law determines our rights and delineates our wrongs. It defines what is 'criminal'.
fact that a criminal offence was perpetrated against a spouse or that a criminal
act was committed in the context of a domestic
situation is not a defence and,
according to our law is not a mitigating factor. An assault or other criminal
act committed in
the context of domestic violence is just as much a crime as any
other similar criminal act.
The fact that a person was affected by alcohol, had been nagged, did not have
food prepared for them, was stressed from work, was
angry because the other
person had done something they thought unfair et cetera- is not a defence to
other criminal offences and
it is not a defence to a criminal offence committed
in the context of domestic violence.
Research establishes that a common characteristic of those who use domestic
violence is that they
do not accept responsibility
for their actions,
and they do not necessarily think they have done anything wrong. These attitudes
are very hard to change.
As a result an offender
will typically attempt to justify his behaviour, often by laying the blame on
the victim, and the offender
will actively seek to gather support for his view
Without a clear understanding of the nature of the violence and the common
techniques used by offenders to
shift responsibility
, police and others
risk being persuaded by the offender and colluding with the offender against
the victim. This is a complex area
for police, the criminal justice system and
others because of the strong undercurrents which are at work.
We have to confidently identify the criminality of the behaviour and, having
done so, the state, and relevant agencies of the state,
must accept
responsibility for charge and prosecution as in other cases where the criminal
law is breached.
Apart from the responses which must flow from the notion of 'equality before
the law' the following are the primary reasons for
a law enforcement approach
to domestic violence which breaches the criminal law
the process of arrest, prosecution, conviction and punishment carries a
clear message that society condemns the conduct of the offender
and that the
offender is personally responsible for his actions;
the criminal process indicates that a crime between household members is as
much a crime as crime in the street, between strangers;
the criminal process acknowledges that the victim is entitled to the
state's protection and that the relationship between the offender
victim does not come before the victim's basic safety;
the law has an important symbolic and educative role; and
arrest, prosecution and sentencing may serve as direct deterrents for
individual offenders.
and civil responses
Reform in relation to domestic violence in Australia has focused on services,
development of policy directions and reform of civil
law (that is, the introduction
of domestic violence protection order legislation from the early 1980s). As noted
above there has
been little emphasis on the criminal justice process. The pattern
has been different in Canada and USA where there has been a significant
on criminalization.
Whereas criminal processes aim to hold an offender responsible for past
criminal behaviour, civil processes (that is, protection
orders) aim to prevent
further incidents. Many protection orders are made by consent or in the absence
of the offender. Although
breach of a protection order is a criminal offence
this means that generally two criminal acts will have been committed before the
offender is held criminally accountable. Civil processes are primarily remedial
and preventative and consequently, civil processes
are not a substitute in law
or effect for criminal charges.
approach - policy, co-ordination and
Over the past 10 years every major report dealing with domestic violence at an
international, national and state level has stressed
the need for a co-ordinated
and comprehensive approach to the problem.
It has become apparent that there is little
hope of effectively stopping the violence unless players in the system work co-operatively.
The players include the courts, the police, the prosecution, lawyers, correctional
services, health, housing, crisis and victim
support workers, refuges, and the
legislature.
It is also obvious that a system which is dysfunctional, and in which
co-operation has not been established, is not going to be rectified
adding another service or putting on more workers. Agencies can choose to work
against each other some or most of the time
or they can choose to work
together. The latter offers benefits to all as well as better service to the
community and more effective
use of public funds.
The legal response to domestic violence is only one aspect of a systems
response, albeit crucial. The legal response can be affected
by factors which
are beyond the control of the individual players, for example, the performance
of courts is effected by the performance
of the police, the prosecution, and
the availability of victim support services. The same is true of all other
players in a systems
response to domestic violence, for example, agencies
involved in the provision of housing, health and education. In order for the
whole system to work together with common purpose there are two key elements:
agreed policy- that is, there has to be a blue print for action; and
co-ordination and monitoring on a case level- to ensure that the
system is performing as intended.
That is, a top down as well as a bottom
up approach is required. Neither can ever be fully effective without the other.
Victim support and victim advocacy assistance are essential because of:
the imbalance of power between the victim and the offender;
the vulnerability of the victim to intimidation by the offender and
to assist to counter subtle systemic discrimination
which often applies in domestic violence cases.
There are two kinds of services of particular relevance to offenders of
domestic violence. Both are also relevant to the safety of
victims and to the
accountability of offenders for the violence. The first are services which
provide information to offenders about
available assistance, for example,
information about accommodation and perpetrator education programs. The second
are the education
programs themselves. In a best practice response both forms
of assistance are available with the services sharing the focus on the
criminality of the behaviour, the responsibility of the offender, the safety of
the victim and the reform of the offender.
There is much debate about the effectiveness of perpetrator education programs.
The fundamental problem is that attitudes which give
rise to domestic violence
are very hard to change. Offenders typically do not accept responsibility and,
unless programs are victim/safety
orientated, they can unintentionally collude
to develop reasons or excuses for the violence. On the other hand, quality
perpetrator
programs have two undeniable benefits:
they serve to meet the desire of the community and of many victims, that
assistance be extended to the offender and that they have
the opportunity to
reform; and
they help to dispel prevalent myths about the causes of the
Quality perpetrator programs have a wider role in educating the
community about the criminality of the behaviour and the responsibility
and violence
Acknowledging the gendered nature of domestic violence is not the same as
saying that all men are perpetrators of domestic violence
or that all men
adhere to the belief system which predicates domestic violence. Statistics
are alarming. Without in any way
minimising the pervasiveness, criminality or consequences of domestic violence,
the statistics do
not come close to suggesting that
physical violence against their spouse. It is probably true that most
Australians agree with a value of non-violence in relationships.
important that offenders of domestic violence realise that
odd ones out; that
behaviour is intolerable; and although they can
expect to be treated with dignity and given the opportunity to correct their
when their behaviour breaches the criminal law they will be
held criminally responsible for it
The fact that domestic violence is gendered is not an excuse for the violence
and the community should not permit it to be used as
The Research Paper noted that community feelings of ambivalence about intervention
in domestic violence cases relate to idealised
conceptions of what families should
be like and how we should in turn relate to them.
Community education and education specifically for those who are involved in
the criminal and civil justice responses to domestic
violence, is integral to
the long term reduction of the violence and the quality of the system response.
In the last 20 years rapid
progress has been made in thinking and research in
relation to domestic violence and many people are unaware of developments.
should be confronted and debunked. Common key themes have emerged for
domestic violence education, such as those related above. Many
of these themes
will be new to those who did their professional training more than say, 5 years
ago and many of the themes will be
new to many members of the community.
There have also been significant changes in educational methods over recent
years. The banking method of teaching (where the teacher
knows everything and
the students know nothing; the teacher talks and the students passively listen;
the teacher determines the method
of evaluation and the students accept the
teachers choice, et cetera) is being supplemented or replaced with educational
models which
use active learning techniques, group discussion and experience
sharing. In other words, the teacher becomes a 'facilitator'. The
particularly suited to domestic violence education.
importance of domestic violence
As noted above, there is overwhelming agreement, that domestic violence must be
approached in a comprehensive and coordinated manner.
The response must involve
a partnership between government, agencies and the community. A number of
government services and public
institutions are involved in a 'whole system'
approach, for example, the criminal justice system (the police, the courts, the
prosecution,
and correctional services); health; housing; education; and victim
support services. Obviously the activities and contributions of
these agencies
have to be coordinated.
Federal policy in relation to domestic violence is contained in a number of
documents which are brought together in the National
Strategy on Violence
Against Women. As mentioned earlier, that policy has been accepted by the ACT
government and all other governments
in Australia. The National Strategy
provides a comprehensive
framework. However, as it is a
national framework there is still work to be done to devise local policies
which mesh with it and
to develop detailed implementation plans.
in other Australian
All Australian states and the Northern Territory have, or have had, a domestic
violence advisory or coordinating council or a domestic
violence taskforce. All
have performed the function of developing a strategy for implementation of
reforms in relation to domestic
violence responses in their jurisdiction. In
addition, most jurisdictions have a domestic violence resource or co-ordination
within government which has responsibility for, amongst other things, the
development and implementation of domestic violence policy.
The present position in the other jurisdictions is as follows:
NEW SOUTH WALES
- has a ministerially appointed Domestic Violence
Advisory Committee (DVAC) and a Domestic Violence Strategic Plan. The Strategic
Plan specifies actions and implementation dates across government activities. A
number of government departments have developed policies
on domestic violence,
for example, in relation to health and education. There is a network of local
domestic violence committees
which feed into the DVAC.
- has a government appointed Violence Against Women Task Force
which is part of the Victorian Community Council Against Violence.
Its role is
to advise government on strategies on violence against women. Health and
Community Services is developing a family violence
- has a Domestic Violence Council which is ministerially
appointed. It has government and non-government members. The Council has
developed a domestic violence strategy. There has been significant development
of domestic violence policies in the areas of education,
housing, policing,
health, and Aboriginal issues. Queensland police have also developed a domestic
violence strategy.
has a Domestic Violence Advisory Committee comprised of equal
numbers of government and community representatives. The Committee
the Minister for Community Services and Health. It is responsible for advising
government on domestic violence policy.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA-
has an inter-departmental Justice Co-ordination
Council which oversees implementation of domestic violence strategies by
departments. The Council reports to the Attorney-General.
(Discussions are presently underway about the establishment of a Task Force
relation to domestic violence made up of government and non-government
representatives.)
SOUTH AUSTRALIA-
had a Domestic Violence Prevention Committee which is
presently in abeyance. It consisted of government and non-government
representatives
and provided advice to the Minister for Family and Community
NORTHERN TERRITORY-
released a Domestic Violence Strategy in April 1994
and has a Domestic Violence Coordinating Committee with departmental and
non-government
members. The Committee is implementing and broadening the
strategy. Health and housing policies in relation to domestic violence
been developed in the last 12 months. There are specific provisions relating to
domestic violence in police general orders.
policy in the ACT
The ACT does not have a domestic violence policy and there is no single body
with a brief to develop a policy.
The National Strategy on Violence Against Women was accepted by all Australian
governments at the October 1992 Commonwealth/State
Ministers Conference on the
Status of Women.
The ACT has been active in promoting the objectives of the National Strategy on
Violence Against Women. In 1992, the ACT placed the
National Strategy on the
agenda of the inaugural meeting of the Council of Australian Governments (COAG)
held in December of that
year. In February 1994, at the request of the ACT,
COAG established a working group to survey government implementation of the
Strategy and to identify aspects of the Strategy which could benefit
from a national approach.
A number of groups and government agencies in the ACT have undertaken specific
projects in relation to domestic violence issues.
The list below is not
exhaustive but does cover some of the major bodies and programs in this area.
The ACT Women's Consultative Council
was established in 1989 to advise
the Chief Minister on matters relating to the interests and well being of ACT
women and policies
to meet their needs. It acts as a link between ACT women and
the Government. The work of the Council led the ACT Government to issue
current reference on domestic violence to the Community Law Reform Committee.
The National Strategy on Violence Against Women Management Group
interdepartmental group established to oversee the ACT Government's community
awareness campaign to minimise violence against
women in line with the
objectives of the National Strategy. The group had representatives from across
ACT government agencies, including
the Attorney General's Department, Health
and Community Care, the Department of Education and Training, the AFP, the
Chief Minister's
Department and the Community Advocate. The group has been
The community awareness campaign incorporated:
funding for the education program Preventing Abuse in Relationships,
conducted in ACT high schools and colleges on request by the
anti-rape workshops conducted in ACT high schools on request by Men Against
Sexual Assault (MASA);
the development of training materials on violence against women for use at
workshops conducted for ACT Government employees in November
the development of a booklet Understanding Violence Against Women
and Children;
an advertisement in the 1995 Telecom White Pages with a list of
organisations which provide support and assistance to women experiencing
a series of television commercials; and
advertisements in the print media, on ACTION buses and on milk
The ACT Domestic Violence Interagency
(DVIA) is an unfunded
inter-agency group which has about 50 members who represent direct service
providers. It provides a forum for
discussion, information sharing and
coordination. It aims to contribute to the development of policy, programs and
law reform. There
is no formal input from government program areas.
The Community Safety Committee
was established in November 1993 to
finalise a draft community safety strategy for government endorsement. It has
released the
Civic by Night
Report. The Committee may have a role in
coordinating or developing aspects of an ACT Domestic Violence Strategy.
The Women's Information and Referral Service
runs support groups for
domestic violence survivors. The Service also has a domestic violence support
worker providing general assistance
to domestic violence survivors. It also
operates as a referral point.
The Australian Federal Police (ACT)
are developing an 'AFP Strategy on
Domestic Violence in the ACT'. Police Regional Instructions are also under
review. The AFP have
a domestic violence training module for recruits and
inservice training.
The Department of Education and Training
supports the Preventing Abuse
In Relationships (PAIR) program which has been conducted in most ACT high
schools by the DVCS (sometimes
in conjunction with a complimentary program run
by Men Against Sexual Assault).The DVCS, the Rape Crisis Centre and other
offer additional programs which are taken up by schools to compliment
the courses they offer within their curriculum. In Primary
Schools domestic
violence is most often addressed through the Protective Behaviours program. The
Department is developing two modules,
one for boys and one for girls,
addressing issues of gender and violence.
The Department of Health and Community Care
has no specific policy in
relation to domestic violence although there is a draft women's health policy
which addresses issues of
violence against women. The Women's Health Service
receives specific funding for counselling of domestic violence survivors.
and community based social workers work with clients affected by
domestic violence. The Department also operates the Child at Risk
Unit at Woden Valley Hospital. Under the Health Grants Program community
agencies are funded for specific projects dealing
with violence against
The Department of Housing and Community Services
has a policy on
domestic violence. This policy was developed in 1991 in conjunction with the
Women's Housing Issues Working Party,
a national group which still operates.
Some of the major issues addressed by the policy are:
priority housing - domestic violence is a reason to be granted priority on
waiting lists;
extra security -requests by domestic violence victims for security doors
and other extra security measures are met quickly;
six month wait -the rule that an applicant must live in the ACT for six
months before being eligible to apply for government housing
does not apply to
applicants fleeing to the ACT to escape domestic violence;
staff training - staff have received training on domestic violence issues
and more recently on access and equity issues generally;
transit flats - houses are provided to Northside and Weston Creek Community
Services as temporary accommodation for domestic violence
Department of Housing and Community Services administers two Commonwealth
government funded programs:
the Crisis Accommodation Program - providing capital expenditure for the
purchase and building of houses to be used as refuges and
crisis services; and
the Supported Accommodation Assistance Program - providing ongoing funding
for the operation of refuges and crisis services.
ACT Domestic Violence
Despite the extensive activity which is underway, the ACT is now behind
developments in other Australian jurisdictions in relation
to the development
of a strategic plan for a multi- systems response to domestic violence. Reforms
to the law and legal processes
must be supported and paralleled by activities
in other relevant areas, and all activities must be coordinated.
When compiling information for this report it became apparent that policy
initiatives and domestic violence programs were fragmented.
It is rare for one
government agency to know what others are doing on domestic violence issues.
The community groups are somewhat
less affected because of the existence of the
DVIA and informal networks for passing information. It is certainly the case
is no central agency, body or "one stop shop" that provides this
information.
A strategy on domestic violence for the ACT would require all government
agencies and community groups working with this issue to
set goals, plan
programs to achieve those goals and devise methods of evaluation. The strategy
would include an overall evaluation
to determine the effectiveness of the
strategy as a whole.
Recommendation 1:
That an ACT Domestic Violence Strategy be developed.
Domestic Violence Advisory
There is no single body in the ACT which has the brief or resources to develop
an ACT Domestic Violence Strategy. It is noted that
other Australian
government representation, to develop a
strategy and the bodies have had
secretariat assistance provided by a relevant government department.
The Committee believes that a statutorily appointed Domestic Violence Advisory
Council should be established in the ACT. The Council
would be responsible for
the development of an ACT Domestic Violence Strategy and Implementation Plan
for a multi-systems response
to domestic violence. It would perform a
continuing role of advising government on domestic violence policy.
The Committee envisages that the Council would be a body with 13 members of
these, 8 positions would be held by representatives
of the police, the courts,
ACT Corrective Services, the Attorney General's Department, health, housing,
women's issues and
education; and 5 would be community members. The Committee
recommends that the Council should be established under a new part
of the Domestic
Violence Act as discussed below.
For the community member positions, the government should advertise for
expressions of interest from those who are committed to the
objective of
stopping the violence and to the directions of the National Strategy on
Violence Against Women.
The Council should aim to develop an ACT Domestic Violence Strategy within the
first 6 months and an implementation plan within 12
months. The Council should
advise government at the conclusion of the 12 month period on the appropriate
nature of its ongoing role.
In order to perform these functions the Council will need to be appropriately
resourced, for example, by provision of secretariat
assistance from a relevant
government department.
Recommendation 2:
That the government establish a statutorily appointed ACT Domestic Violence
Advisory Council consisting of representatives of relevant
government program
areas, the police and the courts and community members.
Recommendation 3:
That the Council develop an ACT Domestic Violence Strategy and an
Implementation Plan for consideration by government.
Recommendation 4:
That the Council perform a continuing role in advising Government on
Domestic Violence policy.
Statistics,
Measures and Research
need for statistics on domestic
The need for statistical information on domestic violence has been widely acknowledged
and has been the subject of comment in nearly
every study on this issue. The National
Committee on Violence Against Women recommended that all governments "research,
and make publicly available annually the rates of arrest, charge, prosecution
and disposal of cases of physical and sexual violence
against women."
Statistics are relied upon by governments in the development of policy and the
allocation of resources. Whilst statistical information
in the area of domestic
violence may suffer from inaccuracy due to under reporting, crime victim
surveys and other methods can be
used to estimate levels of under reporting and
can to some extent fill this gap.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics(ABS) is currently developing a Women's
Safety Survey which it expects to conduct early in
1996. It is expected that
the survey will "make an important contribution to informed decision making
and public discussion
in what is a significant area of public policy and community
The Survey is not just an incidence
survey, but will also include information about actions taken after violence
and the effect
of violence on women.
Whilst this national survey will undoubtedly provide all governments and groups
dealing with domestic violence with useful information,
there is a need to
obtain data which is specific to the ACT. This is particularly the case if the
ACT is to adopt an integrated,
inter- agency approach to domestic violence, as
recommended in this report. The necessary monitoring and evaluation of the
response to domestic violence cases cannot be carried out in the
absence of such information.
The lack of coherent statistical information about domestic violence in the ACT
was discussed in some detail in the Research Paper.
Obtaining statistics for the
Research Paper was described as "essentially a manual exercise, involving lengthy
periods of painstaking
The researchers
concluded that the problem was not so much that the necessary data was not collected,
but that it was not readily
accessible. This conclusion was also reached in the
ACT Crime and Justice Statistics and Management Information Collection and
a report prepared for the ACT Attorney General's Department
by John Walker Consulting Services released in May 1995 (the Walker report).
The Walker report looked at the overall crime and justice statistical needs of
The main agencies dealing with domestic violence in the ACT are the police, the
DVCS, the courts, ACT Corrective Services, the Legal
Aid Office and the Office
of the Director of Public Prosecutions. Basic information required of each
during a given time frame, for
example each month, would be as follows:
Police: how many calls regarding domestic violence, how many call
out attendances, how many arrests, how many charges, reasons for
arrest/charge, in cases where no arrest/charge whether any further action was
taken, and how many offender were granted bail by
DVCS: how many calls, how many new clients, how many repeat clients,
how many crisis interventions, how many clients supported in
court and whether
this was for criminal or civil action;
courts: how many applications for protection orders lodged and
issued(interim and final), how many criminal matters involving domestic
violence, nature of these matters, for example, what charges, outcome of these
matters including applications for bail, the number
of pleas of guilty and
pleas of not guilty, convictions, sentences and period of time from when the
matter was first before the court
to sentence;
ACT Corrective Services: how many domestic violence offenders
referred by the courts, action taken, how many offenders were admitted
perpetrator education programs;
Legal Aid Office: how many people assisted in domestic violence
matters and outcomes;
Director of Public Prosecutions:
how many prosecutions, nature of charges, outcome of prosecutions including
bail hearings and whether bail was opposed.
In the main this data is already collected by each agency, although significant
modification is required and is being undertaken
to make it accessible. There
is an initial difficulty in obtaining the police, DPP and the court data on domestic
violence. Offences
are not coded to indicate whether they arose in the context
of domestic violence.
Further, data collection by each agency in isolation is only a starting point.
It does not resolve the problem of how to track
specific cases, which is a "key
element in effectiveness evaluations. While it is important for resourcing purposes
how many and what types of cases are dealt with by individual agencies
in the system, some measure of client overlap is required.
If agencies are dealing
with the same clients, then one of the significant measures of intervention
effectiveness must involve
tracing of those cases common to agencies."
For example, information from the DPP might indicate a fall in prosecutions
compared to the previous month while information from
the police might indicate
a constancy in the number of charges laid. Individual cases should be "tracked"
from the initial police
response through to prosecution to ascertain what part
of the system is not performing.
The value of "tracking" was revealed by the questions that the Research Paper
was unable to answer. As a result of not being able
to track cases we do not
know why only 21 charges were laid as a result of the 347 call outs. We do not
know what action, if any,
was taken to protect the victims of the remaining
The way in which data is coded and collated needs to be standardised across
agencies. At present in the ACT, there is little capacity
to compare records as
each agency uses different methods to identify particular cases.
There is a great need to have the collection, reporting and analysis of
domestic violence statistics coordinated across agencies
both within and
outside government. For the purpose of constant monitoring and evaluation,
analysis of the data needs to be undertaken
by one central agency which would
release periodic reports. This role could properly be undertaken by the
Domestic Violence Project
Coordinator recommended below.
There is a need for the basic information outlined above to be available on a
very regular basis, for example monthly, so that it
will be readily apparent if
some part of the system is not performing. If possible, additional data on
location of domestic violence,
relationship of those involved, age, ethnicity,
gender et cetera should also be collected, but would generally only need to be
on annually. In addition, the collection of data should adhere to
national standards so that comparisons can be made with other states
territories.
There have been a number of proposals to improve the availability of criminal
justice statistics in the ACT. One of these is the
Integrated Justice
Information System (IJIS) which was noted with enthusiasm by the authors of the
Research Paper. IJIS would link
existing computer systems operated by the
police, the courts, the DPP, ACT Corrective Services and the Attorney General's
Department.
The system would comprise a common identification for all cases to
enable case tracking. Each agency would have access to the data
base according
to need. Every case would have a common file so that the file that was opened
by the police when the case initially
came to the notice of the criminal
justice system, would be used until the matter had been finalised in the
system, for example,
when it left the hands of ACT Corrective Services.
IJIS has been referred to as the "Rolls Royce" of statistical systems, however
it is not known whether it will be implemented and
if so, in what form.
Additionally, it would not include records from the Legal Aid Office or the
DVCS. The DVCS does not yet have
automated records. Both of these agencies are
such major players in the domestic violence arena that statistical information
them needs to be available to achieve a coordinated response.
IJIS is not necessary to enable the ACT to develop a crime and justice database
and analytic capability. The Walker report suggests
that there is sufficient
data available right now for the Attorney General's Department to compile a
"Sourcebook of ACT Crime and
Justice Information" which can be updated and
enhanced as resources allow.
The problem, from the point of view of developing policy and carrying out
monitoring and evaluation, is that data is "fragmented
and no single person
or unit is identifiable with the responsibility of putting the data all together
and maintaining it as
an integrated database and interpreting the data..."
The Walker report noted the inability to obtain information on offences committed
in the context of domestic violence, except
information on breaches of protection
orders as this is an identifiable domestic violence offence. The suggested solution
future recording was relatively simple. When data is entered it could be
"tagged" with a code indicating that the offence was
committed in the context
of domestic violence. Practical problems could arise however, with any attempt
to go back and re-code
data, as the AFP operates over 20 computer databases,
many of which contain only partial information in relation to domestic violence
particularly in the area of case tracking. Here the requirements
must be fulfilled and the safety of the victims must be the
paramount consideration. Again, the Committee recommends that the Domestic
Violence Project Coordinator, should undertake the task of developing protocols
between all relevant agencies to ensure compliance
whilst maximising the information to be shared.
It is noted in the Research Paper that even where domestic violence statistics
are available, they are not usually compared with
statistics on other types
of offences. The researchers recommended that such a comparison occur, particularly
with other offences
against the person, so as to be able place findings about
the criminal justice response to domestic violence in context.
This would add a perspective which permits measurement
of relative merit.
The researchers state that "the major value of the data analysis undertaken
for this research project has been the provision of
baseline data against which
future data collection can be compared."
They recommend that further comparative research
be conducted in the ACT on charges, bail and sentencing for different types
of violent offences, to establish a baseline to assist future decision-making
on requirements for domestic violence matters.
Recommendation 5:
That the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator liaise with government and
non-government agencies to develop a standardised system
for the collection of
statistics on domestic violence.
Recommendation 6:
That agencies dealing with domestic violence enhance their information
systems to standardise the way in which domestic violence statistics
and collated.
Recommendation 7:
That the police and the courts include a code in relevant databases to
distinguish offences committed in the context of domestic violence.
Recommendation 8:
That agencies dealing with domestic violence adhere to national standards
set for data collection to enable comparisons to be made
with other states and
territories.
Recommendation 9:
That the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator liaise with agencies to
develop protocols for information sharing having regard to
confidentiality and the
Recommendation 10:
That the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator arrange, in consultation with
agencies, for a body or agency to analyse and evaluate
the statistical
information, and if appropriate, to conduct case tracking exercises.
Recommendation 11:
That the government make the statistical information and analysis of its
implications
Recommendation 12:
That the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator be responsible for monitoring
the statistical information and ensuring that the information
and analysis of
its implications, is made available to government on a regular basis.
Recommendation 13:
That the DVCS consider developing systems to permit monitoring research to
be undertaken under appropriate ethical and privacy guidelines.
Recommendation 14:
That comparative research be conducted in the ACT on arrest, charges, bail
and sentencing for different types of violent offences,
to establish a baseline
to assist future decision making on requirements for domestic violence.
4: BEST PRACTICE CRIMINAL JUSTICE RESPONSE TO DOMESTIC
The basic thrust of the revised criminal justice response to domestic violence
is to work to ensure that domestic violence cases
are not screened out of the
criminal justice system and that the system holds offenders of criminal
behaviour committed in the context
of domestic violence, accountable to the
same extent as offenders of other similar criminal offences.
The fundamental aim is to ensure the safety of victims and to work towards
ending or preventing the violence.
Research indicates that bringing domestic violence cases, which involve breach
of the criminal law, into the criminal justice
system generally results in a
substantial reduction in the violence.
The factors outlined below are generally agreed to form part of a contemporary
'best practice' criminal justice response to domestic
Criminality.
The criminality
of domestic violence is recognised and the criminal
justice system aims to hold the offender accountable for the criminal
Legal sanctions that will deter the offender from committing further
acts of violence are imposed and enforced.
It is recognised that to effectively deal with domestic violence in a criminal
justice context, the special dynamics of the violence
and the special
vulnerability of the victim have to be understood and taken into account in
procedures relating to police, prosecution
and court practice.
driven rather than victim
As for other criminal acts, police take responsibility for charging. The state,
rather than the victim, prosecutes. It is recognised
that the reluctance of the
victim to press charges, and requests by the victim that charges be dropped,
will frequently result from
the victim being pressured or intimidated by the
of the offender.
The right of the offender to be treated as innocent until proven guilty, and to
receive fair treatment at every stage during the
criminal justice process, is
not compromised. The difference is in how the system reacts to the criminality
and the victim safety
ramifications of the alleged behaviour (that is,
ambivalence is replaced by action) and in the system accepting responsibility
holding the offender accountable.
enforcement policing.
Police effectively have a veto on which cases enter the criminal justice system
through police policy and police action in relation
to arrest and charge.
Police also affect the outcome of prosecutions by the way they conduct the
investigation. Police action has
historically tended to direct domestic
violence cases away from the criminal justice system by using a peacemaking
approach. The
revised approach involves a shift from peacemaking to law
enforcement. This in turn may require revision of police instructions or
legislative change and police training. It may also require internal monitoring
of the way police handle domestic violence cases
and establishing processes to
receive feedback from external sources.
responsibility for
prosecution.
There have been long standing difficulties in prosecuting domestic violence
cases. Reasons cited include the victim's reluctance
to cooperate or testify; a
relationship analysis of domestic violence; lack of support for victims; lack
of protection for the victim
from the offender during the prosecution process;
inadequate police investigation and legislative obstacles. Each of these
must be addressed.
in relation to bail.
Special care is needed when making decisions about bail in domestic violence
cases. In considering bail it should be borne in mind
that the victim may be
particularly vulnerable to intimidation or harassment by the offender and that
the offender may be motivated
to attempt to pressure the victim as the likely
weak link in the attempt to hold the offender accountable. The release of the
may pose a serious risk to the victim and the victim should be given
prior notice of the release.
determination and
sentencing.
It is crucial that the prosecution provides the judge or magistrate with all
evidence relevant to prosecution of the charge, and
that relevant material is
before the court at the time of sentence to ensure that penalties reflect the
seriousness of the offence.
The judiciary must maintain a current and thorough
knowledge of the dynamics of domestic violence. Such knowledge is a necessary
basis for assessments of credibility of witnesses and relevance, which can be
crucial to allocating criminal responsibility. It is
also a necessary basis for
decisions about what penalties are appropriate.
The victim must be assisted from the point of initial police intervention
through to the prosecution of the offender.
and case tracking.
In order to ensure that the revised approach is working and that policy is
adhered to, arrangements should be instituted for monitoring
the response
including case tracking through the system.
Police effectively hold the key to an effective response to domestic violence
because they are the gatekeepers of the system - they
decide who will and who
will not be charged. If police screen cases out of the system, by not charging,
the door is closed.
The Research Paper notes that Australian and overseas research indicates that
police tend to consider attendance at 'domestics'
as one of the least desirable
police jobs and this is often because police perceive it to be a 'fruitless
exercise'. Commonly,
police point to their inability to initiate positive action
to diffuse the situation.
Further, research
indicates that police tend to have a negative stereotype of the victims of domestic
violence. They typecast
domestic violence situations as 'not real police work'
but more a matter of 'keeping the peace'. In many instances these views
reinforced through training.
calls for help
The processes for screening, summarising, and prioritising calls to police for
assistance are relevant to the ultimate response.
The dispatcher takes the complaint, determines
urgency and, where police action is thought to be warranted, the dispatcher passes
a message (possibly through a number of intermediaries) to the police who will
attend. The dispatcher has to listen and evaluate,
allocate priority and summarise
the situation for attending police. At each of these stages there is the potential
for information
which should be passed on to attending police to be culled out.
The detail and tone of the summary may colour the attitudes of attending
even prior to arrival at the scene.
Additionally, where the parties are known to police, time permitting, police
should check the alleged offenders prior criminal record,
whether a protection
order is current and whether there are any arrest warrants outstanding. If
there is a protection order, details
should be provided to attending police
Where police believe on reasonable grounds that an offence has been committed
in the context of domestic violence, police response
should be a 'law
enforcement' approach not 'peacekeeping'.
Police demeanour, attitudes and actions will give strong messages to the
parties about the triviality or seriousness of the allegations
made by the
victim. Offenders of domestic violence will often admit the violence but make
excuses. This means that police often have
an admission which obviously boosts
prosecution prospects. It also means that the offender does not accept
responsibility. This in
turn should raise real concerns about repetition of the
offence or intimidation of the victim.
Ideally, police are accompanied by victim support workers or, as a fall back,
support workers provide a follow up for the victim
within 24 hours.
Investigation
The adequacy of the police investigation is fundamental in terms of responding
adequately to the victim and to the ultimate prosecution
of any charge. The
complaint from the victim should not be taken in the presence of the alleged
offender. The investigation should
not assume or expect that the victim will be
prepared to cooperate then or later. Police should not ask the victim whether
wants the alleged offender charged. The decision whether or not to
charge is a matter for the police and police action should not
be determined by
the wishes of the victim.
This position is followed through in a prosecution 'no drop' policy which is
dealt with later.
Where possible, sufficient evidence should be collected so that the evidence of
the victim is not crucial to the success of the prosecution.
In any event, a
thorough investigation based on a law enforcement approach will impress on the
alleged offender and the victim, from
the outset, that the complaint is about a
criminal matter. The victim should at all times be shielded from intimidation
by the offender.
The investigation should include obtaining all available evidence, interviewing
and taking statements from relevant witnesses and
generally following
investigation practices which are applied in other criminal matters. This might
include taking photographs and
collecting physical evidence such as torn or
bloodied clothing. Medical evidence should be obtained where relevant.
The National Committee on Violence, the members of which included AFP Commissioner
Mick Palmer, recommended that where there is
sufficient evidence of criminal assault
in the home, police should lay charges.
Police must take responsibility for charging and again reliance should not
be placed on the victim. The experience from jurisdictions
where a more focused
approach has been taken to charging in domestic violence cases is that although
victims may initially
be reluctant to have the offender charged, they are often
willing to cooperate by the time of the trial or hearing. A more focused
charging policy will increase the number of pleas of guilty. It is likely to
increase officer satisfaction in relation
to the effectiveness of their role
and victim satisfaction.
A study undertaken in London, Ontario in 1990 measured the effect of the adoption
in 1980 of a policy that police should lay charges
whenever there were reasonable
and probable grounds to believe that an assault had occurred.
The effectiveness of the policy was assessed by
interviewing 90 women who had been physically assaulted by their partner, police
data about charge rates, and a survey of police attitudes to the policy. It
was found that in 1979, prior to the introduction
of the policy, police laid
charges in only 2.7% of cases involving wife assault. By 1983, the figure was
67.3% and by 1990
it was 89.3%. By 1990, 77.5% of police surveyed thought that
victims were more likely to follow through under the policy. Whereas
only 33.5% of police thought that the policy was effective, by 1990 52.3% of
police surveyed thought it was effective;
64.9% thought the policy promoted
an important message to the community; and 48.1% thought that the policy helped
The victims who participated in the study reported a high level of satisfaction
with police response and 87% said that they would
call the police again. The
research looked at the extent and severity of violence used by males against
their female partner 12 months
before and 12 months after the target incident
and found that in the majority of cases there was a statistically significant
in the level of violence after police intervention.
Only 10.9% of cases were withdrawn or dismissed compared to 38.4% prior to the
introduction of the policy and the penalties increased
dramatically. Victims
expressed a high level of satisfaction with the court process.
Police powers in relation to arrest are contained in legislation and generally,
police are guided in the use of their powers by police
'general orders' (in the
ACT called police 'Regional Instructions') which are policy directions issued
by the Commissioner of Police.
The fact that police have the power to arrest does not mean that they are
required or expected to arrest for all criminal offences.
The purpose of arrest
is not to punish or frighten the offender. Arrest is one of the points of entry
into the criminal justice system.
For less serious offences a summons is more likely to be the appropriate method
of arranging the offender's attendance at court.
In more serious
cases, arrest will be appropriate. Additionally, one of the criteria which will
be considered in determining whether
to arrest or summons is whether the
offender is likely to be a danger to the victim or attempt to intimidate
In order to overcome the historical reluctance of police to arrest and charge
for criminal offences committed in the context of domestic
violence, that is,
to break police out of the peacekeeping/mediation response model, many American
and Canadian jurisdictions, and
New Zealand, have issued specific directions to
police, in police general orders, about when they should arrest in domestic
cases. Similar provisions have been adopted or are under consideration
in all other Australian states and territories.
As noted in the Committee's Research Paper,
the research in relation
to the effect of arrest in domestic violence cases does not establish whether
arrest is a specific
deterrent ( that is, whether arrest deters the individual
offender ). Additionally, research does not establish whether arrest
has a specific
deterrent effect in relation to criminal offences generally. Research does however
indicate that prosecution
and judicial response
an effective deterrent
to domestic violence.
Until such time as there is an alternative applicable to criminal offences
generally, there is a strong argument, based on the principles
of security of
the person and equality before the law, that domestic violence suspects should
not be singled out for diversion from
the system. Research does not establish
that it is desirable or productive to do so.
The net result is that a best practice in relation to arrest for criminal acts
committed in the context of domestic violence, is
an arrest policy:
based on an understanding of domestic violence (and particularly the
vulnerability of the victim and the potential for intimidation
and repetition);
which aims to ensure that domestic violence offenders are not dealt with
more leniently than those who commit other similar offences;
which balances the need to give clear guidance to police officers while not
overly circumscribing officer discretion to respond appropriately
particular circumstances of the case.
As noted earlier in this report, bail decisions can be crucial to the safety of
the victim. In addition, the offender may be motivated
to attempt to pressure
or intimidate the victim as the likely weak link in the attempt to hold the
offender accountable.
Police, prosecutors and the courts should take every care to ensure that all
statutory criteria relevant to the circumstances of
the offence are taken into
Any testing of protection orders, including breaches which on their face may
appear trivial - such as sending notes - should be treated
with concern.
Where bail is granted appropriate conditions should be imposed which are
necessary to meet any concerns.
The release of the alleged offender may pose a serious risk to the victim and
the victim should be given prior notice of the release.
Indicators.
Police, prosecutors and courts should be aware of what are referred to as
"lethality" indicators, such as:
suicide threats;
threats to kill;
fantasies of suicide or homicide;
self destructive behaviour;
possession of weapons;
obsession with the victim;
repeated violence;
depression;
hostage taking or threats to harm or take
the children;
recent separation;
custody or access disputes.
Information
for the offender
Under the Duluth and Hamilton models (detailed in Chapter 7) the offender is
provided with information about available services,
for example, accommodation
options and perpetrator education programs, prior to release from custody. In
Duluth police can detain
the offender for up to 36 hours without charge which
provides ample time for the offender to be seen before release. In Hamilton
there is a no police bail provision and the offender is generally seen by a
worker or volunteer with the Hamilton Abuse Intervention
Project before
Information should be provided on a one to one basis rather than in a pamphlet.
In providing the information a victim/safety and
offender responsibility
position should be maintained.
The service must be consistent, reliable and quality controlled.
Prosecution
In reviewing recent literature on domestic violence, the Research Paper notes
that research findings have shown that domestic violence
cases are treated
differentially by prosecutors. Criticisms levelled at prosecutors include:
over reliance on the victim - a subjective assessment of the victim's
motivation for prosecution and commitment to continued prosecution;
preoccupation with the extent of the victim's injury;
preparedness to drop the charge only countered by the victim actively
agitating for the prosecution to proceed;
disinclination to prosecute if the parties have reconciled;
a subjective assessment of the prospects of the offender reoffending; and
prior convictions having more influence
on the decision to prosecute than the evidentiary strength of the case.
In fact, it is taken for granted that there will be a low prosecution rate
in domestic violence cases because 'it all hinges on the
"For years defence attorneys have found domestic violence cases
fairly easy to defend... Judges have grown used to having prosecutors
dismissal [of charges]....The already crowded court calendar has not been burdened
with cases that involve fearful,
ambivalent and at times even hostile victims.
'If there is no victim there is no crime' has been the... rationalisation for
prosecutors and judges to mentally dismiss these cases as well."
Over the last 10 years, in the USA and Canada there has been a concerted focus
on prosecution of domestic violence cases.
It has been recognised that the police cannot be expected to charge if cases are
not carried through by the prosecution, and the
courts can only deal with the
charge and the evidence before them.
Overseas experience demonstrates, however, that it is possible to substantially
increase prosecution success rates in domestic
violence cases without infringing
the rights of the offender.
The two year
evaluation of the Hamilton Abuse Intervention Project indicated that the domestic
violence prosecution success
rate in Hamilton was 13% above the New Zealand
national average.
Factors which have historically been cited as producing low prosecution success
rates in domestic violence cases, such as insufficient
evidence and lack of
cooperation from the victim, have not been viewed in context. It has to be
recognised that victims of domestic
violence are typically less able to
co-operate, more susceptible to pressure or intimidation by the offender and
less self assured
than victims of many other crimes. Offenders must not be
permitted to use victims to protect themselves. Police investigation practices
and the adequacy of the police brief can obviously effect the success of the
prosecution.
The key elements in improving domestic violence prosecution success rates are:
drop' policy
The state, and not the victim takes responsibility for the prosecution. The
prosecutor is instructed not to drop the charge simply
because the victim
requests it. Plea bargaining is discouraged unless it is not likely that the
highest charge will be sustained.
The objective of the policy is to remove any motive of the offender to have the
charge dropped by pressuring or intimidating the
victim. It could be said that
this policy removes 'power' from the victim. The standard response is that it
is not possible to remove
power from someone who does not have it, and the
system can empower the victim by taking responsibility for prosecution.
A no drop policy does not mean that all prosecutions of domestic violence
offences must proceed - the prosecutor must evaluate the
sufficiency of the
evidence in the normal way, but the fact that the victim does not want the
charge to proceed is not determinative
of whether the prosecution will proceed.
prosecution
Where possible, one prosecutor sees the case through from the initial
appearance in court to sentencing. This fosters familiarity
with the case and
more consistency in ensuring the safety of the victim. Depending on the volume
of cases, a specialist prosecutor
might be assigned for prosecutions involving
domestic violence.
tracking domestic violence
Fast tracking reduces the pressure on the victim and also serves to ensure
that, if the offender is convicted, the offender is encouraged
responsibility for the action as soon as possible.
support and safety
The victim is kept advised of the progress of the prosecution, and prosecutors
liaise with other services to ensure that the victim
is supported. Prosecutors
ensure that they have full instructions for bail hearings, sentence and trial.
As far as possible the victim
is not exposed to intimidation by the offender.
the victim to give
The victim should be subpoenaed in all cases where the victim is required to give
evidence so that the victim does not have the
responsibility of deciding whether
A victim support worker should
accompany the victim to court. Separate waiting facilities should be arranged
for the victim to
avoid pre trial contact with the offender or overt or subtle
intimidation by the offender. The name of the victim should not be
made public.
Where necessary, arrangements should be made for the victim's evidence to be taken
by closed circuit television.
The prosecution should seek to adduce battered women's syndrome evidence where
relevant and legally admissible. It is not only relevant
to the defence of a
battered woman charged with murder. It also has potential use to the
prosecution in domestic violence cases mainly
to counter propositions about the
victim's credibility based on myths about how a person would have acted if the
account given was
truthful (for example, to counter myths about why women stay
in violent relationships).
Prosecution
The approach to be taken by prosecutors in domestic violence cases should be clearly
specified in prosecution guidelines - the guidelines
should contain the policy
and the reasons for the policy. An example is the
British Columbia Crown Counsel
Prosecutor training is necessary to assist prosecutors to understand the
dynamics and outcomes of domestic violence and the reasoning
behind revised
prosecution policies.
Where the above arrangements are in place there is less chance that the victim
will be needed to give evidence because there are
likely to be more pleas of
guilty and fewer requests to drop charges. If the offender pleads guilty the
victim will generally not
be needed in court. Where the offender pleads not
guilty there may be cases where the offence can be proved without the victim
evidence. Where possible, and feasible, the prosecution should avoid
calling the victim. In most cases, however, it will be unsafe
not to call the
Specific and detailed policies should be developed to guide prosecutors about
how to proceed if the victim is hostile.
submissions
Prosecutors should aim to present all admissible evidence to the court relevant
to sentencing, including evidence about the impact
of the offence on the
victim. Sentencing submissions should reflect the seriousness of the offence.
Where a perpetrator program is available as a sentencing option, the prosecutor
should seek to ensure that this option is considered
by the court, and that an
order that the offender attend a perpetrator program is made where appropriate.
Participation
in police training
Prosecutors should be involved in police domestic violence training to ensure
that police are aware of the nature of investigation
that is required to
enhance the prospects of successful prosecution. Prosecutor involvement should
also serve to reassure and encourage
police about investigation practices.
Reviewing recent literature on domestic violence, the Research Paper states
that a number of criticisms have been laid at the door
of the courts in
relation to domestic violence cases. Research findings show:
a well documented bias against 'relationship cases' including, blaming
victims for not meeting their partners' needs or for provoking
the violence;
acceptance of the offender's testimony in preference to the victim's; and
identifying with the offender as victimised;
ignorance of the dynamics of domestic violence;
lack of appreciation of the deterrent effect of the criminal justice system;
slow processing of cases;
relatively lenient sentencing of domestic violence offenders, with few
cases resulting in a jail term;
contribution to systemic factors which
produce high victim attrition rates.
and clarity
If it is known that the courts will not trivialise or minimise domestic
violence, the police are likely to be more responsive in
charging and preparing
cases, and prosecutors are likely to feel that additional prosecution effort is
worthwhile. Leadership from
the courts is likely to improve the performance of
all agencies relevant to the criminal justice system and offenders will be held
accountable more routinely.
The way judges and magistrates conceptualise domestic violence affects not only
the prosecution process but also the wider community's
views about the
criminality of domestic violence.
The key elements in improving the actual and perceived response of the courts
to domestic violence are:
in relation to bail.
Specific factors in a best practice response to bail
in domestic
violence cases have been detailed above.
tracking domestic violence
importance of fast tracking in reducing the pressure on the victim,
and encouraging an offender to accept responsibility for the criminal
soon as possible has been discussed above as a key element in improving
prosecution success rates. Fast tracking can only
be achieved where facilitated
by the court.
Support and Safety
As far as possible the victim should not be exposed to intimidation by the
offender. Separate entrances, waiting areas and interview
rooms for the victim
and the offender should be available on court premises. The victim should be
able to give evidence by closed
circuit television.
determination and
Just determination and sentencing is very much dependent upon a current and
thorough knowledge of the dynamics of domestic violence.
Penalties should reflect the seriousness of the offence. The aim must be to
ensure that there is parity between the sentences imposed
for an offence
committed in the context of domestic violence and other similar offences.
The objective of sentencing principles for offences generally is to balance
punishment with rehabilitation. Consistent with these
principles, best practice
domestic violence models emphasise a punitive approach to help deter further
violence together with measures
that provide an opportunity for the offender to
change behaviour through appropriate referral, for example, to perpetrator
programs or counselling.
Perpetrator education programs are available as a rehabilitative measure under
the Duluth and Hamilton models. There is debate about
whether perpetrator
education programs should be part of a best practice model. The debate is
detailed in Chapter 8.
The focus of perpetrator education programs is rehabilitation as opposed to
punishment. Where a perpetrator education program
is available it should not
be imposed as a "soft" sentencing option in substitution for punitive measures.
The order for attendance
should be made in addition to any other penalty.
The judiciary, it is suggested, has an obligation to ensure that their
background knowledge about domestic violence is up to date.
Myths and values
creep into assessments of credibility of witnesses and relevance, which can be
crucial to allocating criminal responsibility.
They can also influence
decisions about what penalty is appropriate.
Language which tends to neutralise, trivialise and gloss over incidents which
may involve serious criminal behaviour, or which is
predicated on the fallacy
of equality of power or on a relationship analysis of domestic violence should
not be used.
Judicial education raises issues about judicial independence. Education is
needed but it must be up to the Judges and Magistrates
themselves to take the
initiative to seek or arrange it.
and feedback
In order to ensure that cases are flowing appropriately through the court,
monitoring systems should be developed. The Duluth model
(referred to in
Chapter 7), for example includes a case and court monitoring role and feedback
is provided as agreed. Such information
is obviously invaluable to quality
assurance and identifying needs for policy or legislative change.
Corrections officers are called upon by the courts to prepare reports including
bail assessment reports, reports that monitor the
progress of a person subject
to supervision, breach reports and significantly, pre-sentence reports. They
are required to assess
the offender in terms of propensity to re-offend,
prospects of rehabilitation and suitability in relation to sentencing options
to make recommendations to the court.
The content of the court reports and recommendation are relied upon by the
courts as an impartial guide in making decisions about
bail and sentencing the
offender. It is therefore crucial that Corrections officers understand the
dynamics and outcomes of domestic
violence. In particular, Corrections officers
should be aware of "lethality" indicators.
Supervision
A function of Corrective Services is supervision of people who have been
charged with, or convicted of, criminal offences.
An offender may be required to accept supervision by Corrective Services as a
condition of bail, or to accept supervision on probation
as a condition of a
recognisance (a good behaviour bond), which may be attached to a suspended
sentence, or as a condition of release
Where Corrective Services is required to supervise a person charged with, or
convicted of, an offence committed in the context of
domestic violence, the
corrections officer should contact the victim at the beginning of the period of
supervision to ensure that
the victim is aware of the conditions of bail or
probation, and to invite the victim to advise if there is any breach of those
conditions.
There should be clear guidelines to assist the corrections officer to determine
when breach proceedings should be initiated. The
policy should be made known to
the victim and to the offender.
ACT law provides the basis for a best practice response to parole review for a
person sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which
has a victim and
therefore an offence committed in the context of domestic violence.
The Parole Act 1976 requires the Parole Board, when considering the making
of a parole order, to "have regard to any concern,
of which it is aware, expressed
by the victim about the need for protection from violence or harassment by the
The Board must take all reasonable steps to inform the victim (or if the victim
is a child, the person who has care and control of
the child), as soon as
practicable of:
the Board's decision concerning the making of the order; and
if the Board decides to make the order
- the date on which the person is to be released on parole.
In addition,
the process of parole review should include contact with the victim to ensure
that there has been no intimidation by
the offender during the period of
imprisonment and to obtain a complete history of the violence.
When the offender is released on parole, appropriate conditions should be
imposed to meet any concerns about the safety of the victim.
The approach to be taken by corrections officers in domestic violence cases
should be clearly specified in policy guidelines.
Corrections officers should receive training in relation to domestic violence.
It is important that at all stages in the criminal
justice process the offender
receives the same message about the criminality of the behaviour. It is
essential that the corrective
services officers do not unwittingly collude with
the offender who may seek to minimise the criminality of the behaviour by
the victim.
Victim support and liaison is a central feature of the revised criminal justice
response to domestic violence. In a best practice
response, support is
available to the victim at all stages of the criminal justice process.
It has been noted previously in this report that the DVCS model of crisis
intervention for victims of domestic violence, in cooperation
with the police,
is considered at an international level to be a best practise model. The ACT
also provides the foundation
for a best practice response to victims of crime
in general and therefore victims of domestic violence offences.
Victims of Crime Act 1994
became law on 15 June 1995. The Act establishes
principles to govern the treatment of victims in the administration of justice.
It requires any person who performs a function in the administration of justice
to have regard to such principles.
persons include the police, prosecutors, lawyers, corrections officers, court
staff, magistrates and judges.
The governing principles include:
a victim should be dealt with at all times in a sympathetic, constructive
and reassuring manner and with due regard to his or her
personal situation,
rights and dignity;
a victim should be informed at reasonable intervals (generally not
exceeding 1 month) of the progress of police investigations;
a victim should be informed of the charges laid against the offender and of
any modification of the charges;
a victim should be informed of any decision concerning the offender to
accept a plea of guilty to a lesser charge or a guilty plea
in return for a
recommendation of leniency in sentencing;
a victim should be informed of any decision not to proceed with a charge
against the offender;
a victim should be informed about the trial process and of the rights and
responsibilities of witnesses;
a victim should be protected from unnecessary contact with the offender and
defence witnesses during the course of the trial;
a victim's residential address should be withheld unless the court directs
a victim should be relieved from appearing at preliminary hearings or
committal proceedings unless the court otherwise directs;
a victim should be given an explanation of the outcome of criminal
proceedings and of any sentence and its implications;
a victim who is known to have expressed
concern about the need for protection from an offender should be informed
offender's impending release from custody.
The Committee notes that the definition of `victim ` in the Act would include
a victim of a domestic violence offence. A `victim'
is defined to include "a person
who suffers harm in the course of, or as a result of, the commission of the offence".
Harm includes physical injury; mental injury or emotional suffering (including
grief); pregnancy; economic loss; and substantial
impairment of rights accorded
The Act creates the office of Victims of Crime Coordinator. The functions of
the Coordinator include:
promoting the governing principles;
ensuring, as far as is practicable, that
victims receive the information and assistance they need in connection with
involvement in the administration of justice;
investigation conduct in the administration
of justice which the Coordinator believes on reasonable grounds involves a
of the governing principles and reporting to the Minister.
5: CRIMINAL JUSTICE RESPONSE IN THE ACT
The research and interviews for the Committee's Research Paper were undertaken
in mid 1992. The release of the Paper in March 1993
provided information and
was released the following
steps have been taken:
the ACT Government provided additional funding for the Legal Aid protection
order/restraining order service at the Magistrates Court;
the AFP is developing an AFP Domestic Violence Plan for the ACT;
the AFP is revising the police Regional Instructions in relation to
domestic violence;
the Magistrates Court has developed a pamphlet for victims of domestic
violence which will include a space on the back where attending
write their contact details;
the Domestic Violence Act 1986 was amended to ensure that the established
protocol whereby the AFP notifies the DVCS immediately of
any call-out to
domestic violence incidents and the name and address of the caller did not
contravene the
Crimes Act 1900
was amended to extend the scope of police power to
seize weapons in order to give victims and police more effective protection;
Bail Act 1992
was amended to address concerns about the need for
protection of victims of crime;
Crimes Act 1900
was amended to provide for Victim Impact Statements;
the Parole Act 1976 was amended to address concerns about the need for
protection of a victim of crime when an offender is released
Victims of Crime Act 1994
became law on 15 June 1995, establishing
principles which govern the treatment of victims.
Research Paper
The Research Paper reports that police who responded to the survey indicated
domestic violence is potentially life threatening for the victim (88%
"domestics" are a dangerous type of police work (93% agreed);
alleged offenders often become aggressive towards police (93% agreed); and
police never know when they might get hurt
(98% agreed).
The Research Paper found that there were 347 police domestic disturbance call-outs
during the March-May 1991 survey period.
Eighty-eight per cent of call-outs resulted in
no further action. Six per cent of call-outs resulted in charges being laid.
Out of the 347 domestic disturbance call-outs, 21 charges were laid.
Of the 21charges laid, information was available
on 19. Of the 19, 9 were dismissed or no evidence was offered by the prosecution,
1 resulted in a warrant of apprehension for arrest of the offender who failed
to appear at court and 9 resulted in a conviction.
For most of the respondents to the police survey, only a few or none of their
domestic calls had resulted in arrest, summons,
VATAC, or police application
for a domestic violence protection order. Advising the victim to apply for a
domestic violence
protection order was clearly the most common practice.
Consistent with the police survey, the Research Paper found that in the March-May
1991 survey period police charged in only 8%
of domestic violence call outs
involving an assault, however charges were laid in 19% of cases involving breach
of domestic
violence protection orders.
Further, the Research Paper found that 90% of charges, (22 out of 24), for
breach of a domestic violence protection order, applied
for in the March to
May 1991 survey period proceeded by arrest rather than summons.
Fifty-two per-cent of police in the sample believed that police could best
that police could be
of the best help by arresting the offender.
The researchers commented:
"The officers' priorities for skills and attributes that police
need to manage domestics in an effective manner substantiates both
saw their role as principally conciliators and domestic violence calls as potentially
very dangerous."
Police were critical of the courts and felt that the court gave bail too easily;
that penalties were too lenient; that the approach
to domestic violence cases
was inconsistent; and that overall the courts did not give adequate support to
police in domestic violence
Forty-five of the police thought that overall, domestic violence offenders
were dealt with less harshly than other types of violent
assault offenders.
As the Committee has researched this reference it has become apparent that a
factor which appears to be relevant to whether police
take action to bring a
domestic violence matter within the criminal justice system is '
' , that is, the police do not take a step because they anticipate
the position the prosecution or the courts might take . Double
guessing may
also be a factor relevant to whether the DPP and, perhaps, corrective services
take certain steps within the criminal
justice system.
There is no real way of telling, from the information in the Research Paper,
whether police response was appropriate to the cases
in question. The research
did not include an analysis of police records to determine the appropriateness
of police action. Although
the researchers compared the rate of police response
in domestic disturbances with the rate of police response to all other offence
First, the comparison did not relate like to like, that is, domestic
violence with other types of violence against the person and
consequently it
was of little value.
Secondly, even if a relatively "good" rate of police response
in domestic violence cases is established, in absolute terms this still
constitute a desirable solution. There was much anecdotal evidence, supported
by comments received during interviews for
the Research Paper, that police
continue to avoid arrest in cases where there is sufficient evidence to
The Committee notes that the charge rate of 89.3% in London
Ontario, in 1990, discussed above, is in stark contrast with the findings
the Research Paper of 6% in the ACT.
and instructions
Police powers are conferred by law and obviously police are constrained to act
within their powers. In many instances, police have
to interpret the law and
evaluate factors against statutory criteria. For example, in relation to the
power of arrest and the power
to grant bail there are statutory criteria which
must be applied.
Experience, training, and maturity can influence the
evaluation of factors and consequently the application of statutory criteria.
Values and beliefs may also come into play as well as feelings of sympathy or
hostility to the offender and the victim.
While police discretion is important it should also be acknowledged that police
are fallible. Sometimes myths and practices creep
in, as they do in the law,
and sometimes these myths and practices have to be corrected. In a policing
context the options may include
revision of legislation, revision of police
Regional Instructions or the equivalent, training, supervision and monitoring.
and extent of the correction that is required are factors which will
determine the appropriate methods.
In addition to police powers conferred by legislation, police are also guided
by police Regional Instructions or the equivalent issued
by the Commissioner of
There is one ACT AFP Regional Instruction which specifically deals with Domestic
Violence (17/91). It deals with information to
be obtained before police attend
at a 'domestic dispute'; the need for officers to be concerned for their personal
the scene; the protocol in relation to police and the DVCS; the fact
that interim protection orders can be issued under the Domestic
Violence Act;
and information about how domestic violence protection orders are served.
The Instruction contains the caution that "...police must be conscious that
an assault committed in the home environment is
no less serious that an assault
committed elsewhere", however, it does not contain instructions about what this
means in practice
in relation to police response.
The Committee is aware of a move away from providing written guidance to
police. The Committee considers that police Regional Instructions
equivalent are necessary for an effective police response to domestic violence.
Recommendation 15:
That the police continue to have police Regional Instructions (or the
equivalent) in relation domestic violence matters.
calls for help
The Research Paper did not examine the adequacy of police handling of calls for
assistance in domestic violence cases.
The Research Paper reported that police call-outs covered about three quarters
of all incidents which came to police attention.
However, there was no analysis
of the way in which it was decided when a police patrol vehicle should or should
not be dispatched.
When calls from the public are received details are taken by the Communications
Branch operator. The operator takes relevant information
including name, address,
phone number, location of the incident, persons involved, whether the incident
might involve violence,
whether weapons are involved, whether persons are injured,
and if the offender has left the scene, vehicle registration particulars.
information is summarised by the operator to the radio dispatcher. The radio
dispatcher notifies the DVCS of the incident
and conducts a weapons check and
a prior attendance check on the address. A check for a domestic violence protection
is done if there is reason to think that there may be a protection order.
The radio dispatcher passes on this information to the
patrol. Police patrol
vehicles do not have an on board data facility and consequently attending police
cannot be provided with
a copy of the order. Details of the protection order
are provided to attending police by radio if requested.
Given the crucial nature of the call screening process, in terms of the
sufficiency of the detail obtained and what is finally passed
to the attending
police officers, the Committee believes that the call handling process should
be reviewed by the Police Domestic
Violence Unit recommended below. The review
should establish whether there are particular training issues which need to be
In addition, the Committee believes that the police Regional Instructions or
the equivalent should be revised to confirm details
of current police practice
and incorporate aspects of the best practice response outlined earlier in this
Recommendation 16:
That the Police Domestic Violence Unit recommended below review the handling
and dispatch of calls for assistance in domestic violence
cases and, as part of
the review, establish whether there are particular training needs.
Recommendation 17:
That the police Regional Instructions (or equivalent) be revised to confirm
details of current police practice and incorporate aspects
of the best practice
response outlined earlier in this report.
The police Regional Instructions or the equivalent provide little guidance to
police about how they should conduct themselves at
the scene. The Committee
considers that relevant points for a best practice response are:
the appropriate demeanour of police and particularly how they relate to the
parties. If a law enforcement approach is appropriate,
the importance of the
police adhering to that approach. Conduct such as joking with the alleged
offender, befriending the alleged
offender or encouraging the victim to make
light of the incident are entirely inappropriate;
the importance of interviewing the parties separately and ensuring that the
alleged offender does not have an opportunity to harass
or intimidate the
victim; and
ensuring that no suggestion is made that the victim is responsible for, or
has a choice, in relation to the action which police may
Recommendation 18:
That the police Regional Instructions (or equivalent) to provide guidance to
police about how they should conduct themselves at the
balanced police teams
Almost two-thirds of the police surveyed for the Research Paper believed that
the best gender combination of police officers to
attend at the scene would be
a male and a female. This was statistically significant by gender with far more
females than males
agreeing with the combination.
The Research Paper, however found that attitudes of respondents to the police
survey differed significantly by gender in relation
to their reactions while
attending incidents of domestic violence. One-quarter of female police officers
often felt anger towards
offenders as opposed to only 6% of the males and female
police officers more often felt angry towards victims than male police.
police officers were more apt to feel helpless to really do anything constructive.
The Research Paper noted that this gender differentiation was substantiated
by the view of some DVCS workers who had also noted
a less supportive stance
held by some female police officers toward victims.
The researchers commented that support for the male/female combination of
police officers was perhaps a reflection of the skills
involved as identified
by the respondents to the police survey.
As noted above, the researchers concluded from the police survey that police
saw their role as principally conciliators. This,
of course, is not consistent
with a law enforcement approach and points to the need for further education
and training.
There is no empirical evidence to support the benefit of male/female police
The Committee notes that a policy of male/female police teams would also
involve logistical difficulties. At the time of the police
survey there was a
gender ratio of less than 4:1 in the ACT Patrol Branches, and females were
generally younger.
The Committee does not support the adoption of a policy of male/female police
teams at this stage.
Paragraph 8 (b) of the police Regional Instruction on Domestic Violence
provides that:
"Police Operations will contact the DVCS ...and advise crisis
workers of all calls to domestic violence incidents"
follows a detailed protocol to mark the roles of police and the DVCS workers at
the scene. There is no doubt that these arrangements
are part of a best
practice response. The fundamental issue is whether the instructions and
protocol are adhered to and whether the
arrangement is working.
The Committee's Research Report found that the relationship between police
and the DVCS was very strained- "if police had little
positive to say about
the DVCS, the feeling was certainly mutual."
The DVCS's concerns focused on the actions and performance of the police at
the scene, in particular their reluctance to arrest
or charge in domestic violence
matters; lack of understanding of the role of the DVCS; and discourtesy to crisis
Police concerns focused on the
lack of understanding by DVCS about the role of the police, evidentiary matters
and whether
arrest was warranted and/or charges sustainable; that no assistance
is provided to the offender; that the service/workers are
one sided, anti-male,
anti-reconciliation and biased; and discourtesy by crisis workers to police
at the scene.
As noted above, since the release of the Research Paper in March 1993, the AFP
believes that tensions between the DVCS and police
officers attending the scene
have eased.
To the extent that the problem is continuing, it is likely to result from lack
of clarity or agreement about:
the causes and dynamics of domestic violence;
the extent of police powers;
appropriate police practice;
the theory behind victim support; and
the need for services for alleged offenders.
Commenting on in-depth interviews with police undertaken for the Research Report,
the researchers noted a general lack of knowledge
of police about the legislation
and their role in domestic violence incidents.
police expressed concern that police needed more training in the application of
the legislation so that they can be more
confident about their intervention.
In later recommendations the Committee suggests that police domestic violence
training needs to be upgraded and offered more frequently.
The Research Paper also states: "It was so apparent that communication needs
to be improved between agencies that the researchers
wish to emphasise that
this was possibly the largest, all-pervading problem that was identified during
the research process."
It goes on to state that the "educational" problem appears
to be how to break down the barriers that exist.
The researchers recommended that mandatory in-service training should be imposed
on operational police officers, court personnel
and DVCS workers. It was recommended
that an attempt should be made to 'dispel myths' about domestic violence and
participant organisations in a workshop-type format, using neutral
instructors (that is, not from the three agencies or services).
The Committee supports the principle of mutual training but does not believe
that it is likely to be useful until police have clear
guidance about their
role from revised police Regional Instructions or the equivalent and the
various amendments to legislation referred
The Committee believes that an important first step is for the police and the
DVCS to be aware of the extent of police powers and
how it is expected the
powers should be exercised. To that end, the DVCS and the courts should have
access to revised police Regional
Instructions.
While the police and the DVCS may and appear to be working on a different
analysis of domestic violence it is likely that some tension
will continue. The
DVCS has a victim/safety and offender accountability focus which is extremely
important in encouraging a sound
analysis of domestic violence and better
responses. Accordingly, joint training would be desirable in terms of
influencing an appropriate
focus in police response.
The Committee thinks that
joint training is not a helpful
position and it would be far preferable that the need for joint training was
articulated and requested
by the relevant stakeholders. The Committee, however,
strongly endorses and supports joint training between the police and the
Recommendation 19:
The Committee strongly endorses and encourages joint training between the
police and the DVCS.
Investigation
The police Regional Instructions or the equivalent give no specific guidance in
relation to how police should go about investigating
domestic violence cases.
The preliminaries are dealt with in 'At the Scene' above. The key points are:
the investigation must be thorough and to the extent that it is possible,
the aim should be to obtain sufficient evidence to be able
to prove the case
without the cooperation of the victim;
the investigation should include taking statements from all relevant
witnesses; noting observations of the premises, for example,
broken furniture;
noting any physical injuries sustained by the victim; taking photographs of the
scene and of the victims injuries;
collecting physical evidence such as torn or
bloodied clothing; and arranging a medical examination for the victim where
appropriate.
Recommendation 20:
That the police Regional Instructions (or equivalent) be revised to give
clear directions to police about how they should handle domestic
investigations and include the matters referred to above.
Charging is the formal method of commencing criminal proceedings. It does not
necessarily mean that an arrest has taken place. However,
a charge can be laid
as a result of an arrest.
As pointed out above the Research Paper did not undertake a study of the
adequacy of police action in response to domestic violence
call-outs. However,
many of the public submissions to the Committee criticised police for failing
to charge in domestic violence
cases when, it was suggested, police did have
reasonable grounds to believe that a criminal offence had occurred.
Additionally, comparison
with the Canadian figures tends to confirm that there
is a significant problem.
When police have reasonable grounds to believe that a criminal offence has
occurred in the context of domestic violence a charge
should be laid. Referring
the victim to a service to obtain a domestic violence protection order is not a
substitute for charging.
The revised police Regional Instructions or the
equivalent should specifically state that this practice is unsatisfactory and,
Committee would suggest, unprofessional.
The decision about whether police should charge should be made by the police
and not by the victim. The victim and offender should
be specifically told that
the police will decide whether to charge. If police do charge, police should
advise the offender that the
prosecution applies a no drop policy (referred to
below) if that is the case. This will impress upon the offender that there is
point in trying to intimidate or convince the victim to 'drop the charges'
because the victim does not have the power to do so.
Charges should be laid for each criminal act and for the appropriate criminal
offence which carries the highest penalty together
with back-up charges. In
addition to the substantive offence, where police have reasonable grounds to
believe that a protection order
has been breached a separate charge should be
laid for that offence.
Recommendation 21:
That the police Regional Instructions (or equivalent) direct police
to charge where police have reasonable grounds to believe that
offence has occurred in the context of domestic violence.
Recommendation 22:
That the police Regional Instructions (or equivalent) detail charging
policy incorporating the matters referred to above.
Recommendation 23:
That the police Regional Instructions (or equivalent) specifically
state that the practice of referring the victim to a service to
domestic violence protection order or a restraining order as a substitute for
charging is unsatisfactory and unprofessional.
Legislation
ACT law provides that the police can arrest a person without warrant, only
the criteria in section 349W of the
are satisfied.
If the case does not meet the criteria the police may proceed by way of
summons. Where a summons is available police
may use VATAC (a voluntary
agreement to attend court).
Section 349W(1) provides that a police officer may arrest a person, without
warrant, for an offence if the police officer believes
on reasonable grounds
that the person has committed or is committing the offence and:
"(b) proceedings by way of summons against the person would not
achieve one or more of the following purposes:
ensuring the appearance of the person before a court in respect of the
preventing repetition or continuation of the offence or the commission of
another offence;
preventing the concealment, loss or destruction of evidence relating to the
preventing harassment of, or interference with, a person who may be required
to give evidence in proceedings in respect of the offence;
preventing the fabrication of evidence in respect of the offence;
preserving the safety or welfare of the person."
On the face
of the section the power to arrest seems sufficient where police believe on
reasonable grounds that a criminal offence
has been committed in the context of
domestic violence. However, the Committee notes that arrest, and specifically
the under utilisation
by the police of the power of arrest in appropriate cases
has perhaps been the topic of most discussion during the course of this
Reference, as detailed below.
First, the community is calling for more action and one of the strong themes in
the public submissions to the Committee and in the
Research Paper is that
police are not arresting and charging when they should be.
Secondly, community concerns focus on the safety of the victim, the application
of the criminal law and the likely deterrent effect
Thirdly, most police do not agree that there is a problem of failing to arrest
in appropriate cases but to the extent that they do,
the police say that they
are constrained by law.
Police have submitted to the Committee
the seriousness of the alleged offence is not covered by the
existing section 349W(1)(b).
there are domestic violence cases, including serious cases, where police
can charge but they believe that they cannot arrest because
they have no
evidence on which to satisfy any of the grounds listed in section 349W(1)(b).
The Committee finds this hard to accept.
section 349W(1)(b)(vi) refers to the 'safety or welfare of the person'
(meaning the offender) and that the safety of the victim or
of a third person,
such as children, is not covered. The Committee considers that normally,
concerns about the safety (but not necessarily
'the welfare') of the victim and
of third parties would fall into section 349W(1)(b)(ii) and, in relation to the
victim in particular,
also section 349W(1)(b) (iv).
Each of these issues
however, point to an uncertainty which may well be contributing to under
utilisation of arrest powers in domestic
violence cases.
Fourthly, police have concerns about wrongful arrest. The Research Paper reports
that a fairly high proportion of the respondents
to the police survey, 42% agreed
that it is often not clear when police should or should not arrest.
Concerns about wrongful arrest arise from the wording of section 349W(1)(b) in
that it specifies that a police officer may only arrest
without warrant if the
police officer believes on reasonable grounds that the person has committed or
is committing an offence AND
proceeding by summons would not be effective.
Police must consider whether proceeding by summons would not achieve one or
the purposes that are set out in section 349W(1)(b).
Fifthly, as noted earlier in this report, mandatory arrest was called for in
some of the submissions and strongly opposed in others.
The submissions
universally interpreted `mandatory arrest`as `automatic arrest'. Those who
favoured it generally did so because they
saw it as the only way police
response could be ensured. However, the Committee does not favour 'automatic
arrest' for the following
it would apply to serious as well as minor matters and in relation to more
minor matters the application of such a policy would, in
many cases, be quite
unfair and possibly inflammatory.
there is not strong community support for such a policy at this stage
in any event, such a policy should be an absolute last resort and one to be
considered only after a more structured police discretion
approach had proved
unsatisfactory.
The Committee believes that any change to the law in
relation to police powers of arrest must be fair, simple, focused and effective.
in relation to Arrest
There are several possible courses:
1: Police Regional Instructions, police training and
monitoring.
Police Regional Instructions or the equivalent do not currently deal with the
arrest/summons criteria in the context of a domestic
violence offence. One
initiative could be to ensure that police Regional Instructions or the
equivalent are prepared to guide police
to consideration of arrest criteria in domestic violence cases. This would need
to be supplemented
by police training and a monitoring arrangement.
Consequently, this option would be resource intensive and long term.
2: In addition to option 1, amend section 349W (1) to address points raised by
the police about the safety of the victim and
of third persons in the context
of domestic violence.
The purpose of this would be to make the section clearer for police. The
amendment to section 349W(1)(b)(vi), in italics, would be:
"preserving the safety or welfare of the person,
safety or welfare of a person who has been or who is in a prescribed
relationship with the person"
The words 'prescribed relationship'
would mean the list of persons against whom a "domestic violence offence" may
be committed as
defined in the Domestic Violence Act, that is, a current or
former spouse, child of the person or of a spouse of the person, a relative
a household member.
This amendment would be mainly cosmetic. As noted above, the Committee
considers that as the legislation currently stands, concerns
of the victim and of third parties should normally be taken into account under
section 349W(1)(ii) - preventing
a repetition or continuation of the offence or
the commission of another offence; or 349W(1)(iv) preventing harassment of, or
interference
with, a person who may be required to give evidence in the
proceedings in respect of the offence.
Nevertheless, it is a slight advance on the present section. The specific
reference to persons in a 'prescribed relationship' as
defined in the Domestic
Violence Act would provide some focus on concerns for the safety of the victim
and third parties in domestic
violence matters. It would broaden concerns about
'safety' to 'safety and welfare'.
It is difficult to determine whether the amendment would be likely to have a
significant effect in practice. As a stand alone option,
disadvantages already noted in relation to the first option.
3: Clarify power to arrest in domestic violence
This would involve amending section 349W by adding a further provision which
would read:
"Where a police officer believes on reasonable grounds that a
person has committed or is committing an offence, the commission of
domestic violence offence, in addition to the powers contained in subsection 1,
a police officer may, without warrant,
arrest the person."
definition of "domestic violence offence" for the purpose of the proposed
amendment to the
Crimes Act 1900
is discussed in detail later in this report,
and would include the offence of breach of a protection order.
The advantages of this amendment are:
it clarifies police powers of arrest to make it clear that the only
consideration for police when arresting without a warrant will
be a police
officer's belief on reasonable grounds that a person has committed or is
committing a domestic violence offence;
it overcomes any possible problems of police being unsure whether they have
power to arrest on the basis of seriousness or potential
threat to the victim
or third persons;
police will no longer have the concern of wrongful arrest;
it is clear and as such, will be easy to address in police Regional
Instructions or the equivalent and training and easy to apply
in practice; and
it is likely to have more immediate effect than the previous options.
The Committee believes that the third option is the most appropriate
approach for the reasons set out above.
Recommendation 24:
That s.349W of the
Crimes Act 1900
be amended by inserting a provision to
the following effect:
"Where a police officer believes on reasonable grounds that a person has
committed or is committing an offence, the commission of
which is a domestic
violence offence in addition to the powers contained in
subsection 1
officer may, without warrant, arrest the person."
Regional Instructions in relation to arrest in domestic violence
Ensuring that the power of arrest is adequate is the first step. However, the
fact that police have the power does not necessarily
mean that police will use
Police Regional Instructions or the equivalent should provide guidance to
police about the exercise of the power of arrest. It is
suggested that the
revised police Regional Instruction begin with a preamble which notes that in
the ACT the
criminality
of behaviour which breaches the criminal law in
the context of domestic violence is recognised and that a pro active approach
to be taken to ensure the safety of the victim.
The preamble should note that police have been provided with a broad power of
arrest in order to ensure the safety of the victim.
The reason police have been
given such a broad power is that the nature and context of the violence are
such that the victim is likely
to be particularly vulnerable.
The preamble should also note that it may be difficult to gauge whether the
victim, or others, will be safe if the alleged offender
remains at large. The
police should normally err on the side of caution and arrest the alleged
The police Regional Instruction in relation to arrest should also refer to
the exception report arrangement referred to below.
Recommendation 25:
That police Regional Instructions (or equivalent) provide guidance to police
violence cases.
Recommendation 26:
That the police Regional Instructions (or equivalent) begin with a Preamble
explaining the reasons for the broad arrest power and
noting the focus in the
ACT on the criminality of the behaviour and the victim/safety concerns which
are the basis for the arrest
Recommendation 27:
That the police Regional Instructions (or equivalent) indicate that it is
generally expected that police arrest where a charge is
to be laid for a
domestic violence offence or for breach of a protection order.
Recommendation 28:
That the police Regional Instructions (or equivalent) refer to the clearance
and exception reporting arrangements dealt with at recommendation
Legislation
The fact that the offender is innocent until proven guilty is a fundamental
principle. The questions relevant to bail however, are
not about the offender
person's guilt or innocence, although the strength of the case against the
offender may be a relevant consideration.
The questions relevant to bail, as
set out in the
Bail Act 1992
, are about reliability in attending court, the
interests of the offender, and the safety of members of the community. In the
of domestic violence, the safety of the victim is of particular concern.
the question of whether or not to grant bail is decided
firstly, by the police (an "authorised officer "
meaning a police officer
authorised by the Commissioner of Police)
and secondly, by the courts.
specifies criteria which apply to bail. For minor offences (that
is, all offences punishable by a maximum of not more than 6 months
imprisonment)
there is a presumption in favour of bail without any condition.
However, this provision does not apply to an
alleged breach of a domestic violence protection order or of a restraining order
made under the Magistrates Court Act.
For offences other than minor offences there is a presumption in favour of
bail unless police or the court are satisfied that
bail should be refused having
regard to the list of considerations specified in the
provides an exception where the police may not grant bail - cases
where "the offence with which the accused person has been charged
is a domestic
violence offence of murder or attempted murder." The
maintains the
presumption in favour of bail for those offences where the question of bail
is considered by the court.
Most criminal offences committed in the context of domestic violence carry
maximum penalties of more than 6 months, and therefore
there is a presumption
in favour of bail.
The matters which the police and the court must consider when deciding the
question of bail can be summarised as:
the probability of the person appearing in court "...having regard only to
the background and community ties of the person and his or
her criminal record; and
(ii)the circumstances in which the offence is alleged to have been
committed, the nature and seriousness of the alleged offence, the
strength of
the evidence against the person and any other information relevant to the
likelihood of the person absconding;
the interests of the person charged "...having regard only
how long the person may be in custody if bail is
the need for the person to be free to prepare his or her case; and
the need of the person for physical protection;
the protection of the community "...having regard only
the likelihood of the person interfering with evidence, intimidating
witnesses or otherwise obstructing the course of justice whether
in relation
to himself or herself or any other person;
the likelihood of the person
committing an offence while released on bail; and
the likelihood of the
person harassing a victim or other persons while released on bail."
In addition, where the police or the court is aware that a victim has expressed
concern about the need for protection from violence
or harassment by the offender,
that concern must be considered in the context of "the protection of the community."
Where the court is considering the question of bail, the prosecutor is required
to "inform the court of any concern of which he
or she is aware expressed by the
victim about the need for protection from violence or harassment by the offender".
court is required to "receive any submission in respect of that concern".
Where the police or the court is satisfied that it is not appropriate to grant
bail without imposing a condition, the relevant
officer must consider the conditions
which may be imposed and the extent to which imposing one or more of the conditions
address the matters relevant to bail.
Where the person is charged with 'a domestic violence offence' (meaning: an
offence which is a domestic violence offence within
the meaning of the Domestic
Violence Act
or an offence of breach of
a protection order made under that Act)
conditions may be applied which parallel many
of orders which can be made as protection orders under the Domestic Violence
Where bail is refused by police the offender must "be brought before a court
as soon as practicable after he or she has been taken
into custody and, in any
case, within 48 hours after having been taken into custody."
The Research Paper reports that the highest frequency of domestic disturbances
is between 8pm and midnight.
Where police
bail is refused the offender is taken before the court the following morning,
except when charged on a Saturday
where the offender is taken before the court
on the Monday morning. Many services do not operate on the weekends and victims
of domestic violence are unable to obtain protection orders until Monday (other
than at the duty court on Saturday mornings).
When the police make the decision either to grant or refuse bail to an offender
charged with a domestic violence offence, the
police must take all reasonable
steps as soon as practicable to notify the victim or, if the victim is a child,
who has the care and control of the child of the decision, and if
bail is granted, of any condition of bail.
There is no specific provision in the
requiring such notification
where the court makes a decision either to grant or refuse bail to an offender
charged with a domestic
violence offence. However, there is a an equivalent
provision requiring such notification to victims generally by the police and
the court, where the police or the court "is aware that a victim has expressed
concern about the need for protection from violence
or harassment by the accused".
The rationale for the notification requirement is primarily concern for the
safety of the victim.
The reasons for a decision of a police officer, magistrate, or judge, to grant
bail or to not grant bail, or, where bail is granted,
to impose a condition
on bail must be recorded.
The police Regional Instructions or the equivalent do not deal with bail.
Police refer to the Act itself.
The primary concern raised in submissions to the Committee about the operation
of the present police bail processes relates to the
adequacy of the process in
terms of ensuring the safety of the victim. A secondary but significant issue
raised in the submissions
and generally was the perceived need to detain the
offender for a `cooling off period'. Both of these concerns recognise that the
period during which police are called upon to make a decision about whether or
not to grant bail corresponds to a period when the
risk to the victim is
In addition, the importance of fairness to the offender and civil liberties was
raised in a number of submissions.
The Committee notes that the following may be reasons for particular caution in
relation to police bail in domestic violence cases:
the difficulty is assessing whether the person charged poses a further risk
to the victim particularly given the attitudes and beliefs
of the person which
may have given rise to the alleged offence;
the likely vulnerability of the victim and the need to protect the victim
from harassment or intimidation by the offender; and
the possibility that the police themselves may be sympathetic, in part, to
the offender as a result of hearing the offender's side
of the story and
consequently, perhaps, more inclined to grant bail.
the police refuse bail the question of bail is then considered by the court,
and police decisions about bail may be reviewed
by the court. This is because
it is accepted that the court is in a better position than police to make
decisions about bail. The
court is able to make a more objective decision based
upon evidence given on oath, and untainted by personal contact with witnesses,
including the offender. The victim can be called to give evidence about fear of
the offender. The court has access to any record
of prior convictions of the
offender which may not be available at the time the police must make a decision
police, the court can order a drug, alcohol or
psychiatric assessment of the offender, if it appears necessary or desirable,
making a decision about bail.
On the other hand, the Committee has some concern that if police power to grant
bail for domestic violence offences was removed,
this may affect their initial
decision whether or not to arrest an offender.
in relation to police
There are several possible courses:
1: Procedural improvements.
This option would involve enhancing police Regional Instructions or the equivalent
to alert police to the special issues which may
be relevant in considering bail
where the offender is charged with a domestic violence offence, and in particular
the difficulties
in assessing whether the person charged poses a further risk
to the victim. This might, for example include, listing 'lethality
indicators.'
57 Additionally, a domestic violence bail checklist could be developed which alerts
police to possible issues, as has been done
in New South Wales. These steps would
need to be accompanied by training and monitoring.
The Committee does not favour this option. It relies heavily on effective
training and monitoring. Consequently, it would be resource
intensive and slow
to implement. It would take some time to determine whether and to what extent
procedural improvements and training
were sufficient to bring about a
significant change in practise in relation to bail. In the meantime, police
would still be required
to make the difficult assessment of whether an offender
is likely to be a risk to the victim's safety. The Committee is of the view
that this option does not satisfactorily deal with the risk posed to the
victim's safety.
2: Remove presumption in favour of police bail in domestic violence
This would mean that the onus would be on the offender to satisfy police that
bail should be granted.
There are advantages to this option. It recognises the special risks involved
in domestic violence cases. It would serve to raise
police awareness of
government and community concern about the special risks and need for caution
in domestic violence cases. It
would allow bail to be granted in cases that are
deemed by police to be appropriate.
It is difficult to gauge the likely success of such a measure. It would be
expected that bail would be granted somewhat less frequently
than is currently
the case. However, this option by itself does not squarely address the core
problem of the difficulty a police
officer may have in making an accurate
assessment about the potential risk posed to a victim. It does not provide any
guidance about
the reasons for particular caution and the special issues that
may be relevant in considering bail in relation to a domestic violence
The Committee is of the view that this option alone would not be sufficient to
ensure the safety of most victims.
This option would need to be accompanied by enhancement of police Regional
Instructions or the equivalent to guide police in exercising
the power to grant
bail, as well as training and monitoring. Again, this approach has the
disadvantage of being resource intensive
in its training and monitoring
requirements with no guarantee of effectiveness, particularly in the short term.
3: Remove presumption in favour of police bail and require the police to only
grant bail where satisfied that there is no risk
of danger to the
As noted above, the primary concern in relation to bail is victim safety and
the period during which police are called on to make
a decision about bail
corresponds with a period where the risk to the victim is high.
By way of an extension to option 2, this option would mean that police would
only be able to grant bail where the police officer
is satisfied that there
is no risk of any danger to the victim or any other person during the period
of bail. The police officer
would need to be satisfied on the balance of probabilities,
the standard referred to in the
Two precautionary measures could be included in this option in the event that
bail was granted:
First, a requirement that the police officer state in writing
the factors leading to his or her decision that there is no danger to
Secondly, a requirement that the offender be bailed to appear before the
court within 48 hours. This would mean that an early review
of the police
officer's decision by the court would be available. At that time the victim
would have the opportunity of indicating
any opposition to the continuation of
The difficulty of a police officer making an accurate assessment of
the potential risk to the victim would still exist. However, in
addition to the
advantages noted above under option 2, this option would ensure that police
were focussed on the safety of the victim
as the primary concern in making a
decision about bail. The Committee envisages that the victim safety focus of
this option would
mean that bail would only be granted with extreme caution and
only in those cases where detention was not justified to ensure the
the victim.
To be comprehensive, this option would need to be supplemented by enhanced
police Regional Instructions, training and monitoring.
4: Remove police power to grant bail.
could be amended to add a `domestic violence offence' to the list
of cases where police may not grant bail.
The arguments against this option are:
undue interference with the civil liberties of the offender;
the offender does not pose a threat to the victim in every case and
consequently, it would be unfair to apply a blanket provision;
such a measure is draconian and might inflame the offender;
arrest an offender who they may otherwise arrest;
to be taken before a Magistrate for a bail application.
The arguments
in favour of this option are:
it recognises the safety issues and gives
a strong message to the community that domestic violence is taken seriously;
civil liberties (offender's rights)/victim safety tensions are generally so
complex that they should be dealt with by a Magistrate;
the rationale that bail reduces the risk of aggravating the offender
amounts to appeasement of and collusion with the offender, and
the possibility
of bail being granted in the very case where bail it should not be granted -
the message such reasoning gives to
the offender and the victim is highly
undesirable.
it recognises the difficulty police may have in predicting which offender
poses a threat to the safety of the victim;
it recognises that requiring police to make a decision about bail where a
person has been charged with a domestic violence offence
places an onerous
responsibility on them;
it provides a cooling off period - of
measures suggested as effective in dealing with domestic violence offenders,
the highest
proportion of respondents to the police survey identified 'keeping
(the offender) in the lock up overnight" as 'usually effective;
detention in custody, especially where this occurs overnight, coincides
with the period when victim services are closed;
it ensures that victims have time to make arrangements for their safety;
there would not be significant resource implications in relation to police
training or monitoring;
in the long term there may be significant savings through a reduction in
repeat police attendances;
detention in custody provides an opportunity for the offender to be
provided with information about available services.
5: Remove police power to grant bail for serious offences or in specified
situations.
This option would mean that the police would be unable to grant bail for a
`serious' domestic violence offence, as called for in
a number of submissions,
or in specified situations, for example:
where a person is charged with a `serious' domestic violence offence;
where the offence is a breach of a protection order;
where a person charged with a domestic violence offence has breached bail
conditions;
where a person charged with a domestic violence offence has a previous
conviction for a domestic violence offence; or
where a person charged with a domestic violence offence has previous
convictions for crimes of violence.
The Committee discussed this option at
length and concluded that there were two significant disadvantages, as follows:
First, there is great difficulty in defining which domestic violence
offences are `serious' as opposed to those that are not. A test
of seriousness
by applying an arbitrary cut off in terms of the maximum penalty that may be
imposed for a domestic violence offence
would exclude the offence of breach of
a protection order, as it carries the lowest maximum penalty of all domestic
violence offences
- 6 months imprisonment and a $1000 fine. That offence was
considered to be serious in the submissions to the Committee and throughout
Research Paper and cited in a number of submissions as an offence for which the
police should not be able to grant bail;
Secondly, the difficulties in attempting to define and prescribe a list of
circumstances where police should not have the power to
grant bail are such
that it would be dangerous to produce an exhaustive list.
The Committee considers the safety of victims of domestic violence and others
to be of utmost importance. It recognises the difficulties
in assessing factors
relevant to the safety of victims and consequently, predicting which offenders
are a threat to the safety of
victims. It recognises the vulnerability of the
victims and the importance of ensuring that a clear and firm message is
to the community that domestic violence offences are treated
The Committee very seriously considered recommending that police bail not be
available to an offender charged with a domestic violence
offence. Ultimately,
however the Committee has decided that police should retain a discretion to
grant bail in the strictest of circumstances
in accordance with Option 3, that
is, only where satisfied that there is no risk of danger to the victim or any
other person during
the period of bail.
The Committee believes that in allowing some discretion to remain with the
police, bail can be granted in those cases where it would
be unjust not to do
The Committee concluded that the most effective recommendations are as
Recommendation 29:
That police retain a discretion to grant bail to a person charged with a
domestic violence offence, in the strictest of circumstances,
and only where
the authorised officer is satisfied on the balance of probabilities that there
is no danger to the victim or any other
person during the period of bail.
Recommendation 30:
That if bail is granted the authorised officer is to state in writing the
factors leading to his/her decision that there is no danger
Recommendation 31:
That if police allow bail where a person has been charged with a domestic
violence offence the person must be required to appear before
a court within 48
Assuming that the charge rate rises from that reported in the Research
Paper (6% during the March- May 1991 survey period) there will
be workload
implications for the police, the prosecution and the courts. The Committee
thinks it likely that the charge and arrest
rate will rise and consequently
that there are likely to be resource implications. However, given the level of
community concern,
these resource implications are the unavoidable by product
of an appropriate response.
Preventative
Preventative detention can have two meanings:
detaining a person without charge; or
detaining a person who has been arrested and charged for a certain period
when bail cannot be granted.
As noted earlier in this report, there were
strong views for and against preventative detention in the submissions received
Committee however, many submissions did not differentiate between
detention without charge or detention following charge.
The Committee has dealt above with detention following arrest and charge in
the context of bail, and has recommended that where
a person has been charged
with a domestic violence offence police should retain a discretion to grant
bail in strict circumstances.
This means that generally, the offender will be
detained only until it is practicable for the offender to be taken before the
court and in any event not more than 48 hours. If the offender then applies
for bail it would be a question for the court.
The Committee has been concerned about a number of types of conduct which
occur in the context of domestic violence and may not
currently fall within
the criminal law but which are likely to give rise to serious concerns for the
safety of victim, for
example, suicide threats; self destructive behaviour;
destroying property owned by the person, or by the person as well as the
for example, axing furniture; and, stalking the victim. The Committee has recommended
that such behaviour which gives
rise to fear for the victims safety should be
a criminal offence.
Civil liberty should only be limited with good reason. Establishing whether
there is sufficient reason involves balancing the rights
of the individual
against the harm to be prevented or the benefit to be achieved by detention.
Preventative detention without charge is available in the ACT, for example,
where a person is drunk in a
public place
and where (amongst other things)
the person is behaving in a manner likely to cause injury to themselves or another
or damage to property. In that case, the person can be detained for up
to 8 hours.
If there are situations where a person should be detained for the protection of
another person, that can generally be achieved by
application of the criminal
law, that is, arrest, charge and refusal of bail. If there are instances where
police should be able
to detain a person for the protection of another person
but they cannot do so because no criminal offence exists, then in the
Committee's
view the appropriate course is to consider the creation of a
criminal offence so that the person who poses the risk to another can
with by the application of the criminal law in the normal way.
Preventative detention without charge is not consistent with an approach which
emphasises criminality and the responsibility of the
person for their criminal
Recommendation 32:
That preventative detention without charge should not be available in the
context of domestic violence offences.
Domestic Violence Unit
The Committee's Discussion Paper noted that the formation of specialist
domestic violence units in police forces has a number of
advantages, as follows:
a specialist unit would acquire expertise in dealing with domestic violence
and establish a consistent approach in dealing with domestic
violence offences;
members of a specialist unit would develop close links with other agencies
which offer support to domestic violence victims such as
health services,
refuges, housing services, domestic violence crisis services and the courts
(and perpetrator programs recommended
a specialist unit could keep abreast of reforms in domestic violence laws,
and practices in other jurisdictions and monitor the success
of practices in
its own jurisdiction.
The Research Paper noted that the AFP has established
a Sexual Assault Unit whose members investigate alleged sexual offences. A
of submissions to the Committee called for the establishment of a
specialist police domestic violence unit along similar lines. However,
submission stated that it would be impractical to create a Domestic Violence
Unit with investigation functions like the Sexual
Assault Unit because domestic
violence constitutes a large proportion amount of police work ( a very large
unit would be required
) and economically unfeasible under budgetary
arrangements. The Committee agrees with the AFP.
As an alternative, the Discussion Paper raised for consideration a domestic
violence liaison unit as suggested by the ALRC in its
report on domestic
violence - a small core of experienced officers who could acquire expertise in
domestic violence cases, and among
other duties, could be available to give
advice on and assistance in, handling domestic violence matters. This approach
adopted in New South Wales where each police patrol has a domestic
violence liaison officer who offers advice and support to other
officers on
domestic violence matters.
A further suggestion made in the Discussion Paper and supported in a number of
submissions was the approach taken in Victoria where
a Family Violence Project
Office has the role of coordinating police training and police policy on
domestic violence as well as research
and data collection.
The Committee believes that there is a need for a specialist domestic violence
unit to undertake the following functions:
to drive and monitor the implementation by police of the ACT Domestic
Violence Strategy;
to offer advice, and support to other police officers on domestic violence
to develop quality monitoring systems in relation to police response - for
example, Domestic Violence Incident Report Forms (recommended
below), random
ride alongs to domestic violence call-outs, at the scene observations,
instruction and feedback and measures to gauge
police performance and adherence
to relevant police Regional Instructions;
to liaise with external agencies to promote coordination;
to liaise with victims: for example, to advise on action taken by police
and the progress of a prosecution through the court, and
to provide information
to receive and quickly attempt to resolve inquiries about police in
relation to domestic violence incidents;
to coordinate police domestic violence training, ensure that the police
Domestic Violence Training Manual remains up to date and ensure
training program content, and presentation, are effective;
to undertake policy and law reform work including revision of police
Regional Instructions;
to coordinate police community education initiatives.
The Committee
considers that the unit should be staffed by suitably senior and experienced
officers who are committed to the objectives
of the National Strategy on
Violence Against Women.
Recommendation 33:
That a Police Domestic Violence Unit be established with quality assurance;
coordination; victim liaison; training; police domestic
violence policy and law
reform functions.
Recommendation 34:
That the Police Domestic Violence Unit be staffed by suitably senior and
experienced officers who are committed to the objectives
of the National
Strategy on Violence Against Women.
in the police
Supervision
The police have advised the Committee that most supervising police officers
attend most domestic violence call-outs with the attending
patrol officers.
This practice is not documented in the Research Paper and it is not embodied in
the police Regional Instructions.
The Committee considers it an excellent
quality assurance practice. The Committee recommends that the practice should
be referred
to in the police Regional Instructions.
Police complete Incident Reports on all attendances including domestic violence
call outs. The Incident Reports are submitted to
the supervising police officer
who signs them off if satisfied with the action taken by the attending
The New South Wales police have developed a Domestic Violence Incident Report
Form which is designed to ensure that relevant statistics
are recorded and that
police officers turn their minds to relevant considerations in relation to the
proper handling of cases. The
Committee believes that such a form should be
developed for use in the ACT.
In Victoria, police who attend a domestic violence call-out and do not charge
arrest are required to fill out an "exception statement" providing
reasons. The Committee recommends that an "exception statement"
be incorporated
on the Domestic Violence Incident Report Form.
The Committee suggests that this task of designing the Domestic Violence
Incident Report Form be undertaken by the Police Domestic
Violence Unit
recommended above.
Recommendation 35:
That the police practice whereby supervising police officers often attend
domestic violence call-outs with the attending patrol officers,
for quality
assurance purposes, be recorded in the police Regional Instructions (or
equivalent).
Recommendation 36:
That the Police Domestic Violence Unit develop a Domestic Violence Incident
Report Form incorporating an "exception statement" to
be completed by police
officers attending domestic violence call-outs.
and evaluation
In addition to the monitoring and quality assurance functions of the Police
Domestic Violence Unit referred to above, the following
monitoring arrangements
should be applied:
the Domestic Violence Incident Report Form incorporating an "exception
statement" to be completed by police officers attending domestic
call-outs should be submitted to the Police Domestic Violence Unit to enable
internal monitoring of performance and to permit
early victim follow up, if
necessary, to rectify an inadequate police response. Monitoring action should
be noted on the Domestic
Violence Incident Report Form;
the DVCS should have early access to the Domestic Violence Incident Report
Form to enable the DVCS to provide follow up support to
victims of domestic
Recommendation 37:
That the Police Domestic Violence Unit use the Domestic Violence Incident
Report Form incorporating the exception statement for quality
Recommendation 38:
That the DVCS have early access to the Domestic Violence Incident Report
Form to enable the DVCS to provide follow up support to victims
of domestic
Police who attend domestic violence call-outs generally provide the victim with
their name and a contact phone number to allow any
There are a number of reasons to have a process for the resolution of inquiries
there appears to be more tension surrounding police domestic violence
interventions than most, if not all, other police duties;
if the quality of police work is not satisfactory, police should ensure
that as far as possible the problem in a particular case,
and any systemic
problem, is remedied as soon as possible;
the proper handling of inquiries gives police the opportunity to educate
individuals, and through them the community, about the police
role in domestic
violence cases and in particular, the fact that police take a law enforcement
The Committee recommends the appointment of a Domestic Violence
Liaison Officer whose role would be:
to receive, record and report on the nature of inquiries;
to quickly action inquiries where the action to be taken is in order to
ensure the safety of a person;
to resolve inquiries;
to ensure that the victim understands police powers and policy in relation
to domestic violence; and
to identify and report on systemic issues.
The Committee suggests that
the position of Domestic Violence Liaison Officer be held by an officer in the
Police Domestic Violence
Statistics and details in relation to inquiries should be made available to the
public at least annually.
Recommendation 39:
That a Police Domestic Violence Liaison Officer be appointed to fulfil the
functions identified above.
Recommendation 40:
That the position of Domestic Violence Liaison Officer be held by an officer
in the Police Domestic Violence Unit.
Recommendation 41:
That statistics and details in relation to inquiries be made available to
the public at least annually.
importance of police
Police play a vital role as "gatekeepers" of the criminal justice system. The
way in which the attending police officer handles an
allegation of domestic
violence when the victim first makes contact plays an important role in
determining whether victims will continue
to see the criminal justice system as
an appropriate means by which to ensure their safety and that of their
Police training is of crucial importance in achieving an appropriate service
and law enforcement ethos in domestic violence cases.
To be effective, it is
essential that training be provided in a way which is meaningful to police.
From the Research Paper it can be gleaned that the most common domestic
violence scenario as expressed by police fits the following
profile (note
percentages indicate the number of officers who responded to the survey who
expressed the view):
domestic violence occurs across all income groups (94%);
police often feel sympathy for the children (77%), sometimes for the victim
(75%) and sometimes for the offender (81%);
victims often become aggressive towards the police (78%) and very often the
victims have been drinking (62%);
frequently the victim does not want the offender arrested (48%); and
offenders often become aggressive towards
the police (92%) and often the offender has been drinking (90%).
Obviously, police feedback about the type of incidents they
encounter has to be incorporated in training- training must be realistic
relevant. It is one thing to theorise about domestic violence and policing and
another to apply it in a complex and heated situation.
This highlights the
crucial importance of training.
Commenting on in depth interviews with police undertaken for the Research
Report, the researchers noted a general lack of knowledge
amongst police about
their role in domestic violence attendances.
Senior police expressed concern that police needed
more training in the application of the legislation so they can be more confident
Specific problems in relation to police response to domestic violence were
identified in the Research Report. For example, a fairly
high proportion of
respondents to the police survey, 42%, agreed that it is not clear when police
should or should not arrest.
This has resulted
in concerns about wrongful arrest.
Significantly, 34% of respondents to the police survey said that from their
training and experience they would not say that they
had enough information to
understand what a domestic violence offence is under the Domestic Violence Act.
Consequently, this causes
difficulty for the police in relation to bail because
refers to the Domestic Violence Act for the definition of
`domestic violence offence'.
Throughout this report, the Committee has made a number of recommendations for
amendments which will clarify the law and hopefully
mean that police will need
less training to understand the law. However, police will still need more
training in the application
of the legislation so they can be more confident
Fifty-nine percent of respondents to the police survey conducted for the
Research Paper expressed a desire for further training in
relation to domestic
violence and in particular:
real life scenario role plays and videos;
revision and training on legislation;
more information about services for the parties to the incident and
particularly men;
the need for a mentoring arrangement with new members paired with
experienced training officers;
more officer survival skills training.
Only 33% of those surveyed had received any further instruction on how to handle
domestic violence incidents since completing their
probationary training.
of current police
The training content of the police Domestic Violence Training Manual is based
on the National Strategy on Violence Against Women.
It sets out guidelines as a
minimum standard for training. A comprehensive adoption of these guidelines
would require the police
to undertake the following measures:
including in recruit training a discussion of the nature of domestic
violence and strategies for responding which respect and affirm
the victim and
promote safety as the paramount consideration;
developing a module on violence against women for operational police who
have not undertaken training in this area for five years
or more. The module
would be compulsory and address issues of violence against women, updating
police on the changes in community
expectations about the way violence against
women should be responded to and examining reasons behind changes in
legislation and
police procedures;
including an analysis of the management issues relating to violence against
women in any course or development program provided for
police officers in
senior management positions.
The Committee notes that the content
concentrates more on the nature of domestic violence than police response.
While the nature of
the violence is obviously very important, the Committee
believes that it is equally important that training focus on the real life
situations and dilemmas which police encounter in domestic violence matters,
and the practical application of an appropriate police
response in that
There should be role plays of actual case scenarios, particularly those which
raise policing dilemmas or which more commonly give
rise to complaints. Such
role plays should address the distinction between a law enforcement approach
and a peace making approach.
The content of the manual should be kept under review.
and duration
The domestic violence training program is a 2 day non residential course which
is offered to new recruits and on an in service basis.
Police have advised that
officers would have the opportunity to undertake the course about once every
six years. This is insufficient.
A more satisfactory target would be about
every two years, particularly for those officers who are regularly attending
domestic violence
Recommendation 42:
That police training comply with the minimum standards set out in the
guidelines of the National Strategy on Violence Against Women.
Recommendation 43:
That the police Domestic Violence Training Manual be revised to ensure that
police training makes a clear distinction between police
law enforcement and
peace keeping roles where police have reasonable grounds to believe that a
criminal offence has been committed.
Recommendation 44:
That the content of police training be enhanced by adding a focus on the
situations and dilemmas which police face in domestic violence
matters and
police response should be rehearsed.
Recommendation 45:
That the content of the police Domestic Violence Training Manual be kept
under review.
Recommendation 46:
That police domestic violence training continue to be provided to all new
recruits and there be a target that relevant officers receive
training about once every two years.
of police Regional Instructions in relation to domestic
The police Regional Instructions or the equivalent in relation to domestic
violence are presently under review. The Committee has
already made a number of
recommendations about the need for the revision or development of specific
aspects of the police Regional
Instructions.
There are three other matters upon which the Committee wishes to comment:
Enforcement approach
The police Regional Instructions or the equivalent do not specifically deal the
with the circumstances in which a 'law enforcement'
approach is appropriate.
Police are simply directed to decide "whether to remain to keep the peace or to
resume normal patrol."
The Committee considers that it is crucial that the police Regional
Instructions or the equivalent specify that where police have
grounds to believe that a criminal offence has occurred in the context of
domestic violence, the appropriate response
is a "law enforcement" approach.
Clear and separate directions should be given in relation to that circumstance
and other circumstances
where a law enforcement approach may not be appropriate.
Neutralising
and equalising language
The language used in the police Regional Instruction on Domestic Violence implies
equality of power
'disputants'
, for example, "domestic
disputes", "domestic disturbances between household members", "the disputing parties"and
"domestic situation".
An emphasis on 'the dispute' tends to minimise considerations
like criminality and responsibility. It tends to neutralise, trivialise
over incidents which may include serious criminal behaviour.
'Spousal violence' or 'parental violence' (when the violence is directed at a
child) are more accurate terms.
Language can reflect attitudes. Language can also be an agent of attitudinal
The police Regional Instruction on Domestic Violence should set out in detail
the principles which govern the treatment of victims
in the administration of
justice and advise police that regard must be had to those principles in their
dealings with victims of
domestic violence.
Recommendation 47:
That the police Regional Instructions (or equivalent) in relation to
Domestic Violence be revised to make a clear distinction between
the expected
police response in cases where police have reasonable grounds to believe that a
criminal offence has occurred in the
context of domestic violence and other
Recommendation 48:
That language which is neutralising; minimising; predicated on the fallacy
of equality of power, or on a relationship analysis of
domestic violence not be
used in police training or in police Regional Instructions in relation to
domestic violence.
Recommendation 49:
That the police Regional Instruction (or equivalent) in relation to domestic
violence set out the principles which govern the treatment
of victims in the
administration of justice and advise that police must have regard to those
principles when dealing with victims
of domestic violence.
Information
for the offender
The Committee believes that where the offender is remanded in police custody
following apprehension for a domestic violence offence,
it is highly desirable
that the offender be provided with information prior to release. This would
information about available services, for example, accommodation options;
general information about domestic violence;
information about sentencing options available to the court should guilt be
established, including perpetrator education programs;
information about obtaining legal advice quickly.
Consistent with a
best practice response, the Committee believes that it would be better to
provide the information on a one to one
basis rather than in a pamphlet. In
providing the information a victim/safety and offender responsibility position
should be maintained.
The police have an obligation to take the offender before a court "as soon
as practicable after he or she has been taken into
custody and, in any case,
within 48 hours"
. While it is desirable
that information be provided to the offender, the Committee considers that it
is not desirable for the
offender to be detained any longer than is otherwise
permitted or required by law and only to provide such information.
There appear to be a number of options for the provision of information to the
1: The police.
The police might be trained to provide the information. The advantage of this
option is that the police are on the spot. Consequently,
it would be expected
that the information would always be provided, and there would be less resource
implications than if the service
were to be provided by an outside agency. On
the other hand, there may be problems with quality assurance and a blurring of
enforcement role of the police.
2: ACT Corrective
Subject to resourcing, the information could be provided through ACT Corrective
Services officers attending at the lockup to see
the offender. Alternatively,
ACT Corrective Services might contract out provision of the service.
3: Other services or
The information might be provided by another service or group using their
workers or volunteers. The reliability, consistency and
quality of the service
may be issues.
4: The ACT Domestic Violence Project
Coordinator.
The ACT Domestic Violence Project Coordinator, recommended below could provide
or oversee and monitor provision of the service.
In selecting between options the primary considerations will be the
consistency, quality and cost of the service. The Committee believes
those considerations, the quality of the service is the most important.
The Committee considers that the most practical option, with the least resource
implications, would be for the police to be trained
to provide the service and
for the service to be monitored by the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator to
ensure consistency and
quality. The likelihood of blurring the law enforcement
role of the police should be minimal as the information to be provided is
factual and specific. In any case, this should be further minimised by regular
monitoring by the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator
and appropriate
training. The police could be assisted in the provision of the service by a
pamphlet to be given to the offender.
The Committee notes that the
requires police to provide facilities
to an offender in police custody for the first time in relation to an offence.
The Committee considers that the suggested option for provision of information
to the offender could be effected by inserting a new
provision in the
to the following effect:
"Where the accused person has been charged with a domestic
violence offence an authorised officer shall take all reasonable steps
ensure that the accused person is provided with information about services
which may be available to the accused upon release
by an approved method or
arrangement."
'Approved method or arrangement' would be those
specified by Regulation made by the executive under the
Recommendation 50:
That arrangements be established to provide an offender who is remanded in
police custody following apprehension for a domestic violence
offence with
information about available services, prior to their release.
Recommendation 51:
That the police to be trained to provide the service and that provision of
the service be monitored by the ACT Domestic Violence Project
Coordinator.
Recommendation 52:
be amended by inserting a section as follows:
"Where the offender has been charged with a domestic violence offence an
authorised officer shall take all reasonable steps to ensure
that the offender
is provided with information about services, which may be available to the
offender upon release by an approved
method or arrangement"
'Approved method or arrangement' would be those specified by Regulation made
by the executive under the
Prosecution
In the ACT prosecutions are undertaken by the Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions (DPP) which is an independent body established
Director of
Public Prosecutions Act 1990
Prosecution
The Prosecution Policy and Guidelines of the ACT DPP were issued in December 1991.
The guidelines note that the DPP prosecutes "when
it appears that the offence
or the circumstances of its commission is or are of such a nature that a prosecution
is in the public
The initial consideration
is the adequacy of the evidence which includes assessment of the availability
and likely credibility
of witnesses. Consideration of whether prosecution is in
the public interest includes:
the seriousness or triviality of the alleged offence;
whether the offence is of a technical nature only;
any mitigating or aggravating circumstances;
the antecedents and background of the offender;
the effect of the prosecution on public order and morale;
whether the prosecution would be perceived as counter-productive;
the prevalence of the alleged offence and the need for deterrence, both
personal and general; and
the attitude of the alleged victim to a prosecution.
The guidelines for
prosecutors in the ACT note that in determining whether or not to call a
particular witness, the prosecutor must
pay due regard to the need to be fair
to the offender:
"In general, it is the duty of the prosecution to call all witnesses
capable of giving evidence relevant to the guilt or innocence
of the accused.
It is only in rare circumstances that the prosecution would be justified in
concluding that the overriding
interests of justice require that such a witness
not be called."
The guidelines note that
in prosecuting charges of assault, especially sexual assault, there should be
particular concern for the
position of the victim given that the victim may
have suffered severe emotional and physical distress. Prosecutors are directed:
to explain to victims the role they play in the prosecution process and, if
appropriate, the steps that can be taken to ensure their
protection;
to inform the victim of the reasons for a decision not to prosecute or to
accept a plea of guilty to a lesser charge; and
to consider the wishes of a victim who
does not wish the prosecution to proceed. It is noted however, that "in some
the interests of the wider community may demand that the prosecution
There are no guidelines for prosecutors in the ACT specifically
in relation to criminal offences committed in the context of domestic
The British Columbia Crown Counsel manual advises prosecutors that:
"given the incidence of violence against women in relationships
in Canada, the prosecution of such offences is almost invariably in
interest...the decision to charge or continue the prosecution
be governed by the wishes of the victim."
The other main points
of difference between the ACT DPP Prosecution Policy and Guidelines and the
British Columbia Crown Counsel manual,
as set out in the manual, are:
when a victim indicates an unwillingness to testify the Crown Council is to
try and consult personally with the victim at the earliest
opportunity and
refer the victim to support services;
in cases where threats or inappropriate influences may be affecting the
victim's willingness to testify, where there is a history
of violence or where
the victim refuses to meet with the Crown Council in order to permit an
assessment of the situation, charges
should usually only be stayed at the trial
upon establishing that the victim will not testify and that no other evidence
is available;
diversion should generally be considered inappropriate given the concern of
past or further assaults of the victim;
the Crown Council should obtain a history of abuse prior to any bail
hearing, the victim should be notified of the bail hearing and
of resulting
orders and appropriate bail orders should be sought; and
experienced counsel should be assigned to such prosecutions and the
prosecutor should endeavour to meet with the victim as soon as
possible after
ACT DPP Domestic Violence Prosecution
An ACT DPP Domestic Violence Prosecution Policy should:
mesh with and further explain current DPP Policy and Guidelines for
Prosecutors in cases involving breach of the criminal law in the
domestic violence;
point to the public interest in prosecution of domestic violence offenders;
point to victim support and victim safety considerations relevant to such
prosecutions, particularly in the context of bail;
point to the need to ensure that the alleged offender does not use the
victim to escape prosecution;
incorporate a `no drop' policy, that is, the fact that the victim does not
want the charge to proceed is not determinative of whether
the prosecution will
proceed; and plea bargaining is discouraged unless it is not likely that the
highest charge will be sustained;
in the context of a `no drop' policy, provide additional guidance to
prosecutors on common situations which arise, for example:
where the victim requests that the charges be dropped;
- where the victim indicates unwillingness to give evidence;
- the desirability of subpoenaing the victim even if the victim appears to
be cooperative;
- the importance of personal contact with the victim at an early
point to the need to fast track cases where ever possible;
point to the desirability of vertical prosecution and the assignment
of experienced prosecutors to domestic violence prosecutions;
point to the need for comprehensive sentencing submissions, including
submissions as to matters which should be set out in the Pre-Sentence
and any history of previous violence between the offender and the victim of the
set out in detail the principles which govern the treatment of victims in
the administration of justice and advise prosecutors that
regard must be had to
those principles in their dealings with victims of domestic violence.
Committee believes that the development of an ACT DPP Domestic Violence
Prosecution Policy and guidelines to implement that policy
are highly desirable
and essential to an improved criminal justice response to domestic violence.
Recommendation 53:
That an ACT DPP Domestic Violence Prosecution Policy and guidelines
to implement that policy be developed which, as far as possible,
are modelled
on best practice domestic violence prosecution practices , that is, concern for
victim support and safety; 'no drop';
compelling the victim's attendance at
court; fast tracking; and vertical prosecution.
to develop and introduce an ACT DPP Domestic Violence Prosecution
There are two possible methods of developing and introducing an ACT DPP
Domestic Violence Prosecution Policy:
First, by the DPP alone or in consultation with relevant groups, for
example, the ACT Domestic Violence Advisory Council recommended
in Chapter 2;
Secondly, by the government in consultation
with the DPP.
In relation to the second option, the
Committee notes that the ACT Domestic Violence Advisory Council, if established
as recommended
in this report, would advise government on the development of a
domestic violence strategy and the implementation of reforms.
The Committee considers that the second option would ensure the consistent
integration of an ACT DPP Domestic Violence Prosecution
Policy and guidelines
with the proposed multi-systems response.
The Committee believes that the ACT DPP Domestic Violence Prosecution Policy
and guidelines should be developed as soon as possible.
Recommendation 54:
That the ACT DPP and the government consult about the development of an ACT
DPP Domestic Violence Prosecution Policy with a view to
ensuring that a policy
is prepared and implemented as soon as possible.
of prosecutors
Although the DPP has an arrangement whereby senior prosecutors take
responsibility for coordination of specific classes of cases
such as drugs,
fraud and sex offences, the DPP has advised that no coordination function has
been assigned for criminal acts committed
in the context of domestic violence
as the number of prosecutions is relatively low.
There are three related issues:
first, the desirability of applying vertical prosecution (that is, one
prosecutor throughout) practices as far as possible in domestic
violence cases;
secondly, the desirability of assigning domestic violence cases to
sufficiently experienced prosecutors; and
thirdly, given that neither will presumably be feasible some of the time,
the need for all prosecutors to receive training.
Recommendation 55:
That the DPP apply a vertical prosecution policy to offences committed in
the context of domestic violence wherever possible and should
experienced prosecutors to domestic violence prosecutions where ever possible.
The DPP has not arranged training for it's prosecutors in relation to domestic
violence. There are several reasons why training is
First, prosecutors can easily become frustrated with victims of domestic
violence. Prosecutors need information about the dynamics
of domestic violence:
to understand how the offender may attempt to use the victim to escape
prosecution;
to ensure that the prosecutor does not unwittingly collude with the
attempts of the offender to escape prosecution;
to assist the prosecutor to counter defence arguments about dropping
to ensure that the prosecutor is sufficiently supportive of the victim;
to appreciate the reasons why the victim may be unwilling or not prepared
to go to court and that the purpose of prosecution is the
victim's long term
safety and the public interest rather than the expressed wishes of the victim;
to understand how to prepare a victim of domestic violence to give evidence
as an integral part of good case preparation and presentation.
training is necessary to assist prosecutors to understand the reasoning behind
revised prosecution policies and guidelines,
recommended above.
Thirdly, training is needed to facilitate prosecutor participation in a
coordinated inter-agency criminal justice response to domestic
violence, and in
particular greater communication with the police, the Domestic Violence
Coordinator, corrections officers, and the
ACT Domestic Violence Intervention
Project, recommended below.
Recommendation 56:
That the DPP, the government and relevant agencies liaise to develop and
provide domestic violence training for prosecutors.
with police
While appreciating the independent roles of the police and the prosecution, the
Committee considers that mutual benefit is likely
to flow from the DPP
assisting in AFP training in relation to case preparation and police/DPP roles
in domestic violence cases.
In addition, the Committee suggests that the Office of the DPP and the AFP
should consider having regular liaison meetings in relation
to issues of mutual
concern relating to domestic violence prosecutions. Such meetings, for example,
could take place every three
Recommendation 57:
That the DPP assist in AFP training in relation to case preparation and the
roles of the police and DPP in domestic violence cases.
Recommendation 58:
That the Police Domestic Violence Unit and the DPP have regular liaison
meetings in relation to issues of mutual concern relating
to domestic violence
prosecutions.
Paper and Submissions
Consistent with findings in recent literature discussed in the Research Paper,
the researchers reported that the DVCS workers who
were interviewed made the
following points:
the court is generally patriarchal, the courtroom experience minimises the
realities of domestic violence, and women find attending
court frightening;
Magistrates are out of touch with the issues involved in domestic violence;
Magistrates appear to be unwilling to
impose sufficiently heavy penalties for domestic assault and breach of protection
orders, and they appear too willing to grant bail to offenders.
In reviewing the police survey on Domestic Violence the
Research Paper reported:
three-quarters of the police sample disagreed that overall the courts give
adequate support to the police in domestic violence cases;
93% believed that the courts tend to give bail too easily;
97% disagreed with the statement that 'the courts are too harsh on
offenders'; and
45% believed that domestic violence offenders
are dealt with less harshly than other types of violent assault offenders.
The Research Paper specifically noted that some of the frustration and cynicism
of police officers about the likelihood of making
domestic violence cases `stick'
is directed at the courts, which the police see as too soft, giving light sentences
and bailing
too easily.
In particular, it was the view of police officers
that bail was too readily granted by Magistrates, in many cases against police
Dissatisfaction along the same lines was one of the common themes in most
submissions to the Committee.
On the other hand, the Research Paper reported that Magistrates argued that
they already treat domestic violence cases seriously.
Magistrates acknowledged that they did have a
limited perspective on specific cases - they only see what happens in the court
room - but they saw this as appropriate to their role in the criminal justice
Magistrates have a strong sense of
judicial propriety, in which they see themselves as being required to make independent
which preserve the rights of both parties.
The researchers also noted that Magistrates applauded
the work of the DVCS but at the same time felt criticised by the DVCS and
felt that the DVCS did not understand some aspects of the legal system.
Throughout this Reference it has become apparent to the Committee that there
appears to be a general lack of understanding about
the role of the judiciary
and in particular, the principles of sentencing.
The Research Paper concluded that its research seemed to show that sentencing
and bail in domestic violence cases was lenient,
but it could not be confirmed
without comparative data on sentencing and bail across a number of violent offences.
Without such confirmation there remains the perception of the police, the DVCS
and other relevant agencies involved in the prosecution
process that leadership
from the courts in the context of a criminal justice response to domestic
violence is lacking.
the presumption in favour of bail
The criteria which apply to bail as specified in the
have been set out
in detail under the heading police Bail.
As noted above, the determination by the court of the question of bail is
designed to be more objective than the police bail processes.
Notwithstanding
that fact, the Committee is of the view that the following remain reasons for
particular caution when the question
of bail in domestic violence cases is
decided by the court:
the difficulty in assessing whether the person charged poses a further risk
to the victim particularly given the attitudes and beliefs
of the person which
may give rise to the alleged offence; and
the likely vulnerability of the victim and the need to protect the victim
from harassment or intimidation by the offender.
These factors, together
with the importance of ensuring that a clear and firm message is projected to
the community that domestic
violence offences are taken seriously, have
persuaded the Committee that where an offender is charged with a domestic
violence offence
or breach of a protection order the presumption in favour of
bail should be removed. This would mean that the onus would be on the
to satisfy the court that bail should be granted.
In making its decision, the Committee considered but rejected the approach
taken in New South Wales. In New South Wales the presumption
in favour of bail
with respect to a domestic violence offence or breach of a protection order
involving violence or intimidation
is removed if the court is satisfied:
that the offender has a history of violence; or
if there has been previous violence by the offender towards the person in
respect of whom the alleged offence has been committed,
(whether or not this
previous violence has been the subject of a conviction).
A history of
violence is defined as a conviction within the last 10 years for a violent act
against any person or breach of a protection
order by an act of violence.
In the context of court bail, the New South Wales approach involves two steps.
Firstly, there is a presumption in favour of bail.
Secondly, the presumption in
favour of bail is reversed, but this step is only taken upon the court being
satisfied of the specified
circumstances. This can only occur during the course
of the hearing of the bail application, and where the prosecution has adduced
evidence of such circumstances. In most cases, evidence that the offender has a
history of violence could be proved by tender of
a record of prior convictions.
A record of prior convictions may not however, disclose whether a breach of a
protection order was
by an act of violence.
Where a record of prior convictions is not tendered, and evidence of previous
violence given by the police informant is contested,
the court may only be
satisfied of previous violence where the victim is called to give that
There were two primary reasons why the Committee rejected the New South Wales
First, and most importantly, where there is no record of prior convictions or
if the record is not sufficiently detailed, the practical
effect of the
legislation is to place reliance upon the victim for the prosecution process.
This is contrary to a best practice criminal
justice response to domestic
violence, and in particular the principle that the response should be law
driven rather than victim
driven. The victim would be called upon to give
evidence at a time close to when the alleged offence occurred and consequently,
the victim's fear may be at its height. Secondly, it is unnecessarily
complicated.
Recommendation 59:
be amended to remove the presumption in favour of bail
where the offender is charged with a domestic violence offence or breach of
protection order.
Assessment Reports
The Committee notes that in some cases Magistrates in the ACT adjourn the
hearing of a bail application for the purpose of obtaining
a report. The
purpose of the report is to provide impartial information to assist with bail
decisions and the setting of bail conditions.
Magistrates call upon the ACT
Corrective Services Intake Officer stationed at the court to do this, however
it is not a common practice.
This report has referred to the need for particular caution when deciding the
question of bail where an offender is charged with
a domestic violence offence
because of the difficulty of predicting the risk of harm to the victim.
The Committee believes that the court should follow a practice of obtaining
a Bail Assessment Report report from ACT Corrective
Services as a matter of
course in all cases where an offender is charged with a domestic violence offence.
The Committee that
it would be desirable for the court to consult with ACT Corrective
Services about the content, time frame for preparation and
form of Bail Assessment
Reports and to issue Practice Directions.
The Committee considers that the Practice Directions should specify that Bail
Assessment Reports include all factors relevant to
the ability of the offender
to successfully complete a period of bail, for example:
any risk factors to the victim;
the need for accommodation for the offender and available accommodation
other relevant information such as alcohol and drug factors;
the availability of a bail surety (a person who will sign the bail form
agreeing to pay an amount of money set by the court in the
event that the
offender fails to comply with the conditions of bail).
The Committee also
considers that to properly assess any risk to the victim and formulate
recommendations for bail conditions the
Community Corrections Officer should
consult with the police, particularly about the circumstances of the arrest and
any concern
expressed by the victim about the need for protection from violence
or harassment by the offender. The Community Corrections Officer
should also
liaise with the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator directly where it is
considered necessary to obtain further information
relevant to the safety of
the victim.
The time frame for preparation of the report will depend upon the resources of
ACT Corrective Services. The Committee notes that
the workload of the Intake
Officer is such that it would be difficult to perform this additional function,
especially as it should
involve liaison with the police and where necessary the
Domestic Violence Project Coordinator to be comprehensive.
However, the Committee believes that there should not be undue interference
with the civil liberties of the offender. Accordingly,
it is essential that the
Bail Assessment Report be available as soon as possible and preferably on the
day the offender is first
brought before the court. This would mean that the
police informant or the prosecutor would be at court to speak to the Intake
protection from violence or harassment by the offender. In this context
Committee notes that an assessment of suitability to perform a Community
Service Order is done by the ACT Corrective Services
Intake Officer stationed
at the court within two to three hours.
The Committee considers that the process could be simplified and carried out
more quickly if a form was developed with a check list
of factors relevant to
the ability of the offender to successfully complete a period of bail, as
outlined above, and including a
section indicating contact with, and
information received from the police informant and the Domestic Violence
Project Co-ordinator.
Recommendation 60:
That the court follow a practice of obtaining a Bail Assessment Report from
ACT Corrective Services in all cases where an offender
is charged with a
domestic violence offence.
Recommendation 61:
That the court in consultation with ACT Corrective Services, issue a
Practice Direction about the content and time frame for preparation
and form of
Bail Assessment Reports .
The courts (and in particular the Magistrates court) have recognised the
importance of fast tracking cases where an offender is charged
with a domestic
violence offence. In practise the courts fast track domestic violence cases
where it appears necessary to defuse
a potentially volatile and dangerous
situation for the victim by judicial determination of guilt or innocence. This
is particularly
the case where the court refuses bail and the offender is
remanded in custody.
In the Magistrates court, where an offender is refused bail, the matter must be
relisted before the court every 14 days. The court
generally allows an offender
released on bail an initial adjournment of 6 weeks to obtain legal advice.
The courts are frequently frustrated by the offender, particularly those who
are granted bail, who assert that they wish to exercise
their right to legal
representation but who do not take the necessary steps to consult a solicitor
during the adjournment. Of course,
there comes a time when the court decides
that the offender has had adequate opportunity to obtain legal advice and
representation,
and that the matter should not be further adjourned. Where the
offender requests and is granted a number of adjournments, it is not
for at least 2 months to have passed from the time of initial appearance before
the court to when a plea of guilty or not
guilty is entered. After this, where
a plea of not guilty is entered it is usually about three months before a
hearing date.
The Committee hopes that this problem will be somewhat alleviated by the early
provision of information to the offender about the
benefit of obtaining legal
advice quickly. The problem should be further reduced with the implementation
of the revised DPP Domestic
Violence Prosecution Policy and guidelines that
should point to the need to fast track cases where ever possible. Prosecutors
highlight the problem in specific cases for the court.
The Committee however recommends that the courts should consider the
introduction of Practice Directions to facilitate fast tracking
in domestic
violence cases.
This mechanism would reduce the pressure on the victim. Where there is a
finding of guilt, it may also encourage an offender to accept
responsibility
for the criminal act as soon as possible.
Recommendation 62:
That the court issue a Practise Direction to facilitate fast tracking in
domestic violence cases.
Waiting Facilities
The Research Report notes that Magistrates, court staff and the DVCS held practical
concerns for the safety of victims and others
arising from the difficulty of separating
the victim and the offender in domestic violence cases.
The Committee was consulted about the plans for the new ACT Magistrates Court
in the context of the providing facilities for victims
of sexual offences.
Separate entrances, waiting areas and interview rooms will be available. It is
expected that the new court will
be completed at the end of April 1996. The
Committee considers it essential for the court to make these facilities
available to victims
of domestic violence offences.
In the meantime sheer lack of physical space makes it difficult to provide
separate areas for the victim and the offender. However,
the Committee
considers it essential for the courts to consider manageable interim
arrangements.
Recommendation 63:
That the court consider and implement short term options for physically
separating domestic violence victims and offenders on court
Recommendation 64:
That the court ensure that the separate entrances , waiting areas and
interview rooms in the new ACT Magistrates Court be made available
of domestic violence.
Since August 1991, children in the ACT have been able to use closed circuit television
facilities (CCTV) to give their evidence
in court proceedings.
In November 1994, use of CCTV was extended to
adult victims of sexual or indecent assaults. This enables CCTV to be used in
violence proceedings, but only where the victim is alleging a sexual
or indecent assault.
The Committee is of the view that CCTV should be available to a victim of a
domestic violence on the same basis that it is currently
available to children
and sexual assault victims.
Under the existing CCTV legislation, a witness is able to use CCTV in
proceedings unless:
the witness prefers to give evidence in open court;
it would cause unreasonable delay; or
there is a substantial risk of the proceedings not being conducted
Recommendation 65:
That the Evidence (Closed Circuit Television) Act 1991 be amended so that
CCTV facilities may be used by a victim of a domestic violence
As stated above, the basic thrust of the revised criminal justice response to
domestic violence cases is to work to ensure that domestic
violence cases are
not screened out of the criminal justice system and that the system holds
offenders of criminal behaviour committed
in the context of domestic violence,
accountable to the same extent as perpetrators of other similar criminal
The fundamental aim is to ensure the safety of victims and to work
towards ending or preventing the violence. A strategy
to achieve this aim is to
impose and enforce legal sanctions on the offender that will deter the offender
from committing further
acts of violence.
The Committee confirms that the aim must be to ensure that there is parity
between the sentences imposed for an offence committed
in the context of
domestic violence and other similar offences.
Best practice domestic violence models emphasise a punitive approach to help
deter further violence. They also include measures that
provide an opportunity
for the offender to change behaviour through appropriate referral, for example,
to perpetrator education programs
or counselling.
Accordingly, best practice domestic violence models are consistent with the
objective of sentencing principles set out in case law
and in legislation for
offences generally, which is to balance punishment with rehabilitation, and to
impose a sentence of imprisonment
only as a last resort.
Part XII of the
Crimes Act 1900
sets out general principles and procedures on
sentencing.
Section 429 of the
requires the sentence imposed by a court to be
just and appropriate and, so far as is practicable, be such as to:
facilitate the offender's rehabilitation into society; and
encourage the offender to make appropriate reparation to any victim of the
Section 429C (1) of the
restricts cases where the court
may impose a sentence of imprisonment to where "the court, after having
considered all other available
penalties, is satisfied that no other penalty is
appropriate in all the circumstances of the case".
In order of increasing severity, the penalties which a court may impose are a
fine; a recognisance (a good behaviour bond); a community
service order; a
suspended sentence; periodic detention; and imprisonment. The Committee notes
that a sentencing option may be inappropriate
in a particular case, for example
periodic detention may not be a suitable option where there are concerns about
the need for protection
of the victim.
Crimes Act 1900
sets out matters that may and may not be taken
into account on sentencing. The legislation specifically states that a court
have regard to Victim Impact Statements for offences with a maximum
penalty of at least 5 years imprisonment. The court may order
a Pre-Sentence
Report. Of course, matters relevant to sentencing may arise during the course
of a contested hearing out of evidence
given by witnesses, or, where the
offender pleads guilty, the brief statement of facts prepared by the police
informant (also called
the remand statement). They may also arise out of
submissions as to sentence made by the prosecutor, and submissions in
made by the offender's lawyer.
The offender's record of prior convictions is particularly relevant to
sentence. Generally, where the record discloses convictions
for similar
offences, the court looks at the previous penalties imposed for similar
offences and imposes a more severe penalty for
the offence before the court.
The reasoning behind this is that more severe penalties for subsequent offences
should deter further
So that the process of sentencing can be more thoroughly understood, the
Committee believes that it is desirable to detail the matters
that the court
may take into account on sentencing, and to provide further information about
Victim Impact Statements and Pre-Sentence
Reports below:
taken into account
Section 429A of the
lists matters which a court may consider in
determining the sentence to be imposed on a person. That list includes:
the nature and circumstances of the offence;
previous offences;
if the offence forms part of a course of conduct consisting of a series of
criminal acts of the same or similar character - that course
of conduct;
the personal circumstances of any victim of the offence where known to the
offender at the time of committing the offence;
any injury, loss or damage resulting from the offence;
the degree of responsibility of the person for the commission of the
the deterrent effect that any sentence or order under consideration may
have on any person;
the need to ensure that the person is adequately punished for the offence;
the prospect of rehabilitation of the person;
the probable effect that any sentence or order under consideration would
have on any of the person's family or dependants;
whether the person was affected by a drug or alcohol and the circumstances
in which the person became so effected;
the reason or reasons why the person committed the offence.
The section
requires that the court must have regard to such of the matters listed "as are
relevant and are known to the court". Those
matters are framed in broad terms.
Case law may guide the interpretation of those matters, however there is clear
scope for subjective
interpretation. Whether any of the matters listed are
considered `relevant' by the sentencing Judge or Magistrate is also subjective.
The scope for subjectivity raises the issue of the need for judicial
Section 429A does not limit the matters which a court may consider in
sentencing.
In addition, section 429AB, for example, requires the court to have regard to
any Victim Impact Statement tendered in respect of
the offence.
Relevant matters must be `before the court'. Accordingly, it is crucial that
all relevant evidence is before the court at the sentencing
stage in order to
ensure that penalties reflect the seriousness of the offence.
Section 429B of the
specifies matters not to be taken into account
in sentencing. That list includes:
any alleged offences which the person has not admitted; and
the prevalence of the offence.
Pre-Sentence
Before passing sentence, a court may order a Pre-Sentence Report.
In practice, the court does so of its own accord
or at the suggestion of the offender's lawyer or the prosecutor. In general Pre-Sentence
Reports are only ordered where there is a likelihood of a sentence of imprisonment
being imposed.
A Pre-Sentence Report is prepared by an "authorised officer" - a community
corrections officer employed by ACT Corrective Services.
Section 455 of the
deals with the content of a Pre-sentence Report
in 2 parts.
The first part of section 455 lists matters and requires the authorised officer
to include particulars of each, "so far as is practicable",
and "which, on
investigation, appear to be relevant to sentence". The list includes matters
relating to the offender's personal background
and current circumstances,
including the offender's:
social history and background (including cultural background);
medical and psychiatric history;
employment history;
financial circumstances; and any
special needs of the offender.
The list also includes matters relating
to the offence, compliance with any previous sentence, rehabilitation and the
offender's propensity
to re-offend, including:
any courses, programs, treatment, therapy, or other assistance from which
he or she may benefit; and
the authorised officer's opinion about the offender's attitude to the
offence; and the offender's propensity to commit further offences.
a catch-all provision to enable the authorised officer to include "any other
fact which the authorised officer considers
to be relevant."
The second part of section 455 of the
requires the authorised
officer to include "any other matter which the court has directed to be set out
in the report."
Two points can be made:
First, the matters which the authorised officer must consider for inclusion in
the Pre-Sentence Report do not include all the matters
which the court may
consider in sentencing an offender. In domestic violence cases, matters which
automatically spring to mind as
relevant, but which the authorised officer is
not directed to consider, are the personal circumstances of the victim of the
as known to the offender at the time of committing the offence, any
injury resulting from the offence and previous offences.
Secondly, the matters which the authorised officer may include in the report
are limited to those which the authorised officer considers
relevant to
sentence. Any investigation made by the authorised officer to determine
relevance may be limited by source. For example,
it is the practice of ACT
Corrective Services to request the offender's permission to speak to third
parties when preparing Pre-Sentence
Reports and the offender may not give that
permission. The court cannot assume that its opinion about relevance will be
as the authorised officer's opinion.
For those reasons the Committee considers that it would be prudent for the
court to specifically direct the matters which it considers
relevant be
included in the Pre-Sentence Report.
Matters commonly relevant in sentencing domestic violence offenders and which
the court should direct the authorised officer to set
out in the Pre-Sentence
Report are:
Firstly,matters which focus on the nature and dynamics of domestic violence and
the motive and personal responsibility of the offender,
the nature of the offence;
the degree of responsibility of the person for the commission of the
the reasons why the person committed the offence;
if the offence forms part of a course of conduct consisting of a series of
criminal acts of the same or similar nature - that course
of conduct; and
previous offences.
Secondly, matters relating to the victim of a
domestic offence, both in terms of the immediate impact of the offence and the
consequences
of any sentence, such as:
the personal circumstances of any victim of the offence where known to the
offender at the time of committing the offences;
any loss or damage resulting from the offence; and
the probable effect that any sentence or order under consideration would
have on any of the person's family or dependants.
The Magistrate or Judge
may seek submissions from the prosecutor about what matters to be included in
the report.
Recommendation 66:
That the court follow a practice of specifically directing that matters
commonly relevant in sentencing domestic violence offenders
be set out in the
Pre-Sentence Report, such as:
- matters which focus on the nature and dynamics of domestic violence and
the motive and personal responsibility of the offender;
- matters relating to the victim of a domestic offence, both in terms of the
immediate impact of the offence and the consequences
of any sentence.
Recommendation 67:
That the court seek submissions from the prosecutor about what matters
should be set out in the Pre-Sentence Report.
Impact Statements
This Committee recommended the formal adoption of Victim Impact Statements in
Report No. 6
Victims of Crime.
Legislation in
relation to Victim Impact Statements came into force on 15 June 1995.
A Victim Impact Statement is a statement signed by a victim, setting out the
harm suffered by the victim as a result of an offence.
The court has this statement at the time of sentencing
the offender.
does not require a Victim Impact Statement to be tendered. It
assumes that the Victim Impact Statement will be tendered by the prosecution.
Section 429AB simply states that the prosecutor must not tender a Victim Impact
Statement unless:
the victim has consented in writing; and
a copy of the statement has been given to the defence.
The court must not draw any inference about the harm suffered by the victim from
the fact that the Victim Impact Statement was not
The defence may cross-examine the victim about the contents of the Victim
Impact Statement. An evaluation of the use of Victim
Impact Statements in South
Australia found that this rarely occurs. Challenges which do occur generally
concern claims of financial
loss, and tend to be resolved through negotiation
rather than cross-examination of the victim.
is silent as to who should prepare the Victim Impact Statement.
In practice, the statement has generally been prepared by the investigating
police officer, with input from the victim.
Victim Impact Statements may also be prepared by the victim. A brochure
explaining the law and procedure, and including a form which
may be completed
as a Victim Impact Statement has been prepared for the police and court staff
to give to victims of crime. The brochure
advises the victim to send the
completed statement to the police informant who will send it to the prosecutor.
The brochure states
that if the victim is unsure how to fill in the form, the
police will help.
The Committee notes that the
limits the usefulness of Victim Impact
Statements in domestic violence cases. The legislation only applies to a Victim
Statement in respect of an offence for which the maximum penalty is a
term of imprisonment of at least five years. This cut-off
is arbitrary in the
sense that an offence may cause the victim harm but not be "serious" enough,
in terms of penalty, for the
legislation to apply. For example, the legislation
would not apply to the offence of breach of a domestic violence protection
which has a maximum penalty of a fine of $1,000 or imprisonment for not more
than 6 months.
Prior to the introduction of the legislation, the courts were requesting that
Victim Impact Statements be prepared for sentencing
in relation to a variety of
offences. The courts did so where it appeared that the victim had suffered
significant harm as a result
of the offence, rather than on the basis of the
maximum penalty for the offence. The Committee notes that legislation does not
that practice.
Recommendation 68:
That the court continue to request that Victim Impact Statements be prepared
for domestic violence offences.
of Violence Evidence
Term of reference (h) requires the Committee to consider the provision of
background information to the Court to assist in determining
penalties for
breaches of protection orders. Many submissions argued a need to appraise the
court of any history of previous violence,
even if this had not been the
subject of criminal action. Comment was made that victims often endure violence
for years before reporting
an incident to police, and that the court needs that
information to see the offence before it in context. Those submissions would
doubt argue that a history of domestic violence is equally applicable to assist
the court in determining penalties for all domestic
violence offences, not just
the offence of breach of a protection order.
The Committee acknowledges the validity of the argument that a detailed
history of domestic violence which precedes the offence
would provide a context
that would explain to the court the level of fear and harm caused by the
specifies that any alleged offences which the offender has not
admitted cannot be taken into account in determining sentence.
However, evidence of matters which precede or follow an offence is admissible
in certain circumstances. It has long been established
that similar fact
evidence is admissible. There is a growing body of case law that other matters
arising out of a history of violence
between the offender and the victim may be
admissible. For example, evidence of Battered Women's Syndrome is admissible to
the defence
of a battered woman charged with murder. As previously noted in
this report, evidence of Battered Women's Syndrome may be admissible
propositions about the victim's credibility based on myths about how a person
would have acted if the account given were
truthful (for example, to counter
myths about why victims stay in violent relationships).
Accordingly, the growing body of case law makes admissible a history of
domestic violence which precedes an offence as an aggravating
factor to be
taken into account on sentencing, in certain circumstances. The Committee notes
that the law is developing and is not
sufficiently certain to allow general and
specific principles in this context.
The Committee notes that the law does not prevent a detailed history of
violence by the offender toward the victim, which proceeds
or follows an
offence, and which has not been the subject of a criminal conviction, being
included in a Victim Impact Statement.
Such evidence would be a factor to be
taken into account on sentencing if admitted by the offender or where proved
beyond reasonable
Perpetrator
education programs and
The courts in the ACT have demonstrated flexibility and innovation in
sentencing, particularly in relation to serious offences. The
courts frequently
impose a sentencing package that includes both punitive and rehabilitative
The Committee has recommended that perpetrator education programs be available
as a sentencing option.
The focus of perpetrator education programs is rehabilitation as opposed to
punishment. They should not be imposed as a "soft"sentencing
substitution for punitive measures. Where a perpetrator education program is
available, the order for attendance should
be made as part of a sentencing
package, either as a condition of a recognisance (which may be attached to a
suspended sentence)
or where sentence is deferred upon a finding of guilt, as a
condition of bail.
Based Sentence
Upon a verdict of guilty, or a plea of guilty the court should order a
Pre-Sentence Report in all cases where attendance at a perpetrator
program is being considered.
The Committee considers that it would be highly desirable for the court to
direct that the Pre-Sentence Report focus on:
factors that will assist in deciding the offender's suitability for
referral to a program including:
- the circumstances of the
- issues relating to the violence;
- past offending;
- the extent to which the offender is complying, or has complied with any
- the `authorised officer's' opinion about the offender's attitude to the
offence; and
- the offender's propensity to commit further offences.
the current availability and accessibility of a perpetrator education
conditions required for attendance at a perpetrator education program;
the offender's consent to those conditions;
any further matters relevant to any risk the offender may pose to the victim.
Supervision
A central feature of best practice perpetrator education programs is the
accountability of the program for the safety of the victims
of the violence.
Consequently, a condition of attendance is that program attendees have to
authorise the program facilitators to
pass on victim safety information.
Information about the attendee's behaviour also flows, subject to the victim's
consent, from the
victim to the program facilitators. This gives the program
facilitators feedback about the effectiveness of the program in relation
individual attendees in terms of preventing further violence.
For those reasons the Committee is of the view that supervision by ACT
Corrective Services is essential in all cases where the court
offender to attend a perpetrator education program, to provide case management
for the offender - referrals, linkage and
support, as well as monitoring of
progress. Further, the offender's progress should be monitored with
inter-agency coordination focusing
on the behaviour of the offender and the
experience of the victim.
The approach is based on a recognition that the offender's compliance with the
court orders can only be monitored properly with input
from the victim.
Under the proposed inter agency approach in the ACT, the Committee recommends
that monitoring of the offender's supervision by ACT
Corrective Services be
coordinated with the Domestic Violence Coordinator.
At the beginning of the period of supervision, ACT Corrective Services would
advise the name of the
offender and relevant details. Of course, relevant details would include the
orders and conditions for attendance
at the perpetrator program and
supervision. In turn, the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator would contact
the victim to ensure
that the victim is aware of all of those orders and
conditions and to invite the victim to advise if there is any breach.
The Domestic Violence Project Coordinator would also invite the victim to
attend a parallel victim's education and support group
and would maintain
is expected that both ACT Corrective
Services and the Domestic Violence Project
Coordinator would maintain contact with the perpetrator program facilitators.
The Domestic Violence Project Coordinator would provide the information and
impetus for any breach action to be taken by ACT Corrective
Confidentially issues would need to be canvassed. The offender's written
permission for the disclosure of victim safety information
would need to be
obtained before the court ordered attendance at a perpetrator education
The Committee recommends that before making an order that an offender attend a
perpetrator education program, the court should obtain
the written consent of
the offender:
to an order that the offender accept supervision by ACT Corrective
Services, such supervision to be coordinated by the Domestic Violence
Coordinator in consultation with the victim, the perpetrator education program
and the victim support group;
for disclosure of victim safety information between those agencies and the
The Committee believes that whether or not the court orders the
offender to attend a perpetrator education program, supervision by
Corrective Services is essential in all cases where the court makes a package
of orders that include a condition designed to
prevent harassment, intimidation
or violence by the offender towards the victim.
The Committee notes that it is not uncommon for courts in the ACT, in relation
to offences generally, to find an offence proved and
record a conviction, and
to remand (adjourn) a matter for a period of time before passing sentence.
The Committee believes that a deferred sentencing option is particularly appropriate
to domestic violence offenders and highly
desirable where the court orders an
offender to attend a perpetrator education program.
The advantages of a deferred sentence are:
First, the fact that the penalty for the offence has not been decided and is
dependent upon the offender being of good behaviour
(attending and completing
the perpetrator education program and not committing any further offences)
would mean that the issue of
penalty remained alive for the offender throughout
the remand period. It would not only provide a mechanism to deter further acts
of violence but an incentive for the offender to undertake and demonstrate a
commitment to rehabilitation.
Secondly, a repeat offender could be dealt with more effectively by the
criminal justice system. A further offence committed during
the remand period
would not be dealt with in isolation. Any new offence or breach could be taken
into account at the time of sentencing
for the outstanding offence. In other
words, a serious and repeat offender would not slip through the system.
The Committee notes that the DPP, or the Community Corrections Officer would
need to ensure that any further offences or breach of
bail conditions by the
offender were listed before the Magistrate or Judge who was part heard for
sentence in relation to the outstanding
Thirdly, where supervision is imposed as part of the deferred sentencing
package, case management and monitoring of progress throughout
period would provide a comprehensive basis for reporting back to the court via
Report or a Breach Report.
Where the deferred sentencing option is used, the offender should be required
to enter into fresh bail.
Bail conditions should specifically address:
supervision in accordance with the inter agency arrangement recommended
the conditions of attendance at the program;
any condition necessary to meet any concern about the need to protect the
victim from violence or harassment by the offender.
The Committee notes
that a lengthy adjournment would be required to enable the offender to complete
the program. It is expected that
the offender would participate in the program
for 26 weeks and there would be an open program format so that there is no
new participants joining. The Committee recommends that the hearing
date for sentence should be 7 months from the date the offender
is ordered to
attend the program.
The Committee recommends that the court should order that a Pre-Sentence Report
be prepared for the adjourned sentencing date. Information
in the Pre-Sentence
Report about the perpetrator education program should be limited to the
offender's attendance record and the
effectiveness of the perpetrator education
program in terms of any response of the victim. The Domestic Violence Project
Coordinator
or the victim would provide that information to ACT Corrective
Any further offences or breach of bail conditions should result in the offender
being brought before the court as expeditiously as
possible. Such matters
should be listed before the Magistrate or Judge who is part heard for sentence
in relation to the outstanding
based sentence on finding of guilt
The court may consider it appropriate not to defer sentence. Where the court
orders that the offender be released upon entering into
a recognisance, or
imposes a suspended sentence attached to a recognisance, the Committee
recommends that the conditions as to supervision
and attendance at a
perpetrator program be those outlined above.
of Imprisonment
The severity of the offence, previous criminal record or previous
non-compliance with court orders, for example, may be such that
imposes a term of imprisonment. Where a perpetrator education program is
available, the court may consider it necessary
for the offender to attend the
program upon release from prison.
A mechanism used by the courts is to sentence the offender to a term of
imprisonment and to order that after the jail term has been
served the offender
be released upon entering into a recognisance. The recognisance may be attached
to a suspended sentence.
Should the court follow this course, the Committee recommends that the
conditions of the recognisance include the conditions as to
supervision and
attendance at a perpetrator program as outlined above.
The Committee further recommends that the court should consider the
introduction of practice directions to implement the Committee's
recommendations in relation to the procedure before the court on sentencing
offenders charged with a domestic violence offence and
in particular where the
court orders an offender to attend a perpetrator education program.
Recommendation 69:
That upon a finding of guilt the court order a Pre-Sentence Report in all
cases where a perpetrator education program is being considered.
Recommendation 70:
That an order that the offender attend a perpetrator education program not
be made unless the offender gives written consent:
to an order that the offender accept supervision by ACT Corrective
Services, such supervision to be coordinated by the Domestic Violence
Coordinator in consultation with the victim, the perpetrator education program
and the victim support group; and
- for the disclosure of victim safety information between those agencies and
the victim.
Recommendation 71:
That supervision by ACT Corrective Services be imposed on the offender in
all cases where the court orders an offender to attend a
perpetrator education
program or makes a package of orders that include a condition designed to
prevent harassment, intimidation
or violence by the offender towards the
Recommendation 72:
That the court consider a deferred sentencing option for an offender charged
with a domestic violence offence and in particular where
the court orders the
offender to attend a perpetrator education program.
Recommendation 73:
That where a deferred sentencing option is used to allow the offender to
attend a perpetrator education program:
a. The offender be required to enter into fresh bail including conditions as
to supervision, attendance at the program and protection
of the victim.
b. The date for sentence be 7 months from the date the offender is ordered
to attend the program.
c. A Pre-Sentence Report be ordered for the date for sentence.
d. Any further offences or breach of bail conditions be listed before the
Magistrate/Judge who is part heard for sentence in relation
to the outstanding
offence as expeditiously as possible.
Recommendation 74:
That where the court orders attendance at a perpetrator education program,
either as a part of a community based sentence or to follow
imprisonment, the conditions of the recognisance include conditions as to
supervision, attendance at a perpetrator education
program and protection of
the victim.
Recommendation 75:
That the court consider introducing Practice Directions to implement the
Committee's recommendations in relation to the procedure
on sentencing an
offender charged with a domestic violence offence and in particular, where the
court orders an offender to attend
a perpetrator education program.
It is common ground that domestic violence continues to be a widespread problem
in the Australian community because the community,
as a whole, condones its
occurrence. It is condoned due to an unwillingness to intervene because it is
felt that domestic violence
is a private matter, or because there is a feeling
that the victim must have provoked or deserved it, or because it has its root
in a problem personal to the perpetrator (for example, drunkenness or
unemployment).
Australian Governments have devoted, and continue to devote a substantial
amount of money to re-educate the community that violence
is never acceptable,
including when it occurs in the home.
The judiciary are, like all other members of society, products of their social
upbringing. Hall comments that "even with the best
intentions, judges are limited
by their own knowledge and experience in making decisions".
This limited knowledge and experience can have
serious consequences for the victims of domestic violence. Professor Kathleen
Mahoney has noted that the widespread judicial misunderstanding of the dynamics
and seriousness of a battering relationship
often results in unjust conclusions
being drawn about victims who are reluctant to leave a battering relationship
not cooperate in testifying.
However, the high expectations which accompany judicial officers' important
position in society require that they take the responsibility
of administering
justice seriously, in particular by becoming aware of the social realities
which may effect the matters which come
before them. One of these social
realities is, of course, gender relations.
The need for members of the judiciary to receive training in gender related
issues, particularly domestic violence, has received
prominence during the last
few years due to the broad media coverage given to certain statements about
domestic violence made from
the bench. Although a number of commentators have
criticised the actions by the media following those comments, such as the
of all previous speeches of the judge in question for similar remarks,
and the pursuit of some judges in the street by television
crews, there has
been a growing awareness of the need for suitable training programs to ensure
that justice is - and is seen to be
- delivered to victims of domestic
Hall notes that there are a number of reasons why discussion of the need for
judicial education concerning gender issues in general,
and domestic violence
in particular, is a sensitive issue:
the implication behind such discussion is that judges are currently not
acting fairly in their application of the law;
the discussion may raise personal questions with regard to the individual
judges' attitudes and behaviour in their private lives,
their upbringing and
perhaps their notions of chivalry; and
because the judiciary are required to
be insulated from political pressure, the discussion may be seen as lobbying
judiciary by one special interest group.
The social attitudes of
members of the judiciary reinforce, and are reinforced by, the doctrine of
precedent. The development of precedent
in the law is designed to ensure that
the application of the law is certain and predictable, to ensure that all
decisions reflect
an accepted approach to a particular problem. The rejection
of a long-applied precedent can raise criticism that the courts, rather
simply applying the law, have set out to change that law. However, when a
cultural approach to an issue is enshrined in precedent,
it can become
perpetuated through the following of that precedent, even when it is no longer
appropriate to the society whose views
the precedent is intended to
However, many Australian judges have acknowledged that there is gender inequality
in the law. This, says Professor Mahoney, is
an important first step in ensuring
its eradication. The second step is the recognition that in order to remove
these biases
judges need to better understand the impact of gender and physical
abuse on social behaviour.
Therefore, it
is important that judges demand their own ongoing training in gender-related
Most judges have a strong desire to make decisions that are fair and just. An
appreciation that there does exist the potential for
unfair decisions because
of the in-built biases of the law will result in these judges looking to
available sources of information
on facts such as judicial training programs,
to help them to administer justice with greater knowledge and social
Several authors have commented on the content of the training which should be
received by the judiciary. Rathus has noted that specific
areas of training
which are required in this area concern:
the dynamics of family violence;
battered spouse and child syndromes;
courtroom treatment of victims, offenders and witnesses; and
the impact of personal attitudes, gender
bias and courtroom demeanour.
Canadian judges have access to a
comprehensive Judicial Education Program on Gender Equality, developed by the
Western Judicial Education
Centre. In that program, presented in written and
video form, the legal approach to domestic violence is examined in the context
of gender inequality, with such issues as sexual assault, gender and
credibility, gender appropriate language being considered.
In the ACT correctional services are provided by:
the ACT Parole Board which was created by the Parole Act 1976;
ACT Corrective Services, which is a branch of the Attorney-Generals
Department.
Parole Board
An offender sentenced to imprisonment is required to serve any non parole
period that is set. At the end of the non-parole period,
the ACT Parole Board
may order release of the offender on parole and set conditions of parole,
including supervision.
If the offender returns to live in the ACT, the Parole Board refers the
offender to ACT Corrective Services for supervision by a
Community Corrections
Where the offender breaches a condition of parole, the Community Corrections
Officer is required to provide a written report to the
Parole Board. The Parole
Board determines disciplinary action in relation to the breach.
Corrective Services
Broadly, correctional services provided by ACT Corrective Services are divided
into 2 areas:
community based corrections; and
custodial corrections - "safe and humane containment" for persons refused
bail at the Belconnen Remand Centre.
based corrections
Community Corrections Officers work in teams with a senior supervising officer.
They meet a number of needs in the criminal justice
system in relation to
persons who have been charged with, or convicted of a criminal offence,
preparation of court reports to assist the court by providing impartial
information and recommendations;
supervision as a condition of bail, of a recognisance (a good behaviour
bond, which may be attached to a suspended sentence), or of
ensuring compliance with court orders, such as orders to attend
programs,(for example, the Drink Drivers program) and community service
breach action - where there is a failure to comply with a court order,
including a condition of bail, a recognisance or parole.
A Community
Corrections Officer is assigned and retains responsibility for the "case" of a
person charged with, or convicted of a
criminal offence. Accordingly, the
Community Corrections Officer provides supervision for that person and prepares
court reports
as requested by the court.
The reason for the assignment of one Community Corrections Officer to a "case"
is to provide comprehensive case management for the
individual client:
to ensure that the individual client has appropriate support and guidance;
to make referrals and provide linkage to referral agencies, where it is
considered necessary or appropriate;
to monitor the individual client's progress;
to ensure compliance with court orders.
The strategy fosters
familiarity with the case and provides a safety mechanism to ensure that the
offender does not slip through the
The functions performed by the Community Corrections Officer are intensive in
terms of workload and time spent with the individual
client. Where a person is
referred by the court or the Parole Board to ACT Corrective Services the
Community Corrections Officer
spends more time with the client on a one to one
basis than any other person who performs a function in the administration of
criminal justice system.
Approach of ACT Corrective
ACT Corrective Services does not have a policy and guidelines in relation to
persons who have been charged with, or convicted of
a domestic violence
offence. The Committee have been advised by ACT Corrective Services that it
does not formulate policy in terms
of types of offences.
There are no guidelines as to how to deal with offenders in terms of approach.
Rather, each is dealt with on a "case by case" basis.
For both the purpose of
court reports and supervision there is a focus on the client's background and
current circumstances, the
offence and compliance with any previous sentence.
Those factors are dominant in an assessment of the prospect of rehabilitation
and propensity to re-offend. Consequently, those factors are also dominant in
decisions made by the Community Corrections Officer
in relation to case
management and recommendations, for example, about sentencing options in the
Pre-Sentence Report.
The focus on the individual offender is emphasised by due regard to the
. In practice, the Community Corrections Officer requests permission to
speak to third parties, such as members of the client's family
information given by the client. The Community Corrections Officer will not
speak to third parties without such permission.
Against this context is the prevalent attitude of persons who have been charged
with, or convicted of a domestic violence offence,
of minimising the violence
and not taking responsibility for their criminal behaviour.
The Justice Sub-Committee in South Australia, which constituted 7 members,
2 of whom were from the Department of Corrective Services
in South Australia,
reported that it was "the experience of correctional staff, that at the time
of arrest perpetrators most
commonly deny the violence completely or drastically
minimise the violence. Rarely is there an admission of guilt or responsibility
for actions."
Research has shown that attitudinal
change in offenders of domestic violence, if it occurs at all, is a lengthy
The Committee notes that the focus on the offender, the constraints imposed by
and the prevalent attitude of persons charged with, or
convicted of, a domestic violence offence create difficulties for the Community
Corrections Officer in performing their impartial role in the administration of
the criminal justice system in domestic violence
There is a growing awareness throughout Australia that correctional services
require specific policy and guidelines in relation
to persons who have been
charged with, or convicted of a domestic violence offence.
ACT Corrective Services Policy and
An ACT Corrective Services Policy would:
explain the need for specific policy and guidelines in relation to persons
who have been charged with, or convicted of a domestic
violence offence;
point to the prevalent attitude of persons charged with, or convicted of a
domestic violence offence of minimising the violence and
responsibility for their criminal behaviour;
point to the need to ensure that the offender receives a consistent message
point to the need to ensure that the Community Corrections Officer does not
collude in the offender's attempts to minimise the violence;
point to victim safety ramifications relevant to supervision and
recommendations to the court, for example about sentencing options;
point to the need for guidelines to assist the Community Corrections
Officer to determine when breach proceedings should be initiated;
point to the need for breach action to be taken as expeditiously as
point to the need for inter-agency coordination, and in
particular:
- with the prosecution, to ensure that any
breach action is listed before the Magistrate or Judge who is part heard for
sentence in
relation to outstanding offences;
- with the Domestic Violence Coordinator, in relation to supervision of an
offender and feedback from the victim.
The Committee believes
that the development of an ACT Corrective Services Domestic Violence Policy and
guidelines to implement that
policy are highly desirable and essential to an
improved criminal justice response to domestic violence in the ACT.
Recommendation 76
That an ACT Corrective Services Domestic Violence Policy and guidelines to
implement that policy be developed focusing on the criminality
behaviour, victim support and safety, prompt breach action and inter agency
coordination.
for Court Reports
Community Corrections Officers are called upon by the courts to prepare
reports. The purpose of the reports is to assist the court
by providing
impartial information and informed recommendations. The content and
recommendations of the reports are relied upon by
the courts as a guide in its
decision making process about bail and sentencing the offender. Court reports
therefore play a central
role in the criminal justice system. It is essential
that the nature and focus of matters canvassed in court reports are consistent
with the revised criminal justice response to domestic violence.
Assessment Reports
This report has referred to the need for particular caution when deciding the
question of bail in domestic violence cases because
of the difficulty of
predicting the risk of further harm to the victim.
The Committee has recommended that the court should follow the practice of
obtaining a Bail Assessment Report from ACT Corrective
Services in all cases
where an offender is charged with a domestic violence offence. The purpose of
the report is to provide
impartial information to assist with bail decisions
and the setting of bail conditions. The Committee has recommended that the
should consult with ACT Corrective Services about the content, time frame for
preparation and form of Bail Assessment
The Committee considers that Bail Assessment Reports should include all factors
relevant to the ability of the offender to successfully
complete a period of
bail, for example:
any risk factors to the victim;
the need for accommodation for the offender and available accommodation
other relevant information such as alcohol and drug factors;
the availability of a bail surety (a person who will sign the bail form
agreeing to pay an amount of money set by the court in the
event that the
offender fails to comply with the conditions of bail).
The Committee
considers that to properly assess any risk to the victim and formulate
recommendations for bail conditions the Community
Corrections Officer should
consult with the police, particularly about the circumstances of the arrest and
any concern expressed
by the victim about the need for protection from violence
or harassment by the offender. The Community Corrections Officer should
liaise with the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator directly where it is
considered necessary to obtain further information
relevant to the safety of
the victim.
The time frame for preparation of the report will depend upon the resources of
ACT Corrective Services.
The Committee recommends that ACT Corrective Services develop specific
guidelines for Bail Assessment Reports in accordance with
the matters referred
Recommendation 77
That ACT Corrective Services develop guidelines in relation to Bail
Assessment Reports. That the guidelines direct that the report
include all
factors relevant to the ability of the offender to successfully complete a
period of bail, and refer to the need to liaise
with the police and the
Domestic Violence Coordinator.
Pre-Sentence
Before passing sentence the court may order a Pre-Sentence Report. If the court
defers sentence the court may order a further Pre-Sentence
Report. Subsequent
reports are usually shorter because matters such as the offender's background
have already been canvassed in the
first report and they focus on the
offender's progress during the adjournment. They are commonly called an
Addendum to the Pre-Sentence
Report and less commonly a Progress Report.
The matters which a Community Corrections Officer must include in a
Pre-Sentence Report have been detailed under the heading "Sentencing"
126. In summary, the
lists matters and requires the Community
Corrections Officer to include particulars of each "so far as is practicable"
and "which,
on investigation, appear relevant to sentence." That list includes
matters relating to the offender's background and current circumstances,
offence, compliance with any previous sentence, rehabilitation and propensity
to re-offend. There is a catch-all provision enabling
inclusion of "any other
fact which the.. [Community Corrections Officer]..considers to be relevant."
Three points can be made:
First, the list of matters which the Community Corrections Officer is required
to consider for inclusion in the Pre-Sentence Report
focus on the individual
offender. The Committee has been advised by ACT Corrective Services that other
matters relevant to sentence
are generally not canvassed in a Pre-Sentence
Report unless there is a direction by the court to do so. In domestic violence
there are commonly additional matters which are relevant and which the
court may taken into account in sentencing an offender as
set out in section
429A of the
For example, there are matters which focus on the nature and dynamics of the
domestic violence and the motive and personal responsibility
of the offender,
the nature of the offence;
the degree of responsibility of the person for the commission of the
the reasons why the person committed the offence;
if the offence forms part of a course of conduct consisting of a series of
criminal acts of the same or similar nature - that course
of conduct; and
previous offences.
There are matters relevant to sentence relating to
the victim, both in terms of the immediate impact of the offence and the
consequence
of any sentence, such as:
the personal circumstances of any victim of the offence where known to the
offender at the time of committing the offences;
any loss or damage resulting from the offence; and
the probable effect that any sentence or order under consideration would
have on any of the person's family or dependants.
The Committee considers
that there should be specific guidelines setting out matters which the court
may take into account in sentencing
and which are commonly relevant in
sentencing domestic violence offenders. The guidelines should direct the
Community Corrections
Officer to include those matters in the Pre-Sentence
Report, where relevant.
Secondly, there is clear scope for subjectivity in deciding what matters are
relevant. There is also scope for subjectivity in applying
the relevant matters
to a particular case and in making any assessment of the offender in terms of
propensity to re-offend, prospects
of rehabilitation and suitability for
sentencing options. Myths and personal values may creep into assessments of
relevance and allocations
of criminal responsibility. Consequently, they can
influence recommendations about sentencing options made to the court. The scope
for subjectivity means that it is crucial that the Community Corrections
Officer understands the dynamics and outcomes of domestic
Thirdly, the
places constraints on the Community Corrections
Officer in terms of the investigation that can be made of matters that may be
The offender may not be prepared to give permission for the Community
Corrections Officer to speak to third parties to confirm information
the offender or to obtain further information.
The Committee considers that there should be specific guidelines directing the
Community Corrections Officer to inform the court
that permission to conduct
further investigation was requested of the offender but was denied.
In domestic violence cases, where the Community Corrections Officer considers
making a recommendation for bail or for a community
based sentence, the officer
should also consider whether it is necessary or desirable to include a
condition to prevent harassment,
intimidation or violence by the offender
towards the victim. Of course, such a condition should be recommended in all
cases where
the officer has concerns that the offender may pose a further risk
to the victim.
The Committee considers that the Community Corrections Officer should recommend
supervision in all cases where it is considered necessary
to recommend an order
for the personal protection of the victim.
The Committee considers that ACT Corrective Services should develop specific
guidelines in relation to the preparation of Pre-Sentence
reports in accordance
with the matters referred to above.
Recommendation 78:
That ACT Corrective Services develop guidelines for the preparation of
Pre-Sentence Reports in relation to domestic violence offenders
a. Set out matters which the court may take into account and which are
commonly relevant in sentencing domestic violence offenders,
and direct that
the Community Corrections Officer include those matters in the Pre-Sentence
Report, where relevant;
b. Direct the Community Corrections Officer to inform the court where the
offender denies permission to speak to third parties to
confirm information
given by the offender or to obtain further information.
c. Direct that where the Community Corrections Officer considers making a
recommendation for bail or a community based sentence, the
Officer should
consider whether it is necessary or desirable to recommend an order for the
personal protection of the victim, and
if so the Officer should also recommend
that the offender be subject to supervision.
for Supervision
To be effective, the offender's compliance with orders for the personal
protection of the victim could only be monitored properly
with input from the
victim. This means that the victim must be aware of the court orders. The
victim must also be told who to contact
to advise if there is any breach of
those orders.
The Committee believes that it is highly desirable that monitoring of the
offender's supervision by ACT Corrective Services be coordinated
Domestic Violence Coordinator..
The Committee considers that the Community Corrections Officer should contact
the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator at the beginning
of the period of
supervision. This would mean that the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator
would be made aware of which Community
Corrections Officer was responsible for
the offender's "case", and therefore responsible for any breach action.
In turn, the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator would contact the victim and
be a contact person for the victim if there was a
breach of the court orders.
Recommendation 79:
That ACT Corrective Services develop guidelines for monitoring of
supervision of an offender coordinated with the Domestic Violence
Coordinator to ensure input from the victim.
Streamlined
Procedures For Breach
There should be clear guidelines to assist the probation officer to determine
when breach proceedings should be initiated. The policy
should be made known to
the victim and to the offender.
The victim or Domestic Violence Project Coordinator would provide the
information and impetus for any breach action to be taken by
Adult Corrective
Streamlined procedures for breach can only be achieved by communication between
the court and ACT Corrective Services as to the form
and content of the
relevant documents that must be filed in the court to institute breach
proceedings.
Breach proceedings must be coordinated with the DPP to ensure that there is
fast tracking, consolidation with any related outstanding
matters and no
duplication of proceedings.
Recommendation 80:
That ACT Corrective Services in consultation with the court and the DPP
develop guidelines for streamlined procedures for breach of
court orders.
for Perpetrator Education Programs
The Committee has recommended that court ordered attendance at a perpetrator
education program should be available in the ACT, subject
to a number of
pre-conditions which include the following:
the program would be a correctional service;
the program would adhere to best practice principles including positioning
the program so that it is accountable to victims of domestic
violence and
capable of sustaining a offender responsibility/victim safety focus;
the program should operate in conjunction
with victim's education and support groups.
The Committee envisages that
the perpetrator education program will be operated by an independent agency.
However, an assessment of
an offender's suitability to attend a perpetrator
education program would be conducted by ACT Corrective Services.
The Committee considers it essential that ACT Corrective Services develop
specific guidelines where perpetrator education programs
are available as a
sentencing option.
The ACT Corrective Services guidelines in relation to perpetrator education
programs should begin with a Preamble noting the criteria
for programs as
listed by the National Committee on Violence Against Women and summarised at
page 208 of this report.
The guidelines should address a number of matters in relation to Pre-Sentence
First, the guidelines should set out matters which the Community Corrections
Officer should canvass in the Pre-Sentence Report, as
set out in paragraph
.These matters are, of course, in addition to those matters commonly relevant
in sentencing domestic violence
Secondly, the guidelines should address the need for supervision of an offender
for the period of attendance at the perpetrator education
program and detail
the need for inter agency coordination in accordance with recommendation 76.
The guidelines should also state
that before recommending an order that an
offender attend a perpetrator education program , the Community Corrections
Officer should
obtain the written consent of the offender to accept supervision
and for the disclosure of victim safety information.
The Community Corrections Officer should inform the offender of the reason for
the request for disclosure of the information. If
the offender is not prepared
to give written permission for the disclosure of that information, the court
should be specifically
informed of that fact.
Thirdly, the Committee envisages that the programs will operate on a user pays
basis. At the time of the assessment of an offender's
suitability to attend a
program, the Community Corrections Officer will assess the offender's financial
circumstances and make recommendations
the cost of attendance. Guidelines would need to be developed in relation to
that issue.
Fourthly, where attendance at a perpetrator education program is to be
recommended as part of a community based sentence, the guidelines
should direct
that the Community Corrections Officer consider recommending that sentence be
deferred until the offender has completed
the program. The guidelines should
state that where a deferred sentence is recommended the Community Corrections
Officer should:
recommend bail conditions as to supervision, attendance at the program and
protection of the victim, as appropriate;
recommend the date for sentence be seven months from the date the offender
is ordered to attend the program;
list any further offences or bail conditions before the Magistrate/Judge
who is part heard for sentence in relation to the outstanding
quickly as possible.
Fifthly, where a deferred sentencing option is used
and the court orders an Addendum to the Pre-Sentence Report for the sentencing
date, the guidelines should state that information in the report in relation to
the perpetrator education program should be limited
to the offender's
attendance record.
Sixthly, where the Community Corrections Officer does not recommend a deferred
sentence, but attendance at a perpetrator education
program is recommended as
part of a community based sentence or to follow a term of imprisonment, the
guidelines should state that
the Community Corrections Officer recommend
conditions as to supervision, attendance at the program and protection of the
as appropriate.
Recommendation 81:
That ACT Corrective Services develop specific guidelines where perpetrator
education programs are available as a sentencing option
incorporating the
matters outlined by the Committee.
ACT Corrective Services plans staff training annually. Training is targeted at
both the needs of the staff as a group, which have
recently included issues
such as HIV/Aids, EEO, OH&S, and the needs of individual officers arising
out of work demands, which
have recently included issues such as people who are
depressed and sex offenders. The content of the training plan is negotiated
with the staff.
ACT Corrective Services has not required, provided or arranged training for its
staff in relation to domestic violence. There are
several reasons why training
Firstly, community corrections officers need information about the dynamics of
domestic violence.
The corrections officers spend more time with an offender than any other person
who performs a function in the administration of
the criminal justice system,
case manage, supervise and interview for court reports on a one to one basis.
It is important that at
all stages in the criminal justice process that the
offender receives the same message about the criminality of the behaviour and
that the Community Corrections Officers, in particular, are aware of the victim
safety ramifications for the victim. Corrective services
officers should be
aware of "lethality" indicators. It is essential that the corrective services
officers do not unwittingly collude
with the offender who may seek to minimise
the criminality of the behaviour by blaming the victim.
Training is a necessary basis for assessments of relevance and of the offender
and in formulating recommendations to the court.
Secondly, training is necessary to assist community corrections officers to
understand the reasoning behind revised policies and
guidelines, recommended
Thirdly, training is needed to facilitate participation by community
corrections officers in a coordinated inter-agency criminal
justice response to
domestic violence, and in particular greater communication with the police, the
prosecution, the courts and the
ACT DVIP recommended below.
Recommendation 82:
That ACT Corrective Services provide training for its staff in relation to
domestic violence.
6: OTHER ISSUES RELATING TO THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE RESPONSE
of Domestic Violence
1. For the purpose of an enhanced criminal justice response to offences
committed in the context of domestic violence, the Committee
has recommended
amendments to the arrest powers in the
Crimes Act 1900
and bail powers in the
Bail Act 1992
. The proposed provisions in the
refer to a 'domestic violence offence'. In the
, for example, special
bail provisions will apply to a person charged with a 'domestic violence
2. A definition of 'domestic violence offence' must be framed to cover all
criminal offences committed in the context of domestic
violence where it is
necessary and convenient for the purpose of legislation to refer to those
offences as a group.
3. A consistent definition of 'domestic violence offence' is consequently
needed for the
, so that police and others in the
criminal justice system can readily identify when the recommended arrest and
bail powers operate.
That definition should consist of specified criminal
offences, committed by a person in a specified relationship with the victim
the offence.
4. There is no definition of domestic violence or 'domestic violence offence'
Crimes Act 1900
does contain a definition of 'domestic
violence offence' but only by redirection to Domestic Violence Act 1986.
defines 'domestic violence offence'
as an offence that is a domestic violence offence within the meaning of the
Domestic Violence
Act 1986 or an offence against s. 27 of that Act (breach of
a protection order).
5. The process of understanding the definition in the
becomes more
complex as the Domestic Violence Act defines 'domestic violence offence' as a
`prescribed offence' which, in turn, is
defined by reference to sections in the
, and by section number only.
of this Report, the Committee shall recommend removal of the
definition of 'domestic violence offence' from the Domestic Violence
7. The definition will be obsolete if further recommendations for simplifying
the grounds for a domestic violence protection order
and inserting a definition
of 'domestic violence' are implemented in the Domestic Violence Act.
8. The Committee recognises that the definition of 'domestic violence offence'
for the purposes of the criminal law will be different
from the definition of
domestic violence
in the Domestic Violence Act 1986 for the purposes
of obtaining a protection order. The latter will be wider and purposefully
The range of conduct or threatened conduct which should be sufficient to obtain
a protection order is different from the
conduct or threatened conduct which
should attract the specific provisions in the
. The conduct
which attracts the special provisions in the
be limited to alleged or proven criminal conduct. Criminal conduct includes
the criminal offence of contravening a protection
9. As the definition of 'domestic violence offence' must refer to criminal
offences, there is no alternative other than to list the
relevant sections of
in the definition. Care should be taken to ensure that all
criminal offences which may be committed in the context of domestic violence
are included in the definition. Offences should be listed in a way which
enables them to be readily understood.
10. The definition of 'domestic violence offence' proposed by the Committee is
similar to the current definition of `prescribed offence'
in the Domestic
Violence Act. It contains all offences within the definition of `prescribed
offence'. The definition proposed by
the Committee contains a range of new
offences which have been shown to indicate significant risk to victims when
committed in the
context of domestic violence. Asterix indicate the new
offences. The offence of stalking, once added to the
as recommended
by the Committee below, should also be included in the definition.
11. The definition proposed by the Committee is as follows:
12. 'Domestic violence offence'- means:
the offence of contravening a protection order ( s. 27 of the Domestic
Violence Act)
any of the following criminal offences or an attempt to commit such an
murder (s12)
manslaughter (s. 15)
intentionally inflicting grievous bodily harm (s. 19)
recklessly inflicting grievous bodily harm (s. 20)
wounding (s. 21)
assault with intent to commit certain indictable offences (s.22)
inflicting actual bodily harm (s. 23)
assault occasioning actual bodily harm (s. 24)
causing grievous bodily harm (s. 25)
common assault (s. 26)
acts endangering life (s. 27)
acts endangering health (s. 28)
threat to kill (s. 30)
threat to inflict grievous bodily harm (s. 31)
demand accompanied by threats (s. 32 (1) (a) and 32(2) (a))
possession of an object with intent to kill etc (s. 33)
forcible confinement (s. 34)*
abduction of a young person (s. 36)*
kidnapping (s. 37)
sexual assault in the first, second and third degree (s.92A, s. 92B &
sexual intercourse without consent (s.92D)
sexual intercourse with a young person (s. 92E)
act of indecency in the first second & third degree (s.92F, s. 92G, s.
act of indecency without consent (s.92J)
act of indecency with young persons (s.92K)
incest and similar offences (s.92L)
abduction (s.92M)
destroying or damaging property (s. 128)*
arson (s. 129)
possession of an article with intent to destroy property (s. 133)*
being found with an intent to commit an offence (s. 145(1))*
forcible entry on land (s. 146)
possession of offensive weapon (s.493)
possession of offensive weapon with intent (s.494)
offensive behaviour (s.546A)
aiding or abetting or being knowingly concerned in the commission of a
domestic violence offence*
where the person or one of the
people in respect of whom the conduct or alleged conduct has been engaged in
a spouse of the offender
a child of the offender or of a spouse of the person
a relative of the offender
a household member of the offender
1. The Committee also
considered whether this definition should be extended to "a person with whom
the offender has had an intimate
relationship". This would mean that the
special rules proposed by the Committee with respect to arrest and bail would
apply not just
only to a spouse, a child, a relative or household member of the
offender, but also to someone who had an intimate relationship with
offender. This would encompass boyfriend/girlfriend and same sex relationships
which are presently not included unless the parties
lived in a de facto
relationship.
2. The Committee decided not to recommend this extended definition at the
present time. However, the Committee acknowledges that
the same or similar
dynamics often operate in these relationships, as for example, in spousal
relationships, suggesting that the
recommendations of this report should apply
to them. Whether the range of persons who should be able to obtain a protection
under the Domestic Violence Act should be extended shall be considered in
Part II of this Report.
3. Each of the terms in italics should be defined as they are defined in the
Domestic Violence Act.
Recommendation 83:
That a consistent definition of domestic violence offence should be
inserted in the
. The definition should consist of
specified criminal behaviour, committed by a person in a specified relationship
to the victim and
care should be taken to ensure that all relevant criminal
behaviour is specified.
is stalking?
1. Broadly, `stalking' is conduct directed at a person and intended to cause
intimidation, harassment and/or fear. It is described
in the dictionary as a
"slow, sinister or secret pursuit or approach."
2. Stalking includes behaviour such as following another person, loitering
outside, watching, or entering their home or work, keeping
surveillance, telephoning them, sending them articles, and interfering with
property in their possession. It usually encompasses
actions that have
traditionally fallen short of the criminal law but which could be reasonably
expected to arouse fear or apprehension
in the recipient.
3. In general terms, a recognition of concern about stalking behaviour in
Australia has been caused by its prevalence in domestic
violence cases. A
common trigger is the break-up of a relationship. One person refuses to accept
the end of the relationship or seeks
retribution for what is perceived to be
rejection or infidelity. An act when looked at in isolation, may appear
innocent; but, where
it is performed by an estranged and embittered spouse in
the context of a history of violence, it may be quite frightening, particularly
to the recipient.
4. The growing and extensive literature on the subject suggests that there is
no such thing as a stalker `stereotype'. Stalkers can
be former partners,
co-workers, neighbours, or strangers, such as obsessed fans. This diversity
makes the task of creating laws to
cover all stalking situations particularly
5. A series of stalking homicides galvanised public opinion in Australia in the
early 1990s when it was recognised that the criminal
law had no offence which
targeted stalking behaviour. At about the same time the existence of
legislation in the United States, initially
prompted by the "stalking" of
celebrities by crazed fans, became known. All Australian jurisdictions, except
the ACT have now introduced
legislation creating the criminal offence of
stalking. Stalking is an offence in all jurisdictions in the United States and
The primary focus of such legislation is stalking in the context of
domestic violence, however, many provisions are broad enough
to encompass
situations in which the assailant is a casual acquaintance or a stranger.
create an offence of stalking and/or
intimidation?
1. First, stalking and intimidation are forms of violence. The National
Committee on Violence in its report, Violence: Directions
For Australia(1990),
considered that a definition of violence focusing on physical violence was not
wide enough, and that a true
definition of violence would include non-physical
violence causing psychological and emotional abuse. Once these "non-physical"
are seen as violence, there is no reason that they should not be
addressed by the criminal law in the same way as other forms of
intentional
violence. As stated in a paper prepared for the Police Commissioner's Policy
Advisory Group(PCPAG):
"...the type of behaviour constituting intimidation and harassment
has traditionally fallen outside the law which has not recognised
that it can
be equally terrifying as threats and can cause psychological injury."
1. Secondly,
there is a "gap" in the criminal law. There is recent authority that some
stalking behaviour (but not all) can be prosecuted
as `offensive behaviour' -
conduct may acquire its character of being offensive from the fact that it is
continuing or repeated.
However, the maximum penalty of 6 months for the
offence of offensive behaviour is clearly inadequate to cover serious stalking
Criminal provisions apply to certain stalking methods, for example:
threats to kill; demands accompanied by threats; damage and destruction
property; defacing premises; threats to destroy or damage property; harassment
by post; and harassment by phone. Activities such
as keeping under
surveillance, leaving material and following are not the subject of criminal
provisions.
2. The gap in the criminal law occurs "where one person causes another a degree
of fear or trepidation by behaviour which is on
the surface innocent but which,
taken in context, assumes an importance beyond its immediate significance. Where
a person does
not explicitly threaten another, but silently follows them around,
or sits outside their dwelling, it may be difficult to find
the appropriate
criminal sanction. This kind of behaviour can be controlled by restraining orders,
but the restraining order
may be inadequate to the specific task."
3. In other words, criminal laws can define and regulate behaviour which is
unacceptable or harmful to the community with a force
that the civil system is
unable to match. While little research has been done on the effectiveness of
domestic violence protection
orders, such as exists is consistent with
anecdotal consensus that a domestic violence protection order will have little
the serious obsessive behaviour exhibited by stalkers. To be
adequately regulated, such behaviour, should appropriately be recognised
dealt with as criminal.
4. Thirdly, by creating a criminal offence for stalking and intimidation the
additional protection of the criminal law is available
to victims and the
community is made aware that this sort of behaviour is serious, unacceptable
and criminal. The PCPAG paper puts
"...there is a common belief in the community that non-physical
violence and/or threats are less serious than physical violence
and do not require
a formal legal response. This view is shared by many police officers, and
traditionally
the law has encouraged this view by providing only civil remedies as a means
of protection
1. Fourthly, where
non-physical violence is occurring unchecked by the sanctions of the criminal
law, there is an increased likelihood
that it will escalate to serious physical
violence. The criminal law does not recognise that these non-physically violent
often the precursors for severe and fatal physical violence.
Legislative
1. The Committee has looked at stalking legislation in New South Wales,
Queensland, the Northern Territory and South Australia. The
definition of
stalking in each jurisdiction is different.
2. In New South Wales two offences have been created - the offence of
intimidation and the offence of stalking. In the New South
intimidation
is defined to mean:
conduct amounting to harassment or molestation; or
the making of repeated telephone calls; or
any conduct that causes a reasonable apprehension of injury to a person or
to a person with whom he or she has a domestic relationship,
or of violence or
damage to any person or property
is defined to mean:
the following of a person about or the watching or frequenting of the
vicinity of or an approach to a person's place of residence,
business or work
or any place that a person frequents for the purpose of any leisure or social
1. The legislation in Queensland, the Northern
Territory and South Australia lists a series of acts that may constitute
The diverse nature of "stalking " has meant that the acts have been
defined widely and because such behaviour cannot be fully prescribed,
"catch-all" provisions. For example, the Northern Territory and South Australia
include conduct that could reasonably be
expected to arouse apprehension or
fear. Queensland includes an act of harassment, intimidation or threat against
another person.
2. The acts listed in stalking legislation may be summarised as follows:
follows the other person;
loiters near/outside, watches or enters
the place where the other person lives, works or frequents;
keeps the person under surveillance;
interferes with property (whether the other
person has an interest in the property or not) in the possession of the other
gives offensive material to the other person;
telephoning or otherwise contacting;
an unlawful act committed against the
person or property of the person;
harassment, intimidation or threat against
the other person;
acts in a way that could reasonably be
expected to arouse the other persons apprehension or fear.
Recommendation 84:
That stalking be made a criminal offence.
Recommendation 85:
That intimidation be separately defined but included in the definition of
Recommendation 86:
That a legislative definition of stalking should (non-exhaustively) list a
series of acts that constitute stalking and include a
(catch-all) provision
covering "any conduct that causes a person fear or apprehension."
should be included in a stalking
Applicability
1. New South Wales restricts the offences of stalking and intimidation to where
the offender and the victim have a domestic relationship.
The legislation in
Queensland, the Northern Territory and South Australia has general
application.
2. The Committee considers the New South Wales approach is unsatisfactory as it
ignores the reality that a stalker may be a mere
acquaintance or a stranger.
The Committee considers that stalking legislation should have general
application.
1. As a general rule, behaviour is only criminal if committed with a criminal
intent. Intent is therefore a necessary element of
most criminal offences.
Together with the acts which constitute the alleged offence, criminal intent
must be proved beyond reasonable
2. Intent is an element of the offence of stalking in all Australian
intent must be
3. The narrowest approach is taken in New South Wales where the prosecution
must prove that the offender has an "intention of causing
the other person to
fear personal injury." In South Australia the prosecution must prove that "the
person intends to cause serious
physical or mental harm to the other person or
a third person; or apprehension or fear." The Northern Territory test is
with South Australia, except that there is no requirement that the
physical or mental harm be "serious".
4. Queensland has a complex statement of intent. It is based on the requirement
that there be a course of conduct - an act done on
at least 2 occasions. It
incorporates the "reasonable person" test on the part of the victim regarding
the victim's circumstances
as known or reasonably foreseen by the offender. The
legislation requires that :
the offender intends that the victim be aware that the course of conduct is
directed at the victim;
the victim is aware that the course of conduct is directed at the victim;
the course of conduct would cause a reasonable person in the victim's
circumstances serious concern that an unlawful act of violence
may happen;
the victims circumstances are those known or foreseen by the offender and
those reasonably foreseen by the offender.
1. While complex, the Queensland
approach highlights that to be able to properly judge the intention of the
offender to create apprehension
or fear in the victim, the stalking act must be
viewed in this context. This is especially the case where there has been a
of abuse by the stalker toward the victim and the stalker may be an
estranged and embittered spouse. The New South Wales Act also
recognises this
problem in a different context - for the purpose of determining whether a
person's conduct amounts to intimidation,
a court may have regard to any
pattern of violence (especially violence constituting a domestic violence
offence) in the person's
2. There has been much debate about the requirement of intent in stalking
offences, especially in America. The main concern of police,
prosecutors and
feminists in Australia is that stalking legislation may be rendered ineffectual
because of the difficulty of proving
the requisite intention of the offender
beyond a reasonable doubt. The subjective intention of an offender is often
difficult to
prove, and may be particularly difficult in stalking cases where
an act viewed in isolation and out of context may appear innocent.
3. To overcome these difficulties, the Committee considered a suggestion made
by police to reverse the onus of proof in relation
to intention in stalking
cases. Specifically, that when the prosecution has established that the
offender carried out the stalking
act, the offender must then prove that he did
not intend to cause apprehension or fear.
4. This approach has been taken in some parts of the United States with respect
to the issue of consent in sexual offences - the
onus is on the offender to
prove that the victim was not consenting.
5. The Committee recognises that reversal of the onus of proof in relation to
intent would be a major departure from practise and
an erosion of the
presumption of innocence. Such an approach should only be adopted as a last
6. The Committee believes that the following factors may ameliorate the
difficulty of proving intent in stalking cases:
the intention of the offender should be broadly defined. It should not be
limited to intending to cause fear of physical injury. The
most appropriate
test is an intention to cause apprehension or fear. Apprehension should include
harassment, alarm or intimidation.
in determining the intention of the offender, evidence of the victim's
circumstances as reasonably known or foreseen by the offender,
previous incidents of violence, threats, harassment or intimidation by the
offender toward the victim, should be admissible.
It is only by such evidence
that a seemingly innocent act can be properly seen in context.
Recommendation 87:
That the intention of the offender be defined to include an intention to
cause fear or apprehension of physical harm. Apprehension
should include
harassment, alarm or intimidation.
Recommendation 88:
That for the purpose of this offence, in determining the intention of the
offender, evidence of the victim's circumstances as reasonably
known to or
foreseen by the offender should be admissible. Such circumstances may include
previous incidents of violence, threats,
harassment or intimidation by the
offender or others toward the victim.
1. All legislation recognises that acts may be directed at persons other than
the victim, but intended to cause fear in the victim.
Again, New South Wales
takes the most narrow approach, and restricts the victim's fear of harm to
those "with whom he or she has
a domestic relationship". Queensland includes an
act against "a person, other than the victim, about whose health or custody the
victim would reasonably be expected to be seriously concerned if the act were
done, including for example, a dependant, relative,
friend employer or
associate of the victim". A similar test is applied where the act is against
the property of a person. As noted
above, the legislation in the Northern
Territory and South Australian includes acts intended to cause "physical or
mental harm.....to
a third person".
2. If adopted, recommendations 87 and 88 would have the effect of covering acts
directed at causing the victim to fear harm to third
persons or where the act
is against property.
occurring on two separate occasions
1. In Queensland, South Australia and the Northern Territory, the offence of
stalking is only constituted when a stalking act is
done on at least 2 separate
occasions. This approach follows the early model legislation in the United
States, which, as noted above,
was prompted in large part by celebrity
stalking. It means that to successfully prosecute a stalking offence there must
of two separate incidents. The rationale for this requirement may be
that an act of stalking is usually one of a series of acts composing
of conduct.
2. The Committee recommends against such an approach for the following reason:
If behaviour intended to cause another person to fear or apprehension is
punishable on a second occasion, why should it not be punishable
Recommendation 89:
That there be no requirement in ACT stalking legislation that the conduct
that makes up the stalking offence must occur on at least
2 occasions.
for stalking
1. The maximum penalty in New South Wales and the Northern Territory is 2
years; in Queensland and South Australia it is 3 years.
2. The legislation in Queensland, the Northern Territory and South Australia
specifies circumstances of aggravation which take the
maximum penalty to 5
years imprisonment. In summary those circumstances are where:
the offender unlawfully uses or threatens
to use violence against another person or another person's property;
the offender's conduct contravened an
injunction or an order imposed by a court;
the offender was in possession of an offensive
1. Lethality indicators and past fatalities would
indicate a high degree of potential danger to the victim in such
circumstances.
2. The Committee believes that there should be an offence of aggravated
stalking. It should be an indictable offence, capable of
being dealt with
Recommendation 90:
That for the offence of stalking the maximum penalty be 2 years
imprisonment.
Recommendation 91:
That there be an indictable offence where the offender unlawfully uses or
threatens to use violence against the victim or the victim's
property, where
the offence is in breach of a court order (including a protection order or a
bail condition) or where the offender
is armed with a weapon.
Recommendation 92:
That for the offence of aggravated stalking, the maximum penalty be 5 years
imprisonment.
1. The Los Angeles Police Department has a Threat Management Unit.
The purpose of the Unit is to assess the threat
posed by each stalker and take steps to prevent the stalking escalating into more
serious violence. At the very least, the Unit's intervention makes the stalker
aware that he has come to police attention.
2. Lethality indicators have been discussed previously in this report. The
Committee believes there is merit in training a core of
police officers in
threat assessment to provide protection for victims where the indicators
demonstrated that a victim may be at
serious risk.
Recommendation 93:
That members of the Police Domestic Violence Unit be trained to assess the
threat and risk imposed by stalking behaviour and to make
recommendations for
the protection of victims.
Recommendation 94
That stalking legislation be monitored and separate detailed statistics be
kept on the operation of the legislation.
for breach of DVOs
1. The current penalty for a breach of a domestic violence order in the ACT is
a maximum of 6 months imprisonment and a $1000 fine.
This penalty has remained
unchanged since the introduction of the Domestic Violence Act in 1986.
for other criminal
1. Compared with most other criminal offences in the ACT the penalty for breach
of a protection order is very low. A number of submissions
to the Committee argued
that the penalty does not reflect the severity of the crime. The point was made
that it is less than the
penalty for acts of cruelty to animals.
2. As noted earlier in this report, breach of a protection order carries the
lowest maximum penalty of all domestic violence offences.
In the context of
domestic violence, however, it was considered a serious offence in the
submissions to the Committee, and throughout
the Research Paper.
3. The Committee acknowledges that the commission of the offence of breach of a
protection order constitutes a deliberate and flagrant
violation of a court
order, which in itself demonstrates contempt for the legal process and the
courts. In that context, the Committee
notes two salient points.
4. Firstly, the court makes a protection order where satisfied that the
respondent to the order has engaged or threatened to engage
in conduct that
constitutes a domestic violence offence, or has engaged in conduct of such an
harassing or offensive nature that
it causes the victim to fear for their
safety or the safety of a child. The purpose of a protection order is to ensure
that the victim
is protected from violence or harassment by preventing the
respondent from engaging in further like conduct. In other words, the
order is made to regulate behaviour which is unacceptable and harmful to
members of the community. The protection order aims
to do this by the
imposition of prohibitions and conditions. If the offence of breach of a
protection order carries a relatively
minimal maximum penalty, this sends a
message to the community about the value of the court order, its purpose and
the commitment
to regulating the behaviour complained of.
5. Secondly, many crimes which carry higher penalties may not involve the same
degree of premeditation.
Legislation
in other States
1. In New South Wales the maximum penalty for the offence of contravening an apprehended
violence order is 50 penalty units ($5000)
or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
offence must be dealt with summarily by a Magistrate.
2. The maximum penalty for contravening a domestic violence protection order in
South Australia is 2 years imprisonment or a fine
3. Victoria has recently increased the maximum penalty for breach of an
intervention order. The penalty is dependent upon whether
the offence is a
first offence, or a second or subsequent offence. For a first offence the
maximum penalty is $5000 or 2 years imprisonment,
or both. For a second or
subsequent offence, the maximum period of imprisonment is increased to 5 years
imprisonment.
4. In Western Australia the maximum penalty for breach of a restraining order
has recently been increased to 18 months imprisonment
or an $8000 fine.
5. In Queensland, breach of an order is punishable by a maximum penalty of 40
penalty units ($2400) or 1 year.
6. The maximum period of imprisonment that can be imposed for breach of an
order in Tasmania and the Northern Territory is 6 months
imprisonment or a
fine. The Tasmanian legislation further provides that a community service order
may be imposed in addition to or
in lieu of a fine or a period of imprisonment.
In the Northern Territory the penalty for a third or subsequent offence is
imprisonment
for not less than 7 days nor more than 6 months.
Arrangements between
1. The reciprocal arrangements between all states and territories in Australia
for inter state/ territory registration of protection
orders not only makes the
disparity in penalties apparent, but provides a reason for consistency with the
objective of minimising
reciprocal enforcement anomalies.
2. For the ACT a relevant factor is its close proximity to New South Wales, and
to a lesser extent Victoria. As noted above, the
maximum penalty in both
of Increasing Penalties
1. Research does not establish that higher penalties would act as a specific
deterrent for breach of a protection order or for criminal
offences generally.
However, penalties have traditionally been set to reflect the degree to which
the community regards the behaviour
which constitutes the offence as
unacceptable or harmful to the community.
2. The Committee believes that an increased penalty, particularly an increased
maximum jail term, would:
acknowledge the seriousness of the offence;
sends a positive message to the community about the value of the court
order, its purpose and the commitment to regulating the behaviour
hopefully, act as a specific deterrent.
1. The Committee feels that
there is considerable value in having an elevated penalty for a second or
subsequent offence.
2. Consistent with New South Wales and Victoria, the Committee recommends that
for a first offence of breach of a protection order
the maximum penalty be
increased to 2 years imprisonment. For a second or subsequent offence, the
maximum period of imprisonment
should be increased to 5 years imprisonment.
Recommendation 95:
That for a first offence of breach of a protection order the maximum be
increased to 2 years imprisonment.
Recommendation 96:
That for a second or subsequent offence, the maximum penalty be increased
to 5 years imprisonment.
Diversionary
Conferencing and Domestic
is diversionary
conferencing?
1. On 1 January 1994, the Australian Federal Police established a diversionary
conferencing scheme focused on juvenile offenders.
That scheme aims at
diverting young offenders from formal handling by the criminal justice system
to a conference. The conference
involves the young person, his or her family
(and perhaps other people the offender invites), the victim of the offence and
who support the victim. The cases diverted to a conference are those
where the offender would otherwise have been cautioned. The
conference is
facilitated by trained police officers.
2. The police will also be participating in a "reintegrative shaming
experiment" (RISE) whereby diversionary conferencing would be
applicable not
only to juvenile crime, but to adult assaults and drink driving offences. It is
intended that offenders eligible for
participation in RISE include those who
would otherwise have been sent to court. The addition of RISE to the
diversionary conferencing
scheme is designed to enable the rigorous evaluation
of the validity of the theory of reintegrative shaming, which underlies
diversionary
conferencing.
3. There has been some suggestion recently, that RISE could be expanded to
include domestic violence offenders.
Application
to domestic violence offences
1. The Committee has diverging views on the issue of whether domestic violence
offenders should be diverted to a conference. A number
of Committee members
were strongly of the view that a blanket exclusion should not be applied to
domestic violence offenders and
diversionary conferencing. Other members did
not believe that diversionary conferencing was appropriate at the current time
the situation should be reviewed in say, five years time. The majority
of Committee members strongly held the view that diversionary
conferencing
should never be utilised in domestic violence cases.
2. Mediation, in any form, is prefaced on the assumption that there is equality
of power in the relationship between the parties
to a mediation. The
relationship between the perpetrator and victim of domestic violence is one of
control by one partner over the
other through the use of physical, emotional
and financial means. The power imbalance in a relationship where there is a
of domestic violence is so great as to render mediation an affront to
justice. That imbalance cannot be addressed during a conference,
no matter how
skilled the facilitator.
3. The National Committee on Violence Against Women recommended the exclusion
from mediation of disputes where there has been
domestic violence and that domestic
violence should never be the subject of mediation. The National Committee stated:
or consent to use mediation should never involve an agreement to drop
criminal charges or to withdraw applications for protective
4. Diversionary conferencing may well be effective in circumstances where the
victim and offender are not known to each other. The
victim gets the
opportunity to confront the offender, for example the person who broke into
their house, and to say how the crime
has affected them. On the flip side, the
offender sees that his or her crime did have an actual victim, not just some
anonymous person
who owned the house.
5. This of course does not translate to domestic violence offences where the
parties know each other at the time of the offence.
The victim is often in
great fear of future violence by the offender and is therefore very unlikely to
speak her mind. The offender
has seen first hand the effect of his actions on
the victim. It may be argued that diversionary conferencing is voluntary and if
the victim does not agree a conference will not take place. However, if
diversionary conferencing was extended to domestic violence
offences there is
great potential for the victim to be pressured, intimidated or threatened by
the offender to agree to a conference
so that the offender can avoid a
conviction.
6. The Committee further notes that despite extensive education campaigns,
domestic violence is often not regarded as `criminal'
in the same way as the
community regards other assaults as criminal. It is a fundamental precept of
this report that domestic violence
offences be firmly placed in the criminal
arena. To apply diversionary conferencing to domestic violence would reinforce
the perception
that domestic violence is not a criminal act. This is not the
case with other offences which are unambiguously regarded by the community
Recommendation 97:
That domestic violence offences be excluded from diversionary conferencing
and from the reintegrative shaming experiment.
for costs against the
1. Information from police indicates that a reason why police are reluctant to
press charges in domestic violence matters is that
costs can be awarded against
the individual police officer if a prosecution fails or is withdrawn.
2. Successful prosecution of domestic violence offences can be difficult
because there is rarely a witness to the incident and physical
evidence may not
be available. The victim may not wish to proceed with the prosecution because
of pressure from the offender, fear
of further violence, mistrust of the legal
system or reconciliation with the offender.
3. These problems should be alleviated by the implementation of recommendations
made in this report. However, given the historical
reluctance of police to
press charges in domestic violence matters, the Committee believes that the
deterrent effect of costs orders
should be squarely addressed.
4. The Committee confirms that charging of an offender is a responsibility of
the police and not the victim, and police should charge
where an offence has
been committed in the context of domestic violence.
5. Although police are indemnified against the payment of costs by the AFP, the
order for costs made personally against the officer
can cause embarrassment and
affects morale. There are few, if any, other occupations where performance of
one's job in good faith
could lead to the infliction of a monetary penalty.
Altering the way costs are awarded, so that they do not attach personally to
the officer involved but rather to the organisation may be one way of
minimising these problems.
6. Orders for costs against police is also a consideration for the AFP as an
organisation. The AFP estimate that costs awarded against
them each year amount
to $20,000 to $30,000. Statistics are not available to demonstrate what
proportion of these costs relate to
unsuccessful domestic violence
prosecutions.
7. The Committee considers as a general rule that costs should be awarded
against the DPP and not made personally against the police
8. It should remain within the discretion of the courts to make an order
against an individual police officer where the conduct of
that individual has
caused the failure of that prosecution.
9. The Committee considers that there should be an administrative arrangement
between the DPP and the police as to the satisfaction
of the costs order.
Recommendation 98:
That orders for costs not be made personally against the police informant
in domestic violence prosecutions except where the conduct
of the individual
police officer has caused the failure of the prosecution.
Recommendation 99:
That as a general rule costs orders be made against the DPP and that there
be an administrative arrangement between the AFP and the
DPP as to the
satisfaction of the costs order.
7: THE ACT DOMESTIC VIOLENCE INTERVENTION PROJECT- BOTTOM UP
COORDINATION
1. The ACT Domestic Violence Intervention Project is based on the "Duluth
Model" described below. Briefly, the Project incorporates
a cohesive and
consistent response to domestic violence by all agencies who deal with domestic
violence victims and offenders.
is the 'Duluth model'?
1. Duluth is a city of about 90,000 on the western edge of Lake Superior
Minnesota USA. Minnesota has a history of innovative service
and legislative
response to domestic violence. In 1980 Ellen Pence, a probation officer,
approached the women's refuge in Duluth
with a plan to establish agreements to
develop a consistent multi-agency response to domestic violence.
2. This was supported and over a period of almost two years a series of mutual
commitments were negotiated with relevant agencies
eg. that the police would
reduce the screening out of domestic violence cases by being more active in
investigating, arresting and
charging; the prosecution would adopt a no drop
policy; the refuge and other services would offer support to the victim by
up after the police attendance and support during court processes; that
assistance would be offered to the alleged offender at an
early stage; that
correctional services would be more vigilant in monitoring probation conditions
3. Duluth became the first city in the USA to implement a comprehensive
multi-agency domestic violence intervention program. A body,
Domestic Abuse Intervention Project (DAIP), was formed in 1981 to undertake
system monitoring/case coordination function
and to provide services which were
not available in Duluth at that time ie. perpetrator programs, women's support
groups, education
and training programs. DAIP received state and federal
funding, foundation and philanthropic contribution and from early on also
derived funds from training and publications.
4. The goal of the project is to eliminate violence and to ensure the safety of
the victims of violence. The project has maintained
close links with the
women's refuge and sees itself as accountable to victims of domestic violence.
Over the years there have been
a number of evaluations and these have generally
been undertaken by staff of the Minnesota University which has a campus in
5. The 'Duluth model' refers to a comprehensive, cooperative systems approach,
involving a shared victim safety philosophy, case
flow monitoring, feedback,
and information sharing with the response being maintained by an independent
coordinating agency. The
coordinating agency provides or arranges direct
intervention response to all victims and all alleged offenders identified by
or referred by other agencies. It operates in a conducive legislative
and procedural environment.
6. The 'Duluth model' also refers to the
of the DAIP
perpetrators education programs ie. a group education approach focusing on
victim safety and offender responsibility,
and a power and control analysis of
domestic violence in a gender context.
7. The 'Duluth model' (that is, coordination and program content) has received
international acclaim. The American Council of
juvenile and Family Court Judges
refers to the Duluth model as one 'to be envied by any community in the country.'
The basis of the model has been influential in developing a 'systems' approach
in responses to domestic violence, acceptance
of the concept of 'victim support'
and the development of a strong victim/safety focus in the field of perpetrator
8. The Duluth model has been replicated or adapted by many cities and towns in
the USA and in Hamilton New Zealand; Stirling, Scotland;
London, Ontario;
Noorkoping; Sweden and in Hawaii. A Duluth model project is underway, but
unfunded, in Armadale, Western Australia,
it is being used as a template in
Bunbury, WA and a plan to introduce the model is under way in South Australia.
Challenging the Legal System's Response to Domestic Violence
in Brisbane (March 1994) resolved that Duluth model projects
should be established in all Australian states and territories.
10. Hamilton, New Zealand is a city of about 110,000. The Duluth model has been
implemented completely with all the services and
links in the model, as it
operates in Duluth, with the exception of a supervised child access centre.
11. Pence has pointed out that:
"it (is) important for each community...to filter [the Duluth]
experience through the political., social and cultural realities
of their own
communities...[and] the need for each community to experience its own learning
process...the replication of models
in other communities that do not go through
the process of discovery may be able to mechanically implement the model but
its spirit"
services provided by DAIP are a result of the particular service gaps in Duluth
at the time the program was established. However,
a pivotal feature is the
independence of the coordinating body and the fact that the coordinating body
provides some direct service
to victims. The benefit of the coordinating body
also providing perpetrator education programs, is that the strong victim safety
focus, which essential to the operation of perpetrator programs, is maintained.
Application
of the Duluth model to the
1. The model is best suited to 'closed system' environments. That is,
environments where:
there is stability in the personnel in relevant agencies including the
police and the courts;
the area to be covered is geographically compact;
the area to be covered is autonomous in relation to policy, service
practices and the law ;
the relevant players in the system see the value of a cooperative system
1. Each of these factors is present in the ACT. The ACT has a
population of about 330,000 in a small geographic area. It is self governing.
The police, prosecution, courts and correctional services are local and
staffing is relatively stable.
2. The ACT has a history of innovative response to domestic violence: the ACT
government has accepted the National Strategy on Violence
Against Women; the
Domestic Violence Crisis Service is a
world leader
; the ACT Legal Aid
Office's domestic violence legal help unit was the first such unit in the
country and it is still, arguably, the
state of the art in it's field; the
facilitating and negotiating role of the Deputy Registrars in the ACT
Magistrates Court, in relation
to domestic violence protection orders, was
pioneering.
3. The Domestic Violence Inter Agency group is active as is Men Against Sexual
Assault which has been involved in education programs
in ACT schools. The ACT
community has benefited directly and in a number of ways from the work of the
Australian Institute of Criminology
which is in Canberra and researchers and
criminologists from the Institute undertook research for this reference. There
are a number
of academics and others in Canberra who have national reputations
in relation to various aspects of the system response to domestic
4. The was strong support in submissions received by the Committee for the
establishment of a coordinated inter agency response to
domestic violence in
the ACT and a number of the submissions specifically referred with approval to
the Duluth model.
the Duluth model needed?
1. An example of the need for a coordinated approach to domestic violence can
be illustrated by a case that occurred in New Zealand:-
"The danger of this lack of coordination is starkly illustrated
by the recent case of a woman killed by her ex-partner as she emerged
Family Court ordered counselling session. When it occurred, her death was described
by the local police as unpredictable
and unavoidable. However, our investigations
suggested otherwise. At least four different agencies were involved with the
with minor exceptions, no information was shared between them. Thus
the staff of a psychiatric unit which was dealing with the
abuser treated him
entirely as a suicide risk (he was referred there after an attempt to take his
own life) and did not make
or threats of violence he had directed against her. Neither were they aware
of the protection orders that had been granted to the estranged wife. The Family
Court counsellor, to whom a referral had been
made under section 10 of the Family
Proceedings Act 1980 at the time that the wife applied for a separation order,
only by accident about the protection orders which had been granted
subsequent to the counselling referral. She was informed about
the existence
of the orders when she ran into the Family Court Counselling Coordinator in
a lift. The police in three different
districts had had a number of contacts
with both parties. These related to the husband's repeated threatening telephone
an assault which had occurred when he broke into the home of his parents-in-law
and tried to take one of the children, and another
assault on his wife at her
workplace. The husband was not charged by the police with the assaults and little
information about
the incidents was recorded on their files. No information
was recorded in a central place. Nor was it available to the Family
counselling service or the psychiatric unit.
From the deceased wife's
mother we learned that, when the couple's four year old son was told of his
mother's death, his first
response was "Did Daddy shoot her?" The poignancy
of that comment belies both the sense of surprise and the "unavoidability" of
the event that the various decision makers expressed when the murder/suicide
occurred. The deaths could only have been a surprise
to people who saw only
part of the pattern, viewing single acts in isolation rather than as a whole.
We share the belief of
the wife's mother that her daughter could well be alive
today if there had been adequate interagency cooperation."
research undertaken for the Committee, under this reference, indicates:
that each agency recognises that it is in some ways assisted and in some
ways hampered by the performance of the others. Many agencies
had constructive
comments about how the performance of other agencies could be improved
there are significant weaknesses in the criminal justice response and these
weaknesses can not be addressed by any one of the relevant
players alone that
is, police, courts, victim services et cetera.
there is insufficient coordination between agencies and in many instances
difficulties have been long standing
victim support, while in place with police attendance at the scene and
available for victims seeking restraining orders, is not well
developed in
relation to the criminal justice process and
while the DVCS fulfils something of a monitoring and coordination function
the function is not fully developed.
1. Perpetrator education programs are
not widely available in the ACT. In general, they have not been sufficiently
accountable or
sufficiently linked to victim safety services. Women's support
groups are provided by a number of agencies but program content and
consistency
could be improved. Additionally, although 24 hour phone counselling and crisis
support for victims is available, there
is no parallel to the Duluth/Hamilton
pre bail contact arrangements for offenders.
Establishing
the Duluth model in the
1. The Committee concludes from the above that the Duluth model is suited to
the ACT and what the model offers is needed in the ACT.
2. An ACT Domestic Violence intervention Project (ACT DVIP) based on the Duluth
model must have two essential components:
a body responsible for the development of policy, and specifically an ACT
Domestic Violence Strategy and Implementation Plan for a
multi systems response
to domestic violence.
a body responsible for the day to day coordination, monitoring and
implementation of the multi-agency response to domestic violence
- a Domestic
Violence Project Coordinator, discussed below.
1. For the first component,
the Committee has recommended that a ministerially appointed Domestic Violence
Advisory Council be established
in the ACT to develop an ACT Domestic Violence
Strategy and Implementation Plan.
Domestic Violence Project
Coordinator
of the Domestic Violence Project
Coordinator
1. As noted above the services provided by DAIP were as a result of particular
service gaps in Duluth at the time the program was
established.
2. In establishing a Duluth model response in the ACT it is important to
acknowledge that the ACT has a history of innovative response
to domestic
violence. Existing agencies already provide a significant level of services and
the aim should be to compliment rather
than duplicate those services.
3. A notable service gap in the ACT is the lack of government funded
facilitated access handover and supervision centres. Currently
in the ACT,
there are three handover/supervision centres. The Salvation Army Community
Centre in Dickson operates a facilitated access
handover service as well as a
supervised access service. It is funded entirely by the Salvation Army. The
ACTIV League operate a
supervised playgroup for its members. This service is
operated out of current funding for the League. Marymead operates a supervised
access service for parent's whose children are the subject of ACT welfare
4. The Commonwealth Government has, under its Justice Statement allocated
funding for one or more facilitated handover and or visiting
services in the
ACT. The Attorney General's Department is currently seeking submissions from
non-profit community organisations to
make application for funding under the
pilot project. The funding will not be allocated to provide services for
families whose children
are deemed to be in care under State and Territory laws
5. A further and significant service gap in the ACT is the lack of perpetrator
intervention services, in particular perpetrator education
programs. DAIP and a
number of other Duluth model projects, including the Hamilton Project directly
provide perpetrator intervention
services including early perpetrator contact
(pre bail) and perpetrator education programs.
6. An advantage of the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator undertaking
perpetrator education programs is that it will see itself
as accountable to the
victims of domestic violence and have a strong victim safety focus. On the
other hand, the provision of perpetrator
intervention services places heavy
demands on the facilitators.
7. Unlike the role of the coordinating agency under DAIP and the Hamilton
Project, the Committee considers that the primary role
of the Domestic Violence
Project Coordinator under the proposed ACT DVIP should not be the direct
provision of services but rather
to coordinate develop and monitor already
existing services to achieve a consistent multi-systems response, as well as
and training.
8. The Domestic Violence Project Coordinator will monitor compliance with
policy, ensure the quality of intervention services and
education programs. It
will no doubt at times mediate between agencies who may have long standing
difficulties with each other. The
Domestic Violence Project Coordinator will
need to objectively assess and deal with complaints from agencies about how
others hamper
their performance. It will need to deal with constructive
comments from agencies about how the performance of others can be improved.
9. The Committee considers that it would not be desirable for the Domestic
Violence Project Coordinator under the ACT DVIP to provide
perpetrator
education programs.
10. A pivotal feature of the Duluth model is that the coordinating agency is
independent. The independence of the Domestic Violence
Project Coordinator
under the proposed ACT DVIP would be compromised if it were to provide only one
of a number of services which
are part of a comprehensive response to domestic
violence. It would be very difficult for the Domestic Violence Project
Coordinator
to objectively monitor its own performance as a service provider,
to objectively assess and deal with complaints from other agencies
own performance, and to mediate in relation to its own position vis a vis other
service providers.
11. The Committee believes that the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator under
the ACT DVIP should as much as possible be in a position
where it can deal at
arms length with all service providers. It is fundamental to the successful
implementation of a comprehensive
multi-agency domestic violence intervention
program that all services are appropriately coordinated and monitored as
objectively
as possible. It is essential that the Domestic Violence Project
Coordinator is viewed by other players within the system as independent.
12. Under the proposed plan the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator for the
ACT DVIP would aim to prevent domestic violence in
the ACT by:
promoting a cooperative systems approach;
promoting service coordination;
promoting a victim/safety focus;
case tracking;
monitoring compliance with policy and providing feedback;
coordinating victim support services including services (such as peer
support groups) for children;
ensuring the quality of, perpetrator intervention services including early
perpetrator contact and perpetrator education programs;
coordinate training and education in relation to domestic violence.
The ACT DVIP would operate mainly on
a case level
but provide strong
input and feedback to the ACT Domestic Violence Advisory Council for policy
development.
of the Domestic Violence Project
Coordinator
1. While it might be economical to add the functions of the Domestic Violence
Project Coordinator to an existing victim/safety focused
agency, such as the
Domestic Violence Crisis Service, the Committee is of the view that this would
not be desirable. An existing
agency may not be regarded by others as
sufficiently independent. Furthermore, the coordinating agency function may
impede the ability
of the existing agency to continue to properly fulfil its
2. The Committee is of the view that the coordinating agency role would best be
performed by an independent statutory body. It may,
however, be possible for
the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator to share some resources with an
existing agency.
3. The Committee is of the view that the proposed Domestic Violence Project
Coordinator would require at least 2 full-time positions
to perform its
functions, one of whom would be appointed to the statutory position of the
Domestic Violence Project Coordinator.
Recommendation 100:
That the government establish a statutorily appointed office of the
Domestic Violence Project Coordinator.
Establishing
the ACT Domestic Violence Intervention
1. A flowchart of the proposed ACT Domestic Violence Intervention Project is at
Appendix A.
2. The Committee is of the view that the Domestic Violence Advisory Council and
the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator should
be established under a new
Part in the Domestic Violence Act.
3. In relation to the Domestic Violence Advisory Council, the Act should:
specify that the Domestic Violence Advisory Council is to be ministerially
appointed and to consist of representatives of relevant
government program
areas, police, the courts and community members;
set out its principles of operation, its functions and aims;
specify that a function of Council is to develop a perpetrator program
based on best practice principles and specify the criteria
for perpetrator
programs as listed by the National Committee on Violence Against Women.
In relation to the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator the Act should:
provide for statutory appointment of the Domestic Violence Project
Coordinator;
set out its principles of operation, its functions and aims;
state that the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator have ex-officio
membership of the Council. This would be the mechanism whereby
the Domestic
Violence Project Coordinator would provide feedback to Council and input for
policy development;
specify that the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator is not accountable
to Council. The independence of the Domestic Violence Project
Coordinator
should be maximised by making it accountable to government only.
Committee believes that both Council and the Domestic Violence Project
Coordinator should advise government on tenders for
the perpetrator program.
However, the decision as to who should operate the perpetrator program should
be one for government. Again
it is important to maintain the independence of
the monitoring role of the Domestic Project Violence Coordinator in relation to
perpetrator
2. The Committee considers that the initial establishment phase of the ACT DVIP
is likely to take about 12 months, that even so the
project will develop
incrementally and it will take some time to gauge effectiveness.
3. The Committee believes, that if the project is to be established, there
should be a commitment to fund it for a reasonably lengthy
pilot phase. The
Hamilton pilot was 3 years. However, the Hamilton pilot began
Zealand police practices were adjusted along the lines of many of the
recommendations made in other sections of this report,
whereas in the ACT the
developments would be contemporaneous. While this is likely to speed the change
in the criminal justice response
it does mean that the project would begin in a
different, and less settled, environment than the Hamilton pilot.
4. The Committee consequently recommends a funding commitment for a five year
pilot project and that independent and expert evaluation
be undertaken.
Necessary arrangements should be put in place from the outset.
phase of DVIP
1. In order to manage the set up of the project the committee recommends that
the following steps be followed:
The initial role of the Domestic Violence Advisory Council should be as the
steering group for the set up phase. It should develop
an establishment and
implementation plan.
the ACT Domestic Violence Council should be funded to arrange for a group
nominated by ACT DVIP and approved by the Council to visit
Hamilton New
Zealand, to see the model in operation and to build supportive links with the
Hamilton project.
Recommendation 100:
That an ACT Domestic Violence Intervention Project, based on the Duluth
Model, be established for a 5 year pilot period in the ACT.
Recommendation 101:
That the Domestic Violence Advisory Council and the Domestic Violence
Project Coordinator be established under a new Part in the
Domestic Violence
Recommendation 102:
In relation to the Domestic Violence Advisory Council, a new Part in the
Domestic Violence Act should:
(i) specify that the Domestic Violence Advisory Council is to be
ministerially appointed and to consist of representatives of relevant
government program areas, police, the courts and community members;
(ii) set out its principles of operation, its functions and aims;
(iii) specify that a function of Council is to develop a perpetrator
program based on best practice principles and specify the criteria
perpetrator programs as listed by the National Committee on Violence Against
Recommendation 103:
In relation to the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator a new Part in the
Domestic Violence Act should:
(i) provide for statutory appointment of the Domestic Violence Project
Coordinator;
(ii) set out its principles of operation, its functions and aims;
(iii) state that the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator have ex-officio
membership of the Council. This would be the mechanism
whereby the Domestic
Violence Project Coordinator would provide feedback to Council and input for
policy development;
(iv) specify that the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator is not
accountable to Council. The independence of the Domestic Violence
Coordinator should be maximised by making it accountable to government only.
of Domestic Violence.
1. There have been a number of projects aimed at determining the cost to the
community of domestic violence. Each of these projects
sets out the
definitions, methodologies, sources of data, any assumptions that had to be
made because of lack of data and other matters
relevant to the final
conclusions. We do not intend to compare the studies, nor to provide details of
the methodologies. The conclusions
of the studies are reproduced below as a
sample of estimated costs of domestic violence in other jurisdictions.
1. The first such study was conducted as part of the New South Wales Domestic
Violence Strategic Plan.
The report's authors
first sound a note of caution:
"There are many aspects of this problem which do not lend themselves
to a quantitative analysis. There are areas of economic contradictions
values as remedying violence is more costly than ignoring it in the short term,
though the long-term social costs
may be very high."
1. The study was based on a conservative estimate of 100,000 women actively involved
in a violent domestic situation in New South
Wales in any year (referred to as
stage two costs).
The study also gave an estimate
of costs with respect to women who had not yet disclosed violence, based on a
number of 50,000
(referred to as stage one). The study did not attempt to allocate
costs to a third group, (stage three), women who had been in a
violent relationship
and were now re-building their lives. It was acknowledged however that significant
costs would attract to
this group.
2. The study concluded that the costs to women were much higher than the costs
to government. It found that at least $800 million
annually is either paid
directly by victims or lost to them and those dependent on them. Just over $400
million annually was counted
as direct costs to government. This included costs
for health care, welfare service delivery, housing, income provision and law
enforcement.
3. The main government costs were found to be borne directly and indirectly
by the Commonwealth, with the cost to New South Wales
estimated to be about
$70 million. It was noted however, that the state picks up many of the hidden
costs in the need for more
policing and greater demand for hospital services,
particularly stand alone hospital services.
4. Costs not included were the costs to employers of absenteeism and lost
productivity, the costs of deaths, serious injury and possible
disabilities
arising from domestic violence, specific costings for long term therapy and
extra costs for those from NESB backgrounds
and indigenous women.
The NZ Study
1. The New Zealand Department of Social Welfare commissioned Coopers &
Lybrand to replicate the New South Wales study in New
Zealand. The term used in
the New Zealand study is "family violence". The definition of domestic or
family violence differs between
these two jurisdictions, and the New Zealand
study includes family violence against children. The population of New South
New Zealand is similar.
2. This project costed three scenarios at three different prevalence rates. The
scenarios were:
base scenario, where direct costs are associated with the number of police
callouts which are seen as a measure of the number acknowledging
the five times call out scenario, which assumes that five times as many
people acknowledge family violence as callout the police,
when measuring direct
the income foregone scenario, which imputes
the costs of labour market income foregone because of work days assumed to
lost through family violence.
1. With respect to prevalence, the report noted that international and New Zealand
studies put the total prevalence of family violence
at between 1 in 10 and of
members of the population 1 in 4. The familiar estimate for New Zealand is 1 in
2. The report gave the cost estimate for each scenario as against each prevalence
rate. The most conservative figure, being the
base scenario calculated on direct
costs for families who called the police at a 1 in 10 prevalence rate, is a
cost of $1.187
billion. The report notes that this is more than the $1 billion
earned from wool exports in 1993/94.
3. The report notes
that the base scenario is certainly an underestimate
of costs because police are only called to a proportion of families who experience
violence and the number acknowledging violence and seeking help is larger than
the number calling out the police.
4. Breaking down the results further, the study found that total costs to
the individual on a 1 in 7 prevalence rate were 398
million and total costs
to government were 836 million.
economic cost per person, based on conservative estimates to the individual
and the government was calculated to be
$33,241.03 annually.
5. One last interesting point arising out of the New Zealand study relates
to a costing of the value of life, that is, that a
significant cost is incurred
to a family where a member is actually killed or suffers serious injury as a
result of family
violence. There were 19 domestic homicides in New Zealand for
the year ending 31 December 1993, or 40.4% of all murders that year.
Market research in New Zealand in 1991 on road
safety valued a statistical life in New Zealand at $2 million.
Therefore, statistically the value of the 19
lives lost as a result of family violence cost the economy $38 million.
The 1988 Queensland study.
1. This study was based on a sample of 20 victims of domestic violence. The direct
costs to the community generated by the 20 women,
including costs for law enforcement,
income support, counselling, health and housing was estimated to be $1,024,494.00.
Adding to this costs for compensation and superannuation the total direct costs
for 20 victims were $1,05,712.00.
2. Total indirect costs (foregone income only) were $113,697.00. The average
cost per victim per year was $6,707.
cost of domestic violence in the ACT
1. A study as sophisticated as those conducted in New Zealand and New South
Wales is well beyond the scope of this paper. It is possible,
however, using
the figures in the New South Wales study, to make an estimate of the costs of
domestic violence in the ACT.
1. The starting point for any study has to be the incidence of domestic
violence. The following table reproduces data from the Research
relation to the police and the courts. In summary, there were 347 police
callouts to verified domestic violence incidents
in the three month period
March to May 1991. For the same period there were 155
applications
for a protection order lodged with the court.
2. The data from DVCS is the number of
clients who contacted the
service by telephone. The data does not include any clients who had previously
is the most conservative set of figures, given that
total telephone contacts for the period were 1,728.
Number of reports to ACT agencies for the period March, April and May
Police: 347; Courts: 155; DVCS: 898
It is not possible to make any conclusions about the incidence of domestic
violence in the ACT from these figures. However, given
accepted levels of under
reporting, it is likely that the DVCS figure more closely reflects the reality
of domestic violence incidents
than reports to police or applications to the
court for protection orders.
The annual incidence rates from the above sources are therefore
Police: 1,388 Courts: 620 DVCS: 3592
Calculating
1. The New South Wales study revealed an annual total cost of $1200 million,
based on an incidence rate of 150,000. Of this, $800
million was said to be
direct costs to the victim and $400 million costs to government.
2. Converting this to costs per year per individual victim, (1200 million
divided by 150,000) gives a total of $8000. Of this, $5,300
is direct costs to
the victim, $2,700 is direct costs to government.
3. Applying these figures to the incidence rates:
Police incidence rate
: 1,388 x 8,000 = $11,104,000
(Costs to government: 1,388 x 2,700 = $3,747,600)
Courts incidence rate
: 620 x 8,000 = $4,960,000
(Costs to government: 620 x 2,700 = $1,674,000)
DVCS Incidence rate
: 3,592 x 8,000 = $28,736,000
(Costs to government: 3,592 x 2,700 = $9,698,400)
4. As stated above, these figures are, at best, a rough estimate. They are also
pitched at very conservative levels. The range of
costs revealed is from nearly
$5 million up to nearly $29 million annually. The direct costs to government
range from close to $2
million to close to $10 million.
5. Two things can be said:
First, an investment of resources in measures designed to eliminate or at
the very least minimise domestic violence is economically
worthwhile;
Secondly, reducing domestic violence to figures and dollars should never
obscure the real costs to society on a non-economic level.
The social costs and
the costs to the individuals affected are enormous and largely incalculable.
8: PERPETRATOR PROGRAMS
1. The Committee's terms of reference require consideration of the use of behavioural
change programs as sentencing options for
violent offenders convicted of criminal
2. The Committee has considered this question by reviewing literature, noting
principles which apply to best practice models, reviewing
pros and cons of
ordered attendance and options in relation to ordered attendance.
of programs presently operating in the ACT
1. The Committee's Discussion Paper released in November 1992 noted that at
that stage there were several agencies in the ACT offering
counselling services
to domestic violence offenders who choose to seek help. These included
Relationships Australia, (formerly Canberra
Marriage Guidance Service), the
Counselling Section of the Mental Health Branch and some church based social
services and some community
services. Each of the services were taking people
individually rather than groups. Additionally Adult Corrective Services were
a Violent Offenders Program where attendance was court ordered,
subject to the consent of the prospective attendee, and the order
was made as a
condition of a bond.
2. There have been few changes in the provision of counselling services to
domestic violence offenders as noted in the Discussion
Paper. Several
government and non government counselling services in the ACT are available to
perpetrators of violence seeking assistance.
This includes Relationships
Australia and ACT Health Centres. Murringu Canberra, a non-profit service for
men operating under the
auspices of St John's CARE, ran group programs for a
period of time on a voluntary attendance basis. Adult Corrective Services still
runs the Violent Offenders Program but this is for all violent offenders and
few of the attendees are ordered to attend because of
domestic violence.
1. There has been a great deal of research and writing in relation to perpetrator
programs, particularly in the USA and Canada.
Court-Mandated Treatment of
Men Who Assault their Partner
, for example, Hamberger and Hastings review
evaluations of 28 programs.
A review of issues
and programs was recently undertaken by the Hamilton Abuse Intervention Project
in New Zealand.
Recent Australian works include:
the review undertaken in New South Wales
in the course of developing the New South Wales Domestic Violence Strategic
the New South Wales Domestic Violence Advisory Council's
Fundamentals for Working with Perpetrators of Domestic Violence
a review undertaken in Victoria in 1991;
a study by Devlin & Devlin which has
recently been completed in Queensland;
a recent study of 8 perpetrator programs
in Victoria undertaken by the University of Melbourne's Department of Criminology.
1. Particularly notable in relation to program content are Ellen Pence and Michael
Education Groups for Men Who Batter: The Duluth Model
and Alan Jenkins'
Invitations to Responsibility.
2. There is agreement that there are major methodological problems with most
of the evaluations.
The main problems have
been short follow up and insufficient consultation with victims to verify the
nature and extent of change.
3. There is also agreement that at this point it is not demonstrated that
programs reduce violence in the longer term. Hamberger
and Hastings concluded:
"After reviewing much of the research literature, what do we "know'"
assault? The answer,
unfortunately, is "not much." "Recidivism", however measured in the studies
reviewed here, varied from:
(a) not reported to (b) 4%-5% (rearrests), to (c)
up to 50%. We cannot confidently say whether "treatment works"..."What treatment
works best on which types of client, and under what conditions?" We are...also
unprepared to provide even partial answers to
those questions."
1. They found that the methodological flaws in the studies "rendered them at best
unhelpful and at worst misleading."
2. There is consensus on the point that programs for domestic violence
are not a cure all
and that issues about the availability of
programs and court
attendance are complex. While the purpose of
the programs is quite simple, that is, to change the attitudes of those who
violence in order stop the violence, attitudinal change is very hard
to achieve.
3. The conclusion of the 1994 University of Melbourne study was:
" Ultimately we consider that group programs for male perpetrators
can at best be seen only as a stop gap...the best programs can
provide a resource
and some respite for women who are being victimised, but can not be seen as
a lasting solution...with regard
specifically to the group programs for male
perpetrators, our research allows us to say that in Victoria at least: they
not be relied on to transform men from violent to non-violent and therefore
they should not be viewed as an alternative to formal
sanctions (indeed we would
go so far as to say that if we overload these programs with men whose only reason
for being there
was that they had to attend as part of a court order, we probably
would be sabotaging them). [On the positive side]...men who
'stay in the course'...,as
far as we can tell, tend to produce some immediate shift in 'proneness to aggression'
although this
does not take them below the [dangerous]...level.. programs do
seem to put demands on men (high drop out rates alone seem to attest
rather than simply pandering to rationalisations...most participants, and most
of the partners we could talk to, saw
the programs as having some value..."
1. The National Committee
on Violence Against Women has listed criteria for perpetrator programs which
are in line with the leading
views in the literature. These can be summarised
as follows:
the safety of the victim, as a matter of policy, is given absolute
the perpetrator's violence is responded to as a crime;
criminal proceedings, arrest, imprisonment, and penalties are enforced
and/or protection orders arranged;
programs should not replace or be an alternative to criminal proceedings;
the perpetrator is held totally responsible for the violence and the aim of
the program should be absolute and permanent cessation
of the violence;
joint counselling is not undertaken;
programs are primarily educational in relation to gender issues and address
the perpetrators attitudes to gender inequality, the construction
masculinity, the social/historical/cultural context of violence against women,
the illegality of the use of violence and the concept
of self-responsibility;
all perpetrator programs should be subject to proper evaluation against the
criteria of effectiveness in stopping the perpetrators
the funding of perpetrator programs should
not take funding resources from services for victims of violence.
1. Arguably the most fundamental and the most common problem with perpetrator
programs to date has been insufficient concern with
the safety of the victims
and lack of accountability on that issue. Lack of accountability has
contributed to poor quality programs;
inability to attain or maintain a
offender responsibility/victim safety focus; poor evaluation methodology;
inability to attract
or maintain collaborative assistance from victim services;
and finally, an inability to sustain programs.
2. The Duluth model probably embodies the 'state of the art' in terms of
perpetrator program accountability. The perpetrator program
is run by the
Domestic Abuse Intervention Project which sees itself as a victim service and
accountable to the victims of the violence.
It has close cooperative links with
other victim services. The program content focuses on victim safety and
offender accountability.
In order to attend the program attendees have to
authorise the program facilitators to pass on victim safety information. It is
that when attendance is court ordered that the program will report
failure to attend.
3. The project also provides services for victims of domestic violence including
women's education groups. The perpetrator program
notifies the women's group
facilitators of the names and details of all new program attendees. The women's
group facilitators
group. The women's group uses the same power and control analysis
of domestic
violence as the perpetrator group and what can be expected from perpetrator
group attendance is discussed. It is
known for example that although physical
violence tends to abate during attendance that non-physical violence may escalate.
Information about the offender's behaviour
also flows, subject to the woman's consent, from the women's group coordinator
the perpetrator program coordinator so that the perpetrator program facilitators
are aware of the offender's conduct.
4. Perpetrator programs should be active advocates for victim safety and
offender responsibility, they should endorse and emphasise
the criminality of
behaviour which breaches the criminal law and they should be advocates, and
centres of excellence, for sound analysis
of domestic violence. Programs should
highly critical
of their own performance and highly critical of any
analysis of `
Perpetrator
responsibility and criminal accountability
1. There is general agreement that the ultimate key to change is the ability of
the perpetrator to accept responsibility for the
violence. If programs are, or
become, a way for the perpetrators to avoid responsibility for their criminal
acts, the existence of
programs will work against their purpose.
2. In order to ensure that perpetrator programs are not misused the following
safeguards should be in place:
a firm and consistent criminal justice response to domestic violence;
police should be cautioned against referral to a perpetrator program as a
reason for not pressing charges, not arresting etc. and
likewise attendance at
a program should not treated as a reason for the prosecution to drop charges;
where ordered attendance is available, an order for attendance must not be
used to reduce the penalty which would otherwise be applied;
court ordered attendance should not occur
unless the offender has admitted responsibility or been found guilty;
perpetrator programs should not, and should not be expected to, vouch for
the attendee in court proceedings or otherwise- any feedback
should be limited
to the attendance record.
programs are educational, they stress offender responsibility and
use a gender analysis.
1. Hamberger and Hastings list 5 primary
theoretical orientations in relation to work with perpetrators of domestic
violence. They
ventilation- this posits that the violence is symptomatic of
suppressed anger which needs to be expressed through some other cathartic
means. These programs do not emphasise the primacy of the violence and the
offender's responsibility to stop it. Further criticisms
are that the
ventilation model confuses anger and aggression. Anger is a human emotion which
can be expressed in non violent ways
and anger is not a precondition for
bullying, aggression or violence. Additionally, ventilation theory holds up
anger and aggression
as a release and this arguably increases rather than
decreases the likelihood of aggression in subsequent situations.
insight-orientated therapy- this posits that violence is symptomatic
of some other, underlying conflict, often stemming from the offender's
background or childhood. This has been criticised for failing to confront the
unacceptability of the violence, and the offender's
responsibility for the
violence, in the first instance. Additionally, the search for individualised
and psychological causes invites
the development of excuses. Insight-orientated
therapy has a place once responsibility has been accepted.
systems or interactional approach- in this approach violence is
viewed as an interaction process in which each partner attempts to
dominate and
control the other with one resorting to the use of violence. Both parties are
treated and the violence is viewed as
a 'relationship issue'. The approach has
been criticised for labelling the victims behaviour as precipitating and
identifying both
parties as responsible for the violent behaviour of one.
cognitive-behavioural approach- that
is, an approach based on social learning theories which posits that violent
develops into a behaviour pattern because it has functional value
to the offender. Strategies centre on the behavioural responsibility
offender. This approach is, according to Hamberger and Hastings, perhaps the
most widely used theoretical formulation
of wife assault. One cognitive-behavioural
approach is teaching 'anger management' skills. However, this has been criticised
on the basis that it is superficial and deeper re socialisation is necessary;
'anger management' sometimes implies that
the victim's behaviour or stress
provokes (ie. is responsible for) the violence; the emphasis on anger ignores
of violence to control; the emphasis on the individual ignores the
relevance of social norms and gender-power issues.
educative approach which focuses on locating the violence in its
social/historical context and holding the individual responsible
violence and oppressive practices.
1. Hamberger and Hastings note that the oldest and most widely held beliefs about
male-to-female violence are the pro feminist perspectives,
that is, that the violence
is a socio-political issue relating to men's power, and patriarchal social systems
which oppress women
in many ways, including through the use of violence. It is
noted that educative programs which incorporate feminist theory work
well within
a criminal justice system framework and are to be regarded as the "best practice"
model for perpetrator programs.
2. The Australian studies and guidelines have reached the same conclusion,
that is, program content should be educative, based
on a gender analysis and
aim to ensure that the offender accepts responsibility for the conduct. This
a firm criminal justice response whereas therapeutic
programs tend to work against it.
3. In addition to the program content there is also a question of how the
program should be delivered and the length of the program.
There are examples
of programs operating on an open group format (a person can join the program
at any time), closed group
(that is all attendees start together), individual
sessions and a combination of individual and group sessions. A reasonably lengthy
period of attendance is the norm because the aim is attitudinal change. The
Duluth/Hamilton program, for example, is currently
an open group program consisting
of one two hour session a week for 26 weeks facilitated by one male and one
female facilitator.
The group format is used
because it is said to have a strong educative and reinforcing effect. On the
other hand group work,
in this area, places heavy demands on the facilitators.
A significant advantage of an open group or open program format is that
is no delay in new participants joining and resource wastage, through attendance
attrition, is minimised.
1. As noted above, there have been major and obvious flaws in most of the attempts
to evaluate perpetrator programs and this in
turn has promoted debate about what
can be expected from perpetrator programs and how to measure it. The approach
to evaluation
is however, becoming much more self critical and more emphasis is
being placed on victim feedback.
Competition
1. The National Committee on Violence Against Women as well as the New South
Wales and Victorian reviews emphasise that funding for
perpetrator programs
should not divert funding from services for victims of violence. The reasons
for this boil down to the immediacy
of the victim's needs and the
'cost/benefit' of perpetrator programs.
2. Programs which require funding and which are established for court ordered
attendees or which accept court ordered attendees
should, consistent with the
emphasis on criminal responsibility, be funded through Corrections. A user pays
philosophy, subject
to means, is consistent with the perpetrator responsibility
for programs
1. The Committee has adopted the view that the amount a person is required to
pay to attend a program under a court order should
be taken into account by the
court in determining any financial penalty to impose as part of the sentence.
The Committee wishes to
stress that court ordered attendance at a program
should never be treated as an alternative to the sentence that would otherwise
be imposed.
2. The Committee envisages that an assessment of the persons suitability to
attend a program would be conducted by Corrective Services.
At this time the
person's financial circumstances can be considered and a recommendation made to
the court about the contribution
the person should make towards the cost of
attendance.
for and against perpetrator
1. Devlin & Devlin's review of the arguments for and against perpetrator
programs can be summarised as follows:
the importance of addressing the attitudes which inform the violent
society has a duty to assist offenders to change;
programs have a symbolic value and convey a message that the abusive
behaviour is unacceptable, help is available and society expects
them to change;
the violence rarely stops without intervention;
programs have the potential to increase the safety of victims by: making
the abuse public; ensuring that victims can provide feedback
in relation to
continuing abuse; reducing harassment during and after separation; and the
victim may be empowered to leave the relationship
if the change they hoped for
does not occur;
some evaluations show promise.
To this list could be added
rehabilitation is a fundamental sentencing objective;
best practice perpetrator programs could be centres of excellence for sound
analysis of domestic violence and may, arguably, play
an important part in
debunking myths prevalent in the approach of many key institutions and in the
community, about the causes and
'treatment' of domestic violence;
unless perpetrator programs are available there may be a perception, and
perhaps a strong perception, that the system response to
domestic violence
places insufficient emphasis on rehabilitation and this in turn could serve to
undermine confidence in, and support
for, a responsibility based systems
research provides little evidence that programs can eliminate or
significantly reduce violent behaviour in the mid to longer term;
programs may compete for funds with services for the victim whereas victims
should have priority of access to scarce resources;
the establishment of programs may produce
a false expectation of safety and/or false expectations of successful outcomes.
To this list could be added:
associated with the concern that perpetrator programs may compete with
victim's services for scarce resources is the general concern
cost/benefit of establishing perpetrator programs;
a number of studies have noted that although
physical violence may cease during program attendance, non-physical violence
and manipulative behaviour in fact increases. It has been noted that there
is a tendency for attendees to use the language
and concepts taught in the
program against the victims. That is, research indicates that program content
can provide new
tools for abuse;
because of the complex issues in relation to perpetrator programs there is
an understandable reticence on the part of victim's services
to invest energy
in establishing and guiding programs and this in turn contributes to the
establishment of programs with an inadequate
victim-safety focus;
the resulting difficulty establishing best practice programs in the light
of the resourcing issues, lack of support from victim services
and lack of
emphasis on best practice models by decision makers (government and non
government).
and cons of court ordered
1. Additional considerations apply to court ordered attendance at perpetrator
programs. The arguments for and against can be summarised
as follows:
rehabilitation to end the violence is an appropriate criminal justice goal;
as many domestic violence offenders are not
motivated to stop the violence 'the criminal justice system may provide the
needed leverage to compel an offender to seek treatment';
ordered attendance can be viewed as an expression of the community's
abhorrence of the behaviour and desire that the behaviour cease;
ordered attendance involves supervision and during the period of
supervision it is less likely that the offender will re-offend;
the drop out rate for court ordered attendees
is lower than voluntary attendees
and it could be argued that ordered attendance
better utilises program resources
the community, and many victims, have a strong desire for efforts to be
made to assist the offender to change
the availability of perpetrator programs could serve to dispel myths in
the legal system, the community and among victims about the
nature of the
violence and the prospects of reform.
as it is not demonstrated that perpetrator programs 'work'- ordered
attendance is based on a fallacious premise that attendance is
likely to result
if orders are made without offenders accepting responsibility for the
violence, program resources may be wasted on attendees who are
not motivated to
change and these attendees may undermine the effectiveness of the program for
the others;
ordering replicates the dynamic of coercion which occurs in violent
relationships and sets an inappropriate tone for a program aiming
attitudinal change;
ordering is likely to necessitate government resourcing and this in turn
raises questions of resource priorities and cost/benefit;
unless safeguards are in place, ordered attendance may substitute in part
or whole for the penalty which would otherwise be applied
and consequently
ordering may become a way for the perpetrator to avoid responsibility.
of ordered attendance
1. Due to the methodological limitations little assistance can be gleaned from
the research.
2. However, for the reasons set out below, the Committee has concluded that it
would be desirable for
attendance to a
best practice
perpetrator program to be available in the ACT. Before moving to considerations
which brought the Committee to this conclusion, the
Committee notes that it
considers that there are a number of
preconditions
to action being taken
to implement this recommendation.
3. These are:
that the program would be a correctional service and it would be
established as part of the substantial upgrading of the criminal
response to domestic violence in the ACT;
that the program would adhere to the best practice principles outlined
above- this includes positioning the program so that it is
accountable to
victims of domestic violence and capable of sustaining an offender
responsibility/victim safety focus. The program
would operate in conjunction
with women's education groups;
that support for the establishment of such a program is forthcoming from
ACT services for victims of domestic violence and that these
services are
willing to establish and maintain a cooperative working relationship with the
that funding for the program is not drawn directly or indirectly in the
short or long term from services for victims of domestic violence;
that funding is sufficient for a worthwhile trial period, say 4 years, for
evaluation, and for information sessions to be conducted
with relevant services
and groups, including, for example, police, correctional services, the
magistracy and judiciary, lawyers,
counsellors etc. so that there is a clear
understanding of the nature of the program, the way it works and a realistic
understanding
of likely outcomes.
1. In coming to a conclusion about
ordered attendance the following factors were decisive in the Committee's
many of the submissions to the Committee called
for perpetrator programs or assumed or contemplated that such programs would
be available;
while the effectiveness of perpetrator programs in terms of the
rehabilitation of individual offenders is not demonstrated and while
significant questions about cost/benefit, in the Committee's view programs
which adhere to best practice principles are
likely to be centres of excellence
for the analysis of the dynamics and causes of domestic violence and the
purposes and benefits
of such programs should be viewed more broadly than
rehabilitation of individual offenders;
the tenor of submissions received by the Committee suggests that unless a
quality program is available, there will be ongoing calls
from the community
for a court ordered program to be established and there will be a strong
perception (be it accurate or not) that
there is a serious gap in the response
to domestic violence. These pressures may lead to the establishment of poor
quality programs
and this in turn may hamper the effectiveness of the revised
criminal justice and comprehensive system response recommended by the
Committee. The correction of poor quality programs may require significant
effort on the part of relevant services and government
itself. The Committee
considered that the establishment of a best practice program for ordered
attendance will go part of the way
to fill the perceived gap and it is likely
to inform the development of other programs in the ACT;
the key to change is the offender's acceptance of responsibility for the
violence. The Committee considers it appropriate, and believes
in any event
that it is in line with the ACT community's wishes, that offenders should have
the opportunity to develop an appreciation
of their responsibility for their
behaviour. The fact is however, that it is unlikely that those who come before
the courts in relation
to domestic violence offences will attend a program
voluntarily;
the Committee does not accept the argument that court ordering will 'swamp'
or 'sabotage' the program. The program should not be expected
to put up with
disruptive, uncooperative or discourteous behaviour. At the commencement of
program attendance the rules of the program
should be explained and the
necessary disclosure authorities should be taken. If the attendee is unwilling
to comply with the requirements
or if the attendee fails to adhere to the rules
of the program the breach should be reported and breach action should be taken.
Recommendation 104:
That subject to the preconditions listed by the Committee, ordered
attendance at a perpetrator education program be available in
Recommendation 105:
That a perpetrator education program, for court ordered attendees, be
funded through ACT Corrective Services and be established and
operated within
the ACT Domestic Violence Intervention Project.
orders for attendance should be
1. Court ordered attendance could arise in several ways, that is, as a term of
a protection order or restraining order,
bail condition, as a condition of a bond or as a parole condition.
2. There is at present no power to order attendance as a term of a protection
order or a restraining order under ACT legislation.
It is arguable that the
court has this power under the
but as far as is known the relevant
provisions have not been tested. The court can make orders, as a condition of
a bond (including
a bond attached to a suspended sentence) for attendance at
a perpetrator program and does so when ordering attendance at the Violent
Program run by ACT Corrective Services.
Additionally, it is possible for such a requirement
to be imposed as a term of parole.
as a term of a protection order or restraining
1. The Committee considered whether the court should be able to order
attendance at a perpetrator program as a term of a protection
restraining order. The Committee decided that it may be appropriate in some
circumstances but does not recommend that
this occur at present. The programs
need to be properly established within the criminal justice system before
expansion to the civil
system is further considered.
Condition for attendance at perpetrator
Section 25(3)(d)
allows the Court to impose as a condition
of bail that the offender be required to participate in a program of personal
development,
training or rehabilitation.
2. The Committee has recommended that perpetrator education programs should be
available as a sentencing option.
3. While it is desirable that attendance at a perpetrator education program
commence as soon as possible upon a plea of guilty or
a verdict of guilty,
consideration of bail occurs before there has been a determination of the
charge. Perpetrator education programs
are not geared to short term attendance
- they attempt to facilitate attitudinal change and lengthy attendance is
therefore required.
4. It would be highly undesirable if a power to require attendance, as a
condition of bail, was used to argue for, or justify, the
relaxation of bail
conditions which would otherwise be applied. If this occurred the availability
of such an order may actually jeopardise
the safety of the victim.
5. For these reasons the Committee has concluded that where perpetrator
education programs are available it is not appropriate for
attendance to be
required as a condition of bail, except where there has been a finding of guilt
and the court decides to defer sentence
to allow the perpetrator to complete
the program as discussed previously.
Recommendation 106:
That where perpetrator education programs are available, the court not
order attendance as a condition of bail except where there
has been a finding
attendance as a condition of a bond or
1. As noted above the courts already have power to order attendance at a
perpetrator education program as a condition of a bond including
attached to a suspended sentence.
2. The Committee's terms of reference required consideration of the use of
behavioural change programs as a sentencing option
for violent offenders
convicted of criminal assault
. The Committee considers that limiting the
court's ability to order attendance to 'violent offenders convicted of criminal
is too narrow. There are a number of domestic violence offences which
do not involve an assault. Elsewhere in this report the Committee
recommended that stalking legislation should be introduced in the ACT.
3. The Committee considers that the court should be able to order attendance at
a perpetrator education program where there has been
a conviction for a
domestic violence offence .
4. In instituting ordered attendance, it is not acceptable to offer an
inducement, such as reduction in the penalty which would otherwise
be applied,
in order to encourage attendance. Attendance should be expected, it should be
routine and it should be ordered in addition
to the penalty which would
otherwise have been applied. If the person is to serve a term of imprisonment
it should be ordered that
the person attend a program as a condition of their
release or there should be a recommendation that this should be a condition of
5. The Committee considers that there should be an amendment to the
to provide that in the case of a domestic violence offence (including breach of
a protection order) that ordered attendance will
be routine and it will be
in addition
to the penalty which would otherwise apply. The Committee
recognises that there may be cases where ordered attendance is not appropriate.
Experience may, in due course, suggest some refinement of the provisions which
the Committee recommends but at this stage the Committee
does not think it
attendance is inappropriate.
Recommendation 107:
be amended to provide that when the court convicts for
a domestic violence offence, unless there are exceptional circumstances to
contrary, the court shall in addition to the penalty which would otherwise be
imposed, order the offender to attend an approved
perpetrator education program.
as a condition of parole
1. There is power under the Parole Act for the Parole Board to set conditions
on which a person is released from prison. The person
is always under the
supervision of Corrective Services for the duration of their parole and is
generally required to obey all directions
given by their parole officer,
including the requirement to attend relevant courses and programs.
2. It is envisaged that in most cases the order to attend a perpetrator program
will be made by the court and if the person is imprisoned,
attendance will
follow the period of imprisonment.
3. However, if this does not occur for some reason, but the Parole Board feels
that release on parole should be conditional on attendance
at a program, then
the Committee sees no reason why this should not occur.
Recommendation 108:
That attendance at a perpetrator education program be available as a
condition of parole.
Availability
of voluntary perpetrator programs in the
1. The Committee is unable to gauge the likely level of demand for programs for
voluntary attendees. The Committee considers that
subject to resources the
court ordered program recommended above should be available to voluntary
attendees on a means tested user
pays basis where the person is prepared to
make a commitment to complete the program, is willing to adhere to the program
the person wants to change.
2. The level of demand should be monitored. In the event that demand is beyond
the capacity of the program, the program should report
to the Domestic Violence
Project Coordinator so that the Coordinator can advise Council and government
on available options.
Recommendation 109:
That subject to resources, satisfaction of entry requirements and
willingness to adhere to program rules attendance at the court ordered
be available to voluntary attendees on a means tested user pays basis.
of voluntary perpetrator programs in the
1. In making decisions about funding voluntary perpetrator programs government
and non-government bodies should determine whether,
when and on what
conditions, programs should be established. Where funding is to be provided
funding criteria should aim to ensure
program quality and funding criteria
should be based on the principles and best practice criteria set out above.
2. The Committee noted a significant variation in the approach to violence in
the submissions received in relation to programs for
perpetrators.
3. There are presently no accreditation or regulatory arrangements in relation
to perpetrator education programs in the ACT and no
professional body has a
regulatory or quality assurance function in the area. In the Committee's view
it is highly desirable that
quality be assured. The Committee has considered a
number of possibilities including: inservice training; a formal accreditation
scheme and issuing advisory standards. The Committee concluded that each of
these are likely to be desirable but none is likely to
be sufficient alone.
4. The Committee believes that the most appropriate course is for the matter to
be referred to the ACT Domestic Violence Advisory
Council with a view to the
Council, in consultation with the ACT Domestic Violence Intervention Project,
developing an accreditation
scheme for those who intend to provide therapeutic
rehabilitative assistance to perpetrators of domestic violence.
5. The Committee envisages that the Domestic Violence Project Coordinator be on
the Management Committee for the perpetrator education
program and that
Management Committee would develop a code of practice which would be the basis
of accreditation as well as providing
in service training. The Committee
expects that the code of practice would elaborate on the principles which have
been referred to
in the Committee's review, deal with administrative
arrangements and provide guidance on issues which commonly arise. In addition
to promoting quality the accreditation scheme would assist referring agencies
to make suitable referrals.
6. The Committee considers that the Management Committee for the perpetrator
education program should include the Domestic Violence
Project Coordinator and
representatives from ACT Corrective Services, Victims Services, Department of
Education and of course the
perpetrator education program itself.
Recommendation 110:
That perpetrator programs should be accredited by the ACT Domestic Advisory
Council in consultation with the ACT DVIP.
of Submissions
Organisations
ACT Housing and Community Services Bureau
ACT Womens Consultative Council
Australian Capital Territory Bar Association
Australian Federation of Business and Professional Women (ACT Division)
Australian Federal Police
The Australian National University
Barnados Australia
Canberra Rape Crisis Centre
Citizens Commission on Human Rights
Department of Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
Domestic Violence Crisis Service, ACT Corrective Services and Marriage Guidance
Canberra and Region Inc. (now Relationships Australia)
(joint submission)
Domestic Violence Transit Flat Unit, Northside Community Service Inc.
Doris Womens Refuge
The Law Society of the ACT
Lone Fathers Association (ACT) Inc.
Marriage Guidance Canberra and Region Inc.(now Relationships Australia)
Men Against Sexual Assault (Canberra Branch)
Murringu Counselling and Advisory Service Canberra
Northern Territory Legal Aid Commission
Office of the Community Advocate
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
Victims of Crime Assistance League (ACT) Inc.
W.I.S.E (Workers in Sex Employment)
Woden Valley Hospital
Individuals
The Committee received twenty one submissions on behalf of individuals, and of
those submissions, seven were provided "in confidence."All
submissions have
been treated confidentially by the Committee and the names of those people who
provided submissions have not been
Asmus, Ritmeester and Pence,
Prosecuting Domestic Violence Cases in
Australian Law Reform Commission, Report No. 30:
Domestic Violence,
Australian Law Reform Commission, Interim Report No. 67:
Equality Before the
Law: Women's Access to the Legal System,
1994. (Part I and Part II)
Australian Law Reform Commission, Report No. 69:
Equality Before the Law:
Justice for Women,
British Columbia Crown Counsel Manual
British Columbia Taskforce on Family Violence, Ministry of Womens' Equality,
Victoria, British Columbia,
Is Anyone Listening?
Violent Acts and Injurious Outcomes in Married Couples:
Methodological Issues in the National Survey of Families and Households
Gender and Society, Volume 4.
E.S Buzawa and C.G Buzawa,
Domestic Violence: the Changing Criminal
Justice Response
Innovative Approaches to the Prosecution of Domestic Violence
Crimes: An Overview
in Buzawa and Buzawa,
Domestic Violence: the
Changing Criminal Justice Response,
Mick Devlin,
Men's Domestic Violence Practice
,Queensland Domestic Violence Council 1994.
Director of Public Prosecutions ACT
Prosecution Policy and Guidelines,
Distaff Associates,
Costs of Domestic Violence
R.P Dobash, R.E Dobash, M. Wilson and M. Daly,
The Myth of Sexual Symmetry
in Marital Violence,
Social Problems, 39(1), February 1992.
P. Easteal,
Killing the Beloved: Homicide Between Adult Sexual
Edna Erez, Leigh Roeger and Frank Morgan,
Victim Impact Statements in South
Australia: An Evaluation,
Office of Crime Statistics, South Australian
Attorney General's Department, Adelaide, 1994.
Ruth Frances,
An Overview of Community Based Intervention Programs For Men
Who Are Violent Or Abusive in the Home,
paper presented at the British
Criminology Society Conference, Cardiff, July 1993.
Jane A. Furness,
From a Victim's Perspective: A multiple case study of the
Men's Education Programme
, HAIP Monitoring Team, University of Waikato,
January 1994.
Matthew Goode,
Stalking Crime of the 90's?,
Senior Legal Officer, South
Australian Attorney General's Department delivered to the 8th International
Symposium on Victimology,
Adelaide, August 1994.
Unconscious bias in the judicial system
, in Australian Lawyer,
28(9) October 1993.
L.K Hamberger and J.E Hastings,
Court Mandated Treatment of Men Who Assault
their Partners,
in N.Zoe Hilton,
Legal Responses to Wife Assault:
Current Trends and Evaluations
Harrison and Gearin,
Working Together to Prevent Domestic Violence in the
Northern Territory,
To be published in November, 1995.
Barbara Hart,
Confronting Domestic Violence: Effective Police Responses,
Law Enforcement Training Team Pennsylvania Coalition Against Domestic Violence,
N. Zoe Hilton(ed),
Legal Responses to Wife Assault: Current Trends and
Evaluations,
P Jaffe and others,
A Research Study to Evaluate the Impact and
Effectiveness of the Policy Directive that Police Lay Charges in all Domestic
Incidents Where Reasonable and Probable Grounds Exist
Toronto Provisional Secretariat for Justice.
P Jaffe, E. Hastings and others,
The Impact of Police Laying Charges
N. Zoe Hilton,
Legal Responses to Wife Assault: Current Trends and
Evaluations,
A lan Jenkins,
Invitations to Responsibilty:
The Therapeutic
Engagement of Men Who Engage in Abusive or Violent Behaviour,
Centre, Adelaide 1990.
Justice Sub-Committee Report, Domestic Violence Resource Unit, South
Los Angeles City Attorney, Domestic Violence Prosecution Unit
, Misdemeanour
Domestic Violence Prosecutions.
H. McGregor and A. Hopkins,
Working for Change: The Movement Against
Domestic Violence
Professor K. Mahoney,
Speech to the National Press Club
, 31 June 1993.
P. Mayhew, N. Aye Maing, C. Mirlees-Black,
The 1992 British Crime Survey,
Jane Mugford, Patricia Easteal and Anne Edwards,
ACT Domestic Violence
Research, Report to the ACT Community Law Reform Committee
, Australian
Institute of Criminology, 1993.
Professor Nutbeem, M. Wise, Dr. Bauman, E. Harris, Professor S. Leeder,
Department of Public Health, University of Sydney,
Goals and Targets for
Australia's Health in the Year 2000 and Beyond
, referred to in the Monash
University Accident Research Centre study, 1994.
National Committee on Violence Against Women,
National Strategy on Violence
Against Women,
National Committee on Violence Against Women,
Position Paper on
, prepared by Dr Hilary Astor, December 1991.
New South Wales Women's Co-ordination Unit, New South Wales Strategic Plan,
Programs for Perpetrators of Domestic Violence: Discussion Paper No.
Michael Paymar,
Duluth-An Integrated Model: Working Together to Stop
Violence Against Women
, paper delivered at the Challenging the Legal
System's Response to Domestic Violence Conference, Brisbane March 1994.
Evaluating Treatment Programs for Violent Men: Issues, Dilemmas
and Priorities,
in Local Domestic Violence Committees Conference, Papers
and Proceedings, July 1991, New South Wales, Domestic Violence Committee.
Ellen Pence and Michael Paymar
, Education Groups for Men Who Batter: The
Duluth Model,
Police Commissioner's Policy Advisory Group,
Intimidation, Harassment and
Threats of Violence,
September, 1993.
Queensland Domestic Violence Taskforce,
Beyond these Walls
Rougher than Usual Handling
, 2nd edition, 1995.
Report of the New South Wales Domestic Violence Committee, 1991
N. Robertson and R. Busch,
Hamilton Abuse Intervention Pilot Project Two
Year Evaluation
, University of Waikato, 1993.
N. Robertson and R. Busch,
What's Love Got To Do With It?: An Analysis of an
Intervention Approach to Domestic Violence
Volume 1, 1993 Waikato Law
Going Backwards: Law Reform and Women Bashing
, Women's Studies
International Forum, 9(1) referred to in J. Stubbs and S. Egger, for the
National Committee on Violence Against
The Effectiveness of
Protection Orders in Australian Jurisdictions
J. Sherrard, J. Ozzane-Smith, I. Brumen, V. Reutley, F. Williams, Monash
University Accident Research Centre,
Domestic Violence Problems and
Indicators Report No.63
Suzanne Snively, Coopers and Lybrand,
The New Zealand Economic Cost of
Family Violence
, published by the Family Violence Unit, Department of
Social Welfare, 1994.
Homicides in Australia, 1990-1991
, Australian Institute of
Criminology, 1992.
M. Strauss and R. Gelles (eds)
Physical Violence in American Families
M. Strauss and R. Gelles,
Societal Change and Change in Family Violence from
1975-1985 as revealed by two National Surveys
, Journal of Marriage and the
Family, Volume 48.
J. Stubbs and S. Egger, for the National Committee on Violence Against Women,
The Effectiveness of Protection
in Australian
Dr Adam Sutton,
Male Perpetrators Program: Summary of Findings
delivered at the World Society of Victimology Symposium, Adelaide, 22 August
United Nations,
Strategies for Confronting Domestic Violence: A Resource
United Nations,
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, (General Assembly
resolution 217A (III), annex).
Victorian Community Council Against Violence
, Treatment and Counselling of
Perpetrators of Family Violence
, Report No. 3, March 1991.
John Walker Consulting Services,
ACT Crime and Justice Statistics and
Management Information Collection and Analysis,
prepared for the ACT
Attorney General's Department, May 1995.
Western Australian Task Force on Domestic Violence,
Breaking the
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
TERMS OF REFERENCE
The Australian Capital Territory has innovative legislation about
Domestic Violence. Notwithstanding this, there are community concerns
aspects of the scheme.
I, TERRY CONNOLLY, ATTORNEY GENERAL OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY,
THEREFORE REFER the following matter to the Community Law
Reform Committee as
provided for in the constitution of the Committee:
TO REVIEW the law in force in the Territory in regard to Domestic Violence
legislation in its application to the Territory AND TO
REPORT on desirable
changes concerning the existing law, practise and procedures concerning that
In making its review and report the Committee will consider:
(a) whether the current effectiveness of Domestic Violence Orders in regard to
time limitations imposed and the procedure on the
expiration of the orders is
(b) arrest and Court procedures having regard to a broadly held public view
that the charging of offenders is the responsibility
of the victim;
(c) the collection of statistics on domestic violence in the ACT;
(d) the implementation of automatic preventive detention or refusal of bail to
violent offenders;
(e) the implementation of mandatory arrest and custodial detention of violent
(f) the automatic cancellation of custody and access orders in favour of
violent offenders when protection orders are breached and
death threats have
(g) the need for awareness training for magistrates;
(h) the provision of background information to the Court to assist in
determining penalties for breaches of Domestic Violence Orders;
(i) the need for a specialist domestic violence unit within the police
(j) the use of Behavioural Change programs as sentencing options for violent
offenders convicted of criminal assault;
(k) the facilitation of information exchange between agencies with due regard
to privacy provisions.
In making its review and report the Committee is to have regard to any views
of government agencies, the community and individuals
on the subject matter of
this reference and to the impact of any Territory scheme for the compensation
of victims.
Signed this 3rd day of September 1991
TERRY CONNOLLY
ATTORNEYGENERAL
P. Easteal,
Killing the Beloved:
Homicide Between Adult Sexual Intimates
, 1993, AIC, p13. Easteal deals with
a number of studies of the incidence of domestic homicide.
Homicides in Australia, 1990-1991
1992 using data obtained from the National Homicide Monitoring Program.
Prof Nutbeem, M. Wise, Dr. Bauman, E. Harris, Prof S.
Leeder, Department of Public Health, University of Sydney,
Goals and Targets
for Australia's Health in the Year 2000 and Beyond
, 1993, referred to in
the Monash University Accident Research Centre study referred to in footnote
The Committee did commission research conducted by the
Australian Institute of Criminology on various aspects of domestic violence
Canberra. Although this was not an incidence study, it did include data derived
from police and court files for a specified period.
J. Sherrard, J. Ozzane-Smith, I. Brumen, V. Reutley, F,
Williams, Monash University Accident Research Centre,
Domestic Violence
Problems and Indicators Report No. 63
, Nov 1994 p5. In the study domestic
violence presentations were divided into three categories of confirmed,
probable and suggestive.
All three categories represented only 3% of emergency
department admissions. 53,320 cases were studied in total, with data obtained
through the Victorian Injury Surveillance System.
P. Easteal, (footnote 1) p.13
H. Johnson, Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics,
Developing Statistical Measurements of Violence Against Women
Toronto, p4. This study was conducted in 1993, surveying a random sample of
12,300 women.
P. Mayhew, N. Aye Maing, C. Mirlees-Black,
British Crime Survey, Home Office Research Study No.132
M. Strauss and R. Gelles (eds)
Physical Violence in
American Families
, New Brunswick, 1990 and M. Strauss and R. Gelles,
Societal Change and Change in Family Violence from 1975-1985 as revealed by
two National Surveys
in Journal of Marriage and the Family, Vol 48, p465.
P. Easteal, p50 (footnote 1 ).
see for example R.P Dobash, R.E Dobash, M. Wilson and
The Myth of Sexual Symmetry in Marital Violence
Problems, 39(1), Feb 1992 and L .Bush,
Violent Acts
and Injurious
Outcomes in Married Couples : Methodological Issues in the National Survey of
Families and Households
, Gender and Society Vol 4.
The Myth of Sexual Symmetry
, (footnote 11).
An ACT man was murdered by another man who seriously
attacked his estranged wife at the same time. It is arguable, that this should
be regarded in addition, as a death resulting from domestic violence.
Monash University Accident Research Centre Report, p4.
Monash University Accident Research Centre Report,
The Committee has formed this belief based on publicly
reported data from the police, Magistrates Court, Domestic Violence Crisis
Service, from current literature,the findings outlined in the Committee's
Research Paper No. 1, public and private submissions to
the Committee,
observation and anecdotal evidence.
Children are considered in Part II of this Report,
especially with respect to custody and access orders and as respondents to
Australian Law Reform Commission(ALRC),
30: Domestic Violence
, , Canberra 1986.
As above, p ix.
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Protection Orders (Reciprocal Arrangements) Act 1992.
United Nations,
Strategies for Confronting Domestic
Violence: A Resource Manual
See H. McGregor and A. Hopkins,
Working for
, 1991 p49.
Going Backwards: Law Reform and Women
,, Women's Studies International Forum, 9(1) referred to in J.
Stubbs and S. Egger, for the National Committee on Violence Against
The Effectiveness of Protection Orders in Australian Jurisdictions,
Report No. 30
Report No. 30,
National Committee on Violence Against Women,
National Strategy on Violence Against Women,
Press release issued by the Chief Minister's office on
26 April 1995.
Submission from Community Health Social Workers of ACT Health.
The AIC already maintains the Clearinghouse on Violence
against Women.
See Chapter 7 of this report for a description of the
Duluth model.
Report to the ACT Community Law Reform Committee by the
Australian Institute of Criminology, (J. Mugford, P. Easteal and A. Edwards),
Research Paper No. 1 Domestic Violence,
1993, (Research Paper).
Research Paper, p. 59
While numerous authorities could be
cited the following provide a selection:
Strategies for Confronting Domestic
Violence: A Resource Manual
, United Nations, New York, 1993- which was
finalised by a United Nations expert group and based on a draft prepared by the
Department of Justice in cooperation with the Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice Branch of the Centre for Social Development and
Humanitarian
Affairs and the Helsinki Institute for Crime Prevention and Control;
Equality Before the Law: Women's Access to the Legal System, Interim Report
, Australian Law Reform Commission, 1994;
Equality Before the Law:
Justice For Women, Report No. 69 Part 1
, ALRC, 1994;
Beyond these
, Queenland Domestic Violence Taskforce, Brisbane 1988; Report of the
NSW Domestic Violence Committee, Sydney 1991; Western Australian
Task Force on
Domestic Violence:
Breaking the silence
, Perth, 1989;
Listening? Report of the British Columbia Task Force on Family Violence
Ministry of Women's Equality, Victoria, British Columbia, 1992 ; J. Harrison
and S. Gearin,
Working Together to Prevent Domestic Violence in the Northern
, NT Law Society, forthcoming. (As this book has not yet been
published it is not possible to include page numbers.)
see for example discussion in ALRC,
Equality Before the
Law: Women's Access to the Legal System
Access to Justice an Action
, Access to Justice Advisory Committee, Canberra 1994.
Access to Justice
, (footnote 35)
for a general discussion.
See for example,
Equality Before the Law : Women's
Access to the Legal System
Equality Before the Law: Justice For
, (footnote 34).
see United Nations,
Universal Declaration of Human
, (General Assembly resolution 217A (III), annex).
Harrison & Gearin, (footnote 34).
Harrison & Gearin, (footnote 34).
Equality before the Law:Women's Equality, Report
No 69 Part II,
1994 and also
Equality Before the Law: Justice for Women,
Report No 69, Part I.
As noted in:
Canberra in the Year 2020: Law and
Justice, Issues Paper
, 1993, law is an expression of society's norms.
For example, LK Hamberger and JE Hastings,
Court-Mandated Treatment of Men Who Assault their Partners
, in N. Zoe
Legal Responses to Wife Assault: Current Trends and Evaluation
p. 189, 1993.
The following is a summary of points noted in United
Strategies for Confronting Domestic Violence: A Resource Manual.
(Footnote 34)
Harrison & Gearin, (footnote 34).
For example,
Strategies for Confronting Domestic
Violence: A Resource Manual
; (footnote 34), the
National Strategy on
Violence Against Women
, (footnote 27);
Equality Before the Law: Women's
Access to the Legal System
; (footnote 34);
Beyond these Walls
Queenland Domestic Violence Taskforce,(footnote 34);
Report of the NSW
Domestic Violence Committee
, Sydney 1991, (footnote 34); Western Australian
Task Force on Domestic Violence:
Breaking the silence
, Perth, 1989,
(footnote 34);
Is Anyone Listening?
Report of the British Columbia Task
Force on Family Violence, Ministry of Women's Equality, Victoria,(see footnote
Interim Report No 67, Equality Before the Law,
Women's Access to the Legal System.
Research Paper, p. 13
See Recommendation 101 at p. 197 of
this Report.
National Strategy on Violence Against Women
Australian Bureau of Statistics publicity document.
Research Paper, p. 235
John Walker Consulting Services,
ACT Crime and Justice
Statistics and Management Information Collection and Analysis
, prepared for
the ACT Attorney Generals Department, May 1995.
Duplication in statistics of court and DPP could be
avoided by agreement between these agencies as to recording.
A recent request to the AFP statistical unit for
information on murders and attempted murders committed in a domestic context
unable to be met unless the police expended significant time and resources
locating the information.
Research Paper, p. 236.
Walker report, (footnote 53) p16.
Research Paper, p. 236.
Research Paper, p. 237.
Research Paper, p. 235.
Research Paper, p. 267.
Arrest and the Reduction of
Repeat Wife Assault
, Dutton and others in Buzawa & Buzawa (eds)
Domestic Violence: the Changing Criminal Justice Response
, 1992; Jaffe
and others,
A Research Study to Evaluate the Impact and Effectiveness of the
Policy Directive that Police Lay Charges in all Domestic Violence
Where Reasonable and Probable Grounds Exist
, 1985, Toronto Provisional
Secretariat for Justice.
See for example
Strategies for Confronting Domestic
Violence: A Resource Manual
, United Nations, New York, 1993,(footnote
Although an individual may bring a private prosecution
this is rare.
Research Paper, p. 16.
Research Paper, pp. 18-19
PK Manning,
Screening Calls
, in Buzawa &
Buzawa, 1992 pp. 41-58, (footnote 62)
National Committee on Violence,
Violence Directions for
Australian Institute of Criminology, 1990, p.189.
P. Jaffe, E.Hastings and others,
The Impact of Police
Laying Charges
, pp.62-95 in N. Zoe Hilton(ed),
Legal Responses to Wife
Assault: Current Trends and Evaluations
Or, in the ACT, as an alternative to a summons, a VATAC-
voluntary agreement to attend court.
Working for Change
, 1991 Hopkins and McGregor
argued that the criminal justice system can have a powerful shaming effect on
the perpetrator
and obviously it can provide negative consequences
to counter the choice involved in continuing the violence. See also N. Zoe
Legal Responses to Wife Assault, Current Trends and Evaluations, 1993,
Buzawa and Buzawa (footnote 62), Jaffe (footnote 69),UN Resource
(footnote 34) and The Hamilton Abuse Intervention Pilot Project Evaluation
Barbara Hart, Pennsylvania Coalition Against Domestic
violence, 1990, pp. 241-243
As above, p. 22-24
Asmus, Ritmeester and Pence,
Prosecuting Domestic Violence
Abuse Cases in Duluth
1991, pp. 129-130.
for example see NR Cahn,
Innovative Approaches to the
Prosecution of Domestic Violence
Crimes: An Overview
, pp. 161-180,
in ES & CG Buzawa,
Domestic Violence: the Changing Criminal Justice
In Los Angeles City the success rate increased from 52%
to 77% in the first year of the new prosecution procedures and in San Diego
88% success rate has been reported,
Misdemeanour Domestic Violence
Prosecutions
, Domestic Violence Prosecution Unit, Los Angeles City
Attorney, p. 3;
Family Violence: State of the Art Court Programs
also see Cahn, (footnote76).
N Robertson and R Busch, (The HAIPP Monitoring Team),
Hamilton Abuse Intervention Pilot Project Two Year Evaluation
University of Waikato, 1993, p. 11
The use of subpoenas has been found to correlate with
prosecution success rates- Asmus and others,
Prosecuting Domestic Abuse
Cases in Duluth
, p. 136.(footnote 75).
The Manual contains information about the prevalence and
the dynamics of domestic violence, case citations, commentary on battered
women's syndrome evidence, sentencing decisions and relevant decisions on
admissibility of evidence. It explains how prosecution
fits into a coordinated
response to domestic violence.
Research Paper, pp. 21-22, see also ALRC
Before the Law: Women's Access to Justice ( Interim Report No 67)
Report No 69:Justice for Women (Part 1)
1994.(footnote 34).
See p. 223 of this Report.
Education for Magistrates and Judges is dealt with in
more detail on page .
s20(1A) Parole Act 1976
s20(1B) Parole Act 1976
Victims of Crimes Act 1994.
Victims of Crime Act 1994
Victims of Crime Act 1994
Victims of Crime Act 1994
Victims of Crime Act 1994
Victims of Crime Act 1994
Victims of Crime Act 1994
Domestic Violence Survey, Appendix
1 to the Research Paper, answers to question 1
Research Paper, p. 62
Research Paper, p. 68. In relation to the finding that 6%
of call outs resulted in charges being laid, the Committee notes that the
figure of 6% corresponds with the number of charges being laid (n=21 as a
percentage of total call outs) and not with the number
of call outs at which
charges were laid. If more than one charge was laid at a relevant callout
incident, the percentage of call
outs that resulted in charges being laid would
be less than 6%.
Research Paper, p. 68. The Research Paper did not specify
the number of offender, or the number of charges laid against each offender.
No details were given in the Research Paper in relation
to the proportion of charges that were dismissed by the court because of
insufficient evidence as compared with the charges on which no evidence was
offered by the prosecution.
Research Paper, p. 72
Research Paper, p. 91.
Research Paper, p. 68.
Research Paper, p. 80.
Research paper, p. 89.
Research Paper, p. 91.
Domestic Violence Survey, Appendix 1 to the Research
Paper, answers to question 14.
Domestic Violence Survey, Appendix 1 to the Research
Paper, answers to question 24.
(A copy of the instruction is at Appendix 2 of the
Committee's Research Paper No. 1 on Domestic Violence.).
Research Paper, p. 61.
Information provided by AFP
Research Paper, p. 91.
Research Paper, p. 84-5.
Research Paper, p. 85.
Research Paper, p. 91.
Research Paper, p. 223.
Research Paper, p. 224.
Research Paper, p. 146-150.
Research Paper, p. 151.
Research Paper p. 247.
Research Paper, p. 240.
Research Paper, p. 153.
Research Paper, p. 96.
Research Paper, p. 96.
See p.164 of this Report.
See p. 104-105 of this Report.
Bail Act 1992
Bail Act 1992
Bail Act 1992
Bail Act 1992
Bail Act 1992
For example, common assault, which is the least serious assault
offence carries a maximum penalty of 2 years imprisonment.
Bail Act 1992
Bail Act 1992
Bail Act 1992
Bail Act 1992
Bail Act 1992
`domestic violence offence' is defined in the Domestic
Violence Act to mean a 'prescribed offence' committed by a person against a
spouse of the person; a child or the person or of a spouse of the person; a
relative or a household member. A 'prescribed offence'
means murder or
attempted murder, manslaughter or attempted murder or an offence, or an attempt
to commit an offence, under various
sections of the Crimes Act which include
assaults including serious assaults; acts endangering life; threat to kill;
sexual assault;
possession of an offensive weapon; offensive behaviour etc.
Bail Act 1992
The available conditions are in
Bail Act 1992
Research Paper, p. 67.
Bail Act 1992
ss27A and 46A
Bail Act 1992
Bail Act 1992
See page where lethality indicators are listed.
Bail Act 1992
It is noted that police respondents to the survey
undertaken for the Research Paper would agree with such an approach - most
thought that the most effective response in domestic violence cases was
for the offender to be locked up overnight: Research Paper
Research Paper. Police response to question 23 in the
police survey, at Appendix 1 to the Research Paper.
The question of court bail is dealt with at p.124 of
this Report
See Recommendations 84 to 92 (from p.173) in relation
to stalking and to the lethality indicators at p. 57
Crimes Act 1900
Research Paper Q1
Research Paper, p.151
Research Paper, p.247
Research Paper, p.96
Research Paper, p. 83
Domestic Violence Survey, Appendix 1 to the Research
Paper, answers to question 15.
Reference is made to the article by Busch and Neville
What's Love Got to Do with It?: An Analysis of an Intervention
Approach to Domestic
Vol 1, 1993 Waikato Law Review, New
Zealand, which deals with the minimising effect of 'neutral' language in a law
enforcement and
legal context.
Bail Act 1992
Bail Act 1992
Prosecution Policy and Guidelines in the Australian
Capital Territory, Director of Public Prosecutions, December 1991, p. 3-4.
As above p. 15
As above p. 16
Director of Public Prosecutions Act 1990
that the Attorney -General may give directions or guidelines to the DPP but any
such directions or guidelines:
must be in writing and be published in the
Gazette and laid before the Legislative Assembly; must be of a general nature
and may not
relate to a specific case, and may not be given without prior
consultation
Research Paper, p. 226
Research Paper, p. 99
Research Paper, p. 249
Research Paper, p. 266
Research Paper, p. 268
Research Paper, pp. 157-158, 190-191
Research Paper, p. 249
Research Paper, p. 191
Research Paper, p. 266
See Recommendation 60 at p. 127 of this Report.
Research Paper, p. 254
Evidence (Closed Circuit Television) Act 1991
s2 (definition of victim) and s4 (1)(e) (application of
act) Evidence (CCTV) Act 1991
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1900
(definition of Victim)
s429(1) (b)
Crimes Act 1900
Edna Erez, Leigh Roeger and Frank Morgan,
Impact Statements in South Australia: An Evaluation
, Office of Crime
Statistics, South Australian Attorney-General's Department, Adelaide, 1994, p.
s. 27 of the
Domestic Violence Act 1986.
The Report of the Justice Sub-committee in SA(a
departmental body formed by the Domestic Violence Resource Unit) concluded that
sentence to allow the offender to completed a perpetrator education
program would have the greatest impact on the offender in terms
of deterring
further acts of violence.
,Unconscious Bias in the Judicial System
in Australian Lawyer, 28(9), October 1993 p. 34
Professor K. Mahoney, Speech to the National Press Club
on 31 June 1993, p. 8
K. Hall, p. 35 (footnote 182)
Profeessor Mahoney's speech, p. 11
Rougher than Usual Handling
edition p.192
The Justice sub committee was convened by the Domestic
Violence Resource Unit, South Australia
The Justice Sub-Committee in South Australia have
prepared a "draft" proposal for involvement of the Department of Correctional
in a coordinated inter-agency response to domestic violence. In this
context it is interesting to note that National Competencies
developed for corrections officers with the aim of transferable accreditation
and common practice manuals.
Recommendation 61 at p. 127 of this Report
See p. 209-210 of this Report
Bail Act 1992
Bail Act 1992
The first two grounds for a protection order currently,
are that the respondent has committed or threatened to commit a 'domestic
violence offence'. 'Domestic violence offence' is defined in
There is no
definition of domestic violence. The Committee, in
of this Report to be
issued shortly,recommends that the grounds for a domestic violence protection
order be simplified and that a
definition of 'domestic violence' be inserted in
to the Domestic Violence Act. The need for the Domestic Violence Act to contain
a definition of or to refer to a 'domestic violence offence' will be removed.
s27 Domestic Violence Act 1986
This paper, entitled
Intimidation, Harassment and Threats of
was prepared by Queensland Police Service, Victoria Police
Service and the Australian Federal Police for the Police Commissioner's
Advisory Group(PCPAG) in September 1993. The PCPAG was appointed in July 1992
by the Australasian Police Minister' Council
(APMC) to examine a number of
issues relating to the policing of intimidation, harassment and threats of
violence. In its paper the
PCPAG made a number of recommendations. At its
meeting of 26 May 1994, the APMC agreed that all jurisdictions move to
implement the
recommendations.p9.
Matthew Goode, Senior Legal Officer, SA Attorney General's
Office, "Stalking Crime of the 90's?", delivered to the 8th International
Symposium on Victimology, Adelaide, August 1994.
As above p. 11.
NSW s562A(1); NT s189(1)(a)(i); SA s19AA(1)(a)(i); Qld
s359A(7)(a) includes "loitering near, watching, or approaching another
NT s189(1)(a)(ii); SA s19AA(1)(a)(ii); Qld s359A(7)(c);
NSW s562A(1) limits frequents to "any place that a person frequents for the
purpose of any social or leisure activity"
NT s189(1)(a)(iv); SA s19AA(1)(a)(v)
NT s189(1)(a)(iii); SA s19AA(1)(a)(iii); Qld
s359A(7)(d)
SA s19AA(1)(a)(iv); Qld s359A(7)(f)) includes giving
directly or indirectly; or leaves offensive material where it will be found
given to or brought to the attention of, the other person (Qld s359A(7)(e)
NSW s562A(1) requires "making of repeated telephone
calls" Qld s359A(7)(b)
Qld s359A(7)(h)
Qld s359A(7)(g)
NT s189(1)(a)(v); SA s19AA(1)(a)(vi) requires that such
acts be covert.
Qld s359A(6)(a)(I);
NT s189(2)(b)(ii); SA s19AA(2)(a)(ii); Qld
s359A(6)(iii) includes "or threatens this";
NT s189(2)(b)(i); SA s19AA(2)(a)(i); Qld
s359A(6)(a)(ii).
Matthew Goode,
Stalking: Crime of the 90's?
delivered to the 8th International Symposium on Victimology, Adelaide, August
Combined DVCS, ACT Corrective Services, Relationships
Australia submission. The penalty for acts of aggravated cruelty to animals
2 years, $5000 fine.
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1900
NCVAW Position paper on Mediation prepared by Dr Hilary
Astor, December 1991, p. 40
Family Violence: State of the Art
Court Programs: 1992, p. 83
Pence & Shepard, 1987, p. 23-4
R. Busch and N. Robertson,
What's Love Got To Do With It?
(footnote 156)
The report was prepared by Distaff Associates, primarily
by Eva Cox and Helen Leonard. It is released as "3. Costs of Domestic Violence"
and published by the NSW Women's Co-ordination Unit in July 1991.
As above p.4
As above p.3
As above p.3
Suzanne Snively, Coopers & Lybrand, "The New Zealand Economic
Cost of Family Violence" published by the Family Violence Unit,
Department of
Social Welfare, December 1994.
As above p.iii
As above p.iv
As above p.ii
As above p. 7
As above p. 20
As above p. 21. The total costs to the individual were
taken and divided by the number of survivors, 37,144, making the average total
cost per individual nearly $11,000. If all estimated government costs are
divided amongst the 37,144 the average government cost
per survivor is
$22,510.66.
As above p. 14
As above p. 15
Report of the Queensland Domestic Violence Taskforce,
these Walls
, Brisbane, October 1988, p. 435
As above p. 451
As above p. 469
paragraph (j) of the reference
in N Zoe Hilton (ed)
Legal Responses to Wife Assault:
Current Trends and Evaluation
, 1993, pp. 188-229
From a victim's perspective: A multiple case study
evaluation of the men's education programme
, by Jane A Furness, HAIP
Monitoring Team, University of Waikato, January 1994.
Programs for Perpetrators of Domestic Violence:
Discussion Paper, No 4
, NSW Women's Coordination Unit, NSW Domestic
Violence Strategic Plan, 1991. Also see Bob Pease,
Evaluating Treatment
Programs for Violent Men: Issues, Dilemmas and Priorities
Domestic Violence Committees Conference,
Papers and Proceedings
1991, NSW Domestic Violence Committee.
Treatment and Counselling of Perpetrators of Family
, Victorian Community Council Against Violence, Report No. 3, March
1991. See also Ruth Frances,
An Overview of Community Based Intervention
Programs for Men Who are Violent or Abusive in the Home
, Paper presented at
the British Criminology Society Conference, Cardiff, July 1993.
Mick Devlin,
Men's Domestic Violence Practice
, Queensland Domestic Violence Council 1994.
Male Perpetrators Program: Summary of Findings
paper delivered at the World Society of Victimology Symposium, Adelaide,
22.8.94 by Dr Adam Sutton
Springer Publishing Co, New York, 1993.
Invitations to Responsibility: The Therapeutic
Engagement of Men Who Engage in Abusive or Violent Behaviour
Centre, Adelaide, 1990
. eg. Pease, (footnote 237) and Hamberger and Hastings, (footnote 43)
Hamberger and Hastings p. 220
As above p. 220
Dr Sutton,(footnote 240)
National Strategy on Violence Against Women
. Appendix Three: NCVAW
Position Paper, Feb. 1992; see also A. Jenkins, (footnote 242)
eg. Furness,(footnote 236)
The feature of the partners/ former partners being contacted to
for their support and to provide feedback to the facilitators is
also a feature
of the Men Embracing Non-Violent Solution Program offered in Melbourne. The
importance of this type of feedback was
pointed out in the submission to the
Committee by Doris Women's Refuge which stated :" Residents whose partners are
on Parole or
in a Violent Offenders Program have particular problems...Adult
Corrections workers are often unaware that their clients partner
is in a refuge
as a result of his continuing violence" The NSW
Fundamentals state
the victim should be offered counselling support to enable her to recognise the
functional and deliberate use of violence and
information about the option of
seeking assistance through other services.
If orders are made contrary to this precondition there is a significant risk
that program resources will be wasted on those whose
mission is to advocate
their innocence.
Hamberger and Hastings p. 196-203 (footnote 43), refer also to
Pease, (footnote 237) and M Paymar,
Duluth- An Integrated Model: Working
together to Stop Violence Against Women,
paper delivered at the
Challenging the Legal System's Response to Domestic Violence Conference
Brisbane, 23rd-26th March 1994, for a similar classification of programs
Hamberger and Hastings, p. 203 (footnote 43)
Refer also to Alan Jenkins, (footnote 242)
The evaluation of the 26 week Duluth model perpetrator program by
Furness, (footnote 236) concluded that "the length of the program
was useful in
allowing time for lack of change, reversions to old behaviours and hidden
abuses to become apparent, and was useful
in increasing the likelihood that the
men would be challenged on these...for the women, the length of the programme
had both advantages
and disadvantages. It was stressful coping with the
fluctuations in the men's behaviour. On the other hand, the women were able to
see that their partners had been given every opportunity to change which
sometimes helped them in making decisions in their own and
their children's
best interests" (p. 213-4). For a detailed description of the thinking behind a
group format, and details of the
Duluth perpetrator program content, see Pence
and Paymer,(footnote 241)
eg. Furness, (footnote 236), Hart, (footnote73), Pence &
Paymar, (footnote 241), pp. 163-178; also refer to Pease (footnote 237).
consistent finding is that perpetrators who attend programs report
significantly less violent or abusive behaviour than the victims.
There are also examples of largely self sustaining volunteer
programs eg. Man Alive, Hamish Sinclair, San Rafael, California
Literature Review
pp.1-5 (footnote 239)
See for example, Pease, (footnote 237)
Hamberger and Hastings, (footnote 43) p. 190
Hamberger and Hastings, as above p. 194
For example submissions by: Centacare; Canberra Rape Crisis
Centre; The Law Society of the ACT with which the ACT Bar Association
concurred; ACT Department of Health; joint submission by Domestic Violence
Crisis Service, ACT Correctional Services; Marriage Guidance
Canberra and
Region; Doris Women's Refuge; Men Against Sexual Assault; Australian Federal
Police; Murringu Canberra (Men's Meeting
Victoria is the only Australian jurisdiction where the court has
the power to order attendance at a perpetrator program as a condition
restraining order. It has been reported however that the power is rarely used.
The New Zealand Family Court has the power to
make such orders as a term of a
restraining order.
The court has power under s. 556A or 556B of the
place a person on a good behaviour bond which may include a condition that the
person will comply with a condition which the court
specifies. Under s. 556A a
bond may be imposed with or without conviction where no other penalty, other
than a reparation order if
appropriate, is imposed. Under s. 556B a bond may be
imposed in addition to a fine and/or as a condition to suspending a prison
or as a condition of release following a specified period of
imprisonment. A bond can include a requirement that the person attend
perpetrator program or it can include a condition that the person will be
subject to probation supervision and obey the reasonable
directions of the
probation supervisor. The probation supervisor could in turn direct that the
person attend a perpetrator program.
Breach of a bond imposed under s. 556A
would normally result in the court imposing a fresh penalty for the original
offence. Breach
of a bond under s. 556B which involved a suspended sentence may
result in imprisonment for the balance of the sentence. In the case
of a breach
of a bond which did not involve a suspended sentence, the court may impose the
penalty which would otherwise have been
Parole Act 1976
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter