URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ACTCLRC/1991/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:29:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Loss of Consortium and Compensation for Loss of Capacity to do Housework [1991] ACTCLRC 4
Loss of Consortium and Compensation for Loss of Capacity to do Housework
Introduction
Loss of Consortium
Compensation for Loss of Capacity to do Housework
Financial Considerations for the ACT Government
Bibliography
Terms of Reference
Participants
Loss of Consortium and Compensation for Loss of Capacity to do Housework
Report No 4 of the Community Law Reform Committee of the
Australian Capital Territory. This Report reflects the law as at March 1991.
Committee Reference: CLRC No 4.
The Community Law Reform Committee of the
Australian Capital Territory was established in June 1990. The purpose of the
is to assist the Government to identify areas in need of reform,
anticipate emerging social and legal issues and assess the practical
various proposals and laws on the people of the ACT. The Committee's Office and
Secretariat are at 3rd floor GIO Building,
City Walk, Canberra City ACT 2601
(Tel (06)2070546, fax (06)2070538).
This report examines whether:
(i) the action for loss of consortium should be abolished; and
(ii) in association with the abolition of the action for loss of consortium,
the Government should enact legislation to provide
adequate compensation for
loss of capacity to do housework.
The report is a review of recommendations made by the Australian Law Reform
Commission in its report number 32 (1986).
The action for loss of consortium allows a husband but not a wife to claim
compensation for the loss of the companionship and services
of his negligently
injured wife.
The Committee agrees with the recommendation of the Commission that the action
for loss of consortium should be abolished and not
extended. The action is
clearly considered by the community to be discriminatory and anachronistic.
The Committee agrees with the Commission that it is necessary for the
Government to enact legislation to enable people to claim
proper compensation
for loss of capacity to do housework.
Draft legislation which would give effect to the recommendations appears at the
Introduction
1. This is the third of three reports by the Community Law Reform Committee which
review recommendations of the Australian Law
Reform Commission. Under the Community
Law Reform Program, established in 1984, the Commission prepared several reports
reports on contributory negligence, action for loss of consortium and
occupiers liability. The Attorney-General requested the Committee
to review the
recommendations of the Commission on these areas and as a result the Committee
has now prepared a report on each.
The background to the recommendations of the
Commission and the consequent references to the Committee are detailed in Report
3 of the Committee, on contributory negligence
2. The Attorney-General requested this report in a reference to the Committee
signed on the 21st September 1990. The terms of
reference required the
Committee to review the recommendations of the Australian Law Reform Commission
presented in its report
number 32 (1986). The Commission recommended that:
(i) the action for loss of consortium be abolished; and
(ii) in association with the abolition of the loss of consortium action,
legislation should be enacted enabling negligently injured
people to claim
compensation for the loss of capacity to perform unpaid housework.
Submissions
3. In preparing this report the Committee made use of the collective experience
of its members, including those with expertise
in business, legal practice and
community welfare, to assess the impact of proposals on the ACT community. An
Issues Paper
on this area, prepared by the
Committee's Secretariat, was widely circulated and the Committee called for submissions.
of the Committee have examined the following submissions:
(i) National Roads and Motorists Association, January 1991; and
(ii) Insurance Council of Australia Limited, January 1991.
4. The Committee also carefully considered the Commission's report number 32 on
this area and discussed these issues extensively
with Mr Nick Seddon who as
Commissioner in Charge of the Community Law Reform Program, was a primary
contributor to the Commission's
report. Mr Seddon is a Commissioner of the
Australian Law Reform Commission as well as a member of this Committee.
of Consortium
5. The right to claim for loss of consortium is the right of a husband to claim
compensation for the loss of the 'Society, Companionship
and Services' of his
injured wife when the injury is caused by wrongdoing, that is, by negligence or
assault. 'Services' generally
means domestic or household work. 'Society' and
'Companionship' include day to day companionship and sexual relations
6. Only husbands may claim for loss of consortium. Wives are not entitled to
do so. A husband may not claim compensation for
loss of consortium due to the
death, caused by wrongdoing, of his wife but may claim for any loss due to her
injury for the period
leading up to her death so caused.
7. The right of husbands to claim for the loss of consortium originates from
pre-18th century perceptions of a wife as the servant
or property of the
8. The right is clearly discriminatory and stems from outdated and abhorrent
perceptions of the position of women in society.
9. New South Wales, Tasmania and Western Australia have all abolished the
10. South Australia and Queensland chose to modify the right by reducing its
discriminatory features. Both South Australia and
Queensland passed legislation
to extend the right to wives as well as husbands
11. The original action still exists in Victoria and the Northern Territory
but statutory compensation schemes existing in these
action from applying in many cases. In addition to the original action, the
Northern Territory has
created a new right to claim for loss of consortium due
to the death of a negligently injured person. This new right is available
husbands, wives, de facto spouses of either sex and to spouses of either sex
recognised as such by aboriginal tribal law
12. The ACT is the only jurisdiction where the action still applies without any
restriction or modification at all.
13. There are several possibilities for reform. As mentioned, different States
have chosen different options, some of which are:
(i) abolition of the right to claim compensation for loss of consortium
altogether;
(ii) extension of the right so that wives as well as husbands can claim; and
(iii) extension of the right to relationships other than marriage.
Recommendation
14. The Committee agrees with the recommendation of the Commission that the
action for loss of consortium be abolished as it has
been in New South Wales,
Western Australia and Tasmania. In coming to this decision, the Committee
considered the following matters.
(i) Any extension of the action would discriminate against those who still
cannot claim under the new law, unless it were made
available to all. For
example, if the legislature were to extend the right of action to wives only,
defacto spouses and others
would not be able to claim. Some consider that the
extension of the action for loss of consortium to all, without exception, would
involve an unacceptable increase in insurance costs.
(ii) The action for loss of consortium is a secondary claim, that is, a claim
by one person for losses resulting from injury to
another. Secondary claims
are inappropriate for various reasons. They involve an assessment of the value
of one person to another,
they are complex and costly and may result in over
compensation if the relationship on which the secondary claim is based ceases
soon after the making of the claim. Secondary claims are also arbitrary
because they allow compensation on the basis of some relationships
(iii) Finally the action for loss of consortium is an historical anachronism
which has, as its basis, the concept of giving service
to another reminiscent
of a master-servant relationship
premise is no longer acceptable.
Compensation
for Loss of Capacity to do Housework
15. In the past, people who through injury suffered a loss of capacity to do housework
were unable to claim compensation for this
loss, except in limited instances.
The Courts awarded limited compensation in so far as the loss represented a loss
of enjoyment
in life. A husband could claim the loss of his wife's domestic services
in an action for loss of consortium. Families could claim
for the loss of the
domestic services of a negligently killed relative whether or not the services
were to to be replaced, provided
a pecuniary value could be placed upon them
In general however, people could only claim adequate compensation if the loss
necessitated the hire of outside help. Otherwise
the full effect of the loss was
not recognised by the Courts.
16. In 1977 the High Court, in
Griffiths v Kerkemeyer
, effected far reaching changes to the law in
this area. In this decision the High Court established the principle that people
in need of nursing or domestic assistance as a result of injury could claim
compensation for this need whether they have or
will pay for the help they need.
This principle put an end to the time honoured rule that people had to pay for
outside help
in order to claim compensation for a loss of ability to look after
themselves.
17. In that case, Mr Kerkemeyer became a quadriplegic as a result of a road
accident occasioned by Mr Griffiths' negligence. He
thus lost the capacity to
perform the tasks usually involved in looking after oneself. These tasks, many
necessarily of an intimate
personal nature, were performed for him by his
fiancee and his family. As well, they carried out nursing tasks and helped him
Griffiths v Kerkemeyer,
Gibbs J, as he then was, said at p.169;
'Where necessary services have been provided gratuitously by a relative or
friend, it should now, as a general rule, be held that
the value of the
services so provided should not reduce the damages payable to the plaintiff.'
Stephen J, referring to the principle established in
Donnelly v Joyce
, said, at p.175;
'[That] principle ... readily enables an injured plaintiff to recover damages
for his accident-caused needs met ... by friends
or relatives who, to benefit
the plaintiff, and with no thought of relieving the wrongdoer, gratuitously
provide him with funds,
services or goods. In such cases the courts will
clearly not treat the gratuitous subventions as properly to be debited against
the plaintiff.'
Mason J, as he then was, made it clear that what was to be compensated was a
plaintiff's incapacity to look after himself or herself
when he said, at
'The respondent's relevant loss is his incapacity to look after himself ... and
this loss is to be quantified by reference to the
value or cost of providing
those services. The fact that a relative or stranger to the proceedings is or
may be prepared to provide
the services gratuitously is not a circumstance
which accrues to the advantage of the appellant.'
See also his comment at p.193 that;
'It is now recognised that the true loss is the loss of capacity which
occasions the need for the service.'
He added guidance as to the measure of damages when he said, also at page
'In general the value or cost of providing voluntary services will be the
standard or market cost of the services ...'
Griffiths v Kerkemeyer
principle allows claims for compensation
for loss of capacity to do housework or other domestic work (any later reference
housework is to be taken to include domestic work generally). The Federal
Court confirmed this when it applied the new principle
to circumstances
involving a need for domestic assistance only
. The Supreme Court of the ACT has similarly
applied the principle. See
Hodges v Frost
at first instance
Lander v The Commonwealth and Bagozzi
Lander v Bagozzi
, the Supreme Court awarded compensation for the partial
loss of capacity of a mother to perform housework for herself and her
son. In that case the housework was voluntarily taken over by the daughter.
Griffiths v Kerkemeyer
principle, as applied by State and Territory
Courts, falls short of offering compensation for loss of capacity to do housework
in all circumstances. The Courts have asserted in various ways and in varying
degrees that an injured person should be compensated
for his or her needs and
not those of others and then only if it would have been reasonably necessary
to pay for help if it
had not been provided voluntarily. It may be noted however,
that the ACT Supreme Court in
Lander v Bagozzi
decided that, people could claim compensation for loss of capacity to look
after others as well as oneself.
21. The Courts have expressed a willingness to award compensation for loss
of capacity to do housework which did not fall within
Griffiths v Kerkemeyer
principle, as part of the injured person's general compensation for loss of
enjoyment in life
. However in the past
compensation on these lines has often been less than that which would have been
awarded under the
Griffiths v Kerkemeyer
22. New South Wales and other States have recognised the significance of the
Griffiths v Kerkemeyer
principle with legislation which limits the compensation
people may claim for voluntary assistance. New South Wales legislation
in relation
to motor and work accidents disallows compensation in excess of the average
hourly wage rate and the average weekly
wage. Claims made in respect of the
first six months of assistance after the accident are disallowed while claims
are restricted to periods in excess of the first 6 hours of each
week. South Australia also has legislation which restricts the
maximum amount
of compensation to the average wage in that State. Tasmania has abolished the
right of people to claim compensation
for voluntary services entirely and Victoria
has abolished it in respect of motor accidents
23. There are various ways in which loss of capacity to do housework can be
measured. The Committee considered the several methods
by which a monetary figure
could be put on unpaid housework as set out in the Commission's report
and various statistical approaches in this
24. In determining compensation, the Courts have not adopted a specific formula
to quantify the value of the loss of capacity
to do housework, but determine
the level of compensation according to what is perceived to be reasonable in
the circumstances.
The Courts often consider, as an initial guide, the commercial
cost of obtaining replacement help if voluntary services had not
been available.
While the Courts have taken into account the circumstances of the provider of
voluntary help, various decisions
have emphasised that it is the extent of the
loss of the injured person, not the circumstances of the provider of services
which should ultimately determine the level of compensation
25. The Committee considered the following possible options available to the
Government. These reflect, in part, the different
ways in which loss of
capacity to do housework can be measured:
(i) make no changes to the law, leaving the Courts to determine the relevant
loss of capacity and its appropriate compensation;
(ii) enact legislation enabling claims for proper compensation for loss of
capacity to do housework, leaving the Courts to determine
the appropriate
amount of compensation;
(iii) enact legislation which determines the value of housework according to a
formula or a fixed, unchanging 'hourly rate'; or
(iv) enact legislation which determines the value of housework by tying it
either to the average wage, the median wage, the average
housekeeping wage, the
average wages for each particular type of housework such as cooking or child
care, or the cost of obtaining
a replacement housekeeper, cook or child carer.
Recommendation
26. The Committee agrees with the Commission that legislation is necessary to
enable people to claim proper compensation for loss
of capacity to do housework
and favours the second option set out above. The Committee recommends that the
Government enact legislation
as annexed to reinforce and extend the
Griffiths v Kerkemeyer
principle as applied by the Courts. In coming to
this decision, the Committee considered the following matters.
(i) The Committee agrees with the conclusion of the Commission that the law
should recognise a loss of capacity to do housework
as an economic loss. The
injured houseworker should be entitled to claim compensation for the full extent
of the loss, including
the loss of capacity to perform housework for others
'at the standard or market cost of the services'
(ii) The Committee recognises that the law already allows claims for
compensation for loss of capacity to do housework but considers
developing. It may be that in some circumstances negligently injured persons
will be unable to claim for the full value
of his or her loss of capacity.
(iii) The Committee considers it preferable that legislation be enacted to
enable the Courts to continue to determine the appropriate
compensation in each case, rather than to impose a rigid formula for the
calculation of compensation. This approach will
allow appropriate flexibility
to meet the individual and peculiar requirements of different situations.
(iv) The Committee recognises the undesirability of increases in insurance
premiums but considers that the draft legislation annexed
will have only a
limited effect on compensation costs because people may already claim
significant compensation for loss of capacity
to do housework under the present
law. The draft legislation also enables the Courts to continue to keep
compensation to a level
reasonable and appropriate in the circumstances.
Legislation in New South Wales and South Australia recognises the
v Kerkemeyer
principle and imposes specific restrictions on claims for domestic
. There is also in New South
Wales a draft Bill available for comment which would extend similar restrictions
to all negligence
claims. The draft Bill is subject to change and may not become
legislation.
It is not possible to say at this early stage whether the recently enacted New
South Wales provisions have had or will have any
effect on compensation claims
or insurance premiums in that State. The restrictions they impose are limited
but would, on occasion,
result in inadequate compensation for a particular
individual. The draft legislation annexed allows for reasonable compensation
without the injustice of arbitrary and fixed limitations. It would be
worthwhile, however, to monitor the effect of the New South
Wales legislation
on compensation payments and insurance premiums as one method of assessing
whether restrictions additional to
those in the draft legislation may become
necessary in due course.
Considerations for the ACT Government
Implications
27. The implementation of these recommendations will not require the ACT
Government to incur any immediate financial cost.
28. In the long term, the Government could incur additional costs in the form
of increased compensation payments in relation to
loss of capacity to do
housework. These extra costs would be payable directly by the Government as it
and its instrumentalities
are, in the main, self insured. The Committee
considers such extra costs would be of limited significance because the
recommendations
only extend an already existing right to claim compensation for
loss of capacity to do housework.
Bibliography
Cummings v. Canberra Theatre Trust (unreported) Full Court of the
Federal Court (18 June 1980)
Donnelly v Joyce
[1973] EWCA Civ 2
[1974] QB 454
GIO of NSW v. Planas
(1984) 2 NSWLR 671
Griffiths v. Kerkemeyer
[1977] HCA 45
(1977) 139 CLR 161
Hodges v Frost
at first instance, (unreported) decision of
Supreme Court, ACT
(21 October 1983) No. 799 of 1980
Hodges v Frost
[1984] FCA 98
(1984) 53 ALR 373
Lander v. The Commonwealth and Bagozzi (unreported) decision of
Supreme Court, ACT
(8 May 1987) No. 443 of 1980
McIntyre v Miller
(1980) 30 ACTR 8
Nguyen v Nguyen
[1990] HCA 9
(1990) 169 CLR 245
Veselinovic v. Thorley
(1988) 1 Qd R 191
Wann v. Fire and All Risks Insurance Co. Ltd.
(1990) 2 Qd R 596
Waters v. Mussig
(1986) 1 Qd R 224
New South Wales
Motor Accidents Act 1988
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Northern Territory
Compensation (Fatal Injuries) Act 1974
Law Reform (Husband and Wife) Act 1968
South Australia
Wrongs Act 1936
s 35a(1)(g)
s 35a(1)(h)
Common Law (Miscellaneous Actions) Act 1986
Transport Accident Act 1986
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY, DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE AND COMMUNITY SERVICES
Issues Paper,
Loss of Consortium,
Canberra 1990
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY, DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE AND COMMUNITY SERVICES
Issues Paper,
Contributory Negligence,
Canberra 1990
AUSTRALIAN BUREAU OF STATISTICS
Measuring Unpaid Household Work: Issues and
Experimental Estimates
, Canberra, 1990
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION Report No 32,
Community Law Reform for the
Australian Capital Territory, Second Report
AGPS, Canberra, 1985
COMMUNITY LAW REFORM COMMITTEE Report No 3, Australian Capital Territory,
Canberra, 1991
GRAYCAR R 'Compensation for Loss of Capacity to Work in the Home'
The Law of Torts
7th Ed, The Law Book Company, Sydney,
Assessment of Damages for Personal Injury and Death
Butterworths Pty Ltd., Sydney, 1990
THORNTON M 'Loss of Consortium: Inequality Before the Law'
vol. 10, 1984, 259
of Reference
I, BERNARD COLLAERY, Attorney-General of the Australian Capital Territory,
HAVING REGARD TO -
(a) the recommendations of the Australian Law Reform Commission, made in its
second report to the Commonwealth Attorney-General
pursuant to the Australian
Capital Territory Community Law Reform Program that:
(i) the action for loss of consortium be abolished; and
(ii) in association with the abolition of the loss of consortium action,
legislation be enacted enabling negligently injured people
compensation for the loss of capacity to perform unpaid housework; and
(b) the desirability that the action for loss of consortium be abolished as
anachronistic and discriminatory;
REFER the following matters to the Community Law Reform Committee, as provided
Constitution
of the Committee:
TO REVIEW AND REPORT
(a) whether, the action for loss of consortium as it exists and is used in the
Australian Capital Territory should be abolished
or altered;
(b) whether, in association with the abolition of the action for loss of
consortium, legislation should be enacted enabling negligently
injured people
to claim compensation for the loss of capacity to perform unpaid housework and
for other related heads of damage;
(c) on any other relevant matter the Committee wishes to take into
consideration.
IN MAKING ITS REVIEW AND REPORT the Committee will have regard to any views of
business, community or government agencies on the
subject matter of this
reference and the possible effect any recommendations may have on insurance or
related financial costs.
SIGNED THIS 21ST DAY OF SEPTEMBER 1990
BERNARD COLLAERY
ATTORNEY-GENERAL
Participants
Chairperson
The Honourable JJA Kelly, QC
Deputy Chairpersons
Ms Jennifer Kitchin
Chief Magistrate Mr RJ Cahill
Committee Members
Mr Nick Seddon
Mr Graeme Lunney
Mr Peter Sutherland
Mrs Bettie McNee
Mr Rod Campbell
Ms Judy Harrison
Professor Roman Tomasic
Professor Duncan Chappell
Ms Robin Burnett
Mr Rainer Frisch
Mr Ross Gengos
Mr Peter Hohnen
Reform Unit - Secretariat to Committee
Director: Mr Peter Quinton
Senior Legal Officer: Ms Tracy Reid
Project Officer: Mr David Dunstan
Word processing/Secretarial: Margaret Ryan
Community Law Reform Committee of
the Australian Capital Territory, Report No 3,
Contributory Negligence in
Fatal Accident Cases and Breach of Statutory Duty Cases; Funeral Costs in Fatal
Accident Cases
, Canberra 1991.
Australian Capital Territory, Department of Justice and
Community Services,
Loss of Consortium,
Issues Paper, ACT, Canberra
McIntyre v Miller
(1980) 30 ACTR 8.
Wrongs Act 1936
(SA) s. 33 and
(Husband and Wife) Act 1968
(Qld) s. 3.
Compensation (Fatal Injuries) Act 1974
M Thornton 'Loss of Consortium: Inequality Before the
Sydney Law Review
, Vol 10, 1984, 259 at 275.
Nguyen v Nguyen
[1990] HCA 9
(1990) 169 CLR 245.
Griffiths v Kerkemeyer
[1977] HCA 45
(1977) 139 CLR 161.
Donnelly v Joyce
[1973] EWCA Civ 2
[1974] QB 454.
Cummings v Canberra Theatre Trust
(unreported)
Full Court of the Federal Court (18 June 1980); and
Hodges v Frost
[1984] FCA 98
(1984) 53 ALR 373.
Hodges v Frost
at first instance, (unreported)
decision of Kelly J,
Supreme Court ACT
(21 October 1983) No. 799 of 1980.
Lander v The Commonwealth and Bagozzi
(unreported) decision of Miles CJ,
Supreme Court, ACT
(8 May 1987) No. 443 of
Lander v The Commonwealth and Bagozzi at 28, refer also
Waters v Mussig
(1986) 1 Qd R 224.
Refer to R Graycar 'Compensation for Loss of Capacity
to Work in the Home'
Sydney Law Review,
1985, 528 at 547
to 554 and cases cited therein.
Common Law (Miscellaneous Actions) Act 1986
Transport Accident Act 1986
Motor Accidents Act 1988
(provision commenced operation in
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(NSW) s. 151K
(provision commenced
operation in 1990) and
Wrongs Act 1936
(SA) ss. 35a(1)(g), (h), and
35a(2) (provisions commenced operation in 1987).
ALRC Report No 32 at 10-13.
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Measuring Unpaid
Household Work: Issues and Experimental Estimates,
Canberra, 1990.
GIO of NSW v Planas
(1984) 2 NSWLR 671
Wann v Fire and All Risks Insurance Co. Ltd.
(1990) 2 Qd R 596
for an example of a decision which looks to the circumstances of the provider
of the services refer to
Veselinovic v Thorley
(1988) 1 Qd R 191.
Griffiths v Kerkemeyer at 193.
Refer to paragraph 22.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter