URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ALRCIntroP/1995/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:33:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Introductory Pamphlet 1 - Review of the adversarial system of litigation [1995] ALRCIntroP 1
Introductory Pamphlet 1 - Review of the adversarial system of litigation
An introduction to the inquiry
What is this inquiry about?
Consultations
Issues papers and other publications
Issues papers
Background papers
The scope and focus of the inquiry
A broad topic
The problems of an 'adversarial' system
Solutions in practices and procedures
Eight key principles directing the inquiry
1. Federal proceedings
2. Civil, not criminal
3. First, describe what is actually happening
4. Consider other forms of dispute resolution
5. Look at the social and commercial impact of adversarial proceedings
6. Draw upon overseas ideas and experience
7. Identify all costs
8. Use public interest criteria to assess the legal system
Outline of research program
Understanding the Australian system
Examining options
Shifting disputes away from the courts
Discovery and other specific procedures
Judicial and case management
ADR and multi-door courts
Appellate procedures
Litigants in person
Uniformity and simplification
Training and education
Public expectations
Costs and performance
Submissions
Confidentiality
Attachment A
Terms of reference
Attachment B
Members of the Australian Law Reform Commission
Members of the Advisory Group
Members of the Federal Consultative Council
An introduction to the inquiry
The Australian Law Reform Commission has been asked to look at the
advantages and disadvantages of the present adversarial system
conducting civil, administrative review and family law proceedings
before courts and tribunals exercising federal juris
A copy of the Commission's terms of reference for this inquiry
is attached (Attachment A).
This background paper introduces the inquiry and outlines how the
Commission is conducting it. Issues papers on various aspects of
inquiry will be released throughout 1997 and early 1998. Further
information can be obtained from the Commission at t
set out at the end of this paper.
What is this inquiry about?
This inquiry arose from concerns that legal proceedings in Australia
are excessively adversarial and that this is having a damaging
The aim of the inquiry is to assess whether any changes should be made
to practices and procedures in federal pr
to address those concerns.
In the course of the inquiry the Commission will be looking at
fundamental questions about the performance of the legal system in
Australia. Some of its findings may have application to courts and
tribunals across Australia. However the focus of the in
civil, administrative review and family law proceedings (
criminal proceedings)
before courts and tribunals exercising
Experience in state courts and other jurisdictions will be valuable
for comparison with federal proceedings but will not be the focus
the Commission's report on this inquiry. The Commission's approach to
the scope of the inquiry and the research req
uired is outlined
in more detail below.
Consultations
The Commission wishes to consult widely with the judiciary, tribunal
members, court administrators, the legal profession, experts
resolution, litigants and others involved in or affected by the legal
system or alternative processes.
To ensure that it obtains as wide a range as possible of expert
views, information and experiences, the Commission is using a number
separate consultative and advisory processes.
Advisory Group
The Commission has arranged for an Advisory Group, comprising
eminent judges, lawyers, and others to assist it on this reference.
list of the Advisory Group members is attached (Attachment B). The
Advisory Group is assisting the Commission to formula
broader reform issues and to understand the implications of
reform proposals for the legal system as a whole.
Federal Consultative Council
The Commission has established a special federal consultative
council, which is comprised of the Chief Justices of the Federal Court
and the Family Court, the Chief Justice of the former Industrial
Relations Court of Australia and the President of the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal. The Council comments specifically from the
perspective of the federal legal system on policy issues and on
recommendations
on those issues developed from the inquiry's research
and consultations.
Expert working groups
The Commission has established a number of expert working groups to
particular types of proceedings and processes, the costs of litigation
and other dispute resolution processes, an
d the options
for training and education of participants in these
processes. Separate working groups have been established for each of
main jurisdictions covered by the inquiry: federal civil
litigation, family proceedings, and tribunal proceedi
ngs. There are also
separate working groups that focus on costs and on
training and education issues. These expert working groups help the
to understand where specific reforms are needed and the
Individual consultations
Throughout the inquiry the Commission will be seeking the views and
experiences of individuals and organisations who have had a particular
involvement in the system of legal proceedings or in any alternative
processes. The Commission encourages anyone who has information
views on the Australian system of legal proceedings to send the
Commission a written submission or to register their interest
participating in a consultation.
The Commission is arranging conferences and seminars on various
topics involved in the inquiry and will invite those interested to
participate.
Issues papers and other publications
During the inquiry the Commission will release a number of issues
papers and other publications either for comment or as background
information. Copies of these papers may be obtained by contacting the
Commission at the address set out at the end of th
The timetable for these publications is as follows
Issues papers
Rethinking the federal civil litigation system
(ALRC IP 20) (released April 1997)
Family law proceedings (August 1997)
Legal education and training (August 1997)
Tribunal proceedings (November 1997)
Appellate proceedings (March 1998)
Alternative or assisted dispute resolution (March 1998)
Courts and technology (March 1998)
Background papers
Federal jurisdiction
(released December 1996)
Alternative or assisted dispute resolution
(released December 1996)
Judicial and case management
(released December 1996)
The unrepresented party
(released December 1996)
Civil litigation practice and procedure
(released December 1996)
The Commission will release a discussion paper in April 1998 and
will give its final report on the inquiry to the Attorney-General
April 1999.
The scope and focus of the inquiry
A broad topic
This is a far reaching inquiry. It requires the Commission to
consider fundamental issues concerning the administration of justice
through federal courts and tribunals.
The inquiry is likely to result in a restatement of the principles
governing the roles of federal courts and tribunals in the Australian
legal system, and new, detailed principles to guide their practices and
procedures.
In particular, the inquiry will examine and make recommendations on
the structure and objectives of Australia's federal legal system
the practices and procedures in Australia's federal courts and
tribunals that contribute to the adversarial aspects of the system
how federal courts and tribunals should be linked or relate to
mediation, arbitration and other processes that form part of dispute
resolution in Australia
the culture of Australia's legal system.
These recommendations will have implications for the day-to-day
practice of Australian lawyers, courts and tribunals and for those
involved as litigants, including individuals, businesses, insurers and
government agencies.
The problems of an 'adversarial' system
The central point of reference for this inquiry is the 'adversarial'
nature of the present system. In practice this focuses the inquiry
on a particular group of problems than on a particular type of legal
'Adversarial' does not have a precise meaning. In broad terms the
'present adversarial system' of conducting proceedings refers to
system in which the parties, and not the judge, have the primary
responsibility for defining the issues in dispute and for carrying
dispute forward.
In its simplest form this system has a number of consequences, some
of which have been challenged as counterproductive or inefficient,
the system is about winning and losing — each party has
responsibility for advocating its own case and attacking the other
party's case; this puts an emphasis on confrontation
the lawyer's role is strictly partisan — the lawyer has a
duty to represent the interests of his or her client and is not
accountable for the client's goals or the means used to
attain them, although the lawyer does have certain counte
rvailing duties
to the court and third parties — this gives
lawyers an incentive (and perhaps even an obligation) to exploit any
the legal system allows for their clients
the judge is responsible for ensuring that the proceedings are
conducted fairly — this makes judges sensitive about limiting
issues and arguments raised by parties and putting other controls on
proceedings in case that is considered biased o
the judge is not responsible for how much evidence is collected,
how many different arguments and points are put to the court, how
the proceedings take or how much they cost
the judge must adjudicate questions of fact and questions of law
submitted to the court, but is not responsible for discovering the
truth or for settling the dispute to which those questions relate.
These and other features of the adversarial system have been
criticized as contributing to (among other things) excessive costs and
delays, overservicing, lack of accountability and an unduly
confrontational approach to dealing with disputes.
The adversarial system has also been criticized for its indirect
effects. Strictly, the adversarial system relates only to a small
of dispute resolution in Australia — trials in courts. However it
has a wide ranging impact, affecting in parti
all other stages of proceedings in courts, the role and
proceedings of tribunals, other dispute resolution procedures used by
and tribunals, and other forms of dispute resolution outside
courts and tribunals.
Solutions in practices and procedures
The simple form of the adversarial system does not apply in
Australia. The Australian legal system is a blend of adversarial and
non-adversarial
elements as well as processes that do not fall easily
into any particular category of legal system.
There is little practical benefit in debating whether a pure
adversarial model is better than a pure inquisitorial model or a pure
model of any other kind of legal system. Few legal systems (if any)
reflect a pure model and there are too many different kinds of
processes, including blended processes, to be considered for any pure
model to be of relevance to Australia.
The important issue is what problems and benefits of the kind
attributed to the adversarial system result from a particular federal
practice or procedure, either alone or in a broader context. The focus
of the inquiry is on these problems and benefits and on any
improvements that might be made by adopting different practices and
procedures.
Given the breadth of the topic, and the fuzzy meaning of
'adversarial', the Commission has adopted a set of principles on how it
conduct the inquiry. These principles set out some boundaries to
the scope of the inquiry and indicate the type of r
esearch that
the Commission expects to be most relevant and useful.
Eight key principles directing the inquiry
1. Federal proceedings
The inquiry should focus on federal proceedings, looking at State
proceedings only for comparison and to understand how cross vesting
shared areas of jurisdiction work in practice.
The terms of reference limit the inquiry to proceedings conducted 'before courts and tribunals exercising federal jurisdiction'.
This requires the Commission to focus its research and
recommendations on federal proceedings. In the course of doing so the
will nonetheless need to review some State proceedings for
two purposes.
First, under cross vesting and shared jurisdiction arrangements
State courts and tribunals sometimes exercise federal jurisdiction
an identical state jurisdiction. The inquiry will need to identify when
this occurs and to examine what procedures and processes
are used in
these cases and their effectiveness.
Secondly, much of the work in Australia on reform of litigation
procedures is being undertaken in State courts and tribunals, and
States have had wide ranging experience of the effects of the present
adversarial system. The inquiry will examine the
and the States' experiences as benchmarks and comparisons
for the research on federal proceedings.
The Commission will also need, as part of its focus on federal
proceedings, to examine the limits to judicial power set out in Chapter
Constitution
and the scope for a federal magistracy and
other federal adjudication or dispute resolution p
rocesses. These will be examined with
a view to understanding the scope
for reform.
2. Civil, not criminal
The inquiry should focus on civil, administrative and family law proceedings, not criminal proceedings.
Many of the concerns raised about the adversarial system relate to
its effect on criminal proceedings, and in particular the perception
that it unduly favours the accused.
However the inquiry's terms of reference do not extend to criminal
proceedings. While there are some common issues between criminal
civil proceedings, the differences are too significant to allow useful
comparisons to be drawn. The Commission will therefore
not research or
analyse criminal proceedings during this inquiry. Work on criminal
proceedings might best be undertaken separately
after the Model
Criminal Code Officers Committee has completed its work.
3. First, describe what is actually happening
The inquiry should focus first on describing in detail what is
actually happening in federal proceedings — who is litigating,
what cases, in which courts and tribunals, and what problems are being
encountered.
There are already many active and ongoing litigation reform
initiatives under discussion or trial in Australia. The next step, to
build on existing work and ideas, is to compile a comprehensive
statement of exactly what sort of proceedings are being un
in the federal jurisdiction and where, in detail, the problems
are occurring.
A comprehensive review of this kind has not yet been undertaken. It
will allow a balanced assessment to be made of further reforms
needed and the options to be considered.
4. Consider other forms of dispute resolution
The inquiry should consider the present system of court and
tribunal proceedings in the context of other processes for adjudication
and resolution of disputes.
There is a range of mediation, conciliation, arbitration and other
dispute resolution and adjudication processes used in Australia.
of these are used within courts and tribunals, or are related to court
or tribunal processes. Others are 'stand alo
ne' processes.
Court and tribunal processes should be considered in the context of
those alternative or additional processes. For example, there
questions as to
the types of disputes or issues that should be dealt with by courts and tribunals
when alternative processes should be used (either within or outside courts and tribunals)
whether courts should be funded on a 'user pays' basis like some
of the alternative processes and, if so, in what circumstances and
what extent.
5. Look at the social and commercial impact of adversarial proceedings
The inquiry should look at the impact of the present adversarial
system on commercial and social relationships in Australia and on
government processes.
The Australian legal system and its processes have a far reaching
impact on commercial and social relationships and decision making
processes in government and throughout the community. They affect the
way contracts are drawn up, the insurance policies that people
systems and procedures that government agencies establish, the way
separated or divorced parents treat each other and their
children, and
numerous other aspects of day-to-day activities.
These consequences of the legal system are as important as its
impact on a particular proceeding. The costs which legal systems
and their impact on Australian society need to be examined and
taken into account as part of the assessment of the present system.
6. Draw upon overseas ideas and experience
The inquiry should look at overseas legal systems for ideas and for comparison but only selectively.
The problems arising under the Australian legal system —
particularly cost, delay and complexity — are common to many
legal systems in many different countries. There is much overseas
experience to guide Australian reform and many ideas that could
tested in Australia.
However overseas ideas need to be drawn upon selectively. When
transplanted to Australia, and applied in the context of Australian
attitudes, conditions and practices, they may have unexpected and
unfortunate effects. Legal systems tend to be strongly influenced
the social and economic conditions of the country in which they have
developed, and all of those conditions need to be closely
examined when
assessing the likely effect of particular overseas procedures and
processes if applied in Australia.
7. Identify all costs
The inquiry should identify the costs incurred in federal proceedings, monetary and otherwise, by all participants.
Costs are a perennial focus of debate. Many different views can be
taken on the level of costs that is appropriate, who should pay,
should determine the costs that are payable, and what causes costs to
rise or fall.
Regardless of the views taken, reliable information is required on
exactly what costs are incurred in federal proceedings, in terms
both legal fees and other costs. The Commission will seek to identify
the costs incurred by all participants — c
lawyers, litigants, legal aid providers, insurers and all others
involved. To the extent possible the Commission will also try to
identify non-monetary costs, such as the loss of executive time.
The type of information received on costs can form the basis for
then assessing the part played in the cost of justice by, for example
court costs
current fee structures for legal services
the use of experts
changes in technology and business practices
the work practices and culture of litigation lawyers.
This may lead to reforms concerning, for example, the way in which
courts and tribunals are funded and the amounts that can be charged
courts and tribunals, legal representatives and others as fees for
particular types of proceedings.
This information will also allow some cost/benefit analysis of any
proposed reforms, including, in particular, a comparison with the
of dispute resolution in different forums and using different processes.
8. Use public interest criteria to assess the legal system
The inquiry should assess the current system and reform proposals
by reference to clearly articulated criteria that describe the public
interest in having a legal system.
The Commission is required to report on the advantages and
disadvantages of the present system to the Australian community as a
To assess those advantages and disadvantages the Commission will
seek to develop and articulate criteria for determin
ing what the
Australian legal system should be providing to the
Australian community.
It is not sufficient for example to assess reform proposals only by
reference to their impact on delay or on the costs of the proceedings
to the court. Reducing both of those is a primary objective from the
court's point of view but may be less importa
nt to a litigant
than reducing the litigant's costs and ensuring the
finality of the decision.
The Commission will therefore be seeking views on how best to describe the Australian public interest in its legal system.
Outline of research program
In line with those principles the Commission has identified a number
of topics that it is currently researching. This research will
published in the background papers, issues papers and other
publications listed above.
Understanding the Australian system
There are significant differences between federal, state and
territory approaches to adjudication and dispute resolution processes,
and between civil, administrative law and family law jurisdictions at
the federal level. Identification and analytical d
of the differences between the various proceedings will form
an important part of the Commission's research.
More information is required on who litigates, about what, and in
which courts and tribunals. The current lack of relevant and reliable
information is a characteristic of both federal and state
ollaborative
work by the Commission with courts and tribunals, other
research bodies and possibly through surveys. The methodology adopted
the Commission may be able to be used as a template for the future
gathering of information about what occurs in courts and tribunals.
Examining options
A comparative analysis of adjudication and dispute resolution
processes available within Australia, in civil code countries and
and of the features of those processes, will assist to
clarify possible options for reform. The options for refor
m might include,
for example, reforms to
introduce different dispute resolution processes and procedures
introduce new trial processes, adjudication procedures and timetables
remove or streamline existing processes and procedures
introduce special procedures and rules for multi-party disputes
introduce 'multi-door' systems and processes that allow for screening of disputes into different processes
introduce new forms of representation, such as an Advocate General for public interest issues
identify and encourage best practice judicial and case management in courts and tribunals
improve specific litigation processes such as pleadings, discovery and the use of expert evidence
better assist litigants in person
introduce new training and career paths for judges and other court
and tribunal officers, barristers, solicitors, and others involved
court or tribunal proceedings
introduce wider community awareness programs
ensure that adjudication occurs in an appropriate court or tribunal
encourage greater uniformity of practice and procedure throughout Australian courts
promote a non-adversarial culture within existing legal structures.
Shifting disputes away from the courts
The trend towards shifting dispute resolution away from the court
system and establishing new areas of jurisdiction in the tribunal
system will be assessed. The Commission will examine whether tribunals
are fulfilling the objectives set for them and wh
are appropriate to be dealt with by courts and tribunals
respectively. This question will be examined by reference to the
that operate within tribunals and courts and by reference to
objectives defined for the federal tribunal system when it was
established.
The Commission will also review the increasing role of
non-adjudicatory dispute resolution processes and will examine
referrals to
adjudicatory dispute resolution processes that are
external to courts and tribunals. The growth in facilitative dispute r
processes and external adjudicatory processes has served to
narrow issues in dispute that are dealt with in the final determination
of disputes before many courts and tribunals. These processes have also
resulted in the total resolution of many disputes that have
commenced within the legal system. The future role of these processes
and their relationship to other elements of the litigation
system will
be considered and analysed.
A further aspect to be considered is the effect of providing early
legal and other advice and information. When this is broadly and
accessible, such advice is said to be effective in avoiding disputes or
in resolving disputes quickly without the need for
formal processes.
For some types of disputes and litigants it is considered far more
important and valuable than reforms to court
and tribunal procedures.
Discovery and other specific procedures
A number of aspects of litigation practice and procedure will be
addressed as specific topics for reform. In particular the Commission
will examine pleadings, discovery, subpoenas, expert evidence,
interlocutory proceedings, the trial or hearing proces
s and the extent
and the forms of increased judicial activism. It will
examine the options in relation to oral evidence and the use of court
experts. It will also consider the advantages and
disadvantages of more specialised courts and tribunals and the staffing
of specific
divisions with external experts as judges or staff.
Judicial and case management
The Commission will examine issues relating to greater intervention
by judges in cases and their role as managers of court and tribunal
business. The focus will be on researching differences in approach and
providing comparative comment, for example by comparing the
benefits that flow from a single judge or team of judges approach. The
Commission will also examine the wide range of different
management processes and procedures, with particular regard to
multi-party disputes and how best to manage them.
ADR and multi-door courts
The development of 'multi-door' systems and processes that allow for
screening of disputes into different dispute resolution processes
be examined. The ability of courts to use 'in house' experts, to refer
parties to outside expert evaluators by a
greement and
to use alternative dispute resolution techniques such as
mediation or provisional adjudication are important complements to
and tribunal adjudication. The Commission will consider whether
streaming cases into different dispute resolutio
n processes under
the existing court and tribunal system is an
effective way of managing the resolution of disputes.
Appellate procedures
Different managerial processes may need to be formulated and adopted
for appeal cases where there is a different mix of factual and
issues, and a different pattern of inquiry and caseload.
Litigants in person
The demands and requirements of litigants in person will be
considered as a special area of inquiry, particularly with regard to
appearances
before courts. Litigants in person have particular needs in
terms of access to legal and procedural knowledge a
nd other assistance
in the conduct of litigation. Their needs and the
implications of their presence for court and tribunal procedures vary
significantly
depending on whether the proceedings are before the AAT,
Family Court, Federal Court or another court or tribunal. In some
it is said that they have an adverse impact on the costs of
other parties and on the time taken to complete proceedings. These
may affect decisions about screening cases into particular
dispute resolution processes and the case management techniques that
required. The future requirements of the federal courts and
tribunals to respond to such litigants will be considered in this
Uniformity and simplification
The Commission will review whether it is feasible to achieve greater
uniformity of practice and procedure throughout Australian courts.
present each tribunal, court and often parts or divisions of courts
have different procedures and rules for their litigation processes.
lack of procedural uniformity and simplicity leads to a need to have
specialists involved in all forms of litigation and may have
on the cost of justice. Procedural simplification has been identified
by many courts and t
ribunals as a target area for
reform. The impact of a lack of
uniformity in terms of the process and procedural reform measures
adopted across Australian courts
and tribunals will be examined.
Training and education
The inquiry will review the professional training given to lawyers,
judicial officers, decision-makers and others involved in the
legal system and alternative processes. The training and career paths
of decision makers and others involved in ad
and dispute resolution processes varies from jurisdiction to
specialist areas of expertise and specific education concerns of the
judiciary, there are very few specialist educ
ational courses
within Australia that are directed to decision making.
There are various aspects of specialist training that need to be
considered. In some situations lawyers may need specialist training
be effective advocates (for example, in Children's courts). In other
situations non-lawyers may need specialist trai
ning to enable
them to become specialist advocates (for example, in
social security or other social welfare proceedings). A third situation
a judge or tribunal member needs specialist training to be
able to manage cases and provide expert adjudic
Public expectations
The Commission will seek to identify broader community expectations
identify in a realistic and reasonable manner what the role of judges
and others active within the legal system ought to be and whether
is any mismatch between what judges and others are trained and required
to do, and what the community believes they are or
should be doing.
New technologies are changing the way in which the legal system does
or could work. More data on court proceedings can be collected
analysed, more sophisticated management tools are available to court
administrators, there is more scope and pressur
different types of electronic evidence to the courts, and
there are various different technology-driven visions of the courtroom
of the future. These opportunities and pressures need to be examined to
see how they fit with the objectives of the federal legal
Costs and performance
Research about the costs of litigation will assist to define areas
of future research and will be one important focus of the inquiry.
Research will be undertaken with the assistance of working groups and
through collaborative work by the Commission wit
h courts and
The Commission will also look at other measures that are, or could
be, used when assessing the impact and effectiveness of the federal
legal system. It is essential to establish indicators against which the
performance of an effective federal legal sys
measured and reported on periodically so as to ensure
accountability and effectiveness. Currently, reliable information is
The Commission will therefore consider the future need to
obtain statistical and other indicative information th
at measures in a
meaningful way the health and effectiveness of the
existing and future features of the federal legal system.
Submissions
The Commission welcomes written and oral submissions on any matter
relevant to the inquiry including submissions on its approach and
research program outlined above. Submissions should be sent to
The Secretary
Australian Law Reform Commission
GPO Box 3708
Sydney NSW 2001
Telephone: (61-2) 9284 6333 Facsimile: (61-2) 9284 6363
Confidentiality
Unless a submission is marked confidential, it will be made available to any person or organisation on request.
If you want your submission, or any part of it, to be treated as
confidential, please indicate this clearly. A request for access
submission marked 'confidential' will be determined in accordance with
Freedom of Information Act 1982
The Commission will include in its interim or final reports on this
project a list of submissions received in response to this paper.
may also refer to those submissions in the text of the report and other
Commission publications. It may decide to p
ublish them.
If you do not want your submission or any part of it to be
used in any one of these ways please indicate this clearly.
ALRC July 1997
Attachment A
Terms of reference
Review of the adversarial system of litigation
I, MICHAEL LAVARCH, Attorney-General of Australia, HAVING REGARD TO:
the need for a simpler, cheaper and more accessible legal system;
the Justice Statement; and
recent and proposed reforms to courts and tribunals,
REFER to the Law Reform Commission for inquiry and report under the
Law Reform Commission Act 1973
the following matters:
(a) the advantages and disadvantages of the present adversarial
system of conducting civil, administrative review and family law
proceedings
before courts and tribunals exercising federal jurisdiction;
(b) whether any changes should be made to the practices and procedures used in those proceedings; and
(c) any related matter.
The Commission shall consider, among other matters:
civil litigation and administrative law procedures in civil code jurisdictions
the procedures and case management schemes used by courts and
tribunals to control the conduct of proceedings that come before them
the relationship between courts and tribunals
mechanisms for identifying the issues in dispute
means of gathering, testing and examining evidence
the use of court-based and community alternative dispute resolution schemes
the significance of legal education and professional training to the legal process
the training, functions, duties and role of judicial officers as managers of the litigation process
appellate court processes.
IN PERFORMING its functions in relation to this Reference the Commission shall
(i) consult widely among the Australian community and with relevant bodies, and particularly with
— the High Court of Australia, the Federal Court of Australia,
the Family Court of Australia and other courts and tribunals
federal jurisdiction;
— the Law Council of Australia, law societies, bar
associations, legal aid commissions, community legal centres and
groups representing business and consumers; and
(ii) in recognition of work already undertaken, have regard to
relevant reports, and any steps taken by governments and courts to
implement their recommendations.
IN MAKING ITS REPORT the Commission will also have regard to its
function in accordance with
Law Reform Commission Act
to consider and present proposals for uniformity between the laws of
the Territories and laws of the States.
THE COMMISSION IS REQUIRED to make
preliminary recommendations on the conduct of civil litigation not later than 30September 1997
a final report on the conduct of civil, administrative review and family law not later than 30 September 1998.
Dated 29 November 1995
Michael Lavarch
Attorney-General
Attachment B
Review of the adversarial system of litigation
Members of the Australian Law Reform Commission
Mr Alan Rose (President)
Mr David Edwards (Deputy President)
Dr Kathryn Cronin (full-time Commissioner)
Justice John von Doussa (part-time Commissioner)
Justice Ian Coleman (part-time Commissioner)
Members of the Advisory Group
Mr John Basten
Justice Margaret Beazley
Ms Jenny Boland
Justice Catherine Branson
Mr Mark Burrows
Professor Ross Cranston
Justice Geoffrey Davies
Professor Julian Disney
Justice John Doyle
Mr Tony Hartnell
Justice David Ipp
Dr Ian McEwin
Sir Anthony Mason
Mr John Middleton
Justice Deirdre O'Connor
Justice John Phillips
Mr Andrew Rogers
Sir Laurence Street
Members of the Federal Consultative Council
Justice Michael Black
Justice Jane Mathews
Justice Alastair Nicholson
Justice Murray Wilcox
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter