URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ACTLRAC/2016/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:29:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Guardianship Report [2016] ACTLRAC 4
ABBREVIATIONS
PART 1: INTRODUCTION
PART 2: EXECUTIVE SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
PART 3: GUARDIANSHIP AND SUBSTITUTE DECISION MAKING IN THE ACT
Overview of this Part
3.1 The Guardianship Act
3.1.1 Who is subject to guardianship in the ACT?
Data on the Guardianship work of ACAT
Data on the Public Guardianship Function
Data on the Public Trustee of the ACT Financial Management Function under the Guardianship Act
3.1.2 Overview of the current Guardianship Act
3.1.3 Origins and history of the Guardianship Act
3.1.4 The 2001 amendments: reversion to paternalism
3.1.5 The 2008 amendments: Health Attorney
3.1.6 The Guardianship Act and powers of compulsion
3.2 Other ACT laws that recognise substitute decision making
3.2.1 Powers of Attorney Act
Enduring powers of attorney and supported decision making
General Principles relating to impaired decision making capacity
3.2.2 Powers of Attorney Amendment Act 2016 – Medical Research Power of Attorney
Mental Health Act 2015
Principles and Objectives
Decision making under the
Mental Health Act
Expressing will and preferences and substitute decision making
Compulsory assessment and treatment orders
Policy implications
Medical Treatment (Health Directions) Act 2006
3.3 Conclusions in relation to existing ACT substitute decision making legislation
PART 4: ESSENTIAL ASPECTS OF GUARDIANSHIP LAW
4.1 Legal capacity
4.2 Substitute decision making
4.3 ‘Best interests’
4.4 Conclusions about current substitute ‘best interests’ provisions
PART 5: THE UN CONVENTION ON THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
Overview of this Part
5.1 Background
5.2 Australia’s approach to its obligations under the UN Convention
5.3 Revolutionary change
5.4 Underlying themes in the UN Convention
5.4.1 Equal recognition before the law
5.4.2 Personal autonomy and self-agency
5.4.3 Inclusion and participation
5.4.4 Accessibility
5.5 Decision making under the UN Convention
5.5.1 The exercise of will, preferences and rights under the UN Convention
5.5.2 Impact of legacy of disadvantage for people with disabilities
5.5.3 The UN Convention and Substitute decision making
5.6 Changing the basis for decision making in the ACT to comply with the UN Convention
Recommendation 1:
5.7 Law reform options
Recommendation 2:
PART 6: THE ALRC’S PROPOSALS AND THE GUARDIANSHIP ACT
6.1 The ALRC Reference
6.2 ALRC Framing Principles and the UN Convention
6.3 Decision making principles
6.3.1 The ALRC’s National Decision making Principles
6.3.2 The Principles for Reform
Recommendation 3:
6.4 The ALRC Guidelines
6.4.1 Decision making guiding principles
Recommendation 4:
6.5 The ACT Decision making Framework
Recommendation 5:
PART 7: SUPPORTED DECISION MAKING
AND RELATED MECHANISMS
7.1 Supported decision making
7.1.1 Challenges with supported decision making
7.1.2 Assessment of the need for support in decision making
The current Guardianship Act and determining ‘incapacity’
Assessing support needs
7.2 How to support decision making
7.2.1 Reasonable accommodation and adjustments
7.2.2 Capacity building
7.2.3 Approaches to giving support
7.2.4 Informal supports for decision making
7.2.5 Formal supports for decision making
Recommendation 6:
7.2.6 Co-decision making agreements
Recommendation 7:
7.3 When should representative decision making be allowed?
7.3.1 The more limited role of representative decision making
Recommendation 8:
7.4 Ascertaining will and preferences
7.4.1 Possible difficulties
7.4.2 Advance decision making and directions
7.4.3 Health care decision making
7.5 Implementing the ACT Decision making Framework
7.5.1 Determining and recording a person’s will and preferences
Recommendation 9:
Recommendation 10:
7.5.2 Building community capacity for change
Recommendation 11:
7.6 A summary of key elements of the ACT Decision making Framework
1. Decision making ability
2. Reasonable Accommodation
3. Supported decision making model
4. Supporters and decision-makers
5. Appointing a supporter or decision-maker
6. Enabling decision making
PART 8: SAFEGUARDS
Overview of this Part
8.1 Introduction
8.2 ALRC Guidelines
8.3 Vulnerabilities in a supported decision making context
8.3.1 Limited expectations and expressing will and preferences
8.4 Managing risk
8.4.1 Decision making and risk
8.4.2 The ‘dignity of risk’
8.4.3 Determining risk
8.4.4 Unreasonable risk and substantial harm
8.5 Conflicts of interest, and undue influence
8.6 Resolving conflicting rights
8.7 Ensuring oversight and review
Recommendation 12:
8.8 Principles and Guidelines for supporters, representatives and others
Recommendation 13:
PART 9: CURRENT TRENDS IN GUARDIANSHIP LAW POLICY AND PRACTICE
Overview of this Part
9.1 The ALRC inquiry
9.2 National Supported Decision Making Framework
9.3 Supported Decision making Pilot Projects in Australian jurisdictions
9.3.1 South Australia: 2010-12 Office of the Public Advocate Pilot
Introduction
Profile of participants
Decision making
Issue: Guardianship
Issue: supporters
Issue: the monitor
Proposals for legislative reform
9.3.2 South Australia: 2013-15 HCSCC Pilot
Introduction
Methodology
Profile of participants
Issue: Guardianship
Issue: Greater administrative flexibility and management training
Issue: Limited expectations and conflicts of interest
9.3.3 South Australia: 2013-15 HCSCC Project
Methodology
Profile of participants
Issue: when positive outcomes occur
9.3.4 Australian Capital Territory – 2013 ADACAS Pilot
Introduction
Methodology
Profile of the participants
Operation of the project
Decision making
Individual stories from the pilot (using pseudonyms)
Issue: securing supporters
Issue: guardianship
9.3.5 Australian Capital Territory – 2014 ADACAS Pilot
Introduction
Methodology
Profile of participants
Issues: guardianship
Issues: securing supporters
9.3.6 NSW: Supported Decision making Pilot 2013-2014
Introduction
Methodology
Profile of participants
Profile of supporters
Issue: ‘Decision readiness’
Issue: Tools and Resource Materials
Issue: Supporter selection
Issue: Other barriers to a successful supported decision making experience
Issue: Financial decision making
Issue: Implementation of decisions
Issue: Guardianship and financial management issues
Recommendations
9.3.7 Victoria: Office of the Public Advocate
Introduction
Methodology
Profile of the participants
Profile of the supporters
Decision making
Interim assessment of progress / outcomes
Key findings of the evaluation of the pilot
Other developments in Victoria
9.4 Lessons from the Pilots
PART 10: RELATED MATTERS
10.1 Amendment of legislation that relates to legal capacity
Recommendation 14:
10.2 Future review of criminal justice legislation and practice
Recommendation 15:
10.3 Involuntary treatment, restraint and seclusion
Recommendation 16:
APPENDIX 1: List of Submissions received
APPENDIX 2: Legal Capacity, the UN Convention and implications for other ACT legislation
ABBREVIATIONS
ACAT The ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal
ACT Australian Capital Territory
ADACAS ACT Disability, Aged, Carer Advocacy Service
ALRC Australian Law Reform Commission
Health Directions Act
Medical Treatment (Health Directions) Act 2006
Human Rights Act
Human Rights Act 2004
Mental Health Act
Mental Health Act 2015
NDIS National Disability Insurance Scheme
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
Power of Attorney Act
Power of Attorney Act 2006
QLRC Queensland Law Reform Commission
The Council ACT Law Reform Advisory Council
The Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
UN Convention United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with
VLRC Victorian Law Reform Commission
1: INTRODUCTION
of Reference
The ACT Attorney-General, Simon Corbell MLA, requested the ACT Law Reform
Advisory Council (the Council) to undertake an inquiry into
the terms and
operation of the ACT’s
Guardianship and Management of Property Act
(the Guardianship Act) to ensure that the Act reflects best practice in
guardianship law relating to adults. The Terms of Reference
are as follows:
The Law Reform Advisory Council is asked to inquire into the terms and
operation of the
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
ensure that the Act reflects best practice in guardianship law relating to
adults. The review does not include consideration
of guardianship of children
which is primarily a parental responsibility.
In making any recommendations, the Council should have regard to the General
Principles established in the United Nations UN Convention
on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities focusing on the principle of respect for individual
autonomy and dignity of persons, which
is reflected in supported decision making
frameworks.
The review will include consideration of:
1. The impact of the United Nations UN Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities and other international human rights
instruments, on
principles for guardianship and management of property in the A.C.T;
2. The Act’s consistency with other relevant ACT legislation, in
particular the
Human Rights Act 2004
the Mental Health (Treatment and
Care) Act 1994
Powers of Attorney Act 2006
Disability Services Act 1991
3. Current policy trends in the area of guardianship and substitute decision
making in the ACT.
The Council was originally scheduled to report its findings to the
Attorney-General by 30 September 2015 and the Attorney-General
provided an
extension to accommodate the scope of the work. This Report was provided to the
Attorney-General on 29 July 2016.
The Council began its work on the reference at the end of 2014, following its
completion of review of the
Discrimination Act 1991
1.2 Conduct of the
The Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) conducted a review of equal
recognition before the law and legal capacity for people with
disability in the
Commonwealth jurisdiction in 2013-2014. The ALRC’s inquiry reviewed and
responded to other Australian reviews
of guardianship laws, researched
international developments in other jurisdictions, and conducted an extensive
consultation process.
The ALRC’s Final Report was published at the very
beginning of the Council’s
The Final Report provided a set of principles and guidelines that reflect the
current state and future direction of an approach
to guardianship that is
compatible with Australia’s international obligations under the UN
Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities (UN Convention). The
Council therefore resolved that the ALRC’s Final Report, and the National
and Guidelines, would be the framework within which it would conduct
its inquiry.
The Council used the National Principles and Guidelines as the basis for its
public consultations. It sought people’s accounts
of their experience
with existing guardianship arrangements and their views about how the National
Principles and Guidelines might
work in the ACT, and facilitated this with a
public response booklet in hard copy, soft copy and online. The Council worked
the ACT Disability, Aged, Carer Advocacy Service (ADACAS) to develop an
Easy English consultation document called
Making Decisions about Your
, and made a brief video, on its website, to explain the nature and
process of the inquiry.
Views on the National Principles and Guidelines were sought from people with
impaired decision making ability, guardians, carers,
family members, disability
support providers, service providers and agencies, and businesses who have
dealings with people with impaired
decision making ability. As well, the
Council also invited people who had participated in supported decision making to
share their
stories of this experience.
The Council met and corresponded with individuals and organisations
interested in the reference. It held consultations with a range
Commonwealth Government agencies, individual carers and groups of carers,
consumer advocacy groups, people involved with
aged care, health professionals,
business organisations, individual experts, the ACT Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (ACAT), the
Public Guardian, the Office of the Public Advocate, and the
Public Trustee. The Council received 21 written submissions; a list
who made a submission and agreed to be identified is in Appendix 1.
The Council is very grateful to all who participated in the forums and
meetings, and who took the trouble to prepare a written submission;
its work and
this Report have been enriched by those experiences and views.
1.3 Acknowledgements
The Council was established by the ACT Attorney-General, the Hon Simon
Corbell MLA, to provide expert advice and recommendations to
Attorney-General. The Council operates as a collaborative undertaking between
the ACT Government and the ANU College of Law
at the Australian National
University, which together provide the funds, resources, infrastructure and
staff necessary for the Council’s
operation. The Council is supported by
a part-time Executive Officer located at the ANU College of Law.
Members of the Council are appointed by the Attorney-General for a period of
up to three years, on the basis of their relevant and
varied experience and
expertise. Members contribute to the work of the Council on a voluntary basis.
Members of the Council at
the time of reporting on the Guardianship Act review
Dr Lorana Bartels
Mr Stuart Pilkinton SC
Justice John Burns
Professor Simon Rice, OAM (Chair)
Mr David Heckendorf
Ms Louise Taylor
Mr Martin Hockridge
Chief Magistrate Lorraine Walker
Mr John Kalokerinos
Dr Helen Watchirs, OAM
Assistant Commissioner Rudi Lammers, APM
Ms Heidi Yates
The conduct of the review and the terms of the Final Report were overseen by
the Chair of the Council, Professor Simon Rice and the
Acting Chair Associate
Professor Tony Foley, who was appointed by the Minister during the Chair’s
period of leave.
Ms Fiona Tito Wheatland was the Council Executive Officer responsible for the
Guardianship Review and is principally responsible for
drafting this Report.
Ms Olivia Kelly, Ms Christina Karolis, Mr Nelson Mendonca and Ms Elizabeth
Abbott were ANU College of Law student interns with the
Council who conducted
research and worked on the review, and their work has informed this Report. Mr
Mendonca also provided additional
assistance with research after his internship
was completed, and this research contributed significantly to a number of parts
this Report.
scope of this Report
It was clear from the public consultations that in the relatively short time
available to report on the inquiry, the Council would
not be able to address in
detail all of the changes necessary to give full effect to the UN Convention in
the ACT. The Council’s
brief is limited to law reform in relation to
substitute decision making. However, the practical implications of legislation,
whether legislation is necessarily the most effective way of achieving the
intended policy aim of compliance with the UN Convention,
are questions that
have to be addressed in this Report. While some legislative change is likely to
be required, it is apparent that,
even without legislative change, many people
who are administering and acting under the current Act are already giving effect
the supported decision making principles of the UN Convention. In some areas
of activity, the law needs reform to catch up with
and better reflect practices.
However, in other areas of activity, the law will lead the change in
Pilot programs and other developmental activities are underway and continuing
in the ACT and around Australia. These will provide
further evidence and
information on which to develop the details of reform that will be necessary to
ensure UN Convention compatibility.
However, enough is already known to
commence the legislative reform process; in this Report, the Council addresses
fundamental questions
of law reform, and maps out the further work that is
necessary to fully implement the supported decision making requirements of the
UN Convention.
The Report does not include recommendations relating to a number of areas of
law that will require examination for compliance with
the UN Convention. These
are the subject of separate recommendations in Part 10 below (Recommendations 11
2: EXECUTIVE SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The Council makes a number of recommendations. They are
organised into four groups:
• policy, principles and legislation;
• a new ACT Decision making Framework;
• implementation of an ACT Decision making Framework; and
• related matters.
A. Policy, Principles and Legislation
Changing the basis for decision making in the ACT to comply with the UN
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
The purpose expressed in the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities is:
to promote, protect and ensure the full and equal enjoyment of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms by all persons with disabilities;
and to promote
respect for their inherent dignity.
Human Rights Act
recognises similar rights and requires that
“Territory laws” be interpreted in a way that is compatible with
human rights.
Under Article 12 of the UN Convention and the ACT’s Human Rights Act,
all people with disabilities have a right to recognition
before the law and to
enjoy legal capacity on an equal basis with everyone else. These provisions
mean that adults with impaired
decision making ability have a right to exercise
their legal capacity through making decisions with or without support, based
their will, preferences and rights, subject to appropriate safeguards.
This is based upon:
• a presumption of legal capacity;
• a recognition of their will, preferences and rights as the basis for
decision making; and
• an acknowledgement that support must be provided to maximise the
exercise of their ability whenever possible.
‘Substitute’ decision making is currently used in the
Guardianship Act and other ACT legislation relating to people with
decision making ability. This provides for a ‘substitute’ decision
to be made on behalf of a person with impaired
decision making ability, based on
the substitute decision-maker’s view about what is in that person’s
‘best interests’.
To comply with the UN Convention, all relevant
legislation, policy and procedure for people with impaired decision making
must move to ‘supported decision making’, based on the will,
preferences and rights of that person.
Recommendation 1
The Council recommends that the ACT Government adopt a decision making
paradigm for people in the ACT with impaired decision making
ability that
replaces a ‘best interests’-based substitute decision making model
with a ‘will, preferences and rights’-based
supported decision
making model and that this model be reflected in legislation.
Law reform options
The Council’s preferred law reform option is the enactment of a new
overarching Supported Decision making Act, which would apply
to all relevant
civil legislation in the ACT and consequential amendment to other legislation.
This model has recently been adopted
in the Irish Republic in its
Decision making (Capacity) Act 2015
If this option is not accepted, the Council’s second preference is for
the insertion in all relevant ACT legislation of a standardised
supported decision making, consistent with the recommended policy change.
If neither of these two options is accepted, the Council proposes the
insertion in the Guardianship Act
of a statutory model of supported
decision making consistent with the change of policy and principles recommended
above. However,
this last option will leave a number of other significant Acts
non-compliant with the UN Convention and with the ACT’s Human
Rights Act.
With all these options, there are likely to be consequential amendments
involving other legislation.
Recommendation 2
The Council recommends that legislation to implement the new ‘will,
preferences and rights’-based supported ACT Decision
making Framework be
prepared for public consultation, using one of the following options in order of
preference:
2.1 A single Act providing for the overarching reform of the law relating
to people who require or may require assistance in exercising
their decision
making ability to mandate the use of the ‘will, preferences and
rights’-based supported decision making
framework; or
2.2 The use of a ‘will, preferences and rights’-based
supported decision making framework be independently inserted in
all existing
legislation that currently provides for substitute decision making for people
who require or may require assistance
in exercising their decision making
ability; or
2.3 A ‘will, preferences and rights’-based supported decision
making framework for people who require or may require assistance
in exercising
their decision making ability, be inserted in the
Guardianship and Management
of Property Act
in place of the current ‘best
interest’-based substitute decision making provisions.
The Principles for Reform
A simple, concise statement of principles should be adopted which affirms and
provides the basis for this paradigm shift. The Council
recommends the broad
framing principles for reform of laws relating to people with disabilities
recommended by the Australian Law
Reform Commission in its Final Report,
Equality, Capacity and Disability in Commonwealth Laws
, for this purpose.
These principles are: dignity, equality, autonomy, inclusion and participation,
and accountability.
In the context of reform of decision making arrangements for people with
impaired decision making ability, the Council’s consultations
also showed
broad support for the Australian Law Reform Commission’s National Decision
making Principles. The Council believes
that these principles provide a sound
basis for reform of decision making laws in the ACT.
Recommendation 3
The Council recommends that the ACT’s reform of law and policy
relating to decision making arrangements for people with impaired
making ability be based upon the Australian Law Reform Commission’s four
National Decision making Principles:
Principle 1
: All adults have an equal right to make
decisions that affect their lives and to have those decisions respected;
Principle 2
: People who require support in decision making
must be provided with access to the support necessary for them to make,
communicate
and participate in decisions that affect their lives;
Principle 3
: The will, preferences and rights of persons who
may require decision making support must direct decisions that affect their
Principle 4
: There must be appropriate and effective
safeguards for people who may require decision making support, including to
prevent abuse
and undue influence.
Decision making guiding principles
The Australian Law Reform Commission also developed three sets of guidelines
to underpin its National Decision making Principles.
These were its Support;
Wills, Preferences and Rights; and Safeguards Guidelines. These Guidelines
provide strong philosophical
and practical guidance for new legislation, policy
and procedures. They also provide a useful basis for a nationally consistent
to decision making for people with impaired decision making ability.
The Guidelines received strong community support in submissions
to the Council.
Recommendation 4
The Council recommends that the development of legislation, policy and
procedures to implement the new ACT Decision making Framework
be informed by the
principles in the Australian Law Reform Commission’s Guidelines on
Support; Wills, Preferences and Right;
and Safeguards.
B. A new ACT Decision making Framework
Decision making – support and representation
The Australian Law Reform Commission recommended that support be made
available for people who needed assistance to exercise their
decision making
ability in the form of
supported decision making
. In cases where this
was not possible, the Australian Law Reform Commission proposed there be
representative decision making
. In both circumstances, the decision
making would be directed by the will, preferences and rights of the
decision-maker. The Council
was persuaded by the work of other law reform
agencies in Australia and overseas that there was also a place for
co-decision making
as an additional form of supported decision making in
appropriate circumstances. A new decision making framework based on these
forms is recommended.
Recommendation 5
The Council recommends that the ACT’s new framework for supported
decision making provide for three forms of assisted decision
5.1 Supported decision making: The decision making framework requires and
provides support for decision making based upon the will,
preferences and rights
of someone whose decision making ability is impaired.
5.2 Co-decision making: Where impaired decision making ability makes the
exercise of decision making ability with support difficult,
additional support
shall be provided to allow the person to properly exercise their decision making
5.3 Representative decision making: Where it is not possible to provide
sufficient support for a specific decision by a person with
impaired decision
making ability, any method chosen to make that decision must be representative
of the will and preferences of the
person with impaired decision making ability,
as well as being consistent with their rights.
Supported Decision making
The legislation needs to reflect a flexible decision making process for
people with impaired decision making ability, in recognition
that their ability
will vary over time and with the nature of decisions. In addition, the
availability of support will also vary
over time. The first and preferred step
in the ACT Decision making Framework is to ensure the availability of a range of
where someone wants or needs assistance to exercise their decision
making ability, based upon their will, preferences and rights.
Recommendation 6
The Council recommends that the ACT Decision making Framework be based
upon the provision of support for decision making, where someone
wants or needs
support to exercise their decision making ability. This support must be based
upon the will, preferences and rights
of someone whose decision making ability
is impaired. Such support may include any actions which provide support for a
decision-maker
to exercise their decision making ability, including:
(a) reasonable accommodation; and
(b) the provision of various means of informal and formal support for
decision making, with reviewable statutory guidelines about
how such support can
best be provided, without the prescription of a specific model.
Co-Decision making
Where specific decisions could carry an unreasonable risk of substantial harm
for a decision-maker acting alone, but where, with sufficient
support, the
person can still exercise their decision making ability, the Council proposes
that a co-decision making option be available
in place of supported decision
making. This model exists under the Irish Republic’s
Assisted Decision
making (Capacity) Act 2015
. The model was also recommended for certain
decision making situations by the Victorian Law Reform Commission in its 2012
of guardianship laws. Under this option, decisions are negotiated and
agreed jointly by the decision-maker and the co-decision maker.
The decision
making is guided by the will, preferences and rights of the decision-maker. If
the decision-maker and co-decision-maker
are unable to agree, provision can be
made for an appropriate independent person or agency to work with them, to
support their relationship
and assist in reaching a joint decision.
Recommendation 7
The Council recommends the availability of co-decision making as a
distinctive form of supported decision making where someone requires
level of support to exercise their decision making ability in relation to
specific decisions, particularly those decisions
which may involve risk of
substantial harm to the decision-maker which risk cannot reasonably be
ameliorated through risk reduction
strategies.
Representative Decision making
The Australian Law Reform Commission model also provides for ‘will,
preferences and rights’-based representative decision
making as a last
resort when neither supported or co-decision making are able to provide
sufficient support for the person to exercise
their own decision making ability.
A representative decision-maker can be a person chosen by the decision-maker to
represent them
with appropriate safeguards, or, a person formally appointed by
the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal. In most cases, representatives
need to demonstrate that they have sought to support the decision-maker to
participate in decision making to the greatest extent
possible before they acted
as the representative decision-maker and this would need to be recorded
appropriately.
Recommendation 8
8.1 Where it is not possible to provide sufficient support for someone to
exercise their decision making ability either as a supported
co-decision-maker, and a representative is appointed either by the person or by
the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal, any
decision made by a representative
must be representative of the will and preferences of the person with impaired
decision making
ability, as well as being consistent with their rights.
8.2 Appointment to act as a formal representative decision-maker for
another person shall be subject to application to the ACT Civil
Administrative Tribunal, to determine that options of supported and co-decision
making have first been exhausted.
8.3 Where the need for a representative decision occurs in an emergency,
there should be a temporary power for a person previously
nominated by the
person with impaired decision making ability to act as their representative, or
alternatively a person who has authority
under the existing Health Attorney
provisions to make representative decisions for the person, based on their will,
preferences and
rights. Where the decision-maker does not recover their
decision making ability in the short term, then approval must be sought
appointment as a representative decision-maker in accordance with the terms of
8.1 and 8.2 above.
Determining and recording a person’s will and preferences
Respecting the will, preferences and rights of people who require support to
exercise their decision making ability is a central feature
of the new ACT
Decision making Framework. Determining the will and preferences of a person
with impaired decision making ability
may require a new set of administrative
processes. The determination will often be made through discussion and
engagement between
the decision-maker and their supporters, family, carers and
service providers at the time of decision making. This is necessarily
deliberative process. Such a process of discussion and engagement is not
possible for instance where a person is unconscious
or otherwise unable to
express their will and preferences. Some other process for determining the
person’s will and preferences
is then required.
There are a limited number of ways that a person can record their wishes and
preferences under the current legislation in the ACT.
Existing provisions,
particularly in relation to medical decision making, are complex and, at times,
conflicting. There is no central
administrative arrangement to record the will
and preferences of a person for subsequent access when needed. A requirement to
any such expression of will and preferences could also allow an
oversight or review body to have point-in-time evidence of the will,
preferences
and rights of the decision-maker.
Recommendation 9
9.1 The new ACT Decision making Framework should provide the opportunity
and a mechanism for people to formally record their will
and preferences about
specific issues, in a way that can be readily accessed when needed. Existing
mechanisms such as advance care
directions or consents and agreements under the
Mental Health Act 2015
provide potential models. Extending such options
to other areas of decision making should be explored and developed for affected
persons to be able to formally record their will and preferences about specific
9.2 Where existing Enduring Powers of Attorney are in operation, a
transition period should be set to provide opportunity for such
agreements to be
registered or renewed so as to remain operative.
The first necessary step to ensure decision making arrangements can be
safeguarded under the proposed ACT Decision making Framework
is to know they
exist. At the moment, there is no scrutiny of substitute decision making under
the enduring power of attorney provisions
Powers of Attorney Act 2006
(ACT), but the powers exercised may be as significant as those exercised
under the Guardianship Act. In future, where someone wishes
to appoint another
person as a supporter or a representative, a register will be required to ensure
that these wishes are able to
be known if and when needed.
Recommendation 10
10.1 0.The Council proposes that in the transition period, all existing
substitute decision making arrangements be brought under a
common registration
and monitoring regime, to facilitate the transition to the new ACT Decision
making Framework.
10.2 Where a person wishes to nominate a supporter or representative for
situations where they may need support for decision making
in the future,
administrative processes for the registration of all such agreements should be
developed as part of the transition
arrangements. Registration will facilitate
the formal recognition of people’s will and preferences, and provide
administrative
capacity to monitor and review such arrangements to ensure the
protection of the rights of decision-makers with impaired decision
C. Implementation of an ACT Decision making Framework
In addition to the need for legislation change, the paradigm shift set out in
the recommendations above will require consequent cultural
and procedural
change. The new ACT Decision making Framework will affect many people,
including existing guardians and managers,
people subject to guardianship,
carers and families, and service providers, as well as the broader community.
The Council considers
that a transition period, where elements of the
legislative part of the Framework are implemented, be accompanied by appropriate
education and community information. These changes are likely to require time
and resources to develop and implement.
Building community capacity
Significant community capacity building will be required to move to the new
ACT Decision making Framework. This will include:
(a) the development and provision of explanatory information and education
programs to promote supported decision making skills and
change decision making
culture across the community;
(b) support for relational changes necessary to allow greater decision making
by those who are currently under a substituted decision
making arrangement;
(c) observation of and learning from pilot supported decision making
(d) development of ways of assessing the supports someone may need to
exercise their decision making ability;
(e) assistance for people with impaired decision making abilities to become
‘decision ready’ and learn specific decision
making skills for those
decisions they see as important to their lives;
(f) administrative mechanisms to help facilitate the making and
implementation of supported decisions, including guidelines for the
roles in a supported decision making environment;
(g) development of appropriate registration processes, so that people can
record their will and preferences and any formal arrangements
they want to
operate to support their decision making; and
(h) development and implementation of appropriate monitoring and oversight
mechanisms, where these are necessary.
Recommendation 11
The Council recommends that there be a transition period for
implementation of the new ACT Decision making Framework, in acknowledgement
the need for considerable community capacity building, the development and
delivery of educational and information programs, and
the necessary review of
existing administrative arrangements to occur.
Ensuring oversight and review
The implementation of a new paradigm in relation to decision making may
involve difficulties for some people in making that transition.
As noted above,
there will be a significant need for capacity building for both decision-makers,
supporters, family, carers and
service providers. During the transition period,
there must be a focus on skills development and education to encourage a
willingness
to ‘try out’ new ways of behaving until affected people
feel comfortable in the new paradigm. To ensure that decision-makers
support are able to use their own decision making ability, there will need to be
resources provided from which to obtain
appropriate advice. At times,
intervention may be required to ensure the will, preferences and rights of the
person requiring decision
making support are being respected and acted upon.
Such oversight and review functions should lie with the Human Rights Commission
and/or the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal.
Recommendation 12
12.1 Where a person who needs support to exercise their decision making
ability considers that their will, preferences and rights
are not being
respected, a right to seek advice and intervention from the Human Rights
Commission or where necessary, review by the
ACT Civil and Administrative
Tribunal should be established. Grounds for intervention or review would
include breaches of the Guidance
Principles proposed in Recommendation 13,
including for example:
(a) a supporter's unreasonably limited expectations of a
decision-maker’s ability, resulting in the decision-maker having little
no opportunity to exercise their decision making ability to make their own
(b) unreasonable curtailment of risk;
(c) conflicts of interest;
(d) undue influence;
(d) competing rights between the supported decision-maker and their
supporters;
(e) breach of a prescribed standard, resulting in a decision-maker being
unable to exercise their decision making ability; and
(f) decision-supporter overreach.
Developing guidelines for supporters, representatives and others
The new ACT Decision making Framework requires supporters, representatives
and others who have been acting under the ‘best interests’
substitute decision making paradigm to operate very differently in supported
decision making. This will involve a significant shift
in the power dynamic
within close and sometimes complex relationships. To facilitate this, statutory
non-statutory guidance consistent
with the ‘will, rights and
preferences’ supported decision making paradigm will need to be developed
and adopted during
the transition period. The development of this guidance will
need to take account of the results of supported decision making pilots
conducted around Australia, as well as well as changes to decision making as a
consequence of the implementation of the National
Disability Insurance Scheme
Recommendation 13
The proposed ACT Decision making Framework should include guidance
materials (both directive and informative) for supporters, representatives
others to guide their behaviour appropriately in supporting a person to exercise
their decision making ability.
D. Related matters
The UN Convention requires that people with disabilities have the right to
recognition as ‘persons before the law’ in
all circumstances, and
that they enjoy legal capacity on an equal basis with all other people. While
the Council’s Terms of
Reference focus on the current Guardianship Act and
supported decision making, it is clear that the requirement for equal
recognition
need to be evident in other ACT legislation.
Amendment of legislation that relates to legal capacity
The Council was made aware through its research for this reference that the
terms ‘legal capacity’ and ‘mental capacity’
(sometimes interchangeably) in many pieces of legislation in the ACT, in ways
which do not comply with the Convention’s
intention. There is significant
variation, ambiguity and confusion about what is constituted by
‘capacity’ in these
various provisions. In some instances,
‘capacity’ refers to legal personhood; in other instances,
is concerned with decision making ability, or ability to
do some other task specified in the legislation. In order to comply with
spirit of the UN Convention, the ACT legislation needs to be reviewed to ensure
consistency in the treatment of all people as
equal before the law. Any
legislative limitations on this equality must be framed in a way which is
consistent with a person’s
ability to carry out the specific functions
under the relevant legislation (with such support as necessary, if that ability
is impaired).
Recommendation 14
The Council recommends that the Government undertake an audit of ACT
legislation to identify where amendments are required to give
effect to Article
12 of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities to ensure
that all people (including those with
disabilities) are treated equally before
the law and, where necessary, support is available to enable this to occur.
Legislative
language needs to be framed in terms of ‘ability with
support’, rather than ‘capacity’ and ‘incapacity’.
Whenever the terms ‘legal capacity’ or ‘mental capacity’
are used, or the word ‘capacity’ is
used to indicate ‘legal
capacity’ or ‘mental capacity’, the term ‘decision
making ability’ may
need to be used instead. Similarly, whenever the
terms ‘legal incapacity’ or ‘mental incapacity’ are
or the word ‘incapacity’ is used to indicate ‘legal
incapacity’ or ‘mental incapacity’, the term
decision making ability’ may need to be used instead.
Future review of criminal justice legislation and practice
The Council notes that there are implications for criminal justice practice
and procedure in the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities
that are outside the Council’s Terms of Reference and have not been
considered. There is likely to be strong
public interest that criminal justice
practice and procedure also made compliant with the principles of the UN
Convention.
The Australian Law Reform Commission has made recommendations in this area.
While the Council’s current recommendations do
not address whether reform
to the criminal justice system is necessary, a separate inquiry to consider this
is warranted.
Recommendation 15
The Council notes that there are implications for criminal justice
practice and procedure in the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons
Disabilities that are outside the Council’s Terms of Reference and have
not been considered. The Council recommends that
consideration be given to the
reform of the law in this area.
Compulsory treatment, restraint and seclusion
There are situations where a person’s decision making capacity is
impaired and their actions are seen as likely to cause significant
risk to self
and/or others. In these situations, the imposition of force against that
person’s will to protect that person
and/or others from harm may be
considered necessary. It is hoped that the context of supported decision making
and new understandings
of how to work with people with impaired decision making
who may experience psycho-social difficulties will minimise situations where
imposition of such force will be necessary. However, where the use of force or
compulsion is necessary, there need to be procedural
guarantees to manage the
use of force in any legislation (as amended). Any use of force in these
circumstances should require the
oversight of an external body, and in most
cases, prior approval should be obtained from by a publicly accountable decision
body such as the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal.
Mental Health Act 2015
(ACT) deals with the imposition of force in
the context of mental health involuntary detention and treatment orders which
are regulated
by statutory safeguards. In submissions to the Council, examples
were given of the imposition of force occurring under guardianship
arrangements
not regulated by legislation, such as in aged care facilities, disability
services and health services.
There is a need for careful consideration of the most effective ways of
ensuring the protection of people with impaired decision making
considered to be at risk of harming self or others and therefore potentially
subject to the need for the imposition of force.
The Council considers that
further work is required to develop the most appropriate approach to such
coercive or restrictive practices,
including in circumstances of compulsory
treatment, restraint, seclusion, mandatory living arrangements and other
controls, which
may be seen as breaching the rights of a person with impaired
decision making ability.
Recommendation 16
The Council considers that strong and consistent safeguards are required
to regulate any restrictive or coercive practices applied
to people with
impaired decision making ability. While the Council is attracted to using a
similar set of requirements as are set
Mental Health Act 2015
(ACT), the Council recommends that a further review is needed to ensure a
proper consideration of the complex issues raised by these
3: GUARDIANSHIP AND SUBSTITUTE DECISION MAKING IN THE ACT
of this Part
The focus of the Council’s inquiry is the mechanism of guardianship,
and so this Part begins with an account of the way in which
Guardianship
and Management of Property Act 1991
(ACT) (the ‘Guardianship
Act’) has developed and now operates.
The exercise of guardianship is, essentially, the making of decisions by the
guardian as a substitute for the person under guardianship:
that is to say
‘substitute decision making’. Other laws in the ACT make provision
for substitute decision making and
they are described at the end of this Part:
Powers of Attorney Act 2006
(Powers of Attorney Act), the
Treatment (Health Directions) Act
(Health Directions Act), and the
Mental Health Act 2015
(Mental Health
3.1 The Guardianship Act
3.1.1 Who is subject to
guardianship in the ACT?
One question that needs to be considered is the number of people who may be
affected by the reform of this and other substitute decision
making legislation
in the ACT. What becomes clear is that there are no comprehensive data
available. There is more data available
on guardianship in the ACT because
these arrangements come after an order of the ACAT or from some other judicial
body. However,
because there is no requirement to register arrangements made
elsewhere and under other mechanisms, like Enduring Powers of Attorney,
available information is far from complete. There is also some information
available from ‘last resort’ appointments
under the Public Advocate
and on the review functions and last resort functions of the Public Trustee.
Again these only provide
a partial picture. The lack of a comprehensive record
of these arrangements means that there is no protective oversight available,
and, examples were provided to the Council where this has led to exploitation
and harm to the protected person.
Data on the Guardianship work of ACAT
ACAT has taken on an increasingly active role in relation to reviewing
guardianship orders made previously, consistent with the move
away from plenary
orders of unlimited duration.
provides details of the
number of applications considered by ACAT over the past five years. Applications
can include seeking orders
to grant, vary or remove guardianship
arrangements.
Notwithstanding that the number of applications lodged, have increased, the
number of grants of new Guardianship orders has declined,
as can be seen from
The most recent data on the underlying causes for why guardianship orders at
ACAT are sought is in Figure 3 below. In submissions,
there was some concern
raised about the use of plenary orders in the
. It is understood that ACAT,
through its own motion reviews, is reviewing the appropriateness of all plenary
orders to see if such
wide powers are
Data on the Public Guardianship Function
The Public Trustee and Guardian acts as a Guardian of Last Resort, where ACAT
considers that someone needs a guardian, but there is
no other suitable person
willing or able to fulfil this function. This role was undertaken by the Public
Advocate until 1 April
2016, and data available relates to the Public Advocate.
The numbers of people subject to these arrangements have varied over the
decade, as set out in Figure 4.
While demographic data is not published each year for this group, in 2011-12,
the Public Advocate’s Annual Report noted that
45% of these clients were
female. Figure 5 shows their age distribution.
The number of people under the Guardian of last resort arrangements at any
one time (shown in Figure 4 above) is a measure of the
stock and flow of
clients. Each year new appointments are made both to Private Guardians and to
public guardians. The number of
new ‘Guardian of Last Resort’
clients has declined since 2011-12.
The stock of public ‘Guardian of Last Resort’ clients is also
affected by those who leave each year for various reasons.
The following table
provides data on the reasons people left ‘Guardianship of Last
Resort’ arrangements, when this function
sat with the Public Advocate.
Reason for leaving Guardianship
Client deceased
Client regained capacity
No decisions made so PA requests cessation
Matter resolved so order no longer required
Client relocated to another jurisdiction
Alternative guardian appointed
Reason not stated
Data on the Public Trustee of the ACT Financial
Management Function under the Guardianship Act
The Public Trustee fulfils a number of different roles in relation to the
Guardianship Act. The Public Trustee acts as a financial
manager of last resort
under ACAT orders; as a Financial Manager when appointed under an enduring power
of attorney which subsequently
becomes operative; and as a regulatory supervisor
of private guardians who have been given financial management responsibilities
To give some idea of the scope of work, in 2014-15, the Public Trustee
managed 337 trusts for people under legal disabilities with
values under
$100,000, and 56 trusts with values over that amount.
3.1.2 Overview of the
current Guardianship Act
The Guardianship Act
sets up a statutory regime applying to
‘decision-makers’ for ‘protected persons’.
A decision-maker is a person who ‘exercise[s] a function under [the]
Act in relation to a person with impaired decision making
ability’ (s
4(1)). People who exercise a function under the Act in relation to a person
with impaired decision making ability
are guardians appointed by ACAT to make
decisions about a person’s health and welfare (Part 2 of the Act),
managers appointed
by ACAT to make decisions about a person’s financial
matters or property (Part 2), health attorneys as defined by the Act (Part
and attorneys appointed under an enduring power of attorney (Part 3).
A person with impaired decision making ability is a ‘protected
person’ (s 4(1)), defined as a person whose ‘decision
making ability
is impaired because of a physical, mental, psychological or intellectual
condition or state, whether or not the condition
or state is a diagnosable
illness’ (s 5). This definition is tied to the existence of a disability,
which excludes (s 6A)
a person who:
(a) is eccentric; or
(b) does or does not express a particular political or religious opinion;
(c) is of a particular sexual orientation or expresses a particular sexual
preference; or
(d) engages or has engaged in illegal or immoral conduct; or
(e) takes or has taken drugs, including alcohol (but any effects of a drug
may be taken into account).
As well as using the term ‘impaired decision making ability’, the
Guardianship Act uses the term ‘impaired decision
making capacity’
but only when referring to the exercise of a power of attorney, as defined by
Powers of Attorney Act 2006
The Guardianship Act prescribes a set of decision making principles to be
followed by the decision-maker (s 4(2)):
(a) the protected person’s wishes, as far as they can be worked out,
must be given effect to, unless making the decision in
accordance with the
wishes is likely to significantly adversely affect the protected person’s
(b) if giving effect to the protected person’s wishes is likely to
significantly adversely affect the person’s interests—the
decision-maker must give effect to the protected person’s wishes as far as
possible without significantly adversely affecting
the protected person’s
(c) if the protected person’s wishes cannot be given effect to at
all—the interests of the protected person must be promoted;
(d) the protected person’s life (including the person’s
lifestyle) must be interfered with to the smallest extent necessary;
(e) the protected person must be encouraged to look after himself or herself
as far as possible;
(f) the protected person must be encouraged to live in the general community,
and take part in community activities, as far as possible.
There is a limited obligation to consult with the carers of the
‘protected person’ before making a decision (s 4(3)).
guardian considers that such consultation would, in their opinion,
‘adversely affect the protected person’s interests’,
‘must not consult’ with any carers (s 4(4)).
Amendments in 2001 placed the Guardianship Act squarely in the ‘best
interests’ paradigm of substitute decision making.
This is apparent in
the definition of ‘the protected person’s interests’ (s 5A),
which does not include any reference
to the wishes of the person. The protected
person’s interests are defined to include:
(a) protection of the person from physical or mental harm;
(b) prevention of the physical or mental deterioration of the person;
(c) the ability of the person to
(i) look after himself or herself; and
(ii) live in the general community; and
(iii) take part in community activities; and
(iv) maintain the person’s preferred lifestyle (other than any part of
the person’s preferred lifestyle that is harmful
to the person);
(d) promotion of the person’s financial security;
(e) prevention of the wasting of the person’s financial resources or
the person becoming destitute.
A guardian has powers under s 7(3):
(a) to decide where, and with whom, the person is to live;
(b) to decide what education or training the person is to receive;
(c) to decide whether the person is to be allowed to work;
(d) if the person is to be allowed to work—to decide the nature of the
work, the place of employment and the employer;
(e) to give, for the person, a consent required for a medical procedure or
other treatment (other than a prescribed medical procedure);
(f) to bring or continue legal proceedings for or in the name of the
A guardian’s powers are limited (s 7B), and do
include the
power to discipline the person or to do any of the following things for the
(a) vote in an election;
(b) make a will or other testamentary instrument;
(c) consent to the adoption of a child;
(d) give a consent to a marriage or civil union;
(e) give a consent required for a prescribed medical procedure for the
For purposes of s 7B(e) – limited power for medical consent – a
‘prescribed medical procedure’ is defined
in the Act’s
Dictionary as:
(a) an abortion; or
(b) reproductive sterilisation; or
(c) a hysterectomy; or
(d) a medical procedure concerned with contraception; or
(e) removal of non-regenerative tissue for transplantation to the body of
another living person; or
(f) electroconvulsive therapy or psychiatric surgery; or
(g) any other medical or surgical procedure prescribed for this
definition.
The limitation on a guardian’s giving consent for a prescribed medical
procedure is addressed by a provision that enables the
ACAT to give consent (s
70). In giving consent, the ACAT must have regard to the person’s
‘best interests’, taking
into account:
(a) the wishes of the person, so far as they can be ascertained; and
(b) what would happen if it were not carried out; and
(c) what alternative treatments are available; and
(d) whether it can be postponed because better treatments may become
available; and
(e) for a transplantation of tissue—the relationship between the two
It is notable that ‘the wishes of the person, so far as they can be
ascertained’, in s 70, differs from the definition
of a person’s
interests for purposes generally of decision making under the Act (s 5A).
3.1.3 Origins
and history of the Guardianship Act
The ACT Legislative Assembly originally
enacted the Guardianship
during the ACT’s inaugural period of
self-government.
At the time of
its enactment, the then Attorney-General, Terry Connolly MLA, recognised the
need for modernisation of the laws surrounding
the issue of legal capacity for
people who may have impairment in their decision making abilities because of
‘intellectual,
physical, mental or psychological
incapacity’.
The Guardianship Act was established for a person who
• needed assistance or protection from abuse, exploitation or neglect;
• was legally incompetent; or
• was unable to enter into particular
transactions.
The Act contained a rebuttable presumption of legal competence for all people
with disabilities.
Prior to self-government, individuals in the ACT who exhibited impairment in
their decision making ability could become the subject
of various orders issued
by the ACT Supreme Court under the
Lunacy Act 1898
Before the Guardianship
Act, legislation relating to issues of disability relied on language and
principles that, according to John
Bennett, had existed since the Middle
the Australian Law Reform
Commission considered this language to be ‘associated with negative
connotations or used pejoratively’,
and that it could be seen as lowering
the dignity of people with
disabilities.
The Guardianship Act established the Guardianship and Management Tribunal
(‘the Tribunal’) to be administered by the Magistrates
but in a special
hold an inquiry before making any
it was able to hold its hearing wherever was
appropriate
and to conduct the
inquiry informally and in a public way, ‘with as little regard to legal
technicalities as is
The Tribunal was
given inquisitorial powers, and was bound by the rules of natural
It was given the
authority to appoint a guardian for a person determined by the Tribunal to be
unable to make reasonable judgments
relating to their health and welfare because
of a physical, mental, psychological or intellectual condition, as a result
their health or welfare substantially at
A manager was to be
appointed if a person was legally incompetent because of a physical, mental,
psychological or intellectual condition,
and the question of competence could
arise either if the person sought to enter a transaction relating to their
property, or ‘it
[wa]s in the person’s interests to preserve the
person’s property by preventing a purported disposition of the
The Guardianship Act also established a set of principles that would guide
the Tribunal and guardians/managers, so that the orders
would not be
‘overly intrusive’, and they were subject to review at least every
three years.
The powers given
to guardians and managers were clearly limited to what was necessary in the
circumstances, for example, under section
11 (which remains under the current
The powers conferred on a person’s guardian or on a manager of a
person’s property are to be no more restrictive of the
freedom of decision and action than is necessary to achieve the purpose of the
When introducing the Guardianship Act, the Attorney-General stated that it
was to provide ‘a simple and informal system’
of guardianship and
management of people and their property, where the person was unable to make
decisions because of various forms
incapacity.
Guardianship was,
where possible, to rest in a natural person who was relative or close friend of
the protected person, although
a manager could be the guardian, or the Public
Trustee or another trustee company could be appointed jointly with the guardian.
the absence of a suitable person to act as guardian, a community advocate
could be appointed as a last resort.
2001 amendments: reversion to paternalism
There have been significant amendments to the legislation since its
commencement. Some have altered the language used and the principles
which decision-makers operate; others have added new and significant provisions
relating to medical consent.
Both the principles and the language of the original 1991 Guardianship Act
were more consistent with the paradigm espoused by UN Convention
and the ALRC
Final Report than were the subsequent amending provisions. In contrast, these
amendments expanded the power to grant
guardianship or management over
someone’s decision making, thus spreading the net of substitute decision
The effect of the 2001 amendments was to establish a more paternalistic, less
rights-based approach to guardianship and decision making
than seems was the
intention of the Act in its original form. This is illustrated by an amendment
that changed reference in the
legislation from ‘represented person’
to ‘protected person’
In its original terms, the Act set out as decision making principles that the
person’s views and wishes, so far as they could
be ascertained, should
receive paramount consideration, and that decisions made by the substitute
decision-maker ‘should be,
as nearly as possible, the decisions that he or
she would have made if not affected by the condition concerned’.
In the Guardianship Act as
originally enacted, there was a subsidiary requirement that the person’s
welfare and interests
be appropriately protected, but the paramount
consideration could be seen as a form of representative ‘will and
preferences’.
compares to the new set of principles in the 2001 Amending Act, which are
squarely embedded in the ‘best interests’
. The Explanatory
Memorandum for the amendments criticised the original provisions as creating
‘conflict between the person’s
wishes and their welfare’, and
stated that ‘[g]iving effect to the former may endanger an
individual’s personal
and financial
. Circumstances
in which a manager could be appointed were
and ‘risk to
property’ became a new basis for seeking
guardianship.
The obligations of guardians and managers also changed. Under its original
terms, the Guardianship Act set out, in section 14, obligations
characterised the arrangements as a ‘representative’ form of
decision making: the guardian or manager was ‘to
act, so far is proper, as
the person would have acted in the circumstances if he or she were not affected
by the condition
concerned’.
particular case, where it was not possible to determine how the person would
have acted, was the guardian or manager allowed
to substitute a ‘best
interests’ based decision,
subject to further considerations.
In 2001, the principles were amended to refer to a person’s interests,
which was a defined term.
had been, for example, a principle that a person’s ‘views and
wishes, so far as they can be ascertained, should
be respected’, was
amended to read that a person’s ‘wishes, as far as they can be
worked out, must be given effect
unless making the decision in accordance
with the wishes is likely to significantly adversely affect the protected
person's interest
(emphasis added). The amendments clearly embedded an
approach of substitute decision making in a person’s ‘best
interests’.
2008 amendments: Health Attorney
In 2008, a new Part 2A of the Guardianship Act was introduced to create a new
role, the Health
When a person cannot give consent in a medical emergency, the common law permits
a medical or dental practitioner to act without
consent if they honestly believe
on reasonable grounds that the treatment is necessary to avert a serious and
imminent threat to
the patient’s life or physical or mental health. The
common law doctrine of emergency acts as a defence for the doctor against
claim of battery.
practice was, when possible, to ask the person’s relative or friend for
consent, but this was not required by legislation
in the ACT. Part 2A was
introduced to establish a statutory framework for consent in a medical
emergency, and to bring the ACT into
line with other jurisdictions, such as NSW,
where a close relative or friend can consent to treatment on behalf of someone
with impaired
decision making
According to the
Explanatory Statement,
[t]he scheme is also consistent with the general expectation in the community
that where a person lacks capacity, a person close to
him or her would be
involved in decisions relating to provision of their medical
Part 2A applies when a person has impaired decision making ability in
relation to giving consent, requires medical treatment, has
arrangements for an enduring power of attorney, and does not have a
circumstances, a medical or dental practitioner must determine who ‘is
best able to represent the views of the protected
person’ to be the
person’s health attorney.
To make this determination, the practitioner must follow the priority order set
out in s 32B: first, the continuing domestic partner,
then a carer, and then a
close relative or friend.
When a health professional seeks the health attorney’s consent on
behalf of the person with impaired decision making ability,
professional must give the health attorney extensive prescribed information to
assist the attorney in making a decision
on behalf of the impaired person (s
32G). Under section 32E, the actions of the health attorney and the health
professional are
bound by the decision making principles set out in section
4(2). The consent of the health attorney is effective for six months
treating doctor needs to notify the public trustee and guardian that the
treatment is still ongoing (s 32J).
If the health attorney refuses consent or there is dispute between the people
who could be health attorneys for the protected person,
then the health
professional must refer the matter to the public trustee and guardian (s 32H).
If the public trustee and guardian
cannot help the parties to reach agreement
then the matter must be referred to ACAT (s 32I).
The 2008 amendments created some complexities and confusion. In particular,
Part 2A uses the same term, ‘protected person’,
as is used the rest
of the Act, but defines it differently (s 32A). The definition for Part 2A
people who are under guardianship (that is, people who are
‘protected people’ under the other parts of the Act) and people
have an attorney with authority to give consent for medical treatment under an
enduring power of attorney
In addition, the provisions setting up the nature of the health attorney role
in section 32D create the health attorney as a representative
decision-maker.
This was emphasised in the Explanatory Statement, which states that potential
health attorneys ‘are likely
to be those best placed to understand, the
wishes, views and feelings of the protected
However, section
32E imposes an additional – and what appears to be contradictory –
‘best interests’ obligation
on both the health professional and the
health attorney, by requiring them to follow the decision making principles in
section 4(2).
These create a substitute ‘best interests’ decision
making role.
In combination, these requirements create a potential conflict when, for
example, the health attorney’s view of the person’s
interests’ are at odds with their understanding of the wishes, views and
feelings of the protected person. The
consequence is that the law in relation
to a substitute decision-maker refusing treatment for a person who is
incompetent to make
a decision themselves is far from
3.1.6 The Guardianship
Act and powers of compulsion
The potential powers of a guardian to make decisions in the life of a
protected person can be extensive under the current legislation.
While there
are some limitations about what medical procedures can be approved by a guardian
under section 7B(e) of the Guardianship
Act, consent for most normal medical
treatment for both physical and mental health is now able to be approved by the
guardian. Recent
consequential amendments, accompanying the
Mental Health
, removed general mental health treatment from the list of
‘prescribed medical procedures’, now leaving only electroconvulsive
therapy and psychiatric surgery in the definition, and therefore, as exclusions
from the guardian’s power to decide. Similarly,
a guardian may determine
where and with whom a protected person lives. In both situations, under the
current Guardianship Act, the
guardian may decide these actions against the
wishes of the person, if the guardian forms the view that carrying out the
wishes would be against the person’s interests. The extent
of any compelling force permissible to enact these decisions and
circumstances such force may be used is not clear. The lack of procedural
safeguards was raised as a concern in submissions,
particularly compared with
the safeguards now provided in the
Mental Health Act
The use of force to
impose a decision for mental health treatment compels the medical team to seek
an involuntary treatment order
through ACAT, even where the person has given
advance consent.
ACT laws that recognise substitute decision making
Other ACT legislation which create substitute decision making mechanisms
include the
Powers of Attorney Act
, the Health Directions Act and the
The relevant
provisions of these Acts are summarised below.
3.2.1 Powers
of Attorney Act
A general power of attorney operates only when the principal has decision
making capacity
, while an enduring power of attorney operates as a general
power of attorney while the principal has decision making capacity and
to operate after the principal becomes a person with impaired decision making
An enduring power of attorney cannot be revoked once the
principal has impaired decision making capacity.
A person has decision making capacity when they can ‘make decisions in
relation to their affairs and understand the nature and
effect of these
Correspondingly, someone has impaired decision
making capacity if they cannot make such decisions or do not understand their
A person does not have impaired decision making
because they are eccentric, make unwise decisions, express
a particular political or religious opinion, have a particular sexual
orientation or express a particular sexual preference, engage or have engaged in
illegal or immoral conduct, take or have taken drugs
including alcohol
A question about whether a person had decision making capacity at a particular
time can be resolved by a certificate from a doctor
An attorney does not have power to make decisions on ‘special personal
matters’, including making or revoking a will or
power of attorney;
voting; consenting to the adoption of a minor child of the principal; and
consenting to marriage
An attorney does not have power to make
decisions on ‘special health matters’ including live tissue
donation, sterilisation
or termination of pregnancy unless necessary to treat
organic malfunction or disease; participation by the principal in medical
or experimental health care; electroconvulsive therapy or psychiatric
surgery; or other prescribed health care
General treatment for mental
illness was removed from the list of special health matters, with the
commencement of the recent
Mental Health Act
Concerns were raised in submissions to and consultations with the Council
that there were inadequate safeguards for older people in
relation to the
operation of an enduring power of attorney, and in relation to decision making
more broadly, particularly in relation
to health decisions and where there are
disputes between family members who have substitute powers of decision
powers of attorney and supported decision making
Under an enduring power of attorney, an attorney can ask for treatment to be
withheld or withdrawn from a principal who has impaired
decision making
capacity. This can only occur after seeking medical advice, and if the attorney
believes on reasonable grounds that
the principal would make that decision, if
the principal could make a rational judgment and were to give serious
consideration to
their own health and wellbeing
This is also subject to
the principal’s right to relief from pain, suffering and discomfort and to
the reasonable provision
of food and water
conjunction with
, attempts to give the attorney authority to give
effect to what the principal’s will and preference would be. This is,
at odds with
, which allows specific health professionals to
approach the Public Advocate if the health professional believes that the
decision is not in the best interests of the principal. The
concept of ‘best interests’ is not defined. The scope of
authority in
seems, as well, at odds with the tenor of General Principle
1.11 noted below.
Principles relating to impaired decision making capacity
The General Principles set out in Schedule 1 to the
Powers of Attorney Act
‘must be complied with to the maximum extent possible by a person who
exercises the functions of an attorney under an enduring
power of attorney in
relation to a principal with impaired decision making capacity’
The Principles are quite different from the principles set out in both the
current Guardianship Act and the
Mental Health Act
So far as decision making in concerned, Principle 1.6 seems more consistent
with supported decision making:
1. An individual has a right to take part in decisions affecting the
individual’s life to the greatest extent practicable.
2. Without limiting subsection (1), an individual also has a right to take
part in decisions affecting the individual’s property
and finance to the
greatest extent practicable.
3. The right of the individual to make the individual’s own decisions
must be preserved to the greatest extent practicable.
4. If an individual’s wishes or needs cannot be expressed by the
individual, the person exercising power in relation to the
individual must try
to work out, as far as possible, from the individual’s past actions, what
the individual’s wishes
and needs would be if the individual could express
them and take those wishes and needs into account.
5. However, a person exercising a function in relation to an individual must
do so in a way consistent with the individual’s
proper care and
protection.
6. An individual’s views and wishes may be expressed orally, in writing
or in another way, including, for example, by conduct.
Provided with Principle 1.6(3) are examples of how an individual’s
right to make their own decisions can be preserved:
• The individual must be given any necessary support, and access to any
necessary information, to allow the individual to take
part in decisions
affecting the individual’s life to the greatest extent practicable.
• To the greatest extent practicable, the individual’s views and
wishes must be sought and taken into account before exercising
power in relation
to the individual.
• Power in relation to the individual must be exercised in the way that
is least restrictive of the individual’s rights.
By contrast, Principles 1.6(4) and (5) revert to the tenor of substitute
decision making, requiring an attorney only to ‘take
into account’
what the individual’s wishes and needs would be, in a way
‘consistent with the individual’s
proper care and protection’,
but without any explicit regard to the individual’s rights.
Principle 1.11 also departs from the supported decision making approach
suggested by Principle 1.6. Principle 1.11 states:
1. An individual is entitled to have decisions about health care matters made
by an attorney—
(a) in the way least restrictive of the individual’s rights and freedom
of action; and
(b) only if the exercise of power—
(i) is, in the attorney’s opinion, necessary and appropriate to
maintain or promote the individual’s health and wellbeing;
(ii) is, in all the circumstances, in the individual’s best interests.
2. An individual’s wishes in relation to health care matters, and any
information provided by the individual's health care provider,
must be taken
into account when an attorney decides what is appropriate in the exercise of
power for a health care matter.
This Principle is again at odds with the supported decision making approach
suggested by in Principle 1.6 and, more problematically,
with the terms of
It is hard to see how a decision can both comply with
and with Principle
1.11. This leaves an unresolved inconsistency between supported decision making
(Principle 1.6 and
and substitute decision making (Principles 1.6(4),
1.6(5) and 1.11).
of Attorney Amendment Act 2016
– Medical Research Power of
The Council’s terms of reference necessarily include a review of the
operation of the
Powers of Attorney Act
, as noted. Independently of the
Council’s review, the Government introduced the
Powers of Attorney
Amendment Bill 2015
to the Legislative Assembly on 19 November 2015. The Act
was passed on 18 February 2016 and notified on 1 March 2016, but not yet
commenced at the date of this report. These changes are referred to here as
‘the medical research amendments’. The
Act amends the decision
making powers of substitute decision-makers in relation to medical research
under several Acts that are the
subject of the Council’s review. Its
default commencement date is 1 September 2016.
This Act further complicates legislative provisions in the ACT in respect of
decision making for people with impaired decision making
ability, but confirms
the Council in its view that a single approach must be taken.
The specific issue addressed by this Act is whether people with impaired
decision making ability can participate in medical research.
Prior to the
medical research amendments, a substitute decision to consent to participate in
medical research was not permissible
under an enduring power of attorney. The
power of a guardian or health attorney to make a substitute decision to consent
to participate
in medical research was, by comparison, unclear and turned on
whether participation in medical research could be characterised as
‘treatment’.
The explanatory memorandum for the
Powers of Attorney Amendment Bill 2015
stated that:
the policy objective of the amendments is to remove barriers to people with
impaired decision making capacity participating in medical
research. Removing
these barriers may allow these people to receive beneficial treatment not
otherwise available to them and will
assist health researchers to develop
innovative treatments which may benefit a class of people with a certain
condition. The amendments
are also aimed at making the process for deciding
decision-makers.
The Attorney-General said that the approach put forward ‘strikes an
appropriate balance between removing barriers to participation
research and protecting a person’s right not to be involved in medical
The medical research amendments create a medical research power of attorney
in the enduring power of attorney provisions of the
Powers of Attorney Act
Act also amends the Guardianship Act in relation to both guardianship and health
attorney provisions, and the Health Directions
Act, to allow greater
participation of people with impaired decision making ability in medical
The definition of medical research is two-tiered: ‘low-risk
research’ and ‘medical
research’ is research carried out for medical or health purposes, apart
from a clinical trial, that poses no
foreseeable risk of harm to the person,
other than any harm usually associated with the person’s condition, and
does not change
the treatment appropriate for the person’s condition. A
health attorney can only consent to participation in ‘low-risk
‘Medical research’ is research in relation to the diagnosis,
maintenance or treatment of a medical condition that the
person has or has had
or to which the person has a significant risk of being exposed, including
experimental health care and clinical
trials. ‘Experimental health
care’ is research into health care that need not be medical in nature, is
delivered as part
of a test or trial, and has not yet gained the support of a
substantial number of practitioners in that field of health care.
The research must be approved by a human research ethics committee
constituted in accordance with and acting in compliance with the
National Health
and Medical Research Council (NHMRC)
National Statement on Ethical Conduct in
Human Research.
(see s 41A and 41D(2)(a)).
Under the medical research amendments, only an attorney or guardian can
consent to participation in medical research. They must be
satisfied that
– and an independent doctor must assess whether – the person with
impaired decision making ability will
not recover their ability to consent
before their participation in the research concludes. Under section 41D(2)(c)
the attorney
or guardian must also be satisfied on reasonable grounds that
• the research relates to the diagnosis, maintenance or treatment of a
condition that the principal has or has had, or is at
significant risk of:
• the research may benefit the principal or others with the condition,
• the potential benefit outweighs any potential risk or inconvenience
to the principal or any potential adverse impact on the
principal’s
quality of life, and
• participation in the research will not unduly interfere with the
principal’s privacy.
The medical research amendments to the
Powers of Attorney Act
do not modify
the General Principles that ‘must be complied with to the maximum extent
possible by a person who exercises the
functions of an attorney under an
enduring power of attorney in relation to a principal with impaired decision
making capacity’
Powers of Attorney Act
). However, under
section 41B
, the medical research amendments require a medical research power of
attorney to abide by the same decision making principles as
Guardianship Act. The confusion within the Power of Attorney Act Principles in
the Schedule to that Act have been discussed
above and these are in the
Council’s view magnified in the operation of the new medical research
attorney provisions. In addition,
the Council has concluded that the decision
making principles in the Guardianship Act are not compliant with the UN
Convention and
are inconsistent with the representative nature of the health
attorney provisions.
The new schema goes further than simply providing a consistent arrangement
for substitute health care decision-makers in relation
to medical research. For
example, it modifies the precedence given to health directions made under the
Health Directions Act, discussed
below so far as participation in medical
research is concerned. It also gives retrospective power for an attorney to
provide research
participation consent for a principal, where an attorney was
given power over health care matters in an enduring power of attorney
to the medical research amendments (s 41A ‘medical research power of
attorney’ definition).
The medical research amendments also limit the right of free consent to
participation in medical or scientific experimentation and
treatment under
section 10(2)
Human Rights Act
by allowing a guardian or attorney to make a
substitute decision giving consent. The ACT Attorney has argued that the
is justified because of the benefits that flow from the person
participating in such
The medical research amendments do not utilise supported decision making, but
continue a ‘best interests’ substitute decision
making regime, which
the Council submits is inappropriate and inconsistent with the UN Convention.
Health Act 2015
Principles and Objectives
The new ACT mental health legislation includes a number of provisions which
bring the legislation more into line with the UN Convention,
Human Rights
and other international rights
instruments
For instance, the objects of the
Mental Health Act
(contained in
include provisions that are consistent with the UN Convention Preamble, Purpose
(Article 1) and General Principles (Article 3), including
(b) promote the capacity of people with a mental disorder or mental illness
to determine, and participate in, their assessment and
treatment, care or
support, taking into account their rights in relation to mental health under
territory law; and
(d) facilitate access by people with a mental disorder or mental illness to
services provided in a way that recognises and respects
their rights, inherent
dignity and needs.
The Principles under
Mental Health Act
also reflect many of
the directions in the UN Convention. For example, when exercising a function
under the Act, the following principles
must be taken into account:
(a) a person with a mental disorder or mental illness has the same rights and
responsibilities as other members of the community and
is to be supported to
exercise those rights and responsibilities without discrimination;
(b) a person with a mental disorder or mental illness has the right
(i) consent to, refuse or stop treatment, care or support; and
(ii) be told about the consequences of consenting to, refusing or stopping
treatment, care or support;
(c) a person with a mental disorder or mental illness has the right to
determine the person’s own recovery;
(d) a person with a mental disorder or mental illness has the right to have
the person’s will and preferences, to the extent
that they are known or
able to be known, taken into account in decisions made about treatment, care or
(g) a person with a mental disorder or mental illness has the right to be
given timely information, in a way that the person is most
likely to understand,
to allow the person to make decisions or maximise the person’s
contribution to decision making about
the person’s assessment and
treatment, care or support;
(i) a person with a mental disorder or mental illness has the right to be
assumed to have decision making capacity, unless it is established
person does not have decision making capacity;
(j) services provided to a person with a mental disorder or mental illness
(i) respect the informed consent of the person to the person’s
assessment and treatment, care or support including consent as
expressed in an
advance consent direction; and
(ii) support and allow the person to make the person’s own decisions;
(iii) be provided in a way that considers and respects the preferences of the
person, including those expressed in an advance agreement;
(iv) promote a person’s capacity to determine the person’s
recovery from mental disorder or mental illness; and ...
(viii) be provided in a way that ensures that the person is aware of the
person’s rights
The Explanatory Statement for the Bill centred the aim of the Bill on
‘the right to the highest attainable standard of mental
and detailed
extensively how the Bill is compatible with the
Human Rights
Decision making under the Mental Health Act
Perhaps most significantly, for the purposes of this Report, the new
has specific principles relating to decision making. Decision making
is defined in the Act (s 7) as follows:
... a person has capacity to make a decision in relation to the
person’s treatment, care or support for a mental disorder or
decision making capacity
) if the person can, with
assistance if needed—
(a) understand when a decision about treatment, care or support for the
person needs to be made; and
(b) understand the facts that relate to the decision; and
(c) understand the main choices available to the person in relation to the
decision; and
(d) weigh up the consequences of the main choices; and
(e) understand how the consequences affect the person; and
(f) on the basis of paragraphs (a) to (e), make the decision; and
(g) communicate the decision in whatever way the person can.
The Principles that must be taken into account when considering a
person’s decision making capacity under the Act, as set out
in section 8
below, are a ‘blended’ form. The principles have moved towards
supported decision making and the recognition
that decision making ability
varies at different times and across different decisions. However, when someone
has no decision making
capacity at a particular point, under section 8(3), the
requirement for substitute decision making becomes a ‘best
test. Section 8 provides:
(1) In considering a person’s decision making capacity under this Act,
the following principles must be taken into account:
(a) a person’s decision making capacity is particular to the decision
that the person is to make;
(b) a person must be assumed to have decision making capacity, unless it is
established that the person does not have decision making
(c) a person who does not have decision making capacity must always be
supported to make decisions about the person’s treatment,
care or support
to the best of the person’s ability;
(d) a person must not be treated as not having decision making capacity
unless all practicable steps to assist the person to make
decisions have been
(e) a person must not be treated as not having decision making capacity only
(i) the person makes an unwise decision; or
(ii) the person has impaired decision making capacity under another Act, or
in relation to another decision;
(f) a person must not be treated as having decision making capacity to
consent to the provision of treatment, care or support only
because the person
complies with the provision of the treatment, care or support;
(g) a person who moves between having and not having decision making capacity
must, if reasonably practicable, be given the opportunity
to consider matters
requiring a decision at a time when the person has decision making capacity.
(2) A person’s decision making capacity must always be taken into
account in deciding treatment, care or support, unless this
Act expressly
provides otherwise.
(3) An act done, or decision made, under this Act for a person who does not
have decision making capacity must be done in the person’s
(4) In considering a person’s decision making capacity under this Act,
any approved code of practice under section 198 must
be taken into account.
Section 198 allows the chief psychiatrist to approve a code of practice to
provide guidance on assessing whether a person has decision
making capacity.
This code is a notifiable instrument.
will and preferences and substitute decision making
Mental Health Act
enables a person with an existing or latent mental
disorder or mental illness to make provision, at a time when they have decision
making capacity, in anticipation of when they may lack that capacity in future,
including (in summary) provisions for:
• nominating someone to be the person’s ‘nominated
– the nominated person’s main function is
to help the person with a mental disorder or mental illness by ensuring that
that person’s interests are respected if the person requires treatment,
care or support for a mental disorder or mental illness;
they also have a right
to receive information, to be consulted about decisions in relation to the
treatment, care or support of the
person who nominated them and to undertake
other functions given by the Act. This does not provide a substitute decision
making power;
an advance agreement (s 26) which sets out for the person’s treating team
information the person considers relevant
to their treatment, care or support
and any preferences the person has for practical help they may need as a result
of their mental
disorder or mental illness – this agreement is placed on
someone’s medical record and provides information about the
wishes and preferences, to guide treating mental health professionals and
substitute decision makers (as set out below);
• making an advance consent direction (s 27), which allows a person to
make a direction about a range of matters to which they
consent or refuse
consent, in the event of them not having “decision-making capacity”
– these directions can cover
treatment; care or support; medications or
procedures, as well as directions about who may and may not be provided with
information
To be valid, any such direction must have involved discussion with the
treating team about possible options at a time when the person
had decision
making capacity. The administrative requirements for different treatment
provisions vary. For example, advance consent
directions for electroconvulsive
therapy and psychiatric surgery require a higher level of documentation and
witnessing than other
So far as application of these agreements or consent directions are
concerned, a mental health professional must, before giving treatment,
support to a person with a mental disorder or mental illness who lacks decision
making capacity, take reasonable steps to
find out whether an advance agreement
or advance consent direction is in force. If there is, then the mental health
professional
treating the person is bound by their instructions in that
agreement or direction so far as practicable (s 28). If the person has
decision making capacity and they resist the treatment that they have consented
to under the advance consent direction,
the Act is also clear that the treatment
may not be given. Section 28(3)(d) states that the health professionals must
not apprehend,
detain, restrain or use force to give effect to the direction. In
that case, an order must be sought from ACAT. Section 28(4) provides:
If an advance consent direction is in force in relation to a person but the
person resists being given treatment, care or support
to which they have
consented under the direction, a mental health professional may give the
treatment, care or support to the person
only if the ACAT, on application by the
mental health professional, orders that the treatment, care or support may be
Mental Health Act
sets out new arrangements between other substitute
decision makers and the person so far as mental health treatment is concerned.
Until 1 March 2016, under the Power of Attorney Act, ‘treatment for mental
illness’ was a special health care matter
under section 37(e). Because of
this, an attorney appointed by someone to make health care decisions was not
able to make decisions
related to mental health, and consent needed to be
obtained through ACAT under the
Mental Health (Treatment and Care) Act
. There was a similar exclusion under the ‘prescribed medical
procedures’
definition of
the Guardianship Act
These exclusions for the ‘treatment of
mental illness’ were removed in the amending legislation, and became
operational
at the same time as the new
Mental Health Act
. This means that
substitute decision-makers can now make decisions in relation to treatments for
mental illness, if they have power
to make other health decisions. So far as
advance agreements and advance consent directions are concerned, if the person
has a guardian
or an attorney, the consent of the guardian or attorney is not
required if consent is provided by the person in an advance agreement
consent direction
(4) respectively). The decision making
functions of a guardian or an enduring attorney must ‘be exercised taking
into account
the advance agreement or advance consent direction’
(3)). In the case of an attorney, under
section 31(2)
, they are required
to use the wishes expressed in these documents, when determining the
person’s wishes or needs under the
decision making principles in Schedule
1 of the Power of Attorney Act. Presumably, where these documents are silent on
treatment option that is not statutorily precluded, the general
powers of these people to make a substitute decision continue.
After it is decided to give treatment, care or support to a person, there are
strong duties to disclose information both to the person
and to other associated
people (such as nominated people, guardians or attorneys, health attorneys and
others), advising of the various
rights of the person under the
Mental Health
and more generally, including the right to a second opinion, to legal
advice, to nominating someone, and to make an advance agreement
consent direction
assessment and treatment orders
ACAT retains an important judicial role in relation to mental health orders
under the new legislation
A person with a mental illness or disorder
may apply for an Assessment Order for themselves (s 33) if they believe
themselves to
be, because of mental disorder or mental illness, unable to make
reasonable judgments about matters relating to their own health
unable to do something necessary for their own health or safety, or likely to do
serious harm to others. An application
can also be made by someone else on these
same grounds (s 34) or by the police when the person is alleged to have
committed an offence
(s 35). Assessment orders allow someone with a mental
illness or mental impairment to be assessed and, where necessary for this
occur, detained in a mental health facility during such an assessment (s
ACAT has power to act against the consent of someone in relation to an
emergency order for assessment when there is ‘a serious
concern about the
immediate safety of the person, the applicant for the order or another person
arising out of the application process’
(s 39). ACAT must provide the
chief psychiatrist with written notice of this serious concern (s 39(2)(a)) and
notify the Public Advocate
immediately after such order is made (s 41).
Before an involuntary treatment or other order is made, ACAT must undertake
an assessment (s 56), and must take into account ‘the
views and wishes of
the person, so far as they can be found out, including in an advance agreement;
and an advance consent direction’.
Under a psychiatric treatment order, the chief psychiatrist can impose a
range of involuntary processes (s 65), including confinement,
involuntary seclusion and forcible administration of medication, but only to the
degree that is reasonable and necessary
to prevent harm to the person or others,
or to ensure the person remains in custody under the order.
When a person with a mental disorder is assessed under an assessment order,
or is subject to an application for a mental health order
or a forensic mental
health order, ACAT may, instead, make a community care order (s 66). A
community care order can be made when
a person refuses to receive treatment,
care or support and ACAT believes on reasonable grounds that, because of their
mental disorder,
the person is doing or is likely to do serious harm to
themselves or someone else, or is suffering, or is likely to suffer, serious
mental or physical deterioration, to an extent that outweighs the person’s
right to refuse to consent. A community care order
can require:
• that the person be given treatment, care, support, or medication,
• that they undertake a counselling, training, therapeutic or
rehabilitation program,
• that their communication with other people be limited,
• that they live – or be detained – in an approved
community care facility, and/or
• that they not approach a specified place or person or undertake
stated activities.
If a person with a mental illness or mental disorder is under a mental health
order, and they contravene it, there are powers under
section 77 to give notice
to the person to comply and, if they do not, then authority to police to
apprehend the person and take
them to the relevant approved facility. If the
person absconds from the approved facility, there are powers under section 78 to
authorise police to return them there. In both cases, ACAT and the Public
Advocate must be notified of these actions in writing
within 12 hours.
Emergency detention is permitted under Chapter 6 of the Act. A police
officer or authorised ambulance paramedic may apprehend a person
and take the
person to an approved mental health facility if they believe on reasonable
grounds that the person has a mental disorder
or mental illness, and has
attempted or is likely to attempt suicide or to inflict serious harm on
themselves or another person (s
80(1)). Similarly, a doctor or mental health
officer may apprehend a person and take the person to an approved mental health
if they believe on reasonable grounds that the person who has a mental
disorder or mental illness that requires immediate treatment,
care or support in
a restrictive environment, or their condition is likely to deteriorate within 3
days to such an extent as to
require such treatment, care or support. In
addition, the person must have refused to receive that treatment, care or
support and
the detention must be necessary for the person’s health or
safety, social or financial wellbeing or for the protection of someone
the public (s 80(2)). ACAT must, on application, review the above decision of a
doctor or mental health officer within two
working days after the day the
application is made (s 80(3)).
Policy implications
Mental Health Act
seeks to embody many of the principles and aims of
the UN Convention. In particular, it focuses on involving patients as much as
possible in decision making, and provides a will and preference model in
relation to advance consent directions and advance agreements.
Where these
wishes are recorded in documents, but the person’s mental illness means
they fight against their previously expressed
will and preferences, the
direction and agreement provides a useful starting point for ACAT. These
documents help ACAT in considering
whether making a compulsory treatment order
is, first of all, consistent with the person’s will and preferences, as
before their decision making capacity was impaired. Once the matter
becomes one for a compulsory mental health order, ACAT becomes
the forum to
review all the evidence before making the order
However, the new legislation includes provisions which can both increase and
decrease compliance, because of their links to substitute
decision making
mechanisms which use a ‘best interests’ framework, and its own
acceptance of this as the basis for decisions
when someone is believed to have
no decision making capacity because of their mental illness. For example, the
introduction of mental
health decision making powers to an enduring power of
attorney to make substitute decisions could be argued to improve the possibility
of someone chosen by the person being able to ensure their wishes are honoured.
Where there is both an enduring power of attorney
and an advance consent
direction or advance agreement, this may well be the practical outcome.
However, if the person does not have
an advance consent direction or advance
agreement, then the decision making principles come under different legislation,
with different
principles of decision making.
In addition, because the legislation provides for compulsory treatment and
community care orders, which can be enforced against the
person’s will and
preferences, its consistency with the UN Convention can be debated. If,
however, one looks at these situations
in terms of other rights, like the right
to life, the right to health and wellbeing and to access to services to meet
needs, it may
be that these provisions could be framed as consistent. The issues
of compulsory treatment, restraint and seclusion raise complex
questions in a
range of other settings, where the
Mental Health Act
protections may not apply.
This is discussed later in
and Recommendation 16. The issue of forensic
detention remains an area which needs to be explored outside this reference, in
context of the UN Convention and issues related to criminal responsibility.
This is an area identified in Recommendation 15 for
further work.
Mental Health Act
provisions make progress towards the goal of the
UN Convention, they further highlight the complexity of having multiple
inconsistent
pieces of legislation dealing with impaired decision making
Treatment (Health Directions) Act 2006
The Health Directions Act allows a person with decision making capacity to
set down their wishes in relation to some specific health
care decisions in a
health direction, expressing their ‘will and preferences’ and
thereby constraining some substitute
decision making.
A health direction cannot be made by a person ‘for whom a guardian is
appointed’ or ‘who has impaired decision making
capacity’ (s
7). Issues of substitute decision making arise in two circumstances. The first
is if a person who makes a health
direction later loses their decision making
capacity and a guardian is appointed; the guardian must exercise any power to
to treatment in a manner consistent with the health direction (s 18),
giving effect to the person’s express will and preferences.
under s 68B of the Guardianship Act,
on application by the guardian, the
ACAT may revoke all or part of the health direction.
Issues of substitute decision making also arise when someone who makes a
health direction later makes an enduring power of attorney
that deals with
health matters. In that case, the health direction is automatically revoked (s
19), and the person’s will
and preferences as expressed in the health
direction no longer operate.
A health direction forms part of the ACT Health Directorate suite of advance
care planning tools (‘Respecting Patient Choices’),
include an enduring power of attorney and a statement of choices. This kit is
designed to help people think through treatment
choices, often in the context of
end of life choices. This has now been in place for two years, but the take-up
rate of the initiative
has been low. One reason for this may be the very
time-specific and condition-specific nature of many health care choices for
it is difficult to pre-plan.
3.3 Conclusions
in relation to existing ACT substitute decision making legislation
In summary:
Powers of Attorney Act
enables a legally competent person to
create an enduring power of attorney, which operates only when the
person’s decision
making capacity becomes impaired. The decision to
appoint an attorney, and the choice of the attorney, is a discretionary one,
has meant that the regulatory regime is less formal, and less subject to
regulatory oversight, than with guardianship, even though
the roles of attorney
and guardian can be quite similar in practice. Once the enduring powers of
attorney becomes operative, the
principal, whose decision making capacity has
become impaired, is exposed to the same risks, but without the same safeguards
as guardianship
• The various provisions relating to substitute decision making in
health legislation overlap and conflict with each other.
This creates an
administratively complex process for working out what and who has priority where
someone’s decision making
capacity becomes impaired. This is further
complicated if the cause of the impaired decision making capacity relates to
mental health,
given the ‘nominated person’, and ‘advance
agreements’ provisions and ‘advance consent directions’
only to people under the
Mental Health Act
• Different provisions take different approaches to the same end.
Sometimes a ‘best interests test’ is used, eg
when a guardian
decides a health matter under the Guardianship Act; sometimes a representative
‘will and preferences’
approach is used, eg when a guardian is
appointed after someone has executed a health direction, the guardian must
exercise their
power consistent with the health direction. At times, these
approaches conflict, eg at the intersection between health attorneys
Guardianship Act
• The new mental health legislation gives some effect to the supported
decision making requirements of the UN Convention. However,
these measures are
available only to those to whom the Act applies, and are themselves qualified.
For example, powers relating to
involuntary treatment, use of restraint, and
enforceable directions can be exercised in a person’s ‘best
without consent, or with consent through substitute decision
It is apparent that these different legislative provisions take different
approaches to what is essentially the same consideration:
the making of
decisions in circumstances where a person’s decision making capacity is
impaired. It is the Council’s
view that there would be significant
community benefit in establishing a single coherent framework, informed by
consistent underlying
principles, for all occasions when a decision must be made
by or for a person whose decision making ability is impaired.
4: ESSENTIAL ASPECTS OF GUARDIANSHIP LAW
Overview of this Part
The law of guardianship in the ACT is based on the same common law principles
as elsewhere in Australia. The idea of legal capacity
– when it exists,
when it is lost, and when it is limited or impaired – is central to
guardianship. For adults, the
issue of guardianship only arises if there is a
question about a person’s legal capacity.
The question of a person’s legal capacity arises principally when the
person has to make a decision. When a person is said
to lack the capacity to
make a decision, the law of guardianship allows substitute decision making, and
the usual criterion for that
substitute decision is the ‘best
interests’ of the person for whom the decision is made.
This Part describes the concept of legal capacity, the standard approach to
substitute decision making, and the related idea of ‘best
interests’.
The concept of guardianship arose from the feudal times as one of the
obligations of the Lord and then, later, the King to protect
those who were
vulnerable.
This became part of
the role of the Lord Chancellor, who led the courts’ equitable
as ‘the keeper of the
King’s conscience’.
The courts of equity exercised a ‘protective jurisdiction’ that
included powers in relation to the ‘persons and
property’ of
‘infants, idiots, lunatics and married
the oldest of
these ‘protective jurisdictions’ related to those people classified
as mentally incompetent.
time, law provided these crown ‘protections’ to more
Professor Terry Carney
provides a useful summary of this history so far as it relates to the first
three of these:
The ancient English common law institution of personal or property
guardianship of individuals with diminished competence was once
entirely the
province of superior courts under prerogative powers of the Crown, and covering
three vulnerable groups, namely children,
the mentally ill and those with an
intellectual disability. It was a state protective device governed by a best
interest test and
a paternalist philosophy, but financially accessible to very
The courts’ duty in their protective jurisdiction was to act in the
best interests of the people who were judged as lacking
legal capacity. The
judges were substitute decision-makers acting under the best interest paradigm,
much as courts and tribunals
still do today.
When a person (usually of wealth) was born with an intellectual disability,
the King became the trustee of that person’s property
and person for their
lifetime, and if someone became legally incompetent through development of a
mental illness or other
‘misfortune’
the King held the person’s property until they recovered. In both cases,
the person became ‘infantalized’
before the law, ‘having no
legal control or authority over their body or property’. The management of
their life and
property was undertaken by a ‘committee’ of their
estate, which could be one or more people, often family
Although this was seen
at that time as a benevolent and paternalistic approach, at times property was
usurped through such
arrangements.
A finding of legal
incompetence was often of indefinite duration, permanently impeding the
person’s exercise of their legal
rights, and transferring their property
to the crown at least for their life-time.
The common law principles which derive from this historical context presume
that every adult has legal capacity, in the full sense
of having both legal
standing and legal agency.
Capacity means it is ‘me’ creating my
own life – substitute decision making means it is ‘you’ making
(Comment at a public debate on Supported decision
Legal capacity underpins people’s power to make decisions for
themselves, including day to day decisions about:
• where to live
• who to live with
• what education and training to do
• what work to undertake
• how to spend leisure time
• what day to day decisions to make about food, clothes and everyday
things, and
• what to spend our money on.
It allows us to enter and enforce contracts, to exercise various civic and
community rights like voting and marriage, and to take
legal action to protect
his or her rights, or to be able to perform actions which have legal
Laws such as guardianship and mental health laws define circumstances when a
person is considered to have impaired or no legal capacity,
in the sense that
they are seen to have impaired or no legal agency; this is sometimes referred to
as ‘legal incompetence’.
Laws for powers of attorney anticipate the
possibility that legal capacity, in the sense of legal agency, will be lost or
up. If someone is found to ‘lack capacity’ or to be
‘legally incompetent’ they can be prevented from participating
many activities, and decisions about their life can be taken out of their hands.
It has been said that a ‘determination
of incompetence is in some cases a
stronger degradation of the human being than is being declared a
4.2 Substitute
decision making
The making of decisions is central to a person’s exercise of legal
agency. To fully understand a regime that is concerned with
decision making, it
is important to appreciate the nature of that decision making. A regime that
substitutes one person’s
decision for another assumes that the person
making the substitute decision is making a ‘normal’, rational,
and independent decision. In fact, people’s decisions are
often not rational, considered and independent, and often arrived
at with the
support of and involvement of others.
An appreciation of these unacknowledged features of ‘normal’
decision making provides an essential context for a discussion
people with impaired decision making ability. By the time a person reaches
adulthood they are often assumed to have
the ability to make decisions based on
knowing, for example:
• how to gather information about what they want to make a decision
• how to weigh up the information and work out what is the right
decision for them;
• how to make the decision, including seeking advice and delaying
• how to enact the decision – doing what is necessary to make it
Regardless of this people make decisions differently, depending on the
importance attached to the decision and emotions that are felt
at the time.
Some people, for example, are cautious, mulling over choices and sometimes, not
making a decision because it is too
hard. Another person may be risk averse.
Some people are systematic decision-makers who carefully weigh up all the
evidence before
deciding; others make decisions rapidly, with only partial
information, because of time constraints or because the outcome is not
Whatever the approach to decision making, most decisions have strong
emotional elements; people decide on the basis of their ‘will
preferences’, consistently with their values, within limits imposed by
financial and other constraints, and often unconsciously
influenced by other
considerations.
How quick come the reasons for approving what we
(Jane Austen ‘Persuasion’)
Much of the influencing conduct used in society, like advertising, recognises
the emotional overlay of rational decisions. An example
of the effect of
emotion on decisions is when the same mistake in choosing an option is made
repeatedly because of the feelings that
motivate the decision. People do not
necessarily learn from their mistaken choices – as would be rational
not always know or understand the non-rational feelings that
have led to the decision.
But decision making is still seen as the ‘rational’ act of an
individual. There is now significant evidence that most
people do not make many
of their decisions
‘rationally’.
decision is made and then justified by developing rational reasons for it.
A person’s perception of available choices in decision making is also
shaped by the values and examples they see and experience
in the society in
which they live. Judgements of what choices or decisions are wise, unwise,
normal or abnormal are shaped by these
experience and by personal values and
preferences. Being able to evaluate and make choices creates a life that a
person recognises
as their own. Sometimes a decision works out well and
sometimes not. In some instances a decision can be revisited because of more
information, and maybe the consequences of an earlier decision can be redressed
and maybe not. People enjoy the right, and run the
risk, of making a decision
that may or may not be a good one.
In liberal democracies there is an embedded, often unspoken, conception of
decision making as an isolated action of an individual
who ponders options alone
and then makes a decision about what they have reasoned is in their ‘own
good’. There are
many forms of informal decision making arrangements and
people often trust others to make decisions for them, through the granting
specific power, or spontaneously, or by agreement, in families, at workplaces
and in social groups. These allowances are not
usually characterised as
‘substitute’ decision making, because there is consent given to the
decision-maker and the decision
can usually be debated, varied or over-ridden by
the decision-maker. They are more in the nature of delegated decisions.
Such ‘supported’ decisions are commonplace whether people have
impaired decision making ability or not. As social and
relational beings,
people make decisions with and for others, particularly family and friends. A
Submission to the Council noted:
Chen is going out to dinner with someone special and he
asks his friend for advice about what he should wear.
Tasman wants to put up new curtains in her flat, so she
asks her mother and her partner to come with her to help choose the
[the idea of] supported decision making acknowledges the role of social
support in decision making by all people and also acknowledges
that few people
make decisions in isolation. Collaboration and relationship building to promote
autonomy and self-advocacy are core
values. In this way, supported decision
making reflects how most people make and weigh the choices in their
Most people seek and give advice, even about quite trivial decisions, from a
friend, a life partner, or someone who happens to be
nearby; in fact, it can be
seen as the wisest path because sometimes others see things differently, and
their insights might not
be affected by the same emotions. Different people may
be consulted for different decisions; for decisions involving technical issues,
for example, advice may be sought from a professional. In personal decisions
decision-makers often preferentially select advice
that supports their
preferences.
There are common barriers to a person’s making a decision, affecting
the decision making process from information gathering
and evaluation to making
and enacting the decision. The barriers can include lack of information, not
fully understanding the information
that is available, not knowing or
understanding the range of available choices or the implications of some
choices. As well there
are subjective barriers, such as a person’s
emotional state (eg relaxed, afraid, excited or depressed), their physical state
(eg tired, hungry or in pain), and even the time of day or place where the
decision is being made. Most people may have difficulty
making a decision, for
example, in a noisy and stressful place when they are tired and under time
pressure, or when they feel threatened,
or where they have previously had a bad
experience.
‘Best interests’
decision making
what is best for me.
‘Will, preferences and rights’
based decision making
– either on my own, with
support or, if I am not able to decide for a particular reason, with someone I
have chosen as my representative,
standing in MY shoes, not their own!
There is a problematic culture surrounding the lives of
people with disabilities. This includes a significant preoccupation with
management and the pervasive attitudes that people with disabilities do not know
their own interests, and therefore need protection
from themselves and from
society. Current guardianship practices are a product of this culture and major
cultural change will be
needed to address this.
Advocacy for Inclusion, Submission 6, page 16.
When a person is found to lack capacity to make their own decisions, the
usual legal approach in the ACT and elsewhere has been for
another person
– sometimes called a guardian, financial manager or an attorney when
formally appointed –to be as substitute
decision-maker on behalf of the
person said to ‘lack capacity’ For ease of discussion in the
following paragraphs, a
person involved in any of these roles in a formal way is
called a ‘substitute decision-maker’, the person subject to
substitute decision making is called the ‘person’, and the
relationship is called ‘guardianship’.
Laws regarding legal capacity usually require the substitute decision-maker
to make decisions in the ‘best interests’
of the person. This
privileges the substitute decision-maker’s view of what is in the best
interests of the person over the
person’s own wishes, if expressed, and
potentially over their rights. Although some laws, like the current ACT
Guardianship
Act, refer to the person’s having views and wishes that must
be considered in making the decision, this obligation remains
subject to the
substitute decision-maker’s own view that the decision will not
significantly adversely affect the interests
of the person.
This ‘best interests’ approach has a strong paternalistic
character: it allows one person to impose on another what they
think is best for
the other person. This is fundamentally inconsistent with the UN
Convention’s principles set out in the
Preamble, which recognises, in
paragraph (n) the ‘importance for persons with disabilities of their
individual autonomy and
independence, including the freedom to make their own
choices’. Paragraph (o) also considers ‘that persons with
disabilities
should have the opportunity to be actively involved in decision
making processes about policies and programmes, including those directly
concerning them’. It also fails to comply with Article 12(2) which
requires recognition that ‘persons with disabilities
enjoy legal capacity
on an equal basis with others in all aspects of life’. Nonetheless it is a
view deeply embedded in our
social and legal cultures and practices.
Susan is a 30 year old woman with an intellectual
disability. She lives at home with her parents who are her guardians. Susan
met a man with an intellectual disability at her work and she wants to have
a sexual relationship with him. Her parents don’t
want her to become
sexually active because they are afraid she might become pregnant, so they will
not allow her to be alone with
her boyfriend.
Given the nature of paternalism, the best interests’ approach carries
the risk that a substitute decision-maker may, consciously
or not, adopt their
own preference as being in the ‘best interests’ of the person. This
issue has been discussed by
various courts in general terms as regards the
complex interrelationships between the interests of the person being cared for
the interests of the carer, and in case specific circumstances such as those
relating to sterilisation of women with disabilities.
The blending of interests
creates vulnerability in many decision making
arrangements,
and can undermine
supported decision making legitimacy. It was identified in NSW research as a
real impediment in its Supported Decision
making pilot, which is discussed
further in Part
The ability of a substitute decision-makers to simply make the decision can
mean that they do not consider less rights-restrictive
ways of addressing their
concerns, nor talk to the person both about those concerns and about what
options are possible. In relation
to Susan’s example in the box on this
page, the parents may lack the skills to explain contraception and even sexual
to their daughter and they may not know someone who could. Even
though there are useful resources
they may not have access to these, and their principal concern to prevent
pregnancy does not make allowance for the will, preferences
and rights of their
daughter to have a sexual relationship. Their view that the prevention of
pregnancy is categorically in their
daughter’s best interest is, at the
same time, a significant restriction on her human right to seek sexual
expression.
This concern was
raised in a Submission to the
4.4 Conclusions about
current substitute ‘best interests’ provisions
There are inherent difficulties with substitute decision making within a
‘best interests’ paradigm.
• Most people with full capacity make decisions that are not wholly
rational but have strong emotional elements. People decide
on the basis of their
‘will and preferences’, consistently with their values, and within
limits imposed by financial
and other constraints.
• Most people with full capacity do not make decisions alone.
‘Supported’ decisions are commonplace in everyday
living. As social
and relational beings, people make decisions with and for others, particularly
family and friends.
• People with limited or impaired decision making ability have/should
have the same entitlement to make supported decisions
which take account of
their ‘will and preferences.’
• The blending of interests in the ‘best interests’
approach of substitute decision making creates vulnerability
arrangements by not taking account of the supported person’s ‘will
and preferences’ and thereby undermining
the legitimacy of the substitute
PART 5: THE UN
CONVENTION ON THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
Overview of this Part
The Council has been asked to consider the impact of the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (the
UN Convention), and
other international human rights instruments. In the Council’s view, the
UN Convention has a very significant
impact on principles for guardianship and
management of property in the ACT. The Council’s Report focuses
significantly on
the impact of the UN Convention. No other international human
rights instrument adds anything of relevance, though the legal interpretation
these other instruments, recorded in the decisions of international human rights
bodies, may include lessons for the interpretation
of the UN Convention.
This Part sets out the background, and Australia’s approach, to the UN
Convention, before describing its content and effect.
Attention is paid in
particular to what the UN Convention says about legal capacity and decision
5.1 Background
The UN Convention was adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations
on 13 December
The UN Convention consolidates existing international human rights obligations
stipulated under the Charter of the United Nations,
the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,
International Covenants on Human
in order to clarify their
application to people with
disabilities.
It is described as the first comprehensive human rights charter of its kind in
5.2 Australia’s
approach to its obligations under the UN Convention
When Australia signed the UN Convention on 30 March 2007 and ratified it on
17 July 2008, its ratification was subject to a declaration
interpretation of its obligations:
Australia recognizes that persons with disability enjoy legal capacity on an
equal basis with others in all aspects of life. Australia
declares its
understanding that the UN Convention allows for fully supported or substituted
decision making arrangements, which provide
for decisions to be made on behalf
of a person, only where such arrangements are necessary, as a last resort and
subject to safeguards;
Australia recognizes that every person with disability has a right to respect
for his or her physical and mental integrity on an equal
basis with others.
Australia further declares its understanding that the UN Convention allows for
compulsory assistance or treatment
of persons, including measures taken for
compulsory assistance or treatment of persons, including measures taken for the
of mental disability, where such treatment is necessary, as a last
resort and subject to
safeguards.
Australia’s interpretive declaration can be seen as undermining its
commitment to articles 12 (equal before the law), 17 (equal
respect for the
physical and mental integrity), and 18 (liberty of movement). This is
problematic given the importance of these
articles and their effect on the one
in five Australians who are people with
disabilities.
Effectively, Australia has not wholly committed to supported decision making,
and has reserved the right to use substituted decision
making ‘when
necessary, as a last resort and subject to safeguards’.
The UN Committee, in its response to Australia’s first periodic report
under the UN Convention,
the reference to the ALRC into barriers to equality before the law for people
with disabilities. It expressed concern ‘about
the possibility of
[Australian law] maintaining the regime of substitute decision making’ and
the absence of a detailed and
viable framework for supported decision making in
the exercise of legal capacity’. It also urged Australia to provide
in cooperation with people with disabilities and their organisation,
for ‘all actors, including civil servants, judges and
workers’ in relation to the recognition of legal capacity and the use of
supported decision
The Committee also raised various concerns about the deprivation of liberty of
people with disabilities and the authorisation of
medical treatment without free
and informed consent, including involuntary treatment arrangements and
restrictive practices.
Committee specifically urged Australia to reconsider its interpretive
declarations with a view to withdrawing
It remains unclear what the precise effect of the interpretative declaration
may be on Australia’s implementation of the UN
Convention. However, it
clearly suggested a reluctance to fully champion a shift to a rights-based
approach to disability at the
Commonwealth government level. In its Discussion
Paper, the ALRC said that Australia’s interpretative declaration to
12 may act as a ‘handbrake on
The ALRC Final Report
address the concerns of the UN Committee in relation to decision making in its
recommendations, as discussed in Part 6
5.3 Revolutionary
The UN Convention has fundamentally shifted the approach to guardianship law.
Its preamble sets an ambitious aim:
[t]o promote and protect the rights and dignity of persons with disabilities
... to redress the profound social disadvantage of persons
with disabilities and
promote their participation in the civil, political, economic, social and
cultural spheres with equal opportunities,
in both developing and developed
The UN Convention sees disability as resulting from ‘the interaction
between persons with impairments and attitudinal and environmental
barriers that
hinder their full and effective participation in society on an equal basis with
The UN Convention
places the onus on states to overcome the extensive discrimination still faced
by people with disabilities, which
is often associated with poverty and
exclusion. Decision making – both as an element of the individual’s
autonomy and
independence and in relation to policies and programs concerning
people with disabilities
is a key focus of the UN Convention. The UN Convention also recognises the
importance of family as ‘the natural and
fundamental group unit of
society’ that should also be protected and assisted to ‘enable
families to contribute towards
the full and equal enjoyment of the rights of
persons with disabilities’.
The aim of the UN Convention is to ensure the full access and participation
of people with disabilities in society, as reflected in
its general principles
set out in Article 3:
(a) respect for inherent dignity, individual autonomy, including the freedom
to make one’s own choices, and independence of
(b) non-discrimination;
(c) full and effective participation and inclusion in society;
(d) respect for difference and acceptance of persons with disabilities as
part of human diversity and humanity;
(e) equality of opportunity;
(f) accessibility;
(g) equality between men and women;
(h) respect for the evolving capacities of children with disabilities and
respect for the right of children with disabilities to preserve
identities.
The UN Convention outlines a broad range of obligations and rights,
• the implementation of discrimination awareness raising programs
across society including within families (Article 8)
• improved accessibility to buildings, transport and other services
(Article 9)
• the right to life and to humanitarian assistance (Articles 10 and
equal recognition before the law, including legal capacity and
supported decision making (Article 12)
• access to justice (Article 13)
• liberty and security of the person (Article 14)
• freedom from torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment (Article 15)
• freedom from exploitation, violence and abuse (Article 16)
• right to respect for physical and mental integrity (Article 17)
• rights to liberty of movement and nationality (Article
• right to live independently, with whom and where they choose and be
included in the community on the same basis as everyone
else (Article 19)
• to have means of personal mobility (Article 20)
• the right to freedom of expression, opinion and access to information
(Article 21)
• respect for privacy (Article 22)
• respect for home and family (including all matters relating to
marriage, family, parenthood and relationships) on an equal
basis with others
(Article 23)
• right to education (Article 24); right to highest standard of health
without discrimination (Article 25)
• right to comprehensive habilitation and rehabilitation to enable
people with disabilities to gain and maintain maximum independence,
participation and ability (Article 26)
• right to work and employment without discrimination (Article 27)
• the right to an adequate standard of living and social protection
(Article 28)
• the right to participation in political and public life (Article 29),
• the right to participate in cultural life, recreation, leisure and
sport (Article 30).
Since the adoption of the UN Convention there has been a fundamental shift in
the discourse on disability and the way that it is legislated.
Convention significantly reframes the principles which have underpinned
guardianship legislation. At its core the UN Convention
advocates for a shift
from the ‘medical’, ‘best interest’ model utilised
previously, to a social model and
human rights based approach. It configures
disability as complex and varying rather than as an absolute
and recognises that
people are disabled by social and environmental factors rather than their bodies
It obliges States to
reduce social and environmental barriers through the provision of
infrastructure, support and services, which
promote participation and autonomy
and enable accessibility and inclusion of people with disabilities. It is
significant not only
as a model and impetus for legislation, but also as a
powerful tool for public awareness of the difficulties faced by people with
disabilities in living autonomously, and for policies that direct resources
towards facilities, infrastructure and services to support
people with
disabilities.
The UN Convention is revolutionary in reconceiving the rights of people with
disabilities as deserving the same focus and commitment
by governments as shown
to people without disability.
The key principles which underpin the UN Convention include individual autonomy,
respect for dignity, independence and freedom to
make one’s own choices,
non-discrimination, participation and inclusion, respect for difference and
acceptance of diversity,
equality of opportunity and between men and women,
accessibility and respect for the evolving capacity and identity of children.
Respect for autonomy presumes that all people have legal capacity, rather
than presumptively assuming lack of capacity due to disability.
Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities describes these two parts
of capacity as being ‘a holder of rights
and an actor under
The UN Convention recognises that decision making is core to exercising these
rights. The nature of decision making is not independent
but interdependent,
and the UN recognises the reality that most people, in making decisions, consult
with others for advice. It
therefore views the decision making of people with
disabilities similarly,
the basis for supported decision making. It also recognises that a
person’s ability to exercise their legal capacity
may vary according to
the decision, the decision making context, and the availability of support in
the decision making. The UN
Convention advocates for a transition from a
‘best interests’ substitute decision making approach to a
rights-based framework,
which emphasises respect for the will and preference of
the individual through ‘supported’ decision making.
5.4 Underlying themes in
the UN Convention
5.4.1 Equal recognition
before the law
One of the fundamental principles which underpins the UN Convention is
equality before the law, as reflected in Articles 5 and 12
of the UN Convention.
Article 5 recognises that all people ‘are entitled without any
discrimination to the equal protection
and equal benefit of the law’. It
follows that people with disabilities, guaranteed equal and effective legal
protection, must
be accorded reasonable accommodations to enjoy equality.
Article 12 outlines the right of people with disabilities to recognition as
‘people before the law’, in all contexts,
equally with people who do
not have disabilities. This article has been highlighted by Australian state
and federal guardianship
inquiries as foundational in the shift to an emphasis
on the will and preferences of the
individual,
to more universal conceptions of legal capacity and to a paradigm shift from
substituted to supported decision making.
It obliges States to ensure that they have appropriate measures in place to
provide access to support that is necessary or required
for people with
disabilities to exercise their decision making ability, and requires states to
put in place safeguards to ensure
that measures relating to legal capacity do
not violate international human rights law. In full, Article 12 reads:
1. States Parties reaffirm that persons with disabilities have the right to
recognition everywhere as persons before the law
2. States Parties shall recognize that persons with disabilities enjoy legal
capacity on an equal basis with others in all aspects
3. States Parties shall take appropriate measures to provide access by
persons with disabilities to the support they may require in
exercising their
legal capacity.
4. States Parties shall ensure that all measures that relate to the exercise
of legal capacity provide for appropriate and effective
safeguards to prevent
abuse in accordance with international human rights law. Such safeguards shall
ensure that measures relating
to the exercise of legal capacity respect the
rights, will and preferences of the person, are free of conflict of interest and
influence, are proportional and tailored to the person’s
circumstances, apply for the shortest time possible and are subject
review by a competent, independent and impartial authority or judicial body. The
safeguards shall be proportional to the
degree to which such measures affect the
person’s rights and interests.
5. Subject to the provisions of this article, States Parties shall take all
appropriate and effective measures to ensure the equal
right of persons with
disabilities to own or inherit property, to control their own financial affairs
and to have equal access to
bank loans, mortgages and other forms of financial
credit, and shall ensure that persons with disabilities are not arbitrarily
of their property.
5.4.2 Personal autonomy
and self-agency
Personal autonomy and self-agency are foundational principles of the UN
Convention and are reflected
throughout.
States must ensure
that laws are applied on an equal basis and that accommodations and assistance
are provided to ensure personal
autonomy and self-agency. Article 13 obliges
states to ensure that procedural and age-appropriate accommodations are made to
the role of people with disabilities in legal proceedings, as well as
ensuring those working in the administration of justice have
been appropriately
trained. Article 17 guarantees equal respect for the physical and mental
integrity of people with disabilities;
article 18 guarantees liberty of
movement, and nationality; and Article 20 obliges states to ensure that people
with disabilities
enjoy independence and personal mobility through measures
which facilitate access and assistance.
Article 19 guarantees the right of people with disabilities to live
independently and in the community, allowing all people to carry
out their lives
with the same freedoms and autonomy afforded by inclusion and participation in
the community. This places a substantial
obligation on states to ensure that
the necessary support, assistance and accommodations are made to allow
self-agency. Article
21 guarantees freedom of expression and access to
information; states must ensure this through provision of accessible information
by public bodies as well as encouraging private entities and the mass media to
deliver information in accessible and usable formats.
Throughout the UN Convention it is clear that conceptions of autonomy and
self-agency extend beyond mere ‘non-interference’,
and champion
‘empowerment’.
requires a significant shift in the paradigm of decision making for people with
disabilities.
5.4.3 Inclusion and
participation
The social approach to disability that underpins the UN Convention emphasises
inclusion and participation. This relies on a re-conceptualisation
disability such that, ‘whilst a person might have an impairment their
disability comes from the way society treats them,
or fails to support
It follows that
ensuring the social participation of people with disabilities requires the
adjustment of social and legal mechanisms.
One example of the focus on participation in the UN Convention is in article
guarantees to people with disabilities participation in and
access to work and employment on an equal basis with others in the public
private sectors. This includes freedom to work in a chosen labour market, free
from discrimination relating to disability in
recruitment and promotion. States
must ensure that work conditions, and remuneration allow equal participation,
and must promote
employment and training opportunities as well as career
advancement to people with disabilities.
The approach is also evident in articles 29 and 30, which obliges States to
ensure participation. This is clearest in article 30,
which highlights the right
of people with disabilities to participate equally in cultural life through
accessible cultural materials
and activities; for example, states must enable
people with disabilities the opportunity to develop their creative and artistic
and ensure intellectual property laws do not unreasonably limit access
to cultural materials.
5.4.4 Accessibility
Accessibility is as key part of addressing social and environmental barriers
to people with disabilities’ participation and
autonomy. Article 9
highlights the significance of accessibility in order to enable people with
disabilities to ‘live independently
and participate fully in all aspects
of life’. Again, it shifts the burden to States to ensure that there is
adequate infrastructure
to allow people adequate access to ‘the physical
environment, to transportation, to information and communications ... and
other facilities and services open or provided to the public, both in urban and
rural areas’. Additionally Article 9 requires
the implementation of
minimum standards for accessibility of services and facilities, and the
implementation of accessibility mechanisms
by private entities. This includes
not only physical access but also access to information and communication
technologies and systems.
5.5 Decision making
under the UN Convention
In its commentary on Article 12, the UN Committee has identified common
substitute decision making
Substitute decision making regimes can take many different forms, including
plenary guardianship, judicial interdiction and partial
guardianship. However,
these regimes have certain common characteristics: they can be defined as
systems where (i) legal capacity
is removed from a person, even if this is just
in respect of a single decision; (ii) a substitute decision-maker can be
by someone other than the person concerned, and this can be done
against his or her will; and (iii) any decision made by a substitute
decision-maker is based on what is believed to be in the objective ‘best
interests’ of the person concerned, as opposed
to being based on the
person’s own will and preferences.
The UN Committee is clear that substitute decision making does not comply
with the UN Convention, leading to ‘States’
obligation to replace
substitute decision making regimes by supported decision making’. This
requires ‘both the abolition
of substitute decision making regimes and the
development of supported decision making alternatives’. The UN Committee
that ‘development of supported decision making systems in parallel
with the maintenance of substitute decision making regimes
is not sufficient to
comply with article 12 of the
Convention’.
5.5.1 The exercise of
will, preferences and rights under the UN Convention
The UN Convention’s recognition of individual autonomy carries with it
recognition of the paramount status of a person’s
own will, preferences
and rights in decision making. Determination by a third party of what is in a
person’s ‘best interests’
is fundamentally at odds with the UN
Convention.
People’s wishes and preferences create their vision for their lives and
provide the colour and texture which reflects how people
see themselves. Values
and preferences vary among individuals, according to relationships, experiences,
and social, cultural and
economic circumstances. However, whether or not they
have a disability, a person’s ability to give effect to their wishes
preferences is often limited because of, for example, funds, time and distance.
As a result, a person with a disability will
not necessarily be able to enact
their wishes simply because amending legislation changes the base of decision
making from ‘best
interests’ substitute decision making to supported
decision making based on the ‘will, preferences and rights’
person. A person with a disability will be subject to the same limitations that
apply to every adult.
5.5.2 Impact of legacy
of disadvantage for people with disabilities
For people with disabilities the ordinary limitations, to which all people
are subject, are often compounded by the historic legacy
of discrimination and
unequal opportunities. For example, the ACOSS Report
Poverty in Australia
shows that 53% of
people with a disability participated in the labour force, compared to 83% of
people without a disability. This
affects the incidence of households living in
poverty, with 44.5% of households where someone has a disability having an
income less
than 60% of median household income, compared to 27.5% of all
households. Additionally, over 800,000 people with disabilities receive
Disability Support Pension. Where households are dependent on the Disability
Support Pension alone, more than 48% are receiving
less than 50% of median
household income. None of these figures takes into account the extra costs of
living with a disability.
Overall the choices of people with disabilities are
limited proportionally more than the choices of other people, because of
lack of economic opportunities, and additional costs related to
disability.
Some of these considerations can limit the ability of all people to exercise
legal agency. Limited financial resources can prevent
people from contracting
or entering financial arrangements such as entering a mortgage to buy a house.
It can mean people cannot
easily pay their bills to access services. It can
mean that people whose rights are violated may have limited resources to enforce
those rights. Even when decision making ability for people with disabilities is
dealt with in a normalised way, based on will, preferences
and rights rather
than on the basis of disability-based legal incapacity, it is often only a floor
of equal treatment that has been
established. Many other forms of inequality
(mostly economic in nature) affect ability to enact wishes and exercise rights.
example, in 2014 the Australian Productivity Commission Inquiry Report noted
that only about 8% of households would meet income and
assets tests for legal
and commented that:
The hard reality is that the cost of legal representation is beyond the reach
of many, probably most, ordinary Australians. ... In
theory, access to that
legal system is available to all. In practice, access is limited to
substantial, business enterprises, the
very wealthy, and those who are provided
with some form of
assistance.
Lack of access to services can make it difficult for someone to be ‘an
actor under law’ in the words of the UN Committee
but this is not a
diminution of their legal capacity. Legal capacity exists and continues,
whether or not it is being exercised
at any particular time. The UN Convention
makes clear that this is so for people with disabilities as much as for anyone:
they retain
their legal personhood regardless of the extent to which their
ability to make decisions may be impaired.
UN Convention and Substitute decision making
The UN Convention has played a fundamental role in advocating for a shift
from substitute to supported decision making. This shift
aligns with the UN
Convention’s core underpinnings of personal autonomy and dignity to ensure
participation and inclusion in
society on an equal
The Guardianship Act
needs significant amendment of its substitute decision making provisions to
follow the UN Convention’s
lead in moving away from a model of disability,
which positions people with disabilities as objects of care and protection. The
intention of the UN Convention is to instead provide people with disabilities
with the necessary support to make decisions about
their own life on an equal
basis with other members of society.
The appointment of substitute decision-makers under the Guardianship Act is
based on a medicalised rather than social approach to
disability: ACAT
determines whether a person has impaired decision making ability on a written
application that is accompanied by
medical, psychological or other professional
reports about that person’s decision making ability (Guardianship Act s
The considerations for
ACAT in appointing a guardian are only whether there is a risk to the person's
health, welfare or property,
whether the person's needs will be met, or how the
person's interests will be affected (s 7(1)).
The dualist approach of the Guardianship Act, distinguishing only between
capacity and lack of capacity, fails to reflect the contextual
decision making ability and fails to consider the possibility of support in
decision making. Once appointed, a guardian
has expansive powers which deny a
person autonomy and equal participation, as required by the UN Convention. The
powers extend to making decisions for that person which relate
to their living arrangements, education or training, whether they
can work and
the nature of their employment, providing consent for medical treatment and
engaging in legal proceedings (s 7(3)).
The limitation on powers – that
they be ‘no more restrictive of the person’s freedom of decision and
action than
is necessary to achieve the purpose of the order’ (s 11)
– does not change the basic nature of the guardian’s power
substitute decision-maker. To comply with the Australia’s obligations
under the UN Convention, the Guardianship Act must
abandon its approach of
‘best interests’ substitute decision making’, and adopt a
model of supported decision making.
5.6 Changing the basis
for decision making in the ACT to comply with the UN Convention
The purpose expressed in the UN Convention is:
to promote, protect and ensure the full and equal enjoyment of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms by all persons with disabilities;
and to promote
respect for their inherent dignity.
Human Rights Act
recognises similar rights and requires that ACT laws be
interpreted in a way that is compatible with human rights. International
such as the UN Convention is not self-executing in Australian law, and needs
local legislation to enable it have legal force,
such as the ACT’s Human
Rights Act. The
Human Rights Act
obliges ACT Public Authorities, including ACT
Government agencies and those performing outsourced Government work, to act and
decisions consistently with human rights. Section 31 states that
International law, including instruments like the UN Convention,
can be used in
interpreting rights. This is particularly relevant for
, which provides that everyone has the right to recognition as a
person before the law, and has the right to enjoy his or her human
without any distinction or discrimination of any kind.
also provides
that no one may be subjected to medical or scientific experimentation or
treatment without his or her free consent.
These sections are implemented in
practice by provisions that require all ACT law to be interpreted in a way that
is compatible with
human rights, and give people who claim that their human
rights have been breached the ability to take proceedings directly to the
Supreme Court.
Under Article 12 of the Convention and the
Human Rights Act
, all people with
disabilities have a right to recognition before the law and to enjoy legal
capacity on an equal basis with everyone
else. These provisions mean that adult
people with impaired decision making ability have a right to exercise their
legal capacity
through making decisions with or without support, based upon
their will, preferences and rights, subject to appropriate safeguards.
based upon:
• a presumption of legal capacity;
• a recognition of their will, preferences and rights as the basis for
decision making; and
• an acknowledgement that support must be provided to maximise the
exercise of their ability whenever possible.
‘Substitute’ decision making is currently used in the
Guardianship Act and other ACT legislation relating to people with
decision making ability. This provides for a ‘substitute’ decision
to be made on behalf of a person with impaired
decision making ability, based on
the substitute decision-maker’s view about what is in that person’s
‘best interests’.
To comply with the UN Convention, all relevant
legislation, policy and procedure for people with impaired decision making
must move to ‘supported decision making’, based on the will,
preferences and rights of that person.
Recommendation 1:
The Council recommends that the ACT Government adopt a decision making
paradigm for people in the ACT with impaired decision making
ability that
replaces a ‘best interests’-based substitute decision making model
with a ‘will, preferences and rights’-based
supported decision
making model and that this model be reflected in legislation.
5.7 Legal capacity under the UN Convention
The concept of ‘legal capacity’ under the UN Convention has been
discussed by the UN Committee on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities
Committee’).
Committee makes the point that article 12, paragraph 1 recognises that:
Every human being is respected as a person possessing legal personality,
which is a prerequisite for the recognition of a person’s
legal capacity.
Concerning legal capacity, the UN Committee says:
Article 12, paragraph 2 recognizes that persons with disabilities enjoy legal
capacity on an equal basis with others in all areas
of life. Legal capacity
includes the capacity to be both a holder of rights and an actor under the law.
Legal capacity to be a holder
of rights entitles the person to full protection
of his or her rights by the legal system. Legal capacity to act under the law
the person as an agent who can perform acts with legal effect ...
The UN Committee explains that ‘Legal capacity and mental capacity are
distinct concepts’:
Legal capacity is the ability to hold rights and duties (legal standing) and
to exercise these rights and duties (legal agency). It
is the key to accessing
meaningful participation in society. Mental capacity refers to the decision
making skills of a person, which
naturally vary from one person to another and
may be different for a given person depending on many factors, including
environmental
and social factors. Under article 12 of the Convention, perceived
or actual deficits in mental capacity must not be used as justification
denying legal capacity.
This distinction is not well-understood:
In most of the State party reports that the Committee has examined so far,
the concepts of mental and legal capacity have been conflated
so that where a
person is considered to have impaired decision making skills, often because of a
cognitive or psychosocial disability,
his or her legal capacity to make a
particular decision is consequently removed. This is decided simply on the basis
of the diagnosis
of a disability (status approach), or where a person makes a
decision that is considered to have negative consequences (outcome approach),
where a person’s decision making skills are considered to be deficient
(functional approach). In all these approaches, a
person’s disability
and/or decision making skills are taken as legitimate grounds for denying his or
her legal capacity and
lowering his or her status as a person before the law.
Importantly, the UN Committee states:
Article 12 does not permit such discriminatory denial of legal capacity, but
rather requires that support be provided in the exercise
of legal capacity.
In light of the UN Convention’s approach to legal capacity, the current
approaches to guardianship and substitute decision making
are as archaic as the
language of the common law relating to ‘fools natural’,
‘imbeciles’ and ‘lunatics’.
This protective approach
reinforces the ‘othered’ nature of people with disabilities, and as
such is an instrument of
their legal segregation from the rights of other
adults. Many people with disabilities reject notions of state imposed
protection and of having their ‘own good’
determined by someone else, with little or no capacity to make decisions about
It is clear from this that the language that is used is important for what it
conveys and implies. In the view of the ALRC, ‘[e]ven
‘capacity’ carry some of the connotations of previous times.
‘Capacity’ is regularly confused with
‘legal capacity’,
and ‘legal capacity’ is regularly conflated with ‘mental
capacity’. The ALRC
decided that, ‘[t]o avoid such confusion and to
direct reform towards supported decision making’ it would use the word
‘ability’, emphasising that ‘the focus should be on assessing
how the individual can be supported to exercise their
ability’. The
Council advocates the use of that same language to mark this shift in emphasis.
It is the Council’s view
that to avoid confusion over the meaning of the
word ‘capacity’ in the context of decision making, it is preferable
use instead the term ‘decision making ability’.
Because of the different uses of the words ‘capacity’ and
‘incapacity’ in different Acts, the Council considers
further work
is required to address this and sets out a proposal to achieve this in Part 10,
recommendation 14. Appendix 2 sets
out some of the other legislation which will
need to be altered to ensure that the language used does not confuse the terms
them consistent the approach across all ACT legislation. The next
section set out in broad terms the options for reforming the substitute
making laws in the ACT to ensure compliance with the UN Convention.
5.7 Law reform options
Another preliminary question is how to achieve the paradigm shift required by
the UN Convention. The Council’s consultations
generated almost universal
support in written submissions for reform consistent with the UN Convention and
the ALRC Final Report.
Concerns raised were not about the spirit of these
reforms, but rather about how the reforms would be further developed and the
need for a co-operative approach with the legal and medical profession, carers,
advocates and people with disabilities, the need
for a period of education and
adjustment and testing of what was possible for people with significant levels
of impaired decision
making ability, using a supported decision making
The Council has
considered these concerns, and addressed them through proposing a significant
transition period to the generally
desired endpoint of compliance with the UN
Convention, as discussed later.
There has already been significant effort made towards supported decision
making in a number of ACT forums, including in ACAT, in
Disability ACT and in
some of the work practices described by the Public Advocate’s office, and
Mental Health Act
. There is also more pilot work on supported
decision making being conducted in the ACT and elsewhere. However, these
are ahead of the ACT law on guardianship and other substitute decision
making arrangements. To broaden compliance with the UN Convention
proposals of the ALRC, a statutory schema that is internally consistent and fit
for purpose is now necessary. The Council
proposes this be implemented in a
staged manner, moving to a single or common statutory approach to decision
making for people whose
decision making is impaired.
This could occur in a range of ways:
• A single Act on Supported Decision making, of the kind recently
legislated in the Irish
and previously
legislated in England.
approach replaces the provisions of the various Acts which relate to substitute
and best interest decision making, with an Act
setting out the new legislative
framework proposed in this Report with a cross referral to the new Act’s
provisions within
• A common set of provisions inserted into each of the relevant Acts
consistent with the framework proposed; or
• Amendments firstly made to the Guardianship Act alone, with a plan
for action on the other Acts which also do not comply.
There are arguments for each of these options. The first marks a significant
paradigm shift and produces legislation which could
form a model for other
Australian jurisdictions, all of which are considering making similar changes.
It allows a single shift to
occur, though there may well be options for
different commencement dates for different areas. There will, of course, need
consequential amendments to other Acts, if this model is chosen, as would
be the case with any other option. However, a single Act
may be seen as too big
a step by some. The second option is a mid-point, which requires multiple
significant changes, but which
allows the continuation of known Acts, with new
principles and decision making, safeguards and other provisions which are
across each one. The third option would be a preliminary step to
later adoption of either the first or second option, as other Acts
would remain
inconsistent with the provisions of the UN Convention and would require
Whichever implementation option is preferred, the proposed shift in the
underlying philosophy of the law on decision making in the
ACT is to one which
is compliant with the UN Convention and the ALRC Final Report which requires
clear a legislative statement which
breaks from ‘best interests’
substitute decision making. In its place there should be a system of supported
making to give effect to a person’s will, preferences and rights,
with the possibility of co-decision making when a higher
level of support is
required in some cases through a rights-based approach to representative
decision making when no form of supported
decision making is possible.
This is a significant practical and philosophical shift. This shift will
require a period of transition, where the change to the
law is only part of the
story. A transitional period will be needed for those who are currently under
guardianship arrangements
or where Enduring Powers of Attorney are operative, so
they and their supporters are able to make a transition to the new
arrangements.
A clear statement of principle by the Government to its commitment to the UN
Convention’s important goals in relation to moving
from substitute
decision making, based on a best interest’ paradigm, to a ‘will,
preferences and rights’ based
supported decision making framework is a
crucial and significance first step to developing the new mechanisms and
processes required
to implement the change. To facilitate this transformation,
the Council proposes the Government consider an exposure draft Bill,
significant period for refinement, to address concerns, to allow education and
adjustment and to establish the mechanisms
that may be needed to provide
administrative and practical support for these changes.
The Council’s preferred law reform option is the first – the
enactment of a new overarching Supported Decision making
Act which would apply
to all relevant civil legislation in the ACT and consequential amendment to
other legislation. As indicated,
this model has recently been adopted in the
Irish Republic in its
Assisted Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015
this option is not accepted, the Council recommends the second option for the
insertion in all relevant ACT legislation of a
standardised model of supported
decision making, consistent with the recommended policy change. If neither of
these two options
is accepted, the Council proposes implementation of its third
option – the insertion in the Guardianship Act
of a statutory model
of supported decision making consistent with the change of policy and principles
recommended above. However,
this last option will leave a number of other
significant Acts non-compliant with the UN Convention and with the ACT
. With all these options, there are likely to be consequential
amendments involving other legislation.
Recommendation 2:
The Council recommends that legislation to implement the new ‘will,
preferences and rights’-based supported ACT Decision
making Framework be
prepared for public consultation, using one of the following options in order of
preference:
2.1 A single Act providing for the overarching reform of the law relating
to people who require or may require assistance in exercising
their decision
making ability to mandate the use of the ‘will, preferences and
rights’-based supported decision making
framework; or
2.2 The use of a ‘will, preferences and rights’-based
supported decision making framework be independently inserted in
all existing
legislation that currently provides for substitute decision making for people
who require or may require assistance
in exercising their decision making
ability; or
2.3 A ‘will, preferences and rights’-based supported decision
making framework for people who require or may require assistance
in exercising
their decision making ability, be inserted in the
Guardianship and Management
of Property Act
in place of the current ‘best
interest’-based substitute decision making provisions.
PART 6: THE ALRC’S
PROPOSALS AND THE GUARDIANSHIP ACT
6.1 The ALRC Reference
As noted in
, the ALRC Final Report
Equality, Capacity and Disability in Commonwealth Laws
was tabled on 24
November 2014, just prior to the commencement of the Council’s reference.
The ALRC Terms of Reference, given
in July 2013, asked that, in light of the UN
Convention, the ALRC inquire into and report on:
The examination of laws and legal frameworks within the Commonwealth
people with
disability as persons before the law and their ability to exercise legal
The scope of its reference was much wider than the Council’s reference,
as it covering ‘all relevant Commonwealth laws
and legal frameworks that
either directly or indirectly impact on the recognition of people with
disability before the law and their
exercise of legal capacity on an equal basis
with others’.
The areas included: access to justice and legal assistance program,
administrative law, aged care, anti-discrimination law, board
participation,
competition and consumer law, contracts, disability services and supports,
electoral matters, employment, federal
offences, financial services including
insurance, giving evidence, holding public office, identification documents,
jury service,
marriage, partnerships, parenthood and family law, medical
treatment, privacy law, restrictive practices, social security, superannuation
and supported and substitute decision making.
Among a range of propositions, the terms of reference asked the ALRC to
explore ‘how maximising individual autonomy and independence
modelled in Commonwealth laws and legal
frameworks’.
specific importance to the work of the Council was its recognition that many
laws which impacted on the rights of people with
disabilities were under state
and territory control. Recommendation 10-1 in the ALRC Final Report stated:
State and territory governments should review laws and legal frameworks
concerning individual decision making to ensure they are consistent
National Decision making principles and the Commonwealth Decision making Model.
In conducting such a review, regards should
also be given to:
(a) interaction with any supporter and representative schemes under
Commonwealth legislation;
(b) consistency between jurisdictions, including in terminology;
(c) maximising cross-jurisdictional recognition of arrangements; and
(d) mechanisms for consistent and national data collection.
It was this recommendation, with the sense of moving towards a nationally
consistent approach to supported decision making that led
the Council to use the
ARLC’s proposals as the starting point for consultations.
6.2 ALRC Framing
Principles and the UN Convention
General principles express the theoretical approach that underpins
guardianship legislation. Decision making principles provide practical
so that those who are performing a function or power under the Act do so
consistently with the underpinning theoretical
General principles are a feature of the UN Convention, in article 3, set out
above in Part 5. General principles also characterise
the reform directions
taken by law reform bodies in Australia. The Queensland Law Reform Commission
(QLRC), for example, proposed
amendment to the General Principles and Decision
making Principles in various substitute decision making Acts in recognition of
principles of the UN
Convention.
principles articulated by various law reform commissions include the same human
rights and fundamental freedoms as people
who do not have
disabilities,
participate in and carry out decisions, empowerment to exercise human rights and
fundamental freedoms,
entitlement to participate in community life, maintenance of existing supportive
relationships
and cultural
and linguistic environment and values, respect for privacy, entitlement to take
reasonable risks, and maximising an
adult’s participation in decision
The Victorian Law
Reform Commission (VLRC) also stated that any limitation on these freedoms must
be ‘justified, reasonable
proportionate’.
It is the Council’s view that the current Guardianship Act
not set out general principles that comply with the UN Convention Principles and
that the other substitute decision making legislation
in the ACT includes
different and conflicting principles. These deficiencies can be overcome by
having a single set of principles
in the single decision making ability Act
proposed, or if not a single Act, a common set of principles across each one.
The ALRC Final Report bases its recommendations on what they call ‘five
principles’:
• autonomy (in the sense of empowerment, rather than
non-interference)
• inclusion and participation, and
• accountability.
The ALRC sees these as key parts of both the UN Convention and the National
Disability Strategy 2010-2020, endorsed by Commonwealth,
State and Territory
Chief Ministers through the Council of Australian Governments on 13 February
These principles are also reflected in the legislation underpinning the NDIS
Act. In the ACT, these same principles are reflected
in the human rights
principles to be furthered under Schedule 1 of the
Disability Services Act
(ACT), and in the rights enacted in the
Human Rights Act
The Council considers these framing principles to be a useful guide for the
proposed legislation on decision making ability. They
provide principles
against which different options that might be developed under the general
enabling legislation, proposed for supported
decision making, might be measured.
They also serve as a guide to the directions proposed by the ALRC for a National
approach and
are supported by both the UN Convention and other international
human rights instruments.
6.3 Decision making
The current Guardianship Act (s 4) sets out principles to be followed by
substitute decision-makers, rather than principles that enable
and support a
person with a disability to make their own decisions, and ensure that those
decisions are respected. The principles
clearly operate from a best-interests
framework; they are not based on a commitment to autonomy, equality before the
law, participation
and inclusion, and they fail to promote the independence of
people with disabilities. For example, the Guardianship Act sees decision
making as the domain of a carer and substitute decision-maker. But where a
person must be supported and enabled to make decisions
for themselves it is
insufficient to merely ‘consult with each carer of the protected
person’ before making a decision
(s 4(3)). Although the Guardianship Act
requires that a person’s wishes must be ascertained as ‘far as they
can be worked
out’, their wishes will not be given effect if they are
‘likely to significantly adversely affect’ the person’s
interests (s 4(2)). And rather than encouraging people to live in the general
community and participate in community activities
Guardianship Act should express the right to such participation and require
necessary support to ensure this is achieved.
6.3.1 The ALRC’s
National Decision making Principles
The ALRC Final Report sets out four National Decision making Principles, to
ensure that supported decision making is encouraged, that
representative
decision-makers are appointed only as a last resort, and that people’s
will, preferences and rights direct the
decisions that affect their lives.
The four National Decision making Principles are:
Principle 1
: All adults have an equal right to make decisions
that affect their lives and to have those decisions respected.
Principle 2
: People who require support in decision making must
be provided with access to the support necessary for them to make, communicate
and participate in decisions that affect their lives
Principle 3
: The will, preferences and rights of persons who
may require decision making support must direct decisions that affect their
Principle 4
: There must be appropriate and effective safeguards
for people who may require decision making support, including to prevent abuse
and undue influence.
6.3.2 The Principles
A simple, concise statement of principles should be adopted which affirms and
provides the basis for this paradigm shift. The Council
recommends the broad
framing principles for reform of laws relating to people with disabilities
recommended in the ALRC Final Report
for this purpose. These principles are
dignity, equality, autonomy, inclusion and participation, and
accountability.
In the context of reform of decision making arrangements for people with
impaired decision making ability, the Council’s consultations
also showed
broad support for the ALRC’s National Decision making Principles. The
Council considers that these principles
provide a sound basis for reform of
decision making laws in the ACT.
Recommendation 3:
The Council recommends that the ACT’s reform of law and policy
relating to decision making arrangements for people with impaired
making ability be based upon the Australian Law Reform Commission’s four
National Decision making Principles:
Principle 1
: All adults have an equal right to make
decisions that affect their lives and to have those decisions respected;
Principle 2
: People who require support in decision making
must be provided with access to the support necessary for them to make,
communicate
and participate in decisions that affect their lives;
Principle 3
: The will, preferences and rights of persons who
may require decision making support must direct decisions that affect their
Principle 4
: There must be appropriate and effective
safeguards for people who may require decision making support, including to
prevent abuse
and undue influence.
6.4 The ALRC
The ALRC set out three sets of Guidelines to support these Principles. The
first of these are Support Guidelines:
Support Guidelines
(Recommendation 3-2)
(1) General
(a) Persons who require decision making support should be supported to
participate in and contribute to all aspects of life.
(b) Persons who require decision making support should be supported in making
(c) The role of persons who provide decision making support should be
acknowledged and respected, including family members, carers
and other people
chosen to provide support.
(d) Persons who require decision making support may choose not to be
(2) Assessing support needs
In assessing what support is required, the following must be considered:
(a) All adults must be presumed to have ability to make decisions that affect
their lives.
(b) A person must not be assumed to lack decision making ability on the basis
of having a disability.
(c) A person’s decision making ability must be considered in the
context of available supports.
(d) A person’s decision making ability is to be assessed, not the
outcome of the decision they want to make.
(e) A person’s decision making ability will depend on the kind of
decisions to be made.
(f) A person’s decision making ability may evolve or fluctuate over
The second set are Will, Preferences and Rights Guidelines for both supported
decision making and representative decision making:
Will, Preferences and Rights Guidelines
(Recommendation
(1) Supported decision making
(a) In assisting a person who requires decision making support to make
decisions, a person chosen by them as supporter must:
(i) support the person to express their will and preferences, and
(ii) assist the person to develop their own decision making ability.
(b) In communicating their will and preferences, a person is entitled to:
(i) communicate by any means that enable them to be understood, and
(ii) have their cultural and linguistic circumstances recognised and
(2) Representative decision making
When a representative is appointed to make decisions for a person who
requires decision making support:
(a) The person’s will and preferences must be given effect.
(b) When the person’s current will and preferences cannot be
determined, the representative must give effect to what the person
would likely
want, based on all the information available, including by consulting with
family members, carers and other significant
people in the person’s
(c) If it is not possible to determine what the person would likely want, the
representative must act to promote and uphold the person’s
human rights
and act in the way that is least restrictive of those rights.
(d) A representative may override the person’s will and preferences
only where necessary to prevent harm.
The third set of guidelines are for safeguards, both to ensure that the human
rights of a person with a disability are protected,
and to protect
someone’s decision making from exploitation:
Safeguards Guidelines
(Recommendation 3-4)
(1) General
Safeguards should ensure that interventions for persons who require decision
making support are:
(a) the least restrictive of the person’s human rights
(b) subject to appeal, and
(c) subject to regular, independent and impartial monitoring and review.
(2) Support in decision making
(a) Support in decision making must be free of conflict of interest and undue
(b) Any appointment of a representative decision-maker should be:
(i) a last resort and not an alternative to appropriate support
(ii) limited in scope, proportionate, and apply for the shortest time
possible, and
(iii) subject to review.
The ALRC also highlights the significance of language and terminology in the
context of disability, as discussed earlier.
The Council received almost universally positive feedback in submissions and
at consultation meetings about the ALRC Decision making
Guidelines, including
from people who were subject to guardianship at the moment. The Council
considers that the National Decision
making principles and Guidelines provide a
useful rubric upon which to base nationally consistent arrangements for those
impaired decision making ability. Accordingly, the Council proposes
that these be used as the underlying principles for the single
legislative
framework noted in Recommendation 1, to ensure compliance with the UN
Convention, and adapted– as far as is necessary
– for the ACT
environment.
6.4.1 Decision making
guiding principles
The ALRC Guidelines provide sets of strong philosophical and practical
guidance for new legislation, policy and procedures. They also
provide a useful
basis for a nationally consistent approach to decision making for people with
impaired decision making ability.
The Guidelines received strong community
support for these Guidelines in submissions to the Council.
Recommendation 4:
The Council recommends that the development of legislation, policy and
procedures to implement the new ACT Decision making Framework
be informed by the
principles in the Australian Law Reform Commission’s Guidelines on
‘Support’; ‘Wills,
Preferences and Right’; and
‘Safeguards’.
6.5 The ACT Decision
making Framework
The Australian Law Reform Commission recommended that support be made
available for people who needed assistance to exercise their
decision making
ability in the form of
supported decision making
. In cases where this
was not possible, the Australian Law Reform Commission proposed there be
representative decision making
. In both circumstances, the decision
making would be directed by the will, preferences and rights of the
decision-maker. The Council
was persuaded by the work of other law reform
agencies in Australia and overseas that there was also a place for
co-decision making
as an additional form of supported decision making in
appropriate circumstances. A new decision making framework based on these
forms is recommended.
Recommendation 5:
The Council recommends that the ACT’s new framework for supported
decision making provide for three forms of assisted decision
5.1 Supported decision making: The decision making framework requires and
provides support for decision making based upon the will,
preferences and rights
of someone whose decision making ability is impaired.
5.2 Co-decision making: Where impaired decision making ability makes the
exercise of decision making ability with support difficult,
additional support
shall be provided to allow the person to properly exercise their decision making
5.3 Representative decision making: Where it is not possible to provide
sufficient support for a specific decision by a person with
impaired decision
making ability, any method chosen to make that decision must be representative
of the will and preferences of the
person with impaired decision making ability,
as well as being consistent with their rights.
This Framework is expanded in the following Parts.
PART 7: SUPPORTED
DECISION MAKING
AND RELATED MECHANISMS
Overview of this Part
The most significant implication of the UN Convention for guardianship in the
ACT is the necessary shift from substitute decision
making to supported decision
making. This Part describes the nature and implications of supported decision
making in the ACT context,
and further details about the ACT Decision making
7.1 Supported decision
Decision making is integral to the exercise of legal capacity, hence the
Council’s preference – reflecting that of the
ALRC – for the
term ‘decision making ability’ in place of ‘capacity’.
Based on the presumption that every person has decision making ability,
Article 12(3) of the UN Convention requires state parties
appropriate measures to provide access by persons with disabilities to the
support they may require in exercising
their legal capacity’. To give
effect to this in Australia, the ALRC’s National Decision making
Principles state:
Persons who require support in decision making must be provided with access
to the support necessary for them to make, communicate
and participate in
decisions that affect their lives.
Supported decision making is a method where another person – commonly
family members and friends, but also health and welfare
professionals and
dedicated decision making supporters– assist people with disabilities in
making their own decisions which
reflect their individual will and
preference.
This formalises
what is already often a ‘family shared process’ of decision
Supported decision
making also reflects current practice for most people in the community where
decision making involves engagement
with and advice from others in everyday
In the evaluation of a supported decision making pilot in NSW, supported
decision making was defined as ‘the process of assisting
a person with
disability to exercise their legal capacity to act on an equal basis with
Significantly, this definition links decision making to the principle of
universal adult legal capacity, and shows how supported
decision making assists
in establishing legal agency, the ‘action’ part of legal capacity.
The role of a supporter depends on the level of decision making ability of
the person being supported. It may include providing or
explaining information
in an accessible format, assisting the person to consider their options and the
consequences of options, providing
advice, assisting a person to effectively
communicate their decisions and ensuring that such decisions are
Barriers to the exercise of decision making ability can be acute for people
with certain disabilities, such as people who are experiencing
the effects of a
delusional psychosis, people who have dementia, people who experience episodic
psychosocial disabilities, and people
with an intellectual disability. However,
it is likely that all these people have some decision making ability,
particularly if
they are allowed to practice the necessary
so the need for
support in their decision making is crucial to give full expression to their
will and preferences.
The concept of ‘supported decision making’ is already promoted in
some ACT legislation, such as the
Mental Health Act
discussed in
Disability Services Act 1991
(ACT), the last of which states that:
People with disabilities have the same right as other members of society to
make and actively participate in the decisions that affect
their lives and are
entitled to appropriate and necessary support to enable participation in,
direction and implementation of the
decisions that affect their
At the heart of reform to the ACT laws on guardianship, therefore, must be a
commitment to ‘assisting a person with disability
to exercise their legal
capacity to act on an equal basis with others’.
7.1.1 Challenges with
supported decision making
Although the shift to supported decision making is necessary to uphold the
equal human rights of people with disabilities in line
with the UN Convention,
the practical hurdles associated with this task are significant. Supported
decision making requires significant
time and resources to enable people of
varying levels of decision making ability to direct the decision making in their
It is likely this process would be easier to operationalise in
circumstances where a person has intermittent impairment to their
making ability. In these instances, decisions could be made when that
person’s decision making ability is least ‘impaired’.
comparison, where a person has progressive impairment of their decision making
ability, such as can occur with dementia-related
diseases, this may be more
The VLRC noted in 2012 that there were concerns in relation to the
implementation of supported decision
First, supported decision making would add complexity to legal
arrangements. Secondly, there is limited experience of this model
informal support, which is in place and
These concerns
are being addressed through the various completed and on-going pilots of
supported decision making, some of which
are discussed in Part 9 above. It is
important that these concerns are considered in the transition period and in the
legislative change.
Furthermore, the possibility of shifting to a supported decision making model
is complicated by Australia’s current interpretive
declarations,
particularly in relation to Articles 12. In this declaration the Australian
government outlined its view that substituted
decision making may still be a
necessary component of guardianship processes in Australia. The operation of
the ACT’s Human
Rights Act requires the ACT Government to separately
review the compliance of its legislation with the rights in that Act and in
international human rights obligations. This means that the ACT Government can
act to ensure its legislation is compliant with the
UN Convention, regardless of
the Commonwealth’s interpretive declaration. In any event, the ALRC
proposal for a will, rights
and preferences regime as discussed in
Recommendation 5, is seen as addressing the major concerns of the UN relating to
Australia’s
approach to substitute decision making.
7.1.2 Assessment of the
need for support in decision making
The current Guardianship Act and determining
‘incapacity’
Contrary to the UN Convention, the Guardianship Act makes no presumption of
capacity. Such a presumption is required by article 12
and is essential to any
assessment of decision making ability under guardianship
legislation.
Further, the
Guardianship Act approaches a determination of decision making ability as a
singular and absolute decision, rather
than as one that is context and
decision-specific.
Guardianship Act also draws a ‘convenient but artificial
distinction’
people who possess decision making ability and those who do not, while the UN
Convention calls for a more nuanced approach,
which recognises that even people
with significantly impaired decision making ability people can generally make
decisions in some
parts of their lives. All of these differences will impact on
the type of assessments required under the new system.
Prior to the release of the ALRC Final Report, the Queensland Law Reform
Commission (QLRC) supported a functional approach to determinations
capacity. The QLRC identified that this approach aligned with the presumption
of decision making ability, emphasised the
context and decision specific nature
of decision making and therefore ‘maximise[d] their decision making
autonomy by enabling
the adult to continue to make decisions in those areas of
life for which they have capacity’.
This approach was premised on
the functional ability of people to make a specific decision at a specific time,
focusing on an individual’s
ability to understand and assess information
relating to the specific
determination of decision making ability in a context and decision specific
manner may have significant practical and
resource consequences, given that
different standards of decision making ability are sometimes required under
different areas of
Appreciating that decision making ability is fluctuating and
decision-specific, the VLRC and ALRC recommend principles for determining
decision making ability, based on the NSW
Importantly,
decision making ability is assessed having regard to appropriate support and by
addressing of limiting environmental
The QLRC stated that there are practical challenges in implementing, both the
definition and assessment of decision making ability
and they considered that
comprehensive guidelines concerning the definition of decision making ability
and its application are essential
to ensure a correct and consistent
The application of
the presumption of decision making ability is another issue, which the QLRC also
considered. They suggested
an approach for the application of presumption
following concerns from the Public Trustee, whose role is predicated on a prior
by the Guardianship and Administrative Tribunal that a person lacks
decision making ability.
Commission outlined that the presumption is applied once for specific types of
decisions. If the presumption has already been
qualified by the Tribunal or
Supreme Court for specific kinds of decisions and a guardian or administrator
has been appointed, the
guardian or administrator does not have to apply the
presumption themselves – they can rely on the rebuttal of the presumption
for that matter.
where a formal declaration of capacity has not been made, the guardian must
apply the presumption. Since decision making
ability is to be considered in a
context and decision-specific manner, the presumption will not be displaced for
other matters, even
where the Court has already determined lack of decision
making ability for a specific matter or type of
It is arguable that guidelines, of the kind proposed by the QLRC, undercut
the UN Convention’s intention that wherever possible,
someone will be
supported to make their own decisions and further do not comply with the
ALRC’s own proposals. Significant
time will be required to determine
ability on an individual basis in each specific context and type of decision the
extent of that
an individual’s decision making ability. However, these
concerns may be relieved by understanding that the goal has shifted
single determination of ability or capacity, to determining a process of support
to help exercise ability in as many decisions
that the person wishes to make,
subject to safeguards discussed below. Where the focus is on ‘support
needed’ at any
particular time, the issues are different from the capacity
or ability assessments required under the current legal system.
Assessing support needs
Under the UN Convention, all adults are presumed to have legal capacity,
which includes the ability to make decisions. At some stage
in a person’s
life a question as to their decision making ability may arise, and an assessment
of their decision making ability
and support needs may be required. Because of
its nature, this assessment will be significantly different from the old
of incapacity and may well involve different assessors and
assessments. Given the paradigm of the new system, the ‘assessment’
will be likely to produce ‘enabling’ guidelines within a determined
framework, rather than a set of status determinations,
in most cases.
The ALRC sets out in some of its recommendations a method of determining
whether someone’s decision making ability in relation
to a particular
decision is impaired, so that they require support. This is done by assessing
whether someone can:
• understand the information relevant to the decision they have to
• retain the information necessary to make the decision;
• use or weigh the information as part of the decision making process;
• communicate their decision in some
For young people with intellectual disabilities or psychosocial disabilities,
an assessment may have occurred in their pre-adult years,
especially if they
attended a ‘special school’. Over time, it should be expected that
younger people who are not yet
adults will be assisted to learn about the steps
of decision making. This is something that would be likely to be helpful to all
children and young people, but it may be especially important for those who
previously have been seen as likely to lack decision
making ability. Under a
new paradigm, where legal personhood is universal, it would be expected that
support would be provided to
maximise the potential for everyone to become a
decision-maker when they are an adult. Training in decision making would be a
to decision-readiness and would form part of the education of all
children and young people, especially those who may need support
in one or more
For adults, the assessment of decision making ability under current
arrangements may have occurred later. It may have been done by
a geriatrician
or by an Aged Care Assessment Team assessor, when the person needed support
services to stay in their home or to move
to supported accommodation. For
people with mental illness or other psychosocial disabilities, the assessment
may have occurred
at a time of a health crisis, when a doctor, court or tribunal
was also involved. Such assessments are usually about a person’s
‘capacity’, identifying a deficit in capacity that will be addressed
by a substitute decision making arrangement. However,
the alternative
presumption of capacity will mean that an assessment must be made of the level
and nature of support that the person
needs to exercise their decision making
ability in accordance with their will and preferences. Such assessments will
require quite
different processes and skills.
Assessments about decision making ability in the form of what is in
someone’s ‘own good’ are embedded in the values
perceptions of reality of the assessor. In the important book
Capacity to
the authors discuss in some detail how the assessor’s own views can
significantly affect conclusions that are reached about
the person. Many of
these views are ‘unexamined, unchallengeable beliefs, hypotheses and
values that are simply accepted and
usually excluded from
For example,
if an assessor has a presumptive belief that that a person with dementia is
unable to make any decisions and needs
to be ‘protected’, they are
likely to see only the evidence that supports this view, and may argue that
allowing the
person to make some decisions is too dangerous. Similarly, an
assessor may believe that someone with an intellectual disability
cannot make
‘good’ decisions. If they see a person with an intellectual
disability makes a decision with a bad outcome,
they are likely to
want to make change by presenting alternate accounts [of reality] challenge and
threaten those who hold power. Those in
power attempt to protect and promote
their beliefs and values. Those who try to bring about change by presenting
alternate accounts
risk institutionalised intolerance and punishment.
Molloy, Darzins & Strang.
Capacity to Decide
1999, page 231.
conclude that the person should not in future be allowed to make decisions
which involve risk, this fails to take account of the fact
that most people may
make a ‘bad’ decision at some point, particularly when learning.
The characterisation of the outcome of a decision as good or bad can also be
a subjective decision, based on values. For example,
an older person living in
assisted accommodation may wish to have a consensual sexual relationship with
someone else who lives there.
A staff member may prevent the person doing what
they wish because the staff member does not consider it appropriate according to
their own values. Similarly, families may prevent the person doing what they
wish because the family does not see their elderly
relative as a sexually active
person, or they believe that their relative is too confused to give consent, or
they fear that such
a relationship will disrupt their family dynamics.
Supported decision making is conversely driven by the person’s will,
preferences and rights, not by another’s decision
as to the person’s
‘best interests’. As such the values reflected in the decision
should be the person’s
own. Assessment practices therefore need to focus
on identifying the ability the person has to work out their will and preferences
and to express them, as well as what decision making abilities that the person
has, which can then be developed and supported.
Rather than drawing directly on previous models of capacity assessment, new
methods of assessing the degree of impairment of decision
making ability and the
kind of support required, will be needed. These will need, among other things,
to determine whether the need
for support is critical for the exercise of the
person’s decision making ability generally or specifically to certain
The ALRC Final Report’s four ‘skills’ for decision
making set out above : understanding necessary information,
retaining the
information to make the decision, considering the information and making the
decision; provide some guidance about
the type of assessment needed.
Assessments will need to focus on what would be required to support people to
exercise their decision
making ability.
The Swedish Personal Ombudsmen system, for example, uses the Camberwell
Assessment of Need Model, which is a clinical and social needs
instrument for people with severe mental
importance on the instrument but say the tool is less important than having an
effective way of identifying the support
needs (and the will and preferences) of
the person, which is, in fact, what the UN Convention
It is the Council’s view that the move to supported decision making is
likely to be particularly challenging to those who have
exercised and are
currently exercising power under a substituted decision making arrangement. To
ensure a successful shift to supported
decision making, it is likely that
supporters will require training about the nature of these changes and the
necessary change to
the power dynamics which may have existed under a best
interests, capacity-based, substituted decision making model. Accordingly,
Council proposes a transition period, when options for assessing the levels of
support needed for decision making should be tested.
Those in a position to
assess a person’s need for decision making support will require training
necessary changes to assumptions, attitudes and
power dynamics that exist under a substituted decision making model. There
be a transition period for moving from substitute decision making to
supported decision making, which would involve the development
of an assessment
method to determine what supports someone may require to exercise their decision
making ability including education
and training to become
‘decision-ready’, skill development for different types of
decisions, monitoring and safeguards.
7.2 How to support
decision making
As outlined, the kinds of support that might be required to assist people to
make decisions in their lives are many and varied, and
may vary over time and
with the kind of decision. The necessary decision making support could be as
simple as reducing environmental
and physiological impediments to decision
making to ensure that a person has the best conditions to make decisions, for
ensuring they are in a quiet room with someone they trust, that they
have a drink, and are not rushed. In other cases, a person
may be better able
to make decisions in the morning, or after a meal.
7.2.1 Reasonable
accommodation and adjustments
The necessary decision making support could require reasonable adjustments
or, in the words of the UN Convention, the making of ‘reasonable
accommodation’ to how things are ordinarily done. For example, if someone
cannot read text because of a vision impairment,
then the person will need
someone to read information to them, or to have access to an appropriately
formatted document for a machine
reader. If someone has an intellectual
disability, they will need a longer time to make a decision and they will need a
simple English
explanation of what the particular decision means. This is a
concept well established in the ACT’s Human Rights Act and its
administration. It is also a general requirement under Article 5 of the UN
Convention relating to equality and non-discrimination:
In order to promote equality and eliminate discrimination, States Parties
shall take all appropriate steps to ensure that reasonable
accommodation is
Article 2 defines reasonable accommodation as:
Decision making is a contextual process and the existence
of accessible information in appropriate formats and social supports can
a person’s capacity to make decisions.
Advocacy for Inclusion, Submission 6, page 29
necessary and appropriate modification and adjustments not imposing a
disproportionate or undue burden, where needed in a particular
case, to ensure
to persons with disabilities the enjoyment or exercise on an equal basis with
others of all human rights and fundamental
Having access to comprehensible information has been identified as important
in ensuring people have access to
For example,
health services recognise that it is best practice for all people in our
community to be provided with ‘plain
English’ health
information,
increasingly common to provide translated material for people from culturally
and linguistically diverse
backgrounds.
Significant
resources are committed to providing more easily understandable information and
legal documents, such as
Decision making
support requires the same approach to ensure that information is available in
accessible styles and formats. The
Council’s conduct in its inquiry made
an effort in this direction, publishing an ‘Easy English’
consultation document
and making a brief video to explain the nature and process
of the inquiry. Submissions received from people with disabilities often
involved a supporter working with the person to help them express their views.
The recent evaluation of supported decision making pilot in NSW found that
much of the written material, prepared as part of the pilot
to support decision
making, provided very limited assistance to the decision-makers and their
supports. The materials had been considered
very useful by the facilitators, but
supporters and decision-makers found the materials overwhelming unless they had
assistance from
the facilitator. This appeared partly to do with low literacy
levels among decision-makers and partly to do with how the tool kit
An exception was
the Easy Read booklet, ‘which appeared to serve as a focal point and added
legitimacy to the supported decision
making process for some decision
The booklet
was used by both decision-makers and supporters to ‘keep them on track and
to explain the process’.
In particular, the Pilot recommended such resources, in future, be
tailored to individual circumstances, developed with relevant
therapists, and
with those closest to the
decision-maker.
Re-worked processes by services and institutions can provide the necessary
support to people with impaired decision making ability.
For example, a recent
publication produced by Family Planning NSW helps doctors work with clients with
intellectual disabilities
on issues of reproductive and sexual
changing how they
might conduct a consultation to allow the person more time, and a safer place to
have these sensitive discussions.
Another similar Australian resource for
professionals working with people with intellectual disabilities who have been
violence is
How to hear
Organisations
that usually interact with people with impaired decision making ability through
a substitute decision-maker, such as
courts, tribunals, hospitals and some
service providers and professionals, will require some significant and creative
of many of their processes to enable supported decision making with
proper regard to the will, preferences and rights of the person
to take place.
The transformative work of the National Disability Insurance Agency in
establishing individualised funding for people
with disabilities, based on
self-determined plans whenever possible, provides some early experience of
success with seeking to create
more responsive institutional environments for
people with disabilities to make
This model is based on a social model of disability that recognises
‘attitudes, practices and structures are disabling and
can prevent people
from enjoying economic participation, social inclusion and
Barriers to
decisions can also be physical, such as
inaccessible buildings or the lack of means to exercise power. A person may
want to vote
and be able to decide who to vote for, but they may have trouble
accessing a polling booth or using the normal means of voting.
As well complex
processes can make enacting a decision difficult, for example starting a bank
account or filling out application
forms for jobs or services.
7.2.2 Capacity
The necessary decision making support, particularly for people who have
limited experience of making decisions, will require capacity
building. This
can be done through various forms of training and practice, teaching the process
of decision making and modelling
it with the person, allowing the person to work
on simple low risk decisions first while they develop their skills, then working
towards a time when they may be able to make decisions without support.
As is detailed in the pilot descriptions in Part 9, many of the pilots of
supported decision making in Australia and overseas have
shown that capacity
building has been a crucial transitional requirement. For example, training has
been crucial to allow people
with disabilities, who have not been involved in
many choices about their lives, to be able to make service choices under the
Processes that have
been trialled to provide specific decision making support include computer
assisted decision supports
and the use of mobile
These provide
information about where to get advice and allow people to go through a
structured decision making process, by themselves
or with a supporter, to make
and record the decision, and to record the actions that are necessary to enact
their decision.
Training for people who will provide decision making support is also
required, and the NSW pilot suggests that individualised training
supporters and the person they were supporting is more helpful and effective
than group training.
pilots discussed in Section 9 show that many people with disabilities who were
considered unable to make decisions showed
significant improvement in their
decision making capacity over the period of the trials.
... supported decision making
arrangements are not something that can be imposed on a person or the people
supporting them. It is
imperative that people with disabilities remain in
control of whether (and in what manner)
they wish to engage with support
in making decisions.
Advocacy for Inclusion, Submission 6, page 30.
7.2.3 Approaches to giving support
The focus of supported decision making is on helping the person to work out
what they want to do based on their own will and preferences.
There are many
different ways support can be provided for this, and it is important that the
person can choose the supports which
work best for them. This can vary between
some decisions themselves, particular in relation to everyday choices
regarding, food, clothing, entertainment and so on. However
a person may need
support to make an important or complex decision, or one that the person sees as
significant, in a way that is
based on their view of their ‘own
good’. Such decisions could include contracts involving a significant
amounts of money,
entry into a credit or mortgage arrangement, or major health
care decisions.
Submissions to the Council stated that too often a paternalistic approach is
taken by others in these circumstances, which substitute
someone else’s
idea of what is best for the
As is discussed
further in Part 9, pilots in the ACT with respect to the NDIS show that there
are often limited opportunities for
people with disabilities to exercise
decision making abilities:
Many of those engaged in the project enjoyed very limited opportunity for
self-determination with lives largely lived within the service
governed by the value and decisions of others, including families and care
workers. .. [F]or this group, support for
decision making is also about
creating cultural change that normalises active participation by people with
disability in decision
making, and by extension access to decision support, and
builds the capacity of people who share their lives to enable participation
decision making on a day to day
Similarly, submissions argue that the lack of legal recognition of supported
decision making has been ‘a major barrier to decision
making rights for
people with
disabilities’
‘access to decision making is influenced by deeply embedded cultural
values, reinforced by Guardianship laws, about
the ‘inability’ of
people with disabilities to be decision
It is common for people in general to use others for support in their
decision making. These are usually trusted others in a person’s
support network, such as friends and family. In the submissions to the Council,
a person with a disability tells how he
had used a Power of Attorney to secure
the decision support of two relatives as his natural supports:
I liked that with the power of attorney I could choose who helped me with
decisions. The people I chose listened to me carefully
and explained things in
a way I could understand. I had good experiences with that system.
When other members of this person’s family obtained an order to place
his affairs with the Public Trustee, he was less happy
with arrangements,
because he did not consider he was being given enough information about the
consequences of that action. Under
a supported decision making framework, this
person would be expected to involve both about who was managing his affairs and,
he was able to be supported, to be directly engaged in decisions made in
relation to himself and his
Priority must be placed on
ensuring that informal decision making relationships are acknowledged and
supported by legislation and
legal processes. The wishes of the person with
disability to have their chosen supports, informal or formal, involved in
should be enshrined in law.
Advocacy for Inclusion, Submission 6, page 32
7.2.4 Informal supports for decision
A person who needs or wants support in making a particular decision or type
of decision should be able to use supporters for decision
making, on a voluntary
and informal basis. When a person chooses such an informal support arrangement,
the supporter must have the
right to be present with the consent of the
decision-maker, and the right to provide whatever support the person wants
declining their assistance. If a person decides that they do not wish
to use the supporter for all or part of a decision, then the
supporter is bound
by this decision. The need to recognise the role of someone who provides
decision making support in legislation
is also out in the ALRC’s support
guidelines, which state that such persons should be ‘acknowledged and
respected –
including family members, carers or other significant people
chosen to provide
recognition is likely to be necessary, so that people do not attempt to exclude
a supporter on the basis, for example, of privacy.
The primary obligation on a supporter is to ensure that the person is able to
discern and communicate their own will and preferences
in the decision they
make. Where there may be a conflict of interest between the
decision-maker’s will and preferences and
what the supporter believes to
be the best decision, the supporter must not seek to influence the
decision-maker towards the supporter’s
will and preferences.
7.2.5 Formal supports
for decision making
A person must be able to establish a formal decision making support
arrangement, with one or more people, particularly when an assessment
a person’s decision making ability could be significantly improved through
the provision of adequate support.
The ALRC notes that its approach provides ‘very strong support for
legal models that reflect supported decision making norms
aspirations’, and that its Recommendations and Guidelines:
‘[r]eflect the Inquiry’s framing principles of dignity,
inclusion and participation’. The ALRC further notes that its
Recommendations and Guidelines ‘are consistent
with the general principles
of the NDIS Act, that people with disability should be supported to exercise
choice including in relation
to taking reasonable risks; and receive reasonable
and necessary supports, including early intervention supports’.
There are many options for providing formal support for decision making,
based on a person’s usual support networks, including:
• the person working with ‘circles of support’, where
family, carers, friends and, if necessary, paid support workers
may be involved
in providing support eg under the existing PATH (Planning Alternative Tomorrows
with Hope) program;
• the person working with individual supporters chosen by the person
for different decisions, for example a parent helps with
financial decisions,
and a sibling helps with personal decisions such as health;
• the person working with a small group of supporters in a trust-based
relationship, without the presence of any service providers
professionals.
Arrangements need to be flexible to ensure they adapt to the needs of the
person and their support network, for example, if a person
decides that they can
no longer be a supporter, or if the person decides a different person is
appropriate to provide support in
a specific part of their life, the formal
process such as a written agreement or some other formalised process would need
to be sufficiently
flexible to provide for these kinds of changes to be made.
If a person does not have a natural support network they may need support
through a community or statutory agency, which provides
support on a
professional basis. Most of the supported decision making pilots discussed in
Part 9 identified social isolation and
lack of a social support network as
barriers to effective support for some people. In the NDIS pilots, resources
were provided to
build up natural support networks. Social isolation increases a person’s
vulnerability significantly, and addressing this was an important safeguard.
A multi-layered approach to support is appropriate, first assisting the
person to become decision-ready, and then building the person’s
support network, so that they can either make their own decisions or derive
support from a network. A support network is
an important
After many years
in the hands of the care apparatus, it may be difficult for an individual to
express their own will. This is because
as a patient, the individual felt that
nothing they said mattered or that nobody listened. Different individuals need
amounts of time to express their own will.
Swedish National Board of Health and Welfare discussing the
role of the PO
resource, a ‘framework for advancing people into good and valued
lives’ through an intentional set of arrangements that
authentically
advance a person’s life chances towards citizenship in keeping with each
person’s lifestyle
Because the complex circumstances of a person’s life can make the
development of such natural support networks difficult or
impossible, models
have been developed in some countries to provide an on-going professional
relationship of support. For example,
in Sweden, the Personal Ombudsman (PO)
program in Skåne provides cost effective decision making support and
advocacy for people
with severe mental health problems and psychosocial
disabilities.
The PO program serves the most isolated people, those who have psychoses and who
are homeless, who live isolated and barricaded,
who are difficult to communicate
with, or who are hostile to authority. POs operate independently from state
institutions, and their
work is directed by the concerns of the individual
– the POs work with these isolated people and build up trust with them
time. The person then chooses if they want a PO to assist
The PO program is
driven by the UN Convention’s focus a person’s will, preferences and
rights. The Swedish National
Board of Health and Welfare describes the work of
the PO in these terms:
• the client’s experienced needs and wishes are in focus, not the
diagnosis and the treatment;
• the work is based on the client’s health and his/her potential,
rather than on symptoms, problems and limitations;
• the client chooses the PO, not the other way round; and
• the client, and not the PO, sets the agenda and controls the
The legislation needs to reflect a flexible decision making process for
people with impaired decision making ability, in recognition
that their ability
will vary over time and with the nature of decisions. In addition, the
availability of support will also vary
over time. The first and preferred step
in the ACT Decision making Framework is to ensure the availability of a range of
where someone wants or needs assistance to exercise their decision
making ability, based upon their will, preferences and rights.
Recommendation
The Council recommends that the ACT Decision making Framework be based
upon the provision of support for decision making, where someone
wants or needs
support to exercise their decision making ability. This support must be based
upon the will, preferences and rights
of someone whose decision making ability
is impaired. Such support may include any actions which provide support for a
decision-maker
to exercise their decision making ability, including:
(a) reasonable accommodation; and
(b) the provision of various means of informal and formal support for
decision making, with reviewable statutory guidelines about
how such support can
best be provided, without the prescription of a specific model.
7.2.6 Co-decision
making agreements
When someone needs a high degree of support but can still make their own
decisions, a further option is a co-decision making agreement.
These exist in
the Canadian provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan, and in the Irish
The options is
supported by the Victorian Law Reform Commission
A co-decision making
agreement is a form of supported decision making which moves closer to
representative decision making, but
remains governed by the person’s will,
preferences and rights. It is intended to ‘enable people with some
to their decision making ability to participate in decisions that
affect their lives to the greatest possible extent without exposing
potential harm’.
Under a co-decision making agreement a person chooses a trusted other person
to work with them to make their own decisions. Unlike
supported decision
making, a co-decision making arrangement requires
decision making
on the particular matters covered by the agreement. A legal document, for
example, needs to be executed by both the
co-decision-makers.
The Irish Republic model requires that a co-decision maker must, if they
cannot agree with the person, acquiesce to the person’s
will, preferences
and rights unless it is reasonably foreseeable that the serious harm will result
to the decision-maker or another
The VLRC model
proposes that a co-decision making agreement can be created by an order of the
Tribunal as part of the ‘least
intrusive’ model of arrangements, or
can be entered into without a Tribunal order but the agreement must be
registered to be
It is consistent too with the existing Guardianship Act concept of interfering
in the life of a protected person (including their
lifestyle) to the smallest
extent necessary (section 4(2)(d).
The VLRC model proposes decision making
that require the
exercise of substitute decision making powers ‘in a manner that promotes
the personal and social well-being
of the represented person’ but with a
definition of what this means that brings it close to a representative, rather
than substitute
‘best interest’ decision. If a co-decision maker
cannot agree with the person about the decision then the Tribunal must
the disagreement through mediation or by determining that the co-decision making
order cannot function. Under VLRC recommendations
the grounds for the original
order is the inability for a person to make a specific decision without a
co-decision-maker. The consequences
of such a breakdown in the relationship for
the person seems to be that the Tribunal would appoint someone else as a
co-decision-maker
or a substitute decision-maker, or the Tribunal would make its
own decision on the
It seems to the Council that a co-decision making model is appropriate only
when two people have a longstanding relationship of trust.
Some models,
including the one set out in the VLRC
specifically exclude
statutory bodies such as the use of a Public Guardian as a
co-decision-maker.
Where specific decisions could carry an unreasonable risk of substantial harm
for a decision-maker acting alone, but where, with sufficient
support, the
person can still exercise their decision making ability, the Council proposes
that a co-decision making option be available
in place of supported decision
making. Under this option, decisions are negotiated and agreed jointly by the
decision-maker and
the co-decision maker. The decision making is guided by the
will, preferences and rights of the decision-maker. If the decision-maker
co-decision-maker are unable to agree, provision can be made for an appropriate
independent person or agency to work with them,
to support their relationship
and assist in reaching a joint decision.
Recommendation 7:
The Council recommends the availability of co-decision making as a
distinctive form of supported decision making where someone requires
level of support to exercise their decision making ability in relation to
specific decisions, particularly those decisions
which may involve risk of
substantial harm to the decision-maker which risk cannot reasonably be
ameliorated through risk reduction
strategies.
7.3 When should
representative decision making be allowed?
Representative decision making can become necessary as an alternative, where
a person is not able to make a decision even with as
much support as can be
provided, and where ‘it is not practicable to determine the will and
preferences of an individual’
Some examples include
people who are unconscious or in a permanent vegetative state, have the most
profound intellectual disabilities
or very advanced dementia. In other cases,
people may have periods where they are not able to make a decision because they
are experiencing
profound delusions. In all these cases, the meaning of
supported decision making would be pushed beyond its limits. As the Danish
submission to the UN stated, in the absence of the alternative of representative
decision making, it would:
run the risk of [the person] being exploited, neglected or even left to die.
To assume that no one would ever require someone else
to make a decision on
their behalf would not only be flagrantly wrong but ultimately
irresponsible.
Under the ALRC National Decision making Principles, representative decision
making is seen as a last resort, only applicable when
all forms of support have
been exhausted. The Council believes this, too, should be the starting point
under the new ACT decision
making legislation. Where the person is assessed as
needing a level of support for decision making that is not practicable under
existing arrangements and requires representative decision making at least in
relation to some decisions, the UN Convention requires
an even greater attention
to adequate safeguards. The UN Convention states that:
Such safeguards shall ensure that measures relating to the exercise of legal
capacity respect the rights, will and preferences of
the person, are free of
conflict of interest and undue influence, are proportional and tailored to the
person’s circumstances,
apply for the shortest time possible and are
subject to regular review by a competent, independent and impartial authority or
body. The safeguards shall be proportional to the degree to which such
measures affect the person’s rights and interests.
Where representative decision making is required on either a short or long
term basis, determining what the will and preferences of
a person are or may be
remains the first step. Given the complexities, a principles based approach to
determining the will and preferences
of the person is seen as a preferable one
to attempts to prioritise one or more of a range of possible written documents
ways of expressing will and preferences. In the case of
representative decision making, there will always also need to be a
consideration
of the rights of the person who is unable to exercise their
decision making ability, with any discernment of their will and preferences.
Under the proposed new arrangements, ACAT would have capacity to determine a
range of possible orders to maximise the decision making
power of the person,
within a framework of will, preferences and rights. In determining this, if the
person is able to express their
views at all, ACAT should be required to comply
with the person’s wishes about who should be their representative
decision-maker,
unless to do so, would breach one of the safeguards discussed in
Section 8 below. In all circumstances, before an order to permit
representative
decision making is made by ACAT, the Tribunal must be satisfied that there is no
other option possible without causing
serious harm to the person. Any
arrangement must be consistent with their human rights.
Finally, it is always important to remember that deciding not to make a
decision is also a decision. Equally, just because the person’s
does not agree with, professional advice or a doctor or a family member or that
some might consider the decision unwise,
does not mean that the person is not
able to make such a decision. None of these circumstances give rise to grounds
for invoking
representative decision making.
7.3.1 The more limited
role of representative decision making
In some cases, with all the support in the world, it will not be possible to
support some decision-makers. At the most extreme end,
where someone is
unconscious and remains in a coma for a long period, any fictional construct of
decision making ability is simply
likely to lead to substitute decision making
by stealth. In this case, the Council considers it is far better to recognise
the existence
of a representative decision making arrangement that is based,
first on the known or discernible will and preferences of the person
decision making ability. Where the will and preferences of the person are
unknown and unknowable, then the decision must
be based on the person’s
rights. The appointment of someone as a Representative decision maker should be
by an order of ACAT,
as a way of ensuring that there has been adequate evidence
of prior supported decision making.
The Council considers that if a person has entered a representative agreement
to apply at a time when they are no longer able to make
decisions, then the
agreement should be honoured. This is the direction of the new Advance Consent
Directions under the
Mental Health Act 2015
, discussed above at page 43.
There will need to be adequate statutory safeguards for circumstances when
acting on the representative
agreement may cause serious harm to the person or a
breach other human rights, and to ensure that the representative does not
the wishes of the person with the representatives own interests. While
a person should be able to appoint someone as their Representative,
cases, to ensure that it is being used as a last resort, the Council considers
that the approval of a representative and his
or her powers in any case, should
only be able to crystalise and become operational with the approval of ACAT be
subject to the oversight
Currently in the ACT, people may well be subject to financial management
orders, whether or not they are subject to guardianship.
This partly arises
from the history of this area of law where it was intended to protect the
financial position of the person, or
in all likelihood, the assets of wealthy
families, because of the cost of accessing such arrangements. Over time, this
less expensive. It is also probably the area where paternalism has
remained strongest. It is clear that the UN Convention intended
that as much as
possible, people with impaired decision making ability should be able to be
provided with support to make most if
not all of their financial decisions.
Article 12(5) emphasises this:
5. Subject to the provisions of this article, States Parties shall take all
appropriate and effective measures to ensure the equal
right of persons with
disabilities to own or inherit property, to control their own financial affairs
and to have equal access to
bank loans, mortgages and other forms of financial
credit, and shall ensure that persons with disabilities are not arbitrarily
of their property.
An elderly lady under guardianship and financial management
wanted to install new curtains in her house. The Public Trustee considered
was in her best interests to sell her home and for her to move into assisted
accommodation rather than spend money on a declining
asset. The Public Trustee
refused to release the money for the curtains.
Information provided to LRAC in consultations
The consequence of this is that current property management orders and the
work of the Public Trustee underneath these, or within
enduring powers of
attorney vested in the Public Trustee, significant changes will need to occur.
In many cases, this will involve
working in a less coercive and more partnership
manner with clients, because in all cases, the Public Trustee and the Tribunal
need to consider the will and preferences of the person first, and if these
are not knowable, their human rights. For example, in
the boxed story, the
Public Trustee would be obliged to release the woman’s money to allow her
to buy new curtains.
The ALRC model also provides for ‘will, preferences and
rights’-based representative decision making as a last resort
when neither
supported or co-decision making are able to provide sufficient support for the
person to exercise their own decision
making ability. A representative
decision-maker can be a person chosen by the decision-maker to represent them
with appropriate
safeguards, or, a person formally appointed by ACAT. In most
cases, representatives would need to demonstrate that they have sought
support the decision-maker to participate in decision making to the greatest
extent possible before they acted as the representative
decision-maker and this
would need to be recorded appropriately.
The Council makes the following recommendation:
Recommendation
8.1 Where it is not possible to provide sufficient support for someone to
exercise their decision making ability either as a supported
co-decision-maker, and a representative is appointed either by the person or by
the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal, any
decision made by a representative
must be representative of the will and preferences of the person with impaired
decision making
ability, as well as being consistent with their rights.
8.2 Appointment to act as a formal representative decision-maker for
another person shall be subject to application to the ACT Civil
Administrative Tribunal, to determine that options of supported and co-decision
making have first been exhausted.
8.3 Where the need for a representative decision occurs in an emergency,
there should be a temporary power for a person previously
nominated by the
person with impaired decision making ability to act as their representative, or
alternatively a person who has authority
under the existing Health Attorney
provisions to make representative decisions for the person, based on their will,
preferences and
rights. Where the decision-maker does not recover their
decision making ability in the short term, then approval must be sought
appointment as a representative decision-maker in accordance with the terms of
8.1 and 8.2 above.
7.4 Ascertaining will
and preferences
7.4.1 Possible
difficulties
The most obvious means of ascertaining someone’s will and preferences
in relation to a specific decision is to ask them what
their wishes are. While
this sounds easy and obvious, there are significant complexities that can arise
in helping someone to work
out what they want and what are their values and
preferences. Even for those who have never been prevented from exercising their
decision making ability, working out what they want to do in any particular set
of circumstances can take some time and may involve,
for example, talking
through options to work out what feels right for them. Some people will take a
long time and some may make
quicker decisions – these are all individual
variables, whether or not they have any impairment to their ability to make a
[When Michael decided that he wanted to catch the bus to
his day program, this wasn’t possible without the support of other
in his life. They would not agree, so] the decision was put on hold ... and
Michael worked on other decisions. ... Michael’s
desire to maintain good
relationships with other people in his life is more highly valued than his
desire for independence.
NSW SDM Pilot Report – Michael on page 67
People may have had limited decision making experience for a range of
reasons. For example, they may live in a relationship where
exercises decision making power over, or on behalf of the two. At one extreme,
this may be a paternalistic but loving
relationship, where one partner sees
themselves as ‘looking after’ the other to genuinely help them. At
the other end,
it may be a relationship where there is an exploitative power
dynamic, where a partner serves their own interests and does not regard
interests or wishes of the other. Sometimes, after someone’s decision
making ability has been temporarily impaired for
example through ill-health, and
someone has been helping the person, the pattern of unilateral decision making
may have arisen from
necessity and then continued through habit. These complex
relational dynamics can influence a person’s ideas about what is
will and preferences. This can be a special difficulty if they fear that they
might offend someone who is important to them
by making a specific decision or
expressing a contrary views.
This is even more so, if that person provides them with support and the
continuation of this support becomes contingent on the person
specific way. This is most likely to happen, where a family member or service
provider is afraid that the person will
make a risky choice or one that imposes
an additional burden on them.
Where the consequences of a decision may be increased costs, worries or risks
for someone else, without whose support the decision
may not be able to be
enacted, this can add significant complexities:
Whilst the UN Convention clearly sets out that people with disability should
be afforded the right to make their own decisions, the
reality of implementation
in practice can be far more difficult, especially when a person’s decision
may impact heavily on
those around
The ability for people making decisions and people affected by those
decisions to identify and discuss their interconnected interests
is crucial for
the effectiveness of the supported decision making process. However, this
requires the development of additional
skills and often the intervention of
someone to work with both individuals involved to see what is possible.
A decision-maker also needs to understand what is important to them and what
values they want their decisions to be based on. Part
of the maturation and
individuation of all children from their families as they grew, involves making
these kinds of decisions.
Where an adult has needed prolonged assistance from
their family because of their disability, this process of growing into their
adult self (separate from their parents) may have been suspended. Helping
people to start to identify their own values and preferences
can restart this
process, but conflicts can arise when the values and preferences differ from
their parents. This creates challenges
for everyone, but is an important part
of someone becoming their ‘own person’. For many adult people with
disabilities,
they may not have had this opportunity to develop at an earlier
When someone has not exercised their decision making power much or has
limited experience in deciding what they want for whatever
reason, the process
of determining what they want can also feel overwhelming. Well-meaning people
may ‘leap to their rescue’
with their own answer, or prompt in
anticipation of what they expect the person should
Both of these
actions, while well-meaning, can further discourage people from exercising and
strengthening their decision making
ability. Particularly where people have
been providing support for someone through guardianship over a long period,
changing their
role in relation to the person to finding out what their will and
preferences are can be both challenging and threatening. In a
number of pilots,
some substitute decision-makers were so uncomfortable that they refused to allow
the person they were acting for
to participate in the planned training for
decision making.
Even statutory substitute decision-makers were sometimes resistant to these
changing relationship dynamics. For example, in the NSW
Pilot, people whose
financial affairs were managed by the NSW Public Trustee showed least
development in relation to their financial
management skills over the period of
the pilot. About 22% of people whose affairs were under management showed
increased participation
in financial decision making, while it was more than 50%
across the whole sample.
However this may have been because these people had higher levels of impaired
decision making ability, it is not clear that this
was the case. The NSW Public
Trustee did not accept it had a role in training people to be better able to
manage their money which
may have also contributed to this result. Skills
development for this kind of decision making is clearly important from the
whether people are assisted by statutory or non-statutory supporters.
The process of helping someone to get to the point where they can look at
their values, their resources and available information
to determine their will
and preferences in relation to a specific decision is called ‘decision
readiness’.
In all the Australian pilots, helping someone to get to this point has been a
primary requirement for them to move to making their
own decisions. This
sometimes required a significant period of time and resources, particularly
where people are inexperienced.
For example, in its report
Spectrums of
, ADACAS describes the time necessary to develop decision readiness
(including the primary phase of awareness building) took between
2-16 weeks for
most people, with one person not achieving decision-readiness after 18
Training for decision readiness could potentially be provided under the
which sets out
principles ‘relating to the participation of people with disability’
in section 17A(3):
(3) The National Disability Insurance Scheme is to:
(a) respect the interests of people with disability in exercising choice and
control about matters that affect them; and
(b) enable people with disability to make decisions that will affect their
lives, to the extent of their capacity; and
(c) support people with disability to participate in, and contribute to,
social and economic life, to the extent of their ability.
The ALRC Final Report made recommendations in Chapter 5 to amend the NDIS
legislation to ensure that its decision making activities
became more closely
compliant with the National Decision Making Framework as well as with the UN
Convention.
These recommendations specifically related to the NDIS nominee role, which is a
form of substitute decision making not consistent
with the Framework or UN
Convention, and to building the NDIS’s capability for supported decision
making in its interactions
with Scheme participants. The ALRC noted the
importance of training and guidance for all people involved in decision making
NDIS – people with disability, family, carers and services
providers – ‘to ensure the effective operation of the
decision making model.’
The NDIS operational guidelines relating to the role of a nominee recognises
that, even where there is a nominee, the will and preferences
of the person
should be heard and their decision making skills enhanced wherever
As is clear from this discussion, the ascertainment of someone’s will
and preferences can itself be a complex process, that
can take time, beginning
with someone gaining a basic understanding of what they may want. It is
anticipated that processes like
the NDIS will have given some people with
disabilities, whose experience with decision making may have been limited under
prior arrangements,
the opportunity to begin to think about their own values,
goals and aspirations which can assist them in making decisions with support
on their own on an ongoing basis. Notwithstanding the complexities and
subtleties involved in helping someone to truly identify
their wishes and
preferences, that determination is fundamental to empowering people to make
their own decisions.
7.4.2 Advance decision
making and directions
In some circumstances, people may experience periods during which their
ability to make decisions about ‘their own good’
can be greatly
impaired, while at other times they are not. This can arise when some has an
episodic condition, like a mental illness,
where someone experiences delirium;
or when someone at a time they have decision making ability is making a plan for
their future
in anticipation that their decision making may become impaired. In
these situations, it can be an advantage for someone to set down
their will and
preferences in a written document, when their decision making ability is not
impaired or is less impaired. This is
something which arises most commonly with
health care decision making, but need not be limited to this area.
The concept of an enduring power of attorney is based on the theory, that a
person who (in the old paradigm) has decision making ability,
sets out their
wishes for a time when they ‘lack capacity’ and appoints someone to
make decisions on their behalf at
that time. The theory is that the person
giving the Power of Attorney is best placed to choose the person likely to
decide as they
would want to decide if they were able. In practice, experience
shows that this can be more complex than theory envisages. People
may make an
enduring power of attorney a long period before it becomes ‘live’,
that is, when they ‘lose capacity’,
and their will and preferences,
and circumstances may have changed. The person named may no longer be the
appropriate person for
a range of reasons: for example, their relationship may
have changed, or the person may lack the current knowledge to stand in the
person’s shoes or to act in their ‘best interests’. Because
currently these documents are not registered, it may
also be difficult to find
the document, and to know if a document found is the most recent iteration.
This was an issue discussed
in a submission to the
7.4.3 Health care
decision making
The importance of the legal requirement of consent in relation to health care
decisions (unless there is a life or death emergency),
has meant that this area
has attracted a wide range of legislative procedures relating to forms of health
care substitute decision
making and ways of recording will and preferences.
These include:
• creating a power to deal with a range of health care matters through
an enduring power of
• the creation of a health direction under the Health Directions
• the making of a guardianship order under the Guardianship Act,
covering giving consent to a health procedure or treatment
(Section 7(3)(e)
(other than ‘prescribed medical procedures’ under section 70,
consent for which can only be provided
• using the Health Attorney provisions of Part 2A of the Guardianship
Act, that were introduced in 2008 and were discussed in
section 3.1.5; and
• using advance agreements (under section 26), advance consent
directions (under section 27) and nominated people under the
Mental Health
In addition to these statutory provisions, there is a separate administrative
process through the Respecting Patient Choices Team
in ACT Health, variously
called an advanced care plan
or a statement of choices.
Neither of these instruments has statutory power, but they are intended
‘to inform your attorney and the doctors of your medical
While this is
a useful initiative, and is supported by a central register in the Canberra
Hospital, health care consumers have raised
concerns that the electronic
information is not available if someone is admitted to the Calvary
These provisions exist side by side with conflicting common law principles
where consent is not required in a life or death emergencies
(non-consensual
intervention) or where doctors may choose not to provide or inform someone about
specific kinds of care, if the doctor
determines it is ‘medically
futile’ (non-consensual non-intervention). In Council’s
consultations, this later
concern was raised in relation to care offered to
people with disabilities. The example given related to a resident of a group
who was diagnosed with cancer. While the cancer was medically operable,
the treating doctor refused to offer this treatment and
said the man was to
receive palliative care only ‘because of his poor quality of life’.
When asked about this decision
by group home staff, the doctor stated that
living in a group home compelled his
conclusion.
What is most apparent when looking at current legal and administrative
options is there confused status, both for doctors and patients.
This is as true
for those who are required to step into the shoes of, say an unconscious person,
in relation to an often already
stressful and unexpected health care decision.
While different acts recognise the existence of other legislative provisions,
interaction is complex and not well understood and can often depend on
the different sequence of documents which cannot readily
be accessed or
determined. The exact nature of someone’s substitute or representative
decision making power is therefore likely
to be unclear and the documents
providing the legal basis for it may not be readily available.
Similarly, the limitations on what can be decided, or the ability to give
consent and the principles on which these decisions are
to be based are not
always the same and often contradictory. The administrative requirements for
each can be different. Part of
the suggested reforms must be to introduce a
health care decision making regime, which is straight forward, consistent, and
predictable
for both patients and doctors. By including health care decision
making in the decision making legislation, many of the existing
anomalies from
the multiple options for health care decision making can be addressed and
Consumer and carer concerns voiced about the wider, potentially unpredicted
negative effect of documenting their will and preferences
at a single point in
time are supported by research. Studies have looked at the general care of
patients who document a not-for-resuscitation
order. There is evidence that
other more general life-sustaining treatments are sometimes withheld from such
patients, and that
as a consequence they are significantly more likely to die
from non-resuscitation related
Sometimes also, a
treatment which may seem theoretically unacceptable when someone is fit and well
at the time they are documenting
their wishes, may be in fact, judged as more
reasonable and acceptable when an illness or accident brings the decision into
the present
It is therefore important that, even if someone has expressed their will and
preferences on health care matters at an earlier time,
that this be seen as
limited. The existence of such evidence should not be treated as definitive of
their current will and preferences
when circumstances have changed. Where
possible, the person should be supported to re-make their decision in the
current situation,
rather than relying on past evidence.
The UN Convention and ALRC recommendations on decision making encompass the
importance of provisions for someone being able to change
their mind. This is
reflected in discussion about determining someone’s will and preferences
from a written document. In
one of the submissions, positive reference is made
to the operation of the
Adults with Incapacity Act 2000
in Scotland.
While the following description of its operation is not clear from the wording
of the legislative principles set out
in section 1 of that Act, the Law Society
of Scotland describes the constructing of decisions as using a hierarchy
present competent decisions (even as regards only some elements of a matter
to be addressed) always take precedence, past competent
decisions come next, and
there is then a gradation through decisive present choices, significant present
choices, present wishes
and feelings, past wishes and feelings, information from
persons closest to the adult, and so forth down a hierarchy, at the very
of which are the norms of the society of which the adult is a
7.5 Implementing the
ACT Decision making Framework
The Council believes that new Framework for decision making needs to ensure
that it sets support pathway which must be explored and
exhausted, before a
representative decision-maker can to be appointed or used. This includes
reasonable accommodation, various forms
of supported decision making and
co-decision making. The legislation should allow a range of supported decision
making models to
develop and be tried, within the safeguards provided later, as
the understanding of how best to support someone in any particular
circumstance
is still being explored. It is also likely that this will change over time,
with different people and with different
decisions, so the legislation should
enable rather than prescribe at this stage.
What is also clear is that it is likely to take some time to build the
capacity of decision-makers, supporters and representatives
to understand and
develop skills to operate under the new framework. One option that will provide
a useful signpost for the community
would be the use of an exposure draft for
consultation prior to implementation. If the Government accepts in principle
for the changed framework, then an exposure draft with a significant
consultation period may allow better adjustment to the changes.
In addition it
allows the Government time to make appropriate arrangements and to set up an
administration to handle the registration
of documents where someone sets out
their will and preferences, before there is any impairment of their decision
making ability,
as well as to ensure adequate safeguards are put in place.
The absence of statutory oversight under current guardianship legislation,
including a mechanism for registration, was discussed in
Directorate’s
submission,
position of a guardian was compared to the obligations of the Chief
psychiatrist, when making decisions affecting people
Mental Health
. It was noted that there were many more regulatory protections for people
under that Act. Some of the areas of where a lack of
oversight were of concern
• The lack of a register of guardians;
• The possibly unnecessarily wide powers of guardians to determine
where someone lives and with whom;
• The lack of requirement of written decisions when a guardian makes
important decisions for the protected person eg about where
they will live;
• The sometimes time unlimited orders which can be unduly intrusive for
many whose decision making capacity varies over time
eg many mental health
• The limitation on the guardian’s requirement to consult with
carers and important others when a decision is made about
the person – if
the guardian decides such consultation is not in the person’s best
interests they don’t have to
• The lack of a requirement to report to ACAT is someone who no longer
needs to be subject to substitute decision making.
The submission goes onto recommend a range of statutory protections that the
Health Directorate considers to be necessary and appropriate
for people with
impaired decision making ability, to ensure that their human rights are
The registration of all representative or supported decision making
arrangements provides a means of enabling oversight of the arrangements
appropriate oversight body, such as the Public Advocate or public trustee and
guardian and for periodic review by ACAT as well
as providing a means of
ensuring that someone’s will and preferences are able to be accessed.
This should commence as soon
as possible, and initially include all operational
guardianship orders and Enduring Powers of Attorney, sought to be exercised in
the ACT, wherever made.
7.5.1 Determining and
recording a person’s will and preferences
Respecting the will, preferences and rights of people who require support to
exercise their decision making ability is a central feature
of the new ACT
Decision making Framework. Determining the will and preferences of a person
with impaired decision making ability
may require a new set of administrative
processes. The determination will often be made through discussion and
engagement between
the decision-maker and their supporters, family, carers and
service providers at the time of decision making. This is necessarily
deliberative process. Such a process of discussion and engagement is not
possible for instance where a person is unconscious
or otherwise unable to
express their will and preferences. Some other process for determining the
person’s will and preferences
is then required.
There are a limited number of ways that a person can record their wishes and
preferences under current legislation in the ACT. Existing
provisions,
particularly in relation to medical decision making, are complex and, at times,
conflicting. There is no central administrative
arrangement to record the will
and preferences of a person for subsequent access when needed. A requirement to
register any such
expression of will and preferences could also allow an
oversight or review body to have point-in-time evidence of the will, preferences
and rights of the decision-maker.
Recommendation 9:
9.1 The new ACT Decision making Framework should provide the opportunity
and a mechanism for people to formally record their will
and preferences about
specific issues, in a way that can be readily accessed when needed. Existing
mechanisms such as advance care
directions or consents and agreements under the
Mental Health Act
provide potential models. Extending such options to other
areas of decision making should be explored and developed for affected
to be able to formally record their will and preferences about specific issues.
9.2 Where existing Enduring Powers of Attorney are in operation, a
transition period should be set to provide opportunity for such
agreements to be
registered or renewed so as to remain operative.
The first necessary step to ensure decision making arrangements can be
safeguarded under the proposed ACT Decision making Framework
is to know they
exist. At the moment, there is no scrutiny of substitute decision making under
the enduring power of attorney provisions
Powers of Attorney Act
powers exercised may be as significant as those exercised under the Guardianship
Act. In future, where someone wishes to
appoint another person as a supporter
or a representative, a register will be required to ensure that these wishes are
known if and when needed.
Recommendation
10.1 The Council proposes that in the transition period, all existing
substitute decision making arrangements be brought under a common
registration
and monitoring regime, to facilitate the transition to the new ACT Decision
making Framework.
10.2 Where a person wishes to nominate a supporter or representative for
situations where they may need support for decision making
in the future,
administrative processes for the registration of all such agreements should be
developed as part of the transition
arrangements. Registration will facilitate
the formal recognition of people’s will and preferences, and provide
administrative
capacity to monitor and review such arrangements to ensure the
protection of the rights of decision-makers with impaired decision
7.5.2 Building
community capacity for change
In addition to the need for legislation change, the paradigm shift set out in
the recommendations above will require consequent cultural
and procedural
change. The new ACT Decision making Framework will affect many people,
including existing guardians and managers,
people subject to guardianship,
carers and families, service providers, as well as the broader community.
Significant community
capacity building will be required to enable the effective
implementation of these transitional changes in order to fully implement
supported decision making.
The NDIS and its accompanying disability transition strategy has already
commenced the required process of community capacity building.
Many carers at
the Council’s consultation meetings indicated that they were already
moving to supporting their family member
to make decisions. Learning from these
experiences, the necessary building blocks for supported decision making need to
place alongside any legislative change.
Evaluation of the NSW supported decision making pilot defined supported
decision making as ‘the process of assisting a person
with disability to
exercise their legal capacity to act on an equal basis with
definition appropriately highlights the shift from the paternalism of the
determination of a person’s best interests
by someone else, to a
rights-based approach where a person’s will and preferences, usually
evidenced by their express wishes,
are respected as defining the
individual’s legal personhood and guiding their exercise of their own
legal agency.
For people who are operating as substitute decision-makers under existing
arrangements, using a ‘best interest’ test,
the shift to giving
effect to will, preferences and rights will be a challenging one. New insight,
understanding and skills will
It is the Council’s view that significant community capacity building
will be needed in order to properly enable the effective
implementation of
transitional changes to supported decision making which includes information
dissemination, training and resources.
The first priority is to develop resources to provide explanatory information
and to support educational programs to promote community-wide
understanding of
supported decision making. The recent evaluation of a supported decision making
pilot in NSW emphasised the crucial
importance of providing information in
accessible formats.
Secondly, it is a priority to provide skills training for those who are
decision-makers and guardians under current legislation.
Such training should
be developed for both on-line and face-to-face delivery, and be targeted to
individuals or groups who will provide
Training is also required to assist community organisations and others to
develop and provide training in supported decision making
to people in
guardianship arrangements. The NSW pilot showed that individualised training
with supporters and the person they were
supporting were considered both more
which decision-makers
can opt into the new arrangements once they completed
appropriate training.
Thirdly, people who need and want decision making support will need
appropriate administrative mechanisms to assist them in obtaining
such support
and in making supported decisions. In its submission to the Council, Advocacy
for Inclusion recommends the establishment
of a supported decision making hub,
as a ‘central collection or repository for supported decision making
information and resources,
including independent explanation of the benefits and
challenges of different decision making practices and customisable template
agreements’. Advocacy for Inclusion proposes that the hub could provide
training and independent explanatory information and
include specialised staff
... would need to be experienced communicators and well-trained in presenting
options in an unbiased unpressured style. The hub should
not privilege or
promote one particular style or method of supported decision making, but rather
should encourage customisation and
innovation to ensure people can receive
decision making support in a way that suits their needs and preference.
Such a hub would provide a place for people to go for advice and information,
and allow the development of specialised skills in accessibility
to assist the
making of reasonable adjustments to meet the needs of people requiring decision
making support.
The Council considers that an adequate transition period is required, where
elements of the legislative part of the Framework, are
implemented, accompanied
by appropriate education and community information. These changes are likely to
require time and resources
to develop and implement properly. Community
capacity building which will be required to implement the new ACT Decision
making Framework,
(a) the development and provision of explanatory information and education
programs to promote supported decision making skills and
change decision making
culture across the community;
(b) support for relational changes necessary to allow greater decision making
by those who are currently under a substituted decision
making arrangement;
(c) observation of and learnings from pilot supported decision making
(d) development of ways of assessing the supports someone may need to
exercise their decision making ability;
(e) assistance for people with impaired decision making abilities to become
‘decision ready’ and learn specific decision
making skills for those
decisions they see as important to their lives;
(f) administrative mechanisms to help facilitate the making and
implementation of supported decisions, including guidelines for the
roles in a supported decision making environment; and
(g) development of appropriate registration processes, so that people can
record their will and preferences and any formal arrangements
they want to
operate to support their decision making;
(h) development and implementation of appropriate monitoring and oversight
mechanisms, where these are necessary.
Recommendation 11:
The Council recommends that there be a transition period for
implementation of the new ACT Decision making Framework in acknowledgement
the need for considerable community capacity building, the development and
delivery of educational and information programs, and
the necessary review of
existing administrative arrangements to occur.
7.6 A summary of key
elements of the ACT Decision making Framework
1. Decision making
a) the decision making ability of all adults is presumed;
b) the presumption of a person’s decision making ability is not
rebutted by either a challenge to a person’s decision
making ability, or
the appointment of a supporter, co-decision-maker or representative
decision-maker;
2. Reasonable
Accommodation
a) where someone’s decision making can be enhanced through reasonable
accommodation for example by easy English explanations,
through choosing a
quiet place to enable them to think more easily, by providing communication
assistance etc, this must be done;
3. Supported decision
making model
a) supported decision making requiring the determination of and compliance
with the person’s will and preferences is the default
decision making
b) legislation will enable different models of supported decision making,
rather than prescribe a single model, depending upon the
needs and support
resources available to the decision-makers, including co-decision making;
c) representative decision making which occurs only when a person has no
ability to make a supported decision or to co-decide, requires
the determination
of and compliance with the person’s will and preferences or, where these
are not known, compliance with the
person’s rights;
4. Supporters and
decision-makers
a) the roles of supporter, co-decision-maker and representative
decision-maker be recognised and defined in legislation and coordinated
NDIS to ensure a mutual recognition between the ACT and the NDIS processes of
supported decision making;
b) a supporter, co-decision-maker and representative decision-maker will
support a person to make a decision that gives effect to
the person’s will
preferences and rights, limited only when compliance with their will and
preferences is likely to lead to
high risk of significant harm to themselves or
5. Appointing a
supporter or decision-maker
a) a person may choose to appoint another person as their supporter,
co-decision-maker, and representative decision-maker either informally
application ACAT;
b) ACAT may, after a functional assessment of the person’s decision
making ability appoint a supporter, co-decision-maker or
representative
decision-maker;
c) an appointment by ACAT is for a specified decision or set of decisions,
for the shortest time possible, with the least possible
limitation on the
person’s rights and interests, and subject to regular review by ACAT;
d) any person may make an advanced directive appointing a supporter,
co-decision-maker or representative decision-maker in future,
to operate only
when the person’s decision making ability becomes impaired, a functional
assessment of the person’s decision
making ability is carried out, and an
order is made by ACAT to give effect to the advanced directive;
e) a representative decision-maker will only make decisions that give effect
to a person’s will and preferences as far as they
can be ascertained, and
otherwise that are consistent with the person’s rights;
6. Enabling decision
a) parties with an interest in a decision, defined by role or status in
particular circumstances, have an obligation to make reasonable
adjustments to
support a person in their decision making;
b) mechanisms which enable decision-makers to record their will and
preferences for later consideration like advance directives should
be able to be
formally recorded so they are available if needed at any time.
8: SAFEGUARDS
Overview of this Part
The UN Convention Article 12(4) requires that states put in place
‘appropriate and effective safeguards to prevent abuse’
the exercise of legal capacity, ‘in accordance with international human
rights law’:
Such safeguards shall ensure that measures relating to the exercise of legal
capacity respect the rights, will and preferences of
the person, are free of
conflict of interest and undue influence, are proportional and tailored to the
person’s circumstances,
apply for the shortest time possible and are
subject to regular review by a competent, independent and impartial authority or
body. The safeguards shall be proportional to the degree to which such
measures affect the person’s rights and interests.
This Part describes some of the concerns, and corresponding safeguards, that
need to be addressed when shifting to supported decision
8.1 Introduction
The framework of supported and representative decision making set out in the
recommendations and detailed in Section 10 below is designed
to replace all
substitute decision making arrangements based in a ‘best interests’
paradigm. It has supported decision
making at its centre, supplemented by
representative decision making in situations where, even with the most support
available, the
person does not have the ability at that time to make decisions.
The basis for any intervention is always to ensure that the will
and preferences
of the person are given effect, supplemented by their rights. This requires the
establishment of appropriate safeguards
as set out in Article 12(4) of the UN
Convention set out above.
The ALRC Guidelines provide an instructive example of a simple set of
safeguards:
Safeguards Guidelines
(Recommendation 3-4)
(1) General
Safeguards should ensure that interventions for persons who require decision
making support are:
(a) the least restrictive of the person’s human rights
(b) subject to appeal, and
(c) subject to regular, independent and impartial monitoring and review.
(2) Support in decision making
(a) Support in decision making must be free of conflict of interest and undue
(b) Any appointment of a representative decision-maker should be:
(i) a last resort and not an alternative to appropriate support
(ii) limited in scope, proportionate, and apply for the shortest time
possible, and
(iii) subject to review
However, in relation to people with disabilities and decision making, there
are a number of vulnerabilities that can arise and barriers
to effective
decision making which require consideration, many of which arise from the power
imbalances that often exist in support
relationships.
8.3 Vulnerabilities in
a supported decision making context
8.3.1 Limited
expectations and expressing will and preferences
The family were thrilled. They never believed ... this
gentleman had this in him. I think they have taken a step aside and [are]
realising the gentleman is capable of making some decisions. Whereas previously
he has been coerced and molly-coddled and managed
... so they’ve seen
another side to him that they have absolutely celebrated.
South Australian SDM Pilot Report, page 16
The first necessary safeguard mentioned in submissions and the pilots arises
in the context of the determination of a person’s
will and preferences: a
person’s ability to decide and express their will and preferences is open
to inappropriate influence
by those who are trying to help or protect the
person. It may also be open to limitation, because the supporters, carers or
may have a limited views of the person’s abilities.
The family or carers of a person with a disability may think or be advised to
‘not expect too much’ of the person. This
self-fulfilling, particularly when the family or carer is trying to protect the
person from experiencing ordinary life
circumstances of success and failure.
The NSW pilot evaluation found that the attitudes and actions of others could be
a significant
barrier to a person’s effective decision making:
In the main, the barriers to supported decision making were not intrinsic to
the specific decision maker but to others around them,
the general life
circumstances of people with a disability such as social isolation (leading to
difficulties with supporter recruitment),
lack of power and familiarity with
making decisions, low expectations by others, power imbalance and conflict of
interest in relationships,
and the length of time it takes for someone to be
supported to become
‘decision-ready’.
The NSW pilot evaluation noted the difficulty for some family members in
moving to supported decision making:
Decision makers commonly nominated family members as their preferred
supporter. Not all family members were willing to take on this
withdrawal of one participant from the pilot corresponded with the decision of
her mother to decline to be involved in
... I think we can understand him better because we're
listening. He hasn't changed. In actual fact, the [training] probably didn't
change him, it changed us. You know, because institutions are mostly about what
people need, but they're generally not about what
people want, and that's the
– it's only a fine change, but it's worth everything.
South Australian SDM Pilot Report, page 8.
Trusted close relationships which an individual may have with a family member
can be beneficial to the supported decision making process.
Notwithstanding
this, the pilot showed that in reality family members were not always a natural
fit. Some family members did not
wish to take on the role; in other situations,
family members did not support the person’s desire to make more of their
decisions ... Sometimes there was conflict of interest with family members
as supporters.
The NSW pilot evaluation reported that the fears of families and service
providers can limit people in exercising their decision making
The pilot showed a number of ways in which a person’s choices were
limited. These included restrictive family attitudes and
lack of interest in
supported decision making, rhetoric around supporting the growing independence
of family member with a disability
but resistance in practice and a tendency
(most notably among service providers) to prioritise duty of care over dignity
In other situations, cultural norms in the family environment
influenced decision outcomes. Supporters sometimes felt a protective
stop decision makers from making decisions they considered
The risk that a person’s ability to decide and express their will and
preferences will be influenced by others who have low
expectations of their
ability is best addressed by transitional training, support and change
strategies.
8.4 Managing
8.4.1 Decision making
The second safeguard recommended in submissions relates to the negative
perception that supported decision making involves heightened
risk. There are
two aspects of risk that are relevant: the so-called ‘dignity of
risk’, and the determination of potential
harm from that risk.
There is, understandably, a risk-averse culture associated in the usual
guardianship arrangements that engage in substitute decision
making. This is
described in the submission from Advocacy for Inclusion:
Beyond the practice of formal substitute decision making through the
provision of orders, a ‘culture of guardianship’
exists, brought
their incapacity coupled with a focus
on risk management.
Disabilitycare Australia,
My pathway, my choices, my goals:
Information for participants
Risk minimisation can exclude people with disabilities from participating in
many life experiences. The fear of a person’s
being hurt, making a poor
decision, or suffering a loss has led families, carers and service providers to
focus on minimising that
risk, possibly at a cost to the person’s ability
to experience, develop and enjoy a full life.
The desire to avoid risk can bring with it greater but more subtle risks.
Risk-averse substitute decision making can affect the life
choices and
opportunities of people with disabilities, limiting the development of social
networks and leading to social
Social isolation
is a risk factor in itself.
In its submission Advocacy for Inclusion set out the risks for people with
disabilities in the current system in this way:
People with disabilities are made vulnerable through the social and cultural
environment, which places them in positions of powerlessness.
They are devalued
and disadvantages by an inaccessible society, resulting in high rates of
poverty, victimisation and social isolation,
under employment and low levels of
education. Guardianship compounds vulnerability, it does not negate it.
Guardianship orders
necessitate an imbalance of power, unequal access to legal
assistance and uneven valuing of knowledge in both process and outcome.
perception that guardianship protects and cares for people with disabilities is
unrealistic and must be challenged; as there
are numerous and harrowing examples
where this is not the
Noting that risk is viewed conservatively by support agencies, families and
carers of people with disabilities, Advocacy for Inclusion
This means that people with disabilities, and particularly those under
guardianship orders, are prevented from taking risks that people
disability may freely
‘dignity of risk’
Fear is implanted in us as a preservative from evil; but
its duty, like that of other passions, is not to overbear reason. ... When
is discovered to be groundless, it is to be eradicated like other false
Samuel Johnson,
The Rambler
, No 126, 1 June 1751:
pages 134-135.
Risk is inherent in all decision making, so the right to make a decision
necessarily carries with it the risk of poor decision making;
most people,
especially when they are learning about making decisions, make some unwise,
unfortunate or ‘bad’ decisions.
People underestimate risks or do
not pay adequate heed to them. This is part of the process of learning not only
making but also about exercising personal autonomy. As the ALRC
Supported decision making processes prioritise personal autonomy and
recognise that individuals should be empowered with information
decisions – even bad ones (acknowledging the dignity of
It is in this sense that all people are said to enjoy ‘the dignity of
risk’; risk is integral to the dignity of exercising
personal autonomy.
Both the ALRC Final Report and the NDIS Act encompass the concept of
‘dignity of risk’ in their discussion and principles.
notes in paragraph 2(d) of its Support Guidelines (‘A person’s
decision making ability is to be assessed, not
the outcome of the decision they
want to make’) the prevalence of an outcomes-based approach in place of an
approach that gives
scope for ‘what is described as ‘the dignity of
risk’ which is underpinned by the framing principle of
submissions which warn against the idea that sometimes people should be able to
make bad decisions, particularly in relation
to financial matters, the ALRC
An important shift arises where the person involved has expressed will and
preferences that are likely to be financially detrimental.
While the [UN
Convention] has referred to the need to protect people from ‘undue
influence’, it has also said that protection
must ‘respect the
rights, will and preferences of the person, including the right to take risks
and make mistakes’.
In the general principles of the NDIS Act, such ‘dignity of risk’
is clearly recognised:
s 4(4) People with disability should be supported to exercise choice,
including in relation to taking reasonable risks, in the pursuit
of their goals
and the planning and delivery of their supports.
Supported decision making demands recognition and acceptance of the reality
of risk. This means a shift in approach, from preventing
risk to minimising
risk. The risk of harm can be minimised in different ways. If, for example,
there is a concern about a person
returning to their own home from institutional
care because they may not be able to manage the stove for cooking, then
adjustments
can be made to the environment, such as an induction cook top, a
microwave oven, or ‘meals on wheels’. The effectiveness
adjustments can be reinforced by a supporter discussing risks with the person,
and ways of managing them. For example,
if a person wants to travel on public
transport unaccompanied, they may need skills development, with a training
assistant, in the
catching of buses or trains and timetabling, and assistance
with ‘stranger danger’ awareness.
Supported decision making requires a supporter to explore options with the
person, to identify outcomes of a decision that best align
person’s will preference and rights while, at the same time, putting in
place risk controls and harm minimisation
strategies. This may mean trialling
something which may or may not work. An example of this is given by the Swedish
Personal Ombudsman:
After a stay in hospital, a client wanted to live in a flat of his own.
Since this was the client’s wish, he was supported
by the PO, while many
other professional involved with the client advised against it, saying that it
would not work out. This in
fact turned out to be the case: the client
eventually moved into housing with special support and was very happy there.
Professionals
in the social services and psychiatric services thought that this
was an unnecessary failure, while the PO’s view was that
the reason why
the client was so happy in the special housing was that he had been given the
chance to live in his own flat.
8.4.3 Determining risk
One consideration in determining appropriate risk safeguards is that people
are usually not very good at determining the magnitude
of a particular risk.
Human beings are neurological wired to respond to threat, initially from an
emotional response of fear and,
possibly and later, in light of actual data on
A fear response can
result in people attaching too great a risk to a rare event and ignoring the
more common, frequent causes of
harm. Often as well, the risks that people
discuss are in fact concerns about their own liability if risks materialise; the
of ‘duty of care’ is often raised by families, carers and
service providers as a reason for their reluctance to respect
the will and
preferences of someone with a disability. The NSW Pilot showed, particularly
among service providers, a prioritisation
of duty of care over allowance of
risk. The report also showed that this was an issue with supporters as well,
when they felt ‘a
protective need to stop decision makers from making
decisions they considered too
It is unsurprising, therefore, that families, carers, service providers and
regulators take a risk-averse approach to decision making
for people with
disabilities. The NSW Pilot report described the balance required:
While service providers may have a risk averse culture, some individuals
might need access to specific training and skill development,
which will enable
them to safely undertake a proposed activity.
The report argues that once such training is completed, a further period of
observation can avoid ‘the whole question of duty
of care and dignity of
risk’. However, the report recognises the issue of dignity of risk and
duty of care as ‘a very
real one’ which ‘needs to be
identified, acknowledged and
8.4.4 Unreasonable risk
and substantial harm
It may happen that the only supported decision that is compliant with a
person’s expressed will and preference involves a risk
of substantial
harm, such as death or injury, loss of home work or savings, or a violation of
human rights.
In such cases where there is a concern that a decision by someone whose
decision making ability is impaired would result in unreasonable
and substantial
risk of harm, the ACAT should be given power to intervene and determine whether
the decision-makers wishes should
be honoured or not, having regard to their
will, preferences and rights.
This should not be a right exercisable in all cases of supported decision
making arrangements or co-decision making arrangements.
The right to review the
will and preference of someone on the basis of unreasonable risk of substantial
harm should be limited by
the principle of autonomy exercised by ‘a
competent, independent and impartial authority or judicial
limited review should also be the case with financial
8.5 Conflicts of
interest, and undue influence
The third safeguard considered necessary in submissions relates to the need
to acknowledge and prevent conflicts of interest and undue
influence by
supporters and representative decision-makers performing their roles. These
issues can be complex. There may be a
specific issue with people who are also
in a service provision relationship with the person concerned, and in some cases
family members, carers and friends.
The use of monitors or of groups of people to act as supporters provides a
safeguard and can reduce the potential for inadvertent
exercises of undue
influence or conflicts of interest. In all cases, there will be a need for
training in the expectations of someone
in these roles, to ensure that the
change in the underlying paradigm as a result of these reforms becomes the lived
experience of
decision-makers, their family, carers and service providers. In
some cases, there may need to be a paid person to fulfil this role.
8.6 Resolving
conflicting rights
The fourth set of safeguards recommended in submissions relates to resolving
conflicting rights. In supported decision making, where
the rights of the person
are paramount, there will be occasions when these rights compete with those of
others. For example, a person’s
right to make their own life choices may
be at odds with their (and others’) right to life if their decision
involves risk
Although there is a standard approach to assessing when a limitation on a
right is justified, it may be necessary on each occasion
to decide whether
action in pursuit of one right is a justifiable limit on the enjoyment of
another right. Over time, as the same
issues recur, the same decision can be
anticipated, but it remains the case that the question must always be asked and
is the limitation of a right justified?
Such a constraint on the limitation of rights is implicit in the ALRC
Safeguards Guidelines which require that interventions for persons
who require
decision making support are ‘the least restrictive of the person’s
human rights’, and that the appointment
of a representative decision-maker
should be ‘limited in scope, proportionate, and apply for the shortest
time possible’.
8.7 Ensuring oversight
The Council has been consistently aware of the need to provide a proper
balance between promoting the rights of people with impaired
decision making
ability and the need to consider the risks that may arise, particularly where
the person may suffer great harm without
some protection being in place. At the
same time, the Council is clear that risk is an appropriate element in all
decision making
and that people with impaired decision making, like everyone
else, may sometimes make unwise decisions. The Council is also aware
important that supported decision making results in decisions that are
consistent with the will, preferences and rights
and are not used as a way of
exercising undue influence on the decision-maker, in exercising their decision
making ability with support.
The Council considers there needs to be a
monitoring and review mechanism to provide a light touch but effective set of
safeguards.
The implementation of a new paradigm in relation to decision making may
involve difficulties for some people in making the transition.
As noted above,
there will be a significant need for capacity building for both decision-makers,
supporters, family, carers and
service providers. During the transition period,
there must be a focus on skills development and education to encourage a
willingness
to ‘try out’ new ways of behaving until affected people
feel comfortable in the new paradigm. To ensure that decision-makers
support are able to use their own decision making ability, there will need to be
scope to seek appropriate advice. At times,
intervention may be required to
ensure the will, preferences and rights of the person requiring decision making
support are being
respected and acted upon. Such oversight and review functions
should lie with the Human Rights Commission and/or ACAT.
Recommendation
12.1 Where a person who needs support to exercise their decision making
ability considers that their will, preferences and rights
are not being
respected, a right to seek advice and intervention from the Human Rights
Commission or where necessary, review by the
ACT Civil and Administrative
Tribunal should be established. Grounds for intervention or review would
include breaches of the Guidance
Principles in Recommendation 10 including for
(a) a supporter's unreasonably limited expectations of a
decision-maker’s ability, resulting in the decision-maker having little
no opportunity to exercise their decision making ability to make their own
(b) unreasonable curtailment of risk;
(c) conflicts of interest;
(d) undue influence;
(d) competing rights between the supported decision-maker and their
supporters;
(e) breach of a prescribed standard, resulting in a decision-maker being
unable to exercise their decision making ability; and
(f) decision-supporter overreach.
8.8 Principles and
Guidelines for supporters, representatives and others
There were also submissions suggestion the inclusion of a set of principles
for decision-supporters that could act as an additional
pre-emptive safeguard by
providing a source of clear guidance. The submission from ACT Disability, Aged
and Carer Advocacy Service
(ADACAS) provided a useful example:
ADACAS Principles for Decision Supporters
Every person and every decision will need their own supports. ADACAS has
developed these principles to provide a framework for giving
decision support.
They protect decision supporters as well as decision makers. To be a decision
supporter you must be able to agree
to work to these principles.
1. Every Person has the right to decide
You are born with this right. When you support a person to decide, you are
supporting them to use this right, as far as they are
2. The right to decide can be exercised with support
Regardless of their decision making ability, all people can be supported to
be involved in the decisions that affect them. The focus
is on support not
3. Equality
Decision support is about enabling a person with a disability to approach
decision making with the same expectations, freedoms and
responsibilities as
those who do not have a disability.
4. Respect the decision maker and their decision
To support a decision you must be able to respect the values, experiences and
goals of the decision maker. You must do this even
when you do not share them,
or agree with the decision they are making.
5. Give only as much support as is needed
You must only give as much support as is needed so that the decision maker
remains active and engaged in their decision. Recognise
that different
decisions will need different supports and levels of support may change over
6. Everyone has something to learn
Supported decision making is not disability specific. Everyone has as role.
Everyone has something to learn. Decision making is
a skill that you learn. So
is supporting a decision.
7. The decision being made belongs to the decision maker
The decision maker is free to choose the decisions they want to make and who
will support them. They are free to change their mind,
learn from experience,
be ambitious or creative, take a risk and make decisions that others don’t
agree with. Supporters must
be able to recognise that the decision belongs to
the decision maker. They are supporting the decision, not the outcome.
8. Be mindful of your vested interests
Everyone has vested interests. You must be able to recognise your own vested
interest in the decision being made, and in the life
of the decision maker, and
then consider if you can truly support the decision according to these
principles.
9. The decision support relationship must be built on trust
If you cannot give support according to these principles then the decision
support role is not the right one for you. The biggest
difference you can make
to the decision maker is helping them identify a person who can give support
according to these principles.
The new ACT Decision making Framework requires supporters, representatives
and others who have been acting under the ‘best interests’
substitute decision making paradigm to operate very differently in supported
decision making. This will involve a significant shift
in the power dynamic
within close and sometimes complex relationships. To facilitate this, statutory
non-statutory guidance which
is consistent with the ‘will, rights and
preferences’ supported decision making paradigm will need to be developed
adopted during the transition period. The development of this guidance will
need to take account of the results of supported decision
making pilots
conducted around Australia, as well as well as changes to decision making as a
consequence of the implementation of
Recommendation 13:
The proposed ACT Decision making Framework should include guidance
materials (both directive and informative) for supporters, representatives
others to guide their behaviour appropriately in supporting a person to exercise
their decision making ability.
9: CURRENT TRENDS IN GUARDIANSHIP LAW POLICY AND PRACTICE
Overview of this Part
The implications of the UN Convention for guardianship arrangements have been
the subject of research and experimentation. This Part
describes what has been
done in the area, particularly in the conduct of projects that pilot supported
decision making models.
9.1 The ALRC inquiry
As discussed earlier, the ALRC received Terms of Reference to
‘undertake a review of equal recognition before the law and legal
for people with disability’ in July 2013, and its Final Report on that
reference was tabled on 24 November
just as the Council was
beginning its inquiry into the effect of the UN Convention on the Guardianship
The scope of the ALRC reference covered ‘all relevant Commonwealth laws
and legal frameworks that either directly or indirectly
impact on the
recognition of people with disability before the law and their exercise of legal
capacity on an equal basis with
It extended to
access to justice and legal assistance programs, administrative law, aged care,
anti-discrimination law, board participation,
competition and consumer law,
contracts, disability services and supports, electoral matters, employment,
federal offences, financial
services including insurance, giving evidence,
holding public office, identification documents, jury service, marriage,
partnerships,
parenthood and family law, medical treatment, privacy law,
restrictive practices, social security, superannuation, and supported
substitute decision making.
Relevantly to the Council’s inquiry, the ALRC considered ‘how
maximising individual autonomy and independence could be
modelled in
Commonwealth laws and legal
frameworks’.
out here those parts of the ALRC Final Report that relate to the Council’s
The ALRC’s ‘five framing principles’ of dignity, equality,
autonomy, inclusion and participation and
accountability
National Decision making Principles and Guidelines are discussed in Section 7
below and the basic information will not
be repeated here. The Council believes
them to provide a very useful basis for reform of Guardianship and other
substitute decision
making arrangements in the ACT
The ALRC Final Report provides a detailed analysis of the interaction between
the Australian Government and the UN on these important
and attempts in its
recommendations to meet these concerns. In particular, the ALRC notes that the
UN Committee does not permit
a ‘best interests’ approach to
substitute decision making. The ALRC considers that its recommendations –
for supported
decision making wherever possible, and for ‘representative
decision making’ where someone’s decision making ability
impaired that it was not proper to characterise a decision as theirs – are
likely to meet the concerns of the UN Committee.
The ALRC Final Report comments particularly on laws (similar to those in the
ACT) which refer to both ‘will and preferences’
interests’. The ALRC discusses the conceptual confusion in these laws and
the need for greater clarity about
the role and meaning of the person’s
will and preferences:
Conceptual confusion is also exacerbated when models use ‘best
interests’ language but expressed in terms of giving priority
person’s wishes and preferences. Given the tensions around the usage and
understanding about substitute decision making
– and the blurring between
‘substitute judgment’ and ‘substitute decision making’
considers that it might be preferable to move away from this
language altogether.
The ALRC proposes the terms ‘supporter’ and
‘representative’, to emphasise that when supported decision making
is not possible and substitution is necessary, the decision is still a
representative ‘substituted judgment’ based on
what the person wants
or would have wanted or, if this cannot be determined, based on their human
Under its recommendations in Chapter 4, the ALRC sets out how supported
decision making would work in Commonwealth laws, including
a requirement that
the terms ‘supporter’ and ‘representative’ are included
and that all Acts concerned with
decision making reflect the National Decision
Making Principles. There are also a number of additional provisions relating to
appointment and roles of both supporters and representatives, and about the
alteration of these arrangements.
There are numerous areas of Commonwealth law where the issue of decision
making ability arises, eg under ‘fitness to plead’
arrangements in
Crimes Act 1914
, under mental incapacity provisions in the
Corporations Act
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
and for consent to marry in the
Marriage Act 1961
. The ALRC proposes
that the various tests of incapacity in this legislation be replaced by a test
of a person’s ability to
understand the nature and effect of a decision,
and of the person’s ability to make a decision with support. The ALRC
a framework for assessing this ability:
• the person must be able to understand the information relevant to the
relevant decision
• the person must be able to retain the information for a sufficient
period to make the relevant decision
• the person must be able to use or weight the information as part of
the process of making the relevant decision, and
• the person must be able to communicate their decision in some
The ALRC recommended that State and Territory government review their laws
and legal frameworks concerning individual decision making
to ensure consistency
between this framework, interaction with any supporter and representative
arrangements provided under Commonwealth
law (for example the NDIS), consistency
between jurisdictions in terminology, provisions for maximising
cross-jurisdictional recognition
of arrangements, and adoption of mechanisms for
national data collection.
This is the path adopted by the Council in this inquiry – we used the
foundations of the ALRC Final Report as the basis for
our consultation and
policy considerations, and have sought to be consistent with all of its
recommendation including the National
Decision making Principles and revised
9.2 National Supported
Decision Making Framework
The Australian Supported Decision Making Network brings together practical
expertise on implementing supported decision making in
Australia. Established
in 2012, it has more than 100 members including people with disabilities and
their families, and non-government
and Government Agencies.
In April 2016, the Network published its
Discussion Paper Calling for
development of a National Supported Decision Making Framework
which proposes
the development of a National Framework as a means of engaging ‘policy
makers, governments and other stakeholders
in articulating a common vision for
implementation of the [ALRC’s] National Decision Making Principles’.
The discussion paper sets out the wide-ranging potential uses and benefits of
supported decision making for people with impaired decision
• an alternative or an adjunct to guardianship
• enable people to retain their legal capacity through being an
alternative to enduring documents or powers of attorney as well
as enable people
to make arrangements of their choosing to be implemented in the future if
requires (advance directives);
• a means by which a person can exercise their decision making ability
with support; such as in mental health care and treatment
decisions where it can
be an alternative to involuntary treatment orders;
• enable people to access a range of other rights including having
equal access to healthcare; by being active participants
in health care
• support access housing, legal, financial, telecommunications and
other services;
• extend into people’s personal lives to make decisions around
who they live with, their supports and services, meaningful
employment and the
activities they participate in; and
• enable people to have self-determined relationships, to enjoy a right
to privacy and dignity, and the fulfilment of other
social and cultural rights.
(pages 4-5)
The discussion paper describes steps in Supported Decision Making that have
emerged from practice across the community, noting that
the supports needed and
used will vary over time and with the particular decision. These steps
• building capability to recognise the role of decision making, the
right to equality and self-determination
• learning about decision making
• recognising and expressing a decision
• identifying and establishing support
• exploring a decision
• accessing information to inform a decision
• advocating for the decision
• fulfilling the decision
• ongoing support for another decision.
The discussion paper sets out the range of stakeholders that need to be
engaged in the development of the Framework. It acknowledges
the need for the
Framework to cover a spectrum of responses given the often changing levels of
support that a person may require.
Consistent with the recommendations of the
Council, the discussion paper recommends that legislation and regulatory and
policy frameworks
embody the ALRC’s National Decision making
Principles.
The discussion paper elaborates on the need for appropriate safeguards and an
appropriate balance of risk in supported decision making.
This balance is
expressed as ‘maximising the person’s decision making potential and
autonomy while keeping risk to an
acceptable level’. The discussion on
risk includes a consideration of the dangers associated with over-protection,
benefits associated with a less protective approach to decision making.
It proposes legislative adoption of supported decision making
in a way which
ensures that it achieves the same traction claimed for ‘duty of
care’ obligations. Claims of duty of
care obligations have been used to
prevent someone with impaired decision making from exercising their ability with
support, leading
instead to someone acting as a substitute decision maker.
The discussion paper also calls for the establishment of consistent language,
capacity building, and necessary funding. It advocates
the reallocation of
resources from substitute decision making to supported decision making, and
proposes innovative approaches to
ensure a sustainable shift to supported
decision making including co-design with stakeholders and community capacity
The discussion paper notes the need for evaluation of models, not only to
ensure UN Convention compliance but also to build an evidence
base about what
works, and works best in particular circumstances.
The discussion paper also proposes a set of arrangements to create the
Framework – involving a national supported decision making
involving all stakeholders, the establishment of a national advisory committee
on supported decision making with responsibility
with driving the agenda
(including the creation of the Framework) and increasing the focus on
experiential forms of research, that
recognise and use the expertise of people
with disability, their families, carers, and supporters and the community
9.3 Supported Decision
making Pilot Projects in Australian jurisdictions
9.3.1 South Australia:
2010-12 Office of the Public Advocate Pilot
Introduction
The Office of the Public Advocate of South Australia (OPASA) conducted a
Supported Decision making (SDM) pilot project between December
2010 and October
2012. The project was non-statutory, and in some circumstances operated
alongside existing Guardianship Orders or
Administration
Methodology
The project featured the participant – that is, the person to receive
decision making support – one or more of their supporters,
and a monitor.
Participants chose to participate in the pilot and identified which decisions or
to make. They identified who they wanted
as a supporter or supporters, and understood and accepted that the relevant
decisions would
be their own, not that of their supporter or supporters.
Participants were able to leave the arrangement at any time.
When possible, the participants drew their ‘supporters’ from
existing networks of trusted family and friends. The project
coordinator assumed
the role for some of the participants who could not find suitable supporters or
where a supporter withdrew. Supporters
were required to take the role willingly
and have knowledge of the participant’s personal goals.
A monitor for each participant was appointed with oversight of their
involvement in the process, and was a point of reference if problems
Profile of participants
The project involved 26 participants who agreed to a Supported Decision
Making Agreement.
Recruitment criteria limited participants to people with an intellectual
disability, acquired brain injury, or neurological disease.
Phase 1 of the
project did not include anybody with a mental illness. The organising committee
excluded from eligibility people with
dementia, or mental illness as a primary
diagnosis. In addition, participants who had been assessed as experiencing abuse
were excluded as were those who had been involved in
‘significant conflict’ with family and
Decision making
Central to the project was a ‘Supported Decision Making
Agreement’, setting out details of the participant and supporter,
areas of decision making which the participant wanted to have covered.
The types of decisions or areas of decision making that the participant could
select to be covered by the project were principally
those relating to
accommodation, lifestyle and health decisions, consistently with what could be
included in orders under the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
(SA). The Act provides for guardianship orders to be made for people with
mental incapacity, which meant such persons were unable
to look after their own
health, safety or welfare or to manage their own affairs, and orders could
include any or all decisions about
health, safety and welfare. Differently from
guardianship orders, administration orders could be made for the management of a
affairs, including property related financial matters and various
legal matters. The project’s organising committee excluded
decisions of a type that would be covered by administration
The primary safeguard for the project was that the participant and supporter
made the decision as part of the Supported Decision Making
Agreement, in the
context of a trusting relationship. Further safeguards derived from the roles of
project coordinator and monitor,
and the provision of information to
participants about the Office of the Public Advocate’s Complaints Policy.
The evaluation found (pp 4-5):
The Supported Decision Making project has demonstrated that there were
specific benefits to most of the participants. These were seen
increased confidence in themselves and in their decision making. There was
evidence of improvement in decision making skills.
Participants described the
growth in their support networks. Many reported that they felt more in control
of their lives. Participants
gave evidence that they had increased their
engagement with the community, either through expanding their options or through
decisions that changed their circumstances.
... The evaluation gives evidence that Supported Decision Making was both a
companion process and viable alternative to substitute
decision making for
participants who were initially on Guardianship Orders.
Issue: Guardianship
An issue was that some guardians expressed ambivalence about the concept of
supported decision making, and confusion about overlap.
In particular, they
expressed concerns about whether the supported decision making process might
conflict with their legal obligations
and responsibilities in relation to
guardianship. This suggests the need for careful consideration of legal
obligations and responsibilities
on guardians when a formal guardianship regime
operates alongside a supported decision making scheme.
The evaluation commented (pp 45-46):
Should Supported Decision Making continue to be seen as a viable alternative
to Guardianship, the experience of the project points
to the need for a
considered process, within the processes and structures of guardianship, to
identify potential users of Supported
Decision Making, and the need to clarify,
at a public and formal level, the boundaries and intersections between Supported
Making and guardianship.
The project did demonstrate that, where criteria are clear and the
relationship between Supported Decision Making and guardianship
is delineated,
Supported Decision Making can be a viable alternative to Guardianship. It showed
that Supported Decision Making can
build capacity to the extent that some
existing Guardianship Orders could be revoked.
Issue: supporters
An issue was that more socially isolated participants could not find a
supporter among friends or family, and the project coordinator
had to take on
that role. This suggests that access to supporters may be an issue in future
In relation to the availability of supporters, Oxenham notes that service
providers who take on the role need to consider any conflict
of interest issues,
and that volunteers who take on the role need to consider the implications of
the absence of a pre-existing relationship
with the supported
Issue: the monitor
An issue was that while the concept of the monitor as separate from supporter
is intended to separate responsibilities, the de facto
‘monitor’ for
everyone in the pilot was more often the support meetings that took place
between the project coordinator
and senior staff of the Office of the Public
In recruiting participants for the project, it was discovered that it would
be too difficult for each supported decision-maker to
find somebody they could
appoint as a ‘monitor’ from their networks. There was already
considerable difficulty finding
a ‘supporter’, and that was where
effort was best expended. There were just not enough people in the supported
decision-makers’
lives from whom a ‘monitor’ might be
It was considered that the project structure itself provided a sufficient
‘safeguard’, such that the monitor ‘safeguard’
the evaluation noted (p 53) that ‘[t]he role of monitor in the service
model will need to be re-assessed for its applicability
in processes which, when
in the community, will not operate of necessity within a human research, ethical
framework.’
Proposals for legislative reform
In 2013 the South Australian Public Advocate, in its advisory role about the
operation of the South Australian Guardianship Act, recommended
two legislative
amendments concerning supported decision making: amending the key principles in
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
(SA) to require supported
decision making, and including new sections in that legislation to give
statutory recognition to supported
decision making
arrangements.
these suggested amendments have been enacted.
The Public Advocate also discussed the importance of broader changes to
incorporate supported decision making in the new Disability
Services environment
coming to South Australia with the
In 2013 this broader
context was addressed though two amending Acts which adopted a supported
decision making approach: the
Disability Services (Rights, Protection and
Inclusion) Amendment Act 201 3
(SA), which requires disability services
providers to engage in supported decision making in their work with people with
disabilities,
Advance Care Directives Act 2013
(SA), which in
provides ‘a person must be allowed to make their own decisions
and personal
affairs to the extent that they are able, and be supported to enable them to
make such decisions for as long as they
9.3.2 South Australia:
2013-15 HCSCC Pilot
Introduction
Following the 2010-2102 pilot, the Office of the South Australian Health
& Community Services Complaints Commissioner (HCSCC)
commenced a two stage
project. This started with a pilot stage from October 2013 to May 2014 (the
HCSCC Pilot) followed by a second
project stage ran from August 2014 to May 2015
(the HCSCC Project). An independent evaluation for the Pilot was released in
2014, and an independent evaluation of the Project was released in late
Methodology
The HCSCC described the model as being centred on the decision-maker, and one
or more supporters. The pilot trained, mentored and
coached nine workers –
known as ‘facilitators’ – from seven different Government and
non-Government disability
services to act as project coordinators.
The pilot used voluntary supporters drawn from the participants’
existing circles of family and friends. The main focus of the
project was
building capacity in all parties, the participant, the supporters, and the
facilitators whose job it is to work with
both the participant and the supporter
to establish supported decision making skills.
The facilitators recruited participants, supported participants in choosing
their ‘supporters’, recruited supporters if
necessary, facilitated
meetings, provided appropriate follow-up and, coached, supporters to develop
their ability to support the
participant. The pilot emphasised an intention to
ensure that participants learned and practised with their supporters
wish decision making’ rather than ‘best
interests’ decision making.
Profile of participants
The HCSCC Pilot recruited 11 participants and nine facilitators. The HCSCC
The decision makers are people with complex needs including physical and
intellectual disabilities, with some being non-verbal. Some
institutional settings and/or are dependent on disability services for most of
their needs.
In assessing the pilot, the HCSCC found that a short intervention, of three
or four months, was enough to produce material change
in the lives of
participants. Their support needs eased and their opportunities for independence
expanded, irrespective of their
financial or service provision situation.
The reported outcomes were positive:
In most if not all cases, significant mental health and wellbeing outcomes
were also identified. Most common were increased confidence,
self-esteem and
pride. However, one person was reported to be sleeping better and others as
being happier, more goal oriented and
more focussed.
Five of them made significant life changes, while the other three saw
outcomes described by facilitators as ‘small’, or
achieved due to delays. Yet, the report says: Even ‘for these
decision-makers, changes in relation to mood, self-esteem
and focus were noted,
and impacts on the understanding of other people were identified’.
Issue: Guardianship
An issue was that the program has explicitly excluded people under concurrent
guardianship orders. The one participant admitted to
the program who was under
guardianship made some of the more significant gains from the program. Some
respondents to the evaluation
argued that concurrent guardianship should not be
a barrier to making at least some supported decisions.
Issue: Greater administrative flexibility and
management training
An issue was the need for greater administrative flexibility, such as options
other than team meetings, and for variable individualised
training for
facilitators, managers of Agencies, supporters and participants. It was found
to be sometimes difficult to get people
together for meetings, and there were
occasions when failures to follow-up led to longer delays.
Issue: Limited expectations and conflicts of
An issue was that both service providers and supporters had low expectation
levels for participant decision making ability. Often
the long history of
substitute decision making coloured this attitude. As well, when the
facilitator or supporter needed to support
someone in a decision, conflicts of
interest often arose, and this was not always easy to prevent or address,
suggesting the need
for specific skills in supporters and adequate
safeguards.
9.3.3 South Australia:
2013-15 HCSCC Project
Methodology
The project methodology was similar to that for the pilot, with reduced
participating agencies and an MOU adopted to clarify roles
and expectations of
all parties. Additionally:
• the role of agency liaison was introduced to act as in-house support
for trainee facilitators and back-up if the trainee left
or took extended
• the time available for trainee facilitator was increased to one day a
• the introductory training was extended from 4 to 6 days with an
increase on practical skills needed
• a structured de-briefing process was introduced, and
• the restriction on entry of people under guardianship was
Profile of participants
Ten trainee facilitators – five from each of two disability service
sector organisations – along with their work supervisors,
were trained in
supported decision making processes. In addition, two facilitators who had
participated in the initial training organised
by the project coordinator, were
appointed to the new Agency Liaison position. Ten decision-makers were
recruited, which reduced
The supported decision making model used was seen as effective in the
following circumstances:
• where there is a facilitator and back-up facilitator
• where facilitators are supported in practical and emotional terms by
the program and their agency
• where decision makers have:
cognitive ability to make decisions
a mode of communication
adequate mental health
an interest in making choices
time to commit to learning the skills, and
at least one supporter who could be identified and wanted to be
Positive outcomes were reported for six of the eight decision-makers –
one had withdrawn before completion and one had mixed
outcomes. These positive
outcomes covered a wide range of benefits:
Positive outcomes included goal-setting, increased confidence, greater
assertiveness, reduced frustration and anger with consequent
impacts on service
personnel and costs, increased autonomy in daily living, greater variety in
activities, higher levels of engagement
in community activities and
organisations, increased literacy and numeracy, work related skills, changed
employment and in one case,
a decision to get married. For at least two,
probably three and perhaps more of these decision-makers, outcomes are likely to
costs [in] the participating organisations.
Issue: when positive outcomes occur
An issue identified concerned the requirements needed for positive outcomes.
Positive outcomes for participants required changes
in three areas: voice,
choice and control.
Positive outcomes for facilitators required practical and emotional support
• the development of new knowledge and skills
• role-modelling
• senior leadership support providing financial support and
‘moral authority’ for the program, and
• opportunities for and training in reflection to help refine their
skills and deal with issues as they arise.
Positive outcomes for supporters were influenced by seeing their loved one
being able to make decisions, by feeling more empowered
expectations about community organisations and service providers, and by the
emotional satisfaction of supporting
someone who they care about.
The project evaluation endorsed the model, including further process
refinements. However, it considered a cautious approach was
necessary until
better data on the cost-benefit was available. The report speculated on longer
term savings but considered that
there was a need for independent cost-benefit
modelling on the supported decision making project as an urgent priority.
9.3.4 Australian
Capital Territory – 2013 ADACAS Pilot
Introduction
The ACT Disability, Aged and Carer Advocacy Service (ADACAS) conducted a
supported decision making (SDM) pilot between November 2012
ADACAS’ described the aims of the pilot as to understand how people
with a decision making impairment or whose decision making
undervalued, might be supported to make more decisions.
The ADACAS project took the South Australian trial as a starting point and
sought to add to understanding as to how formal supported
decision making might
be accessed by a cohort of people with a broader range of decision making
impairments and different support
needs. This included people with complex
communication needs, and those whose social isolation prevented them from
identifying a
natural decision support relationship. People needing support to
make financial decisions were also included in the project.
Methodology
ADACAS explains the decision making model, adopted from the South Australian
project, as follows:
In this model, supported decision making takes place in a freely given
relationship, with a decision supporter providing as much support
as necessary
for a decision to be explored, weighed, made and recognised. The decision maker
is always in control and is encouraged
to approach decision making with the same
expectations as a person that does not have a disability. ... This relationship
is overseen
by a monitor who acts as safeguard and coach.
A project coordinator oversaw the pilot to establish and oversee the research
design, conduct community engagement, support the monitor,
and develop processes
and approaches to meet the support needs of the participants and supporters.
There was one monitor appointed, who had the roles of facilitating the
creation of the supported decision making agreements, overseeing
relationships, and providing coaching support where needed. In its 2013 report,
ADACAS recommends ‘[t]hat any supported
decision making initiative include
a paid monitor role to oversee and coach decision makers and decisions
supporters’.
Profile of the participants
Six people with varying degrees of decision making ability participated in
The pilot focused on people with cognitive disability. This term that is
broader and more general than ‘intellectual disability’
includes, for example Down
Operation of the project
The six participants were engaged between November 2012 and January 2013, and
then remained in contact with the pilot until its completion
date of June 2013.
Two expressed a wish to participate during initial community engagement, two
sought involvement on the recommendation
of ACAT, and two were existing ADACAS
The ADACAS 2013 report says:
This group was selected to represent a very broad range of decision making
experiences and decision support needs. This provided the
opportunity to apply
the model in a range of untried contexts and respond to some of the issues
encountered in the South Australian
An important difference from the 2010-12 South Australian pilot was working
with people with more significant support needs. In the
ADACAS pilot several of
the participants were not ‘decision-ready’ or were reluctant to
express a decision. The pilot
included these people to ‘explore what
responses might be needed to secure formal decision support’ in that
ADACAS’s 2013 report notes that the initial interviews with the
participants ‘revealed a diverse range of expectations
and experiences of
decision making. Each of these people enjoyed limited autonomy with lives
largely lived in the service system
and closely monitored by family’.
Their decision making potential was ‘not well recognised’.
At the beginning of the pilot, three of the participants ‘were able to
express their desire for change but lacked the experience,
expectation or
commitment to drive that change’. Another participant could not perceive
that he had decisions to make, despite
being on the cusp of needing to make key
life decision after leaving school. The other two participants were
‘decision-ready’,
and it was these two who were able to identify
people in their lives who they wanted as ‘supporters’.
Interestingly,
both of these participants wanted to make financial
Decision making
Four of the participants used formal, written supported decision making
agreements at some stage in the pilot.
In relation to the range of decisions covered by the pilot, ADACAS did not
exclude financial decisions. Indeed, three of the six people
wanted to make
decisions about money and finances.
The participants had ‘a very diverse range of decision making
experience’, highlighting how supported decision making
responses need to
be individualised in light of the experience and expectation of a broad range of
potential supported decision-makers.
At the outset, three of the six participants said they did not have any
decisions they wished to make. However, by the conclusion
of the interview, with
assistance to articulate their thinking, five of the six were able to express a
desired decision.
Individual stories from the pilot (using
pseudonyms)
Toby was a client of ADACAS and was at risk of homelessness. He was unhappy
with the decisions of his family guardians, and wanted
to make more decisions
himself. He expressed his willingness to make a decision under the pilot
program, either about his accommodation,
or to commence a review of his
guardianship. Toby’s guardians had the power to make accommodation
decisions for him, and were
observed to lack a consultative style, having made
decisions neglecting to take Toby’s will and preferences into account.
did not implement either decision within the pilot timeframe, but he
remained hopeful about his potential to achieve more independence
in decision
Natalie expressed dissatisfaction about her work arrangements. With support,
she was able to articulate this as a prospective decision
support and medication routine in relation to her working hours. Natalie could
not find a supporter, so the project
coordinator assumed that role. Natalie
reported that the respect and willingness to listen shown to her by the
coordinator, as her
supporter’ gave her the confidence she needed to voice
her wishes to make decisions.
Claire wished to make a decision about her accommodation. However, she lacked
decision making experience and had substantial difficulty
understanding key
concepts relevant to that decision. She did not have a supporter, so the monitor
worked with her to develop her
decision making skills and understanding.
The following table, from page 53 of the ADACAS 2013 report, summarises the
pilot’s outcomes.
Both an internal report and an external review were positive.
The ADACAS 2013 report says: ‘There is now clear evidence that
supported decision making initiatives are valuable and enable
people with
disability to be active decision makers who can exercise choice and control over
the decisions that affect their lives’.
The report also noted that:
‘Universally what was discovered was that each person’s capacity for
self-determination
was limited, not by their ability to make a decision, but by
the support they received to exercise decision making’.
The review by the Queensland Office of the Public Advocate commented:
While only based on a small sample, the ACT trial demonstrated that decision
making support, whether informal or formal, can create
positive change for
individuals, families, service providers and the community more broadly. It also
confirmed the need for a spectrum
of decision making supports, from informal to
formal, to meet the varied needs and capabilities of
individuals.
Issue: securing supporters
An issue again was the considerable difficulty in finding supporters. Four of
the six participants experienced social isolation, and
the pilot explored how
such people might access decision support. There were also tensions with family
guardians when trying to secure
supporters.
ADACAS reports that ‘[s]ecuring decision support was the most time
consuming activity within the project’. Four of the
six participants were
able to identify
supporters, but only two actually secured
supporters.
ADACAS’s 2013 report emphasises a need for flexibility in terms of who
a supporter or supporters might be, how long they might
be in that role, and the
scope of decisions they might be providing support for. Accommodating a
‘fluidity’ would bring
supported decision making closer to how
people without a disability make consultative decisions in life.
Participants Claire and Natalie each proposed trusted friends, both with mild
intellectual disability and living in institutional
settings, who they wanted as
supporters. While those friends could clearly identify with many issues the
participants faced, neither
felt able to commit to the role, despite the offer
of coaching and support from the monitor.
Claire approached several others she thought could be her supporter, but was
ultimately unable to secure support within the timeframes
and resources of the
pilot. The project coordinator worked with Claire on developing understanding
of her decision and of active
decision making.
Natalie also approached her sister, who was also her joint guardian. While
there was obviously potential here for tension between
supported decision making
and a ‘best interests’ approach by the sister, the project was
interested to explore how supported
decision making might work concurrently with
guardianship; for example, their concurrent operation might reduce the
use, or misuse, of their powers. However, the sister declined
to take on the role, feeling she would be compelled to make some substitute
decisions, and that having to engage in supported decision making might doing so
more difficult.
In light of the difficulty faced in finding supporters for isolated people,
the organisers considered the possibility of professional
decision support,
acknowledging this would lack the interpersonal benefits of voluntary support.
ADACAS itself took on the role of
‘supporter’ for one participant.
In light of ADACAS’s experience that professional decision support is a
suitable substitute when voluntary support is unavailable,
it recommended:
That supported decision making programs further develop a range of decision
supporter models including freely given known supporters,
volunteer introduced
supporters and professional support.
Issue: guardianship
An issue was that with participants subject to existing long-term
guardianship orders, guardian overreach (even in relation to small,
decisions) was evident, hampering opportunities to develop decision making
experience by practising on the small decisions.
The ADACAS 2013 report notes:
Reassuring guardians that supported decision making could reduce
vulnerability by building new skills while working in tangent with
guardianship orders, helped create acceptance for the possibilities of supported
decision making. One guardian, acutely
distressed by the tension that being a
family guardian placed on the relationship with his daughter, was inspired by
the possibility
that supported decision making could reduce the number of
decisions he may have to make for his daughter.
9.3.5 Australian
Capital Territory – 2014 ADACAS Pilot
Introduction
ADACAS conducted a further supported decision making pilot, this time
focusing specifically on those with a dual diagnosis of psychosocial
intellectual disability.
ADACAS’s aims were:
• to build the decision making ability of people experiencing
psychosocial and intellectual impairment to live the life that
they choose by
making more decisions for themselves, with decision support
• to build the capacity of their communities to recognise and support
their decisions
• to explore how decision support might be made both accessible and
sustainable.
Methodology
Recognising the impact of others in the lives of people with a disability on
respect for their decision making potential, the pilot
engaged with the
communities of the participants, including family, guardians, support workers,
and allied health professionals.
A project coordinator attempted to identify
and engage a ‘supporter’ for each participant from the people in the
participant’s
life. Introducing an ‘external supporter was on option
if the person was socially isolated. If a supporter could not be found,
participant preferred, the project coordinator provided one-on-one professional
decision support. Although 1:1 participant-supporter
relationship was part of
the pilot structure, there was enhanced focus on bringing the
participant’s community along too.
ADACAS specifically recommended investment in supported decision making
training for those who share the lives of people with disability,
to recognise
the people’s rights and potential for decision making.
Profile of participants
The pilot had five participants, each of whom were experiencing a dual
diagnosis of psychosocial and intellectual disability, and
were recognised as
having potential to be more engaged in decision making. Not all of them were
concurrently subject to a guardianship
ADACAS’ 2014 report says that: ‘Overwhelmingly the outcomes
indicate that people whose decision making ability is impaired
can be more
engaged in decision making with support and recognition’. The range and
gained decision making experience
included: having more control in day to day life such as decisions about
clothing and food; ending
restrictive practices; planning for, choosing and
purchasing a pet; social contacts; health care; paid supports; being more
The 2014 report details how participants ‘[g]rew through new
experiences, emerging from exploration of real options driven by
them. Decision
makers were enabled to explore dignity of risk and the responsibilities that go
with rights’. It also describes
their ‘[i]ncreased confidence as
family members, including family guardians, service providers and health
workers, recognised
both their right and capacity to actively live the life that
they choose’.
The report describes how the participants ‘increased expectation to be
engaged in decision making, and experienced decision
making skills including how
to explore options, manage risks, consider responsibilities and
consequences’.
In light of the success of this pilot, ADACAS recommends future supported
decision making programs involve both the development of
the capacity of
individuals and the community at large to engage with supported decision making,
and a concurrent 1:1 support structure
for developing individual capacity.
Issues: guardianship
An issue for ADACAS was that while supported decision making can be used
consistently with the Guardian and Management of Property
Act to ensure least
restrictive practice and the will and preference of the protected person,
subjectivity around what might constitute
a ‘significant decision’
proved an ongoing impediment to decision
The report details ADACAS’ suggestion that:
If decision making ability is assumed and a supported decision is attempted
for each and every decision, the decision maker’s
will and preference may
at least have been established through the support process and subsequently used
to inform any substitute
decisions that may need to be made.
Issues: securing supporters
An issue was that the availability of professional decision support was
essential in giving the opportunity to access supported decision
making. Those
with psychosocial and intellectual disability are especially vulnerable to
isolation and a lack of friendships to draw
on. They may also have particularly
complex and sensitive decisions to make, such that voluntary support may not be
workable. The
2014 report notes professional decision support ‘carried
weight with clinicians and professionals and may, in some cases, be
more readily
available when needed’.
The 2014 report expresses some reservations about the utility of introduced
professional support relationships:
Project time spent exploring introduced support relationships through a range
of organisations who do good works in the community,
as well as those
established as volunteer networks, did not produce positive outcomes. Stigma
around mental illness, lack of confidence
in engaging with people with
psychosocial disability and the complex nature of some decisions, created
difficulty in gaining commitment
from volunteers. Some decision makers
themselves indicated their preference for a professional supporter. This
preference reflected
a lack of willingness to invest in personal relationship,
the need for skill, knowledge and experienced supporters when making and
fulfilling complex and significant decisions.
9.3.6 NSW: Supported
Decision making Pilot 2013-2014
Introduction
The pilot was a joint initiative between the NSW Department of Family and
Community Services, Ageing, Disability and Home Care, the
NSW Trustee and
Guardian and the NSW Public
Methodology
The main aims of the pilot were to learn more about how supported decision
making relationships work, what tools and resources were
useful and what issues
may need to be considered for the broader application of a supported decision
making framework.
The pilot also sought to develop and evaluate education material to raise the
awareness of key stakeholders and the general community
Profile of participants
Twenty-six participants joined the pilot, and six subsequently withdrew. All
participants were drawn from a particular ADHC administrative
region of Sydney.
Five were concurrently under a guardianship order, and nine were concurrently
under a financial management order.
One participant lived in public housing with drop-in support, 13 lived in the
family home, and 12 lived in some form of residential
accommodation, mostly
group homes. Ten were spending their typical day in day programs, three were in
part-time or full-time work,
five were in part-time work and involved with day
programs, two were in a transition to work program, one was in school, and the
remaining five had no formal daytime activity.
Twenty-two of the participants had intellectual disability as their primary
disability, and two had an acquired brain injury as their
primary disability;
the primary disability of the other two participants was not disclosed.
Twenty-two of the participants were verbal,
and the remaining four were verbal
with support.
Profile of supporters
There were 19 people acting as supporters to 16 of the participants. Ten of
those supporters were paid service providers, seven were
family members, one was
a friend, and one was a paid advocate. The pilot facilitators took on the
supporter role for another six
participants. Four participants withdrew from the
pilot without a supporter having been nominated.
The pilot involved training and assistance for supporters, including direct
engagement with facilitators, ongoing coaching and support,
and a workshop.
The report summarised the pilot outcomes as follows:
The pilot demonstrated that [supported decision making, ‘SDM’]
could be successful for a diverse group of people with
a disability and varied
support needs and circumstances.
...Individuals showed increases in confidence and sense of control in their
own lives and were making decisions in areas where they
had not made decisions
The barriers to SDM were largely not due to the person’s disability but
to the lack of supports that were immediately available
to them. Circumstances
of social isolation, lack of power and unfamiliarity with making decisions, low
expectations by others, power
imbalance in relationships and the need for
investment of time within which to do SDM all create challenges for SDM.
Key enablers were 1:1 support and training with a trusted individual and the
time available to work thoroughly through the decision
making process, together
with role modelling, mentoring and training of people in the supporter role and
a shift in the ‘mindset’
of the broader service system providing
services to the individual.
Issue: ‘Decision readiness’
An issue was that for participants to reach the point of ‘decision
readiness’, described as having the knowledge and skills
identified decision:
[F]acilitators in the pilot were required to invest considerable time working
1:1 with each decision maker to build their capacity
to be decision-ready.
Supporters too required mentoring in how to assist in this capacity
The experience of the pilot was that there were significant challenges to
decision readiness, including often limited literacy and
communication skills,
lack of confidence and of course difficulty in securing a supporter. The report
noted that ‘[d]ecision
makers may have a more realistic understanding of
the decision making process after experiencing SDM’ and cautioned that a
person’s ‘communication needs and style need to be established and
accommodated as a first step to SDM’.
Issue: Tools and Resource Materials
An issue was the lack of usefulness of the materials and resources developed
for the pilot. These were:
My life, my decision
– a booklet for the supported
decision making pilot: designed for participants and available in Standard
English and Easy to
Supported Decision Making Pilot Handbook
handbook for supporters who were to help participants make decisions, and for
carers and services providers whether
or not they were being supporters;
Tools and Resources Kit
: a compendium of reading materials,
tools and worksheets drawn together in a folder from local and overseas source,
with website
links to additional information.
It was expected that these resources would ‘reduce the need for
face-to-face facilitation’, however decision makers and
supporters both
reported that they provided limited assistance. They were not seen as
sufficient to enable supported decision making
on their own. The evaluation
noted that:
The pilot demonstrated that the facilitator role was crucial to the
achievement of supported decision making. Facilitators needed
significant time working on a 1:1 basis to support both decision makers and
supported to progress the decisions which had
been identified for the pilot.
The volume of material was seen as overwhelming, and the low literacy levels
of many decision makers meant much was not really suitable.
The exception to
this was the
Easy to Read
booklet, which ‘appeared to serve as a
focal point and added legitimacy to the supported decision making process for
some decision
While some supporters used some of the resources, overall the ones developed
in the pilot were of most use to the facilitators, who
extensively.
Issue: Supporter selection
An issue again was supporter selection:
Choosing a supporter was often one of the first decisions made by decision
makers, with assistance from a facilitator. Finding supporters
proved to be more
challenging than expected. In six instances, the facilitators acted directly as
supporters. This is a fundamental
issue for supported decision making, for
without a supporter there can be no ‘supported’ decision making.
The pilot facilitators, in discussing with prospective participants who in
their networks might be a suitable supporter, tried not
to influence the
person’s decision about who would be appropriate. Some people invited to
be supporters declined to do so,
on the basis that, in their opinion, they were
already implementing supported decision making practices.
The report reported that ‘[i]ndividual choice and staff and
organisation receptiveness combined to make the process of supported
making successful’ for the 10 participants who had a paid supporter, and
noted ‘the potential need to build
the capacity of disability service
providers to become a source of facilitators or supporters’.
Some of the participants had group home staff as their supporter. Some of
those staff indicated they felt time pressures in relation
to the supporter
role, and would have preferred to have had more time supporting the participants
and having that recognised by management.
The report states the need for
recognition of time implications for service providers in the case of staff from
those organisations
taking on a decision making supporter role.
Some difficulties did arise during the pilot in relation to family member
resistance to a decision made by the participant with support
from a paid
supporter. The report further raises the need for conflict of interest risk to
be addressed in the case of paid supporters,
in any future supported decision
making schemes.
In relation to use of the pilot program organisers, or
‘facilitators’, as supporters, the report says the high reliance
this pilot on this source of supporters indicates ‘that any system of SDM
requires the capacity to access supporters who
are not already part of the
networks of individuals who require support with decision making’. The
instances where facilitators
did take on the supporter role in this pilot were
not planned, and so there was substantial time spent by the facilitators on
to know the relevant participants’ preferences, communication
styles and decision making styles.
In relation to the use of family members as supporters, not all family
members who were approached were willing to take on the role
in this pilot.
Indeed, one participant’s withdrawal from the pilot corresponded with her
mother declining to assume the formal
supporter role.
Difficulties encountered in the pilot from the use of family member
supporters included conflict of interest, and resistance to the
desire to make more decisions for themselves. The report noted that readiness
and training may be relevant factors
in any reluctance of family members to
become formal ‘supporters’, and suggests targeted training which
increases familiarity
with supported decision making principles and processes as
a potential remedy for this.
The report made the point that ‘[s]ome individuals will be unable to
identify their own supporters and will need access to an
appropriate mechanism
through which to find [them]’. It added that ‘[a]ccess to an
‘independent’ supporter
can be helpful for some individuals, for
example using an advocate’.
Issue: Other barriers to a successful supported
decision making experience
An issue was a series of unanticipated barriers to successful supported
decision making including lack of interest in supported decision
tendencies especially among service providers to prioritise duty of care over
‘dignity of risk’, and cultural
norms in some family environments.
The report emphasised that any future supported decision making initiatives will
need a focus
on the attitudes of family members and service providers who may
become formal supporters, not just in training about the mechanics
of supported
decision making. It also said that ‘[m]odelling and mentoring (such as
that undertaken by the facilitators in
the pilot) can assist with both training
and attitude change’.
The report said that:
Dissemination of the principles of supported decision making as well as
information about processes which are helpful will be needed
attitudinal and practice changes amongst stakeholders who provide supports to
people with a disability and the broader community.
Issue: Financial decision making
An issue was that most participants said they made few if any of their own
financial decisions. After a couple of months, over half
of participants said
they now made some financial decisions. However, only two of the participants
concurrently under financial management
reported an increase in financial
decision making at that stage.
The report says:
More work needs to be undertaken to develop supports which can assist
individuals who are under financial management to take greater
responsibility
for their own financial decision making.
There needs to be further investigation of the barriers which prevent
individuals under financial management from exercising supported
Issue: Implementation of decisions
An issue was that many supporters lacked the time to assist with
implementation of supported decisions made by the participant. This
problem was
especially acute for paid supporters.
In some instances, supporters felt lacking in ‘authority’ to
assist with implementation. The problem was faced similarly
by participants, who
on occasions decided against implementing their decision out of fear of damaging
relationships. On some occasions,
participants did not want to involve the very
people who needed to be involved for implementation to be successful, such as
members. The report draws from these observations about relationships and
sensitivities that ‘supporters can face dilemmas
to intervene to guide decision makers in the implementation of their
decisions’.
It is notable that ‘in most cases [participants] chose to preserve
relationships instead of pursuing a decision that their supporter
agree with’.
Further, some participants had implementation of their decisions frustrated
by power imbalances between them and service providers.
The report urged a focus, in any future supported decision making
initiatives, on support for the implementation of supported decisions
recommended that ‘[w]eighing up choices and the impact on others should be
part of training in [supported decision
Issue: Guardianship and financial management
An issue was that where a guardian was in place, the guardian reported that
the time taken to make financial decisions was longer
than would be expected in
the absence of a supported decision making arrangement.
The experience of the pilot participants concurrently under financial
management suggests that more financial literacy development
may have assisted
increased financial decision making.
The report cautions:
Adoption of supported decision making processes for individuals who are under
formal guardianship will require more coordination between
the individual and
their supporter and their guardian/ financial manager. There is a time
implication for this.
Recommendations
The report recommended the development of a supported decision making
framework that recognises the need for ‘flexible support
arrangements’, including family members, paid supporters and advocates;
that recognises the need for ‘dedicated supporter
time’; and that
addresses the risk of conflicts of interest where a paid service provider or
family member takes on the supporter
9.3.7 Victoria: Office
of the Public Advocate
Introduction
The Victorian Office of the Public Advocate (OPA) ran an 18-month supported
decision making pilot project funded by the Victorian
Foundation.
an evaluation of
which was released in late March
Drawing on that experience, in September 2015 OPA began a 12-month
collaborative supported decision making project (OVAL) with Victorian
League for Individuals with Disability Inc
aims to recruit, train and match volunteer supporters in Victoria's Barwon
South region with 60 socially isolated people with decision
making disabilities
who wish to receive support with decision making about their National Disability
Insurance Scheme (NDIS) support
Volunteers will assist participants to build their capacity to make
autonomous and informed decisions about their NDIS support plan.
The OVAL Project is funded by the National Disability Insurance Agency
(NDIA), which has identified that further development is required
with disability to assume significant choice and control over their lives.
The OVAL Project will also develop a ‘model of practice’ for
supported decision making for scheme participants, which
include resources and
tools for participants and supporters.
Methodology
The pilot project focused on a core participant-supporter relationship. The
pilot was not designed with a specific ‘monitor’
role in mind.
Profile of the participants
There were 18 participants recruited. OPA recruited adults who had an
intellectual disability and were socially isolated and/or had
few or no informal
supports. The age range of participants was from late teens through to late 60s.
Participants’ accommodation situation varied. Some lived at home; some
in group homes i.e. specialist homes for people with
intellectual disabilities,
and some in residential services i.e. community-run facilities providing meals
etc. Only a few of the
participants actually went to day programs and the like,
in contrast to the 2010-12 South Australian pilot’s participants.
In contrast to the situation in the South Australian
and the ACT, this worked
well for all of them, with very positive outcomes.
The decision to recruit ‘isolated’ participants stemmed from a
desire to avoid the 2010-12 South Australian pilot’s
situation, where
potential participants missed out because ‘supporters’ could not be
found from circles of family and
friends. This drew on the experience in the
sector that a person with an intellectual disability who does not have family
will be especially vulnerable to poor quality of life. The notion of
‘isolation’ broadened as the project coalesced,
and the organisers
set out to find people who were socially isolated and/or had few or no informal
Profile of the supporters
Eighteen volunteer supporters were recruited, none of whom were previously
known to the participants. Each supporter was matched with
a participant, with
one taking on the supporter role for two participants.
It was observed that recruiting volunteers who did not know the participants
addressed the tension that can occur when family members
who take on the
supporter role may be resistant to the person’s wishes.
Decision making
The pilot was designed to cover accommodation, lifestyle and health
of decisions they wanted to make. That shifted as the
trial went on and
participants have practised and developed their decision making processes.
There was no obligation to draw up any formal documentary agreement between
participant and supporter. Only a few supporters expressed
interest in doing
this and a straw poll of people involved in the pilot found that mandating such
a formal agreement was thought
not to be helpful.
Interim assessment of progress / outcomes
The supporters were able to support participants to achieve a wide range of
interventions by:
• breaking the decision making process into understandable and
achievable steps
• obtaining relevant information and presenting it in an accessible
• explaining and assisting with weighing up relevant information and
considerations
• assisting the participant in problem-solving
• assisting the participant to act on their decision
• attending initial appointments with the participant, and
• assisting the participant to link in with self-advocacy or other
ongoing support
One lesson from the pilot was that supported decision making can be less
successful if a person is somewhat ambivalent about the process
engaging with the supporter. Developing or having a good relationship between
the supporter and the decision maker was
Key findings of the evaluation of the
Volunteer supported found their interactions with the broader Disability
Services context often problematic. Almost all of them expressed
frustration
that these services often slowed down or impeded the decision making process for
the participants. Family members also
often acted as a negative external factor
– many having difficulty ‘letting go’ to enable the
participants to experience
the decision making process and practice their
skills. There were also difficulties with participants who wanted to make
but were having difficulty breaking away from what their families
The 12-month timeframe and commitment of support was not considered
satisfactory, as participants were not ready to ‘go it alone’
even to reduce contact. The process ended and the participants were then going
to be left without decision making assistance
and support. This was, in part,
because the plan of the pilot had been to address social isolation, but this had
not worked well
enough by the end of the pilot.
The supports felt that their role definition had not been clear enough, and
in some cases, support had moved into advocacy. The supports
felt that the
organisation running the new OVAL project, VALID, had better delineated three
main advocacy roles:
• Standing behind – providing training, information and advice to
empower people to self-advocate;
• Standing beside – providing assistance (offering prompts and
reminders) to assist the person raise issues with others;
• Standing before – providing representation (acting or speaking
on behalf of the person.
These definitions made it clear that support and advocacy overlapped and that
some advocacy may be necessary for the supporter to
do their job. The new OVAL
project will be addressing these issues.
Other developments in Victoria
Following the release of the VLRC’s Final Report on Guardianship in
2012, the Victorian Parliament introduced amendments to
give a legislative basis
for supported decision making under the
Mental Health Act 2014
Power of Attorneys Act 2014
Guardianship and Administration Bill 2014
which has subsequently lapsed. The
Mental Health Act
in Victoria includes a provision in its principles that
11(c) persons receiving mental health services should be involved in all
decisions about their assessment, treatment and recovery
and be supported to
make, or participate in, those decisions, and their views and preferences should
be respected;
However, there is little else in the Act that sets out how this will be put
into effect.
Powers of Attorney Act 2014
(Vic), sets up a new arrangement
called a Supportive Attorney, to allow someone to be appointed to provide
assistance in decision
making. The lapsed
Guardianship and Administration Bill
had proposed a range of mechanisms including a Supportive Guardian.
The Victorian Department of Human Services has prepared a set of materials
for service providers and decision makers on supported
decision making in
preparation for the introduction of the NDIS. This included a quick reference
guide for disability support workers,
and a booklet for service
A corresponding
set of resources was made available for people with disabilities by Disability
Services (Department of Human
The following the
poster which summarises the principles to be used in supported decision
9.4 Lessons from the
These pilots provide many lessons for the future, including three primary
mechanisms for changing the understanding of the decision
making ability of
those have impaired decision making ability:
• challenging history – particularly negative expectations and
assumptions
• permission to try – a recognition that some things will succeed
and some will not and it’s alright to ‘give
• development of skills to work differently – for
decision-makers, supporters, families and service
Transition to a will, preferences and rights based system of supported
decision making can be a positive learning opportunity for
everyone if the
concerns and fears of carers, families and service providers are acknowledged
and addressed in the transition.
Other lessons from the pilot studies include:
• Participation: There needs to be considerable flexibility in finding
supporters. There need to be flexibility in terms of
who a supporter or
supporters might be, how long they might be in that role, and the scope of
decisions they might be providing support
for. Supported decision making
programs need to develop a range of decision supporter models including known
supporters, volunteer
supporters and professional supporters.
• Publications: Easy-to-read Standard English fact sheets and web
accessible resources are essential. They can serve as a focal
point to the
supported decision making process.
• Training: Training needs to focus not just on the mechanics of
supported decision making process but also on addressing attitudes
members and service providers, including lack of interest, low expectation on
decision making capacity, defaulting to a
duty of care approach, and
unsupportive cultural and family norms.
• Implementation: There needs to be adequate provision in terms of
time and resources to assist with the implementation of
supported decisions made
by participants.
It is the Council’s view that a significant period of transition is
required to effectively implement the change to supported
decision making, as
set out in Recommendation 11 above. Procedural and preparatory changes drawn
from the experience of supported
decision making pilots conducted in the ACT and
other jurisdictions should guide this transition.
10: RELATED MATTERS
The UN Convention requires that people with disabilities have the right to
recognition as ‘persons before the law’ in
all circumstances, and
that they enjoy legal capacity on an equal basis with all other people. While
the Council’s Terms of
Reference focus on the current Guardianship Act and
supported decision making, it is clear that the requirement for equal
recognition
need to be evident in other ACT legislation.
10.1 Amendment of
legislation that relates to legal capacity
The Council was made aware through its research for this reference that the
terms ‘legal capacity’ and ‘mental capacity’
(sometimes interchangeably) in many pieces of legislation in the ACT, in ways
which do not comply with the Convention’s
intention. There is significant
variation, ambiguity and confusion about what is constituted by
‘capacity’ in these
various provisions. In some instances,
‘capacity’ refers to legal personhood; in other instances,
is concerned with decision making ability, or ability to
do some other task specified in the legislation. Appendix 2 includes lists
of the ACT legislative provisions that instance this.
In order to comply with the spirit of the UN Convention, ACT legislation
needs to be reviewed to ensure consistency in the treatment
of all people as
equal before the law. Any legislative limitations on this equality must be
framed in a way which is consistent
with a person’s ability to carry out
the specific functions under the relevant legislation (with such support as
if that ability is impaired).
Recommendation 14:
The Council recommends that the Government undertake an audit of ACT
legislation to identify where amendments are required to give
effect to Article
12 of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities to ensure
that all people (including those with
disabilities) are treated equally before
the law and, where necessary, support is available to enable this to occur.
Legislative
language needs to be framed in terms of ‘ability with
support’, rather than ‘capacity’ and ‘incapacity’.
Whenever the terms ‘legal capacity’ or ‘mental capacity’
are used, or the word ‘capacity’ is
used to indicate ‘legal
capacity’ or ‘mental capacity’, the term ‘decision
making ability’ may
need to be used instead. Similarly, whenever the
terms ‘legal incapacity’ or ‘mental incapacity’ are
or the word ‘incapacity’ is used to indicate ‘legal
incapacity’ or ‘mental incapacity’, the term
decision making ability’ may need to be used instead.
10.2 Future review of
criminal justice legislation and practice
The Council notes that there are implications for criminal justice practice
and procedure in the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities
that are outside the Council’s Terms of Reference and have not been
considered. There is likely to be strong
public interest that criminal justice
practice and procedure also made compliant with the principles of the UN
Convention.
The Australian Law Reform Commission has made recommendations in this area.
While the Council’s current recommendations do
not address whether reform
to the criminal justice system is necessary, a separate inquiry to consider this
is warranted.
Recommendation 15:
The Council notes that there are implications for criminal justice
practice and procedure in the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons
Disabilities that are outside the Council’s Terms of Reference and have
not been considered. The Council recommends that
consideration be given to the
reform of the law in this area.
10.3 Involuntary
treatment, restraint and seclusion
Many of the processes which have traditionally been used where
someone’s decision making capacity was impaired and their actions
seen to cause significant risk to self and others have involved the use of force
against that person’s will. It is hoped
that the context of supported
decision making and new understandings of how to work with people with impaired
decision making who
may experience psycho-social difficulties will minimise
situations where force will be necessary. However, the Council considers,
important to address these situations clearly. The most common areas where force
is used relate to involuntary treatment, restraint
and seclusion, and the
placement of someone in accommodation against their will for protection of self
In their Submission ACT Health noted the lack of clarity around the legal
position of the use of force by a guardian where the protected
person does not
want to go to a facility for treatment, does not want to move to different
accommodation, or does not wish to receive
specific treatment, and where the
guardian considers it to be in their best interests for these events to occur.
The submission states:
[The] problem with the guardian’s section 7(3)(e) power to consent to
treatment ... is that it seems unlikely to extend to the
guardian being
permitted to use reasonable, proportionate force to ensure the person receives
treatment for so-called ‘physical’
conditions, even when a doctor
would reasonably say that the person needs that treatment to avert impending
death or severely compromised
health. Whenever treatment is provided to a
person on the basis of substituted consent, at least two of the person’s
rights, provided by common law and the
Human Rights Act 2004
are engaged: the person’s right to privacy and right to be free from
cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. The latter
right incorporates the right
not to be subjected to medical treatment without the person’s free
ACT Health recognised that under the
Mental Health Act
, supported decision
making now applies first, but that if this does not result in the person giving
consent, when their life is at
risk and their decision making ability is
accepted as impaired, there are procedural guarantees that permit force to be
used to provide
treatment. None of these safeguards exist in the current
Guardianship Act in relation to decisions about the use of force. The
submission goes on to say that:
The European Court of Human Rights has ruled that fundamental to the right to
the latter connotes a right
to refuse consent to medical treatment. The Court also ruled that coercive
treatment that is therapeutically
necessary will not infringe the prohibition on
inhuman and degrading treatment, where that necessity can be ‘convincingly
to exist’ and the treatment is given in the context of proper
‘procedural
guarantees’.
While procedural protections exist under the
Mental Health Act
health care treatment in the therapeutic context, there are no statutory
protections for these kinds of processes in residences,
in aged care setting or
in disability accommodation. Some submissions in the consultation process
described the use of such procedures
in relation to older people and people with
disabilities. While it is clear from international human rights law that there
are circumstances
where the expressed wishes of someone with impaired decision
making ability may be overruled when their life is at stake or their
well-being seriously threatened, the level of evidence that is required is
establish this is quite high – in essence
the concept of ‘medical
necessity’ must be ‘convincingly shown to
Because these circumstances are generally triggered by a question about
someone’s ability to make decisions, where inappropriate
decision are
likely to results in significant harm or death, any use of force in these
circumstances should require the oversight
of an external body, and in most
cases, approval should be given by a publicly accountable decision making body
such as ACAT.
Further, the Council considers that the wording of the UN Convention in
Article 12(4) requires that, in these cases, the rights of
the person can be
adequately protected by:
• Effective safeguards to prevent abuse in accordance with
international human rights law;
• Measures that are free from conflict of interest and undue
• Measures that respect the will, rights and preferences of the
• Measures that are proportional and tailored to the person’s
personal circumstances;
• Any limits on freedom applying for the shortest time possible;
• Regular review by a competent, independent and impartial authority of
judicial body.
In the new legislative framework, the Council considers that such procedural
protections should be provided for any circumstances
where force is necessary to
deliver treatment, to restrain someone or seclude someone. This should ensure
that any of these actions
are preceded by assistance to support the person
making their own decision, and that any actions against their will and
preferences,
complies with their rights, including being proportional, time
limited, convincingly shown to be necessary and determined by ACAT
and overseen,
where necessary, by the Public Advocate. The model of scrutiny and protection
included in the
Mental Health Act
, provides a useful starting point for suitable
model provisions in this regard. However, the Council considers further work is
to properly address this area and ensure that appropriate law,
practices and policies are applied across people in all circumstances.
consultations with the Council, examples were given of the imposition of force
occurring under guardianship arrangements, with
people in aged care facilities,
people in disability services and people in health services, which were not
regulated by legislation.
There is a need for careful consideration of the most effective ways of
ensuring the protection of people with impaired decision making
considered to be at risk of harming self or others and therefore potentially
subject to the need for the imposition of force.
The Council considers that
further work is required to develop the most appropriate approach to such
coercive or restrictive practices,
including in circumstances of compulsory
treatment, restraint, seclusion, mandatory living arrangements and other
controls, which
may be seen as breaching the rights of a person with impaired
decision making ability.
Recommendation 16:
The Council considers that strong and consistent safeguards are required
to regulate any restrictive or coercive practices applied
to people with
impaired decision making ability. While the Council is attracted to using a
similar set of requirements as are set
Mental Health Act 2015
Council recommends that a further review is needs to ensure a proper
consideration of the complex issues raised by these questions,
APPENDIX 1: List of
Submissions received
1. John Smith - Individual
2. Andrew Taylor, Public Trustee for the ACT
3. Individual via ADACAS
4. Helen Bateman, Sheryl Harrison, Hamish Jeffrey, Calvary Hospital
5. Australian Lawyers for Human Rights
6. Advocacy for Inclusion
7. Centre for Disability Law and Policy - National University of Ireland
9. Phyllida Ives - individual
10. Gordon Ross - individual
11. Women with Disabilities ACT
12. ACT Human Rights Commission
13. Mental Health Community Coalition ACT Inc
14. COTA ACT
15. Leading Age Services Australia
16. ACT Law Society
18. Individual Guardian/Carer
19. ACT Mental Health Consumer Network
20. Susan Penn-Turrall, Principal Guardian and Deputy Public Advocate of the
21. Health Directorate, ACT Government
APPENDIX 2: Legal
Capacity, the UN Convention and implications for other ACT legislation
Introduction
The message conveyed to the Council in its inquiry is that decision making
ability should be assumed in all people. Further, that
as a consequence the
issue of legal
capacity arises only when all possibilities for
supported decision making are exhausted. This position is sharply at odds with
current approach taken in laws in the A.C.T, where legal capacity and
incapacity are treated as binary opposites. This Part identifies
legislation where, as currently drafted, ‘loss of capacity’ triggers
certain consequences which are at odds with
these assumptions. By comparison, a
UN Convention-compliant approach would recognise that, with support, most people
most of the
time will have decision making ability, and that any necessary
substitute decision must be made in accordance with a person’s
preference and rights. The changes proposed eliminate the concept of ‘loss
of capacity’ and the consequences that
flow from this.
Recommendation 14 set out in the Report addresses this:
The Council recommends that the Government
undertake an audit of ACT legislation to identify where amendments are required
effect to Article 12 of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities to ensure that all people (including those with
disabilities) are
treated equally before the law and, where necessary, support is available to
enable this to occur. Legislative
language needs to be framed in terms of
‘ability with support’, rather than ‘capacity’ and
‘incapacity’.
Whenever the terms ‘legal capacity’ or
‘mental capacity’ are used, or the word ‘capacity’ is
used to indicate ‘legal capacity’ or ‘mental capacity’,
the term ‘decision making ability’ may
need to be used instead.
Similarly, whenever the terms ‘legal incapacity’ or ‘mental
incapacity’ are used,
or the word ‘incapacity’ is used to
indicate ‘legal incapacity’ or ‘mental incapacity’, the
‘impaired decision making ability’ may need to be used
Many Acts deal with ‘legal incapacity’ and ‘legal
capacity’ in various contexts, including laws relating to
the making of
contracts and other financial transactions, to the age of majority and voting,
to criminal responsibility, and to giving
evidence and participation in legal
Other Acts refer to responsibilities consequent upon adult guardianship.
These will also need amendment with the changes required
to current guardianship
arrangements, to ensure that they are consistent with the proposed framework and
language. A large number
of Acts and regulations make references to adult
guardianship as listed in Table 2.
A further group of Acts refer to physical and mental incapacity, where this
affects people’s ability to exercise various responsibilities,
board members, association public officers, teachers, public servants, other
office holders. Some of these have been
enacted more recently and refer to the
impact of impairments on the capacity to do specific tasks.
However, many use the word ‘incapacity’ rather than impairment,
which can result in confusion between legal capacity and
the physical or mental
ability to carry-out a particular function or responsibility. Reform of the
language and a focus on the impact
of the impairment on the ability to do the
task is crucial to ensure that people with disabilities are not discriminated
in legislation. A large number of these Acts and regulations refer to
‘legal capacity’ and incapacity’:
Age of Majority Act 1974
Children and Young People Act 2008
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
Cooperatives Act 2002
Crimes (Child Sex Offenders) Act 2005
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code 2002
Domestic Animals Act 2000
Electoral Act 1992
Evidence Act 2011
Lands Acquisition Act 1994
Perpetuities and Accumulations Act 1985
Sale of Goods Act 1954
Trustee Act 1925
Victims of Crime (Financial Assistance) Act 1983
Wills Act 1968
Workers Compensation Act 1951
Other legislation adopts the common law position in relation to capacity, eg
Sale of Goods Act 1954
provides that ‘Capacity to buy
and sell is regulated by the general law concerning capacity to contract and to
transfer and
acquire property’. Other legislation relies on the
presumption of capacity, eg
Evidence Act 2011
Other legislation anticipates a guardian’s acting when a relevant
person lacks legal capacity, eg
section 55A
Domestic Animals Act
, which allows a victim to apply for information to be made about a dog
who has attacked a person, provides that ‘if the victim
does not have
legal capacity—the victim’s parent or guardian’ may apply.
See also in this regard:
Limitation Act 1985
‘Notice to proceed’
Crimes (Forensic Procedures) Act 2000
‘Meaning of
Land Titles Act 1925
‘Land brought under Act’
Disability Services Act 1991
s 8F ‘Register of approved
disability accommodation’
Corrections Management Act 2007
Dictionary: ‘family
Retirement Villages Act 2012
‘Attendance at meetings of
Coroners Act 1997
Dictionary: ‘member of the immediate
Other legislation associates ‘capacity’ with the performance of
the inherent requirements of employment, eg section 63(1)(ii)
Teacher Quality Institute Act 2010
provides for suspension or cancellation
of a person’s registration or permit to teach if the person ‘has
become mentally
or physically incapacitated and the incapacity prevents the
person from performing an inherent requirement of their job as a teacher’;
Building Act 2004
provides for resignation as a certifier
‘because of mental or physical incapacity’. See also in this
Public Sector Management Act 1994
s143 ‘Redeploy or retire
officer from service’; s 146 ‘Unattachment of officers’
Unit Titles (Management) Act 2011
‘Manager – ending
‘Service contractor – ending
Civil Unions Act 2012
‘Registration of civil union
celebrants’
Agents Act 2003
‘People disqualified from being
‘People disqualified from being registered’.
Other legislation refers to capacity in relation to holding office:
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Elected Body Act 2008
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
ACT Teacher Quality Institute Act 2010
Agents Act 2003
Anglican Church of Australia Constitutions Act 1902
Anglican Church of Australia Trust Property Act 1917
Anglican Church of Australia Trust Property Act 1928
Architects Act 2004
Associations Incorporation Act 1991
Auditor-General Act 1996
Building Act 2004
Canberra Institute of Technology Act 1987
Children and Young People Act 2008
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
Civil Unions Act 2012
Climate Change and Greenhouse Gas Reduction Act 2010
Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment Act 1993
Construction Occupations (Licensing) Act 2004
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act 2005
Director of Public Prosecutions Act 1990
Domestic Relationships Act 1994
Domestic Violence Agencies Act 1986
Education Act 2004
Electoral Act 1992
Emergencies Act 2004
Family Provision Act 1969
Financial Management Act 1996
Government Procurement Act 2001
Health (National Health Funding Pool and Administration) Act 2013
Health Act 1993
Human Rights Commission Act 2005
Independent Competition and Regulatory Commission Act 1997
Information Privacy Act 2014
Inquiries Act 1991
Judicial Commissions Act 1994
Justices of the Peace Act 1989
Law Officers Act 2011
Legal Aid Act 1977
Legal Profession Act 2006
Legislative Assembly (Office of the Legislative Assembly) Act 2012
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Mental Health (Treatment and Care) Act 1994
National Environment Protection Council Act 1994
Nature Conservation Act 1980
Nature Conservation Act 2014
Official Visitor Act 2012
Ombudsman Act 1989
Planning and Development Act 2007
Public Advocate Act 2005
Public Health Act 1997
Public Sector Management Act 1994
Public Trustee Act 1985
Racing Act 1999
Radiation Protection Act 2006
Remuneration Tribunal Act 1995
Retirement Villages Act 2012
Road Transport (Third-Party Insurance) Act 2008
Royal Commissions Act 1991
Supervised Injecting Place Trial Act 1999
Surveyors Act 2007
Territory Records Act 2002
Transplantation and Anatomy Act 1978
Tree Protection Act 2005
Unit Titles (Management) Act 2011
Victims of Crime Act 1994
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Workers Compensation Act 1951
Working with Vulnerable People (Background Checking) Act 2011
Other legislation allows for action to be taken against a person ‘for
misbehaviour or physical or mental incapacity’,
Education Act 2004
‘Ending of appointment of members
of school board’
Sch 4 s 4.43
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
‘Vacancy in office of
member [of the Professional Standards Council]
Associations Incorporation Act
‘Vacancy in office of
public officer’
Other legislation makes provision for a person who lacks legal capacity,
Cooperatives Act 2002
, ‘Registration as administrator of
estate on incapacity of shareholder’
Sch 2, s 2.1
Cooperatives Act 2002
‘Requirements for all
cooperatives’
Crimes (Child Sex Offenders) Act 2005
regulation making power
for when ‘an offender does or does not have the legal capacity to
understand information’
Evidence Act 2011
‘Competence – lack of
Crimes Act 1900
‘Consent [in relation to sexual
Crimes Act 1900
Summary disposal of certain cases [in the
Magistrates Court]’
Electoral Act 1992
‘Objections to enrolment’
Crimes (Child Sex Offenders) Act 2005
132T ‘Definitions –
‘person with a mental disability’
Other legislation refers to guardians and guardianship, eg:
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
Administration and Probate Act 1929
Coroners Act 1997
Civil Law (Property) Act 2006
Corrections Management Act 2007
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes (Child Sex Offenders) Act 2005
Crimes (Forensic Procedures) Act 2000
Disability Services Act 1991
Electoral Act 1992
Health Records (Privacy and Access) Act 1997
Intoxicated People (Care and Protection) Act 1994
Land Tax Act 2004
Land Titles Act 1925
Limitation Act 1985
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Partnership Act 1963
Retirement Villages Act 2012
Road Transport (Third Party Insurance) Act 2008
Terrorism (Extraordinary Temporary Powers) Act 2006
Trustee Act 1925
Workers Compensation Act 1951
Other legislation anticipates circumstances that involve legal incapacity,
Retirement Villages Act 2012
‘Ending of residence contract
on medical grounds’,
‘ACAT decision in relation to proposed
‘ACAT decision in relation to proposed tenant or
Children and Young People Act 2008
‘Agreement to
transfer an order’
Victims of Crime (Financial Assistance) Act 1983
incapacity – criminal intent’
Partnership Act 1963
‘Dissolution by Supreme
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
‘Executing a warrant’
Workers Compensation Act 1951
s 33 ‘Payments to people with
legal disabilities’
Magistrates Court Act 1930
‘Executing a
Electoral Act 1992
‘Objections to enrolment’
Disability Services Act 1991
Dictionary: disability.
Australian Law Reform
Commission (ALRC).
Equality, Capacity and Disability in Commonwealth Laws
– Final Report.
ALRC Report 124. August 2014 ALRC Sydney (Australia)
(ALRC Final Report 2014).
This Act commenced on 1 March
2016, and replaced the
Mental Health (Treatment and Care) Act 1994.
Figures 1-3 are derived from
the 2014-2015 Annual Report of ACAT: ACAT.
ACT Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Annual Report 2014/15
. Available at
http://cdn.justice.act.gov.au/resources/uploads/ACAT/ACAT_Annual_Review_2014-15.pdf
: pages 21-22.
See, eg, ACT Health,
Submission 21, Appendix A, paragraph 5.
Comment by General President
Crebbin ACAT at Guardianship and Financial Management Roundtable 21 May
First Assembly – ACT
Legislative Assembly,
Members of the First Assembly (1989-1991)
December 2013) ACT Legislative Assembly: http://
www.parliament.act.gov.au/members/members-previous-assemblies/first-assembly
Connelly T.
Explanatory
Memorandum, Guardianship and Management of Property Bill 1991 (ACT)
Legislative Assembly for the Australian Capital Territory (Original Explanatory
Memorandum) at page 1; see also ACT Legislative
September 11991, pages 3216-3219, where Mr Connelly notes (page 3217) the 1989
Report of the Australian Reform Commission on the
guardianship and management of
property of persons in the ACT who are incapable of looking after their own
Guardianship and Management
of Property Act 1991
(as passed - No. 62 of 1991) (Guardianship Act as
originally enacted): section 3(1).
Guardianship Act as originally
enacted - see note
: section 3(3). Section
3(3) of the 1991 Act said: The Tribunal shall apply the principle that, unless
the contrary is proved, persons
suffering from physical, mental, psychological
or intellectual conditions are legally competent and their decisions are
reasonable’.
Lunacy Act 1898
A History of
the Supreme Court of New South Wales
(Law Book Co. 1974), at page 125,
quoted in the ALRC report, paragraph 2.21.
ALRC Report 2014 –
: pages 40-41.
Original Explanatory
Memorandum – see note
: paragraph 2,
Guardianship Act as
originally enacted - see note
Guardianship Act as
originally enacted - see note
: Section 34.
In the Original Explanatory Memorandum (see note
), it was stated that this allowed the Tribunal
to sit at a location and at a time that may suit the special needs of a
represented
person’: page 8.
Guardianship Act as
originally enacted - see note
Guardianship Act as
originally enacted - see note
Original Explanatory
Memorandum – see note
: Clause 7, page
3, and section 7 in the Guardianship Act as originally enacted - see note
Guardianship Act as
originally enacted - see note
: section 8,
especially sub-section 8(1)(b).
Guardianship Act as
originally enacted - see note
Original Explanatory
Memorandum – see note
: paragraph 1,
Original Explanatory
Memorandum – see note
: Clause 9, page
Guardianship and Management
of Property Amendment Act 2001
, no 78 of 2001 (2001 Amending Act), section
Guardianship Act as
originally enacted - see note
: sub-sections
3(2)(a) and 3(2)(b) in particular, but see sub-section (2) more generally as
Guardianship Act as
originally enacted - see note
: sub-section
2001 Amending Act –
: section 4, inserting Part 1A,
Stefaniak B.
Guardianship and Management of Property Amendment Bill 2001- Explanatory
Memorandum,
2001, Legislative Assembly for the Australian Capital Territory
(2001 Explanatory Memorandum) : page 2
2001 Amending Act –
, section 8.
2001 Amending Act –
, section 7 (1) (b)(ii).
Guardianship Act as
originally enacted - see note
: sub-section
Guardianship Act as
originally enacted - see note
: sub-section
Guardianship Act
5A, introduced by the 2001 Amending Act – see note
Guardianship and Management
of Property Amendment Act 2008 (ACT), A2008-47 (2008 Amending Act)
Skene L. When can doctors
treat patients who cannot or will not consent? 1997
Monash University Law
volume 23(1), pages 77 – 91, at page 81.
This matter was noted by Mr
Corbell in his speech on the presentation of the Bill on 7 August 2008: see ACT
Legislative Assembly.
. 7 August 2008: at page 3009.
Guardianship
and Management of Property Amendment Bill 2008 - Explanatory Statement
2008, Legislative Assembly for the Australian Capital Territory (2008
Explanatory Statement): pages 1 and 4.
2008 Explanatory Statement
: pages 2-3.
2008 Amending Act –
: sections 32D and 32F
2008 Explanatory Statement
The Australian judgements
in this area provide a range of outcomes, which are very much dependent on the
facts in each case –
Australian Capital Territory v JT
[2009] ACTSC 105
(28 August 2009);
Hunter and New England Area Health Service
[2009] NSWSC 761
(6 August 2009); and
Brightwater Care Group Inc v
[2009] WASC 229
(14 August 2009). See also the discussion in
Chapter 12 – Substitute Consent to Medical and Dental Treatment in
N. Peisah C
Capacity and the Law:
2011 Sydney University
Press and Australian Legal Information Institute: available at
www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/SydUPLawBk/2011/14.html
See, eg, Submission 21 ACT
Health, Submission 12, ACT Human Rights Commission, Submission 5 Australian
Lawyers for Human Rights
Substantial amendments to
Mental Health (Treatment and Care) Act 1994
were presented and passed
Mental Health (Treatment and Care) Amendment Act 2014
same time, a further revision Act, which was to incorporate the amendments made
by the 2014 Act, was introduced into the
Assembly on 4 June 2015. The
Health Act 2015
commenced on 1 March 2016.
See, for example Submission
14, Council on The Ageing ACT; Submission 15, Leading Aged Services.
Attorney Amendment Bill 2015 – Explanatory Statement.
2015 Legislative
Assembly for the Australian Capital Territory (Health Research Explanatory
Statement 2015: page 1.
Health Research Explanatory
Statement 2015 – see note
Section 13 of the Act sets
out a new Part 4.3A to the Power of Attorney Act. This includes a new
Definition section (s 41A) that
defines these terms. Consequential amendments
are also made to the Guardianship Act and the Health Directions Act in Schedule
which brings these definitions into these Acts as well.
Health Research Explanatory
Statement 2015 – see note
3-6, which sets out the Government’s views about the compliance of the
legislation with the
Human Rights Act 2004
These are detailed in full
Mental Health Bill 2015
Explanatory Statement
delivered in the ACT
Legislative Assembly by the Minister for Health Simon Corbell on 4 June 2015
Explanatory Statement): paragraph 2.8-2.27, pages 2-7.
Mental Health Act
Explanatory Statement – at note
paragraphs 2.23-2.27, pages 5-7.
Mental Health Act
Explanatory Statement – at note
paragraphs 4.1-4.65, pages 11-31.
Guardianship Act,
‘prescribed medical procedure’ in Dictionary (f) included treatment
for mental illness.
The statute which
consolidated the pre-existing customary lordly prerogatives into the powers of
the King was called
De Praerogativa Regis
, and was enacted in 1324 by 17
Edw 2. C.9. For more discussion of the history, see Doron I. From lunacy to
incapacity and beyond
– Guardianship of the elderly and the Ontario
experience in defining ‘legal incompetence’. 1999.
Health Law in
, May, volume 19(4), pages 95-114, especially at page 100.
In re W.M.(a person
alleged to be of unsound mind)
, 1901 New South Wales State Reports, volume
3, pages 552-570, at page 561.
Story J. Grigsby WE.
Commentaries on Equity Jurisprudence
. Chapter XXXV, section 1327, at page
919. 2006, the Law Book Exchange Ltd, New Jersey (USA). Reprint of the first
English edition,
based on the 12
American edition with notes on
English decisions by W.E. Grigsby. Originally published: 1884, Steven and
Hayes, London.
The Canadian Supreme Court
detailed the history of the
parens patriae
Canada and the USA in the important judgement of
E (Mrs) v Eve
1986 CanLII 36 (SCC)
, beginning at pp 407 in the judgement of La Forest J, an appeal case
where a mother sought unsuccessfully to have a non-therapeutic
sterilisation
performed on her intellectually disabled daughter.
E (Mrs) v Eve
1986 CanLII 36 (SCC)
, at pages 409-410.
The protective jurisdiction
in relation to married women related to the legal fiction imposed under the law
of couverture, where
the act of marriage created a suspension of the legal
existence of a woman during marriage. See: Cowie AJ. A history of married
women’s real property rights. 2009.
Australian Journal of Gender and
, volume 1: available at
https://genderandlaw.murdoch.edu.au/index.php/sisterinlaw/article/view/24/57
Carney T. Guardianship,
Citizenship and Theorizing Substitute-decision making law. Legal Studies
Research Paper No. 12/25, University
of Sydney, Sydney Law School, available at:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2041103.
A decision about a
person’s legal competence was made by a jury of 12 men; see Doron I. From
lunacy to incapacity and beyond
– Guardianship of the elderly and the
Ontario experience in defining ‘legal incompetence’. 1999.
Law in Canada
, May, volume 19(4), pages 95-114, especially at page 100
O’Neill N. Peisah C.
Capacity and the Law
. 2011 Sydney University Press, Sydney (Australia),
section 5.2.1, Chapter 5, page 2.
Kunc F (Justice of NSW
Supreme Court). Dented and rusty like a suit of armour? Reflections on the
origins of the parens patriae jurisdiction,
October 2014, available at
http://www.supremecourt.justice.nsw.gov.au/Documents/kunc_201410.pdf
UN Committee on the Rights
of Persons with Disability
. General Comment on Article 12: Equal recognition
before the law
25 November 2013. CRPD/C/11/4 11
March-11 April (UN Committee General Comment 2013): paragraph 11, pages 3-4.
Doron I. From Lunacy to
Incapacity and Beyond - Guardianship of the Elderly and the Ontario Experience
in defining ‘legal
incompetence’. 1999
Health Law in Canada
volume 19(4), pages 95-114.
See, eg, Damasio AR.
Descartes’ Error – Emotion, Reason and the Human Brain
Papermac, London. See also Fine C.
A mind of its own – how your brain
distorts and deceives
. 2005 Allen & Unwin Sydney (Australia): pages
Submission 6 –
Advocacy for Inclusion, page 29.
O’Neill N. Peisah C.
Capacity and the Law
2011, Sydney University Press Law Books: see
http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/SydUPLawBk/2011/1.html: in particular,
2 (Decision making and Relationships) and chapter 15 (Sterilisation).
See, for example, Westwood
My life, my decision – An independent evaluation of the
Supported Decision Making
Pilot. April 2015, NSW Family and Community
Services Ageing, Disability and Home Care Sydney (NSW SDM Pilot Report 2015):
See, eg, Family Planning
Supporting Decision Making in Reproductive and Sexual Health for People
with Disability – a tool to assist clinicians in supporting
the decision
making of clients with intellectual disability
. 2015, Family Planning NSW,
Ashfield (Australia). Available at
http://www.fpnsw.org.au/supportingdecisionmaking
For a useful examination of
the widespread systematic denial of the human rights of women with disabilities
in relation to sexual
expression, see Mykitiuk R. Chadha E. Sites of Exclusion
– disabled women’s sexual, reproductive and parenting rights.
Part II of Rioux MH. Basser LA. Jones M.
Critical Perspectives on Human
Rights and Disability Law
. 2011, Martinus Nijhoff Publishers Leiden: pages
Submission 11 – Women
with Disabilities ACT.
The United Nations (UN)
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
, opened for signature
2007, 999 UNTS 3
(entered into force 3 May 2008), (UN Convention)
http://www.un.org/disabilities/UN
Convention/UN Conventionfull.shtml
Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,
GA Res 217A (III), UN GAOR, 3rd Session, 183rd Plenary
Meeting, UN Doc A/810, 10 December 1948.
International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights,
opened for signature 16 December 1966,
UNTS171, entered into force 23 March 1976;
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
opened for signature 16 December
, entered into force 3 January 1976.
Equality, Capacity
and Disability in Commonwealth Laws - Discussion Paper 81
(DP 81), May 2014
(ALRC Discussion Paper 2014): page 28.
National Association of the
Deaf. UN Convention on the Rights of People with Disabilities. Available
http://www.nad.org/issues/international-advocacy/crpd
Accessed 8/9/2014.
Australia’s
ratification of the Convention in July 2008 also included an additional
reservation about its policies about entry
into Australia. It states that
‘the Convention does not create a right for a person to enter or remain in
a country of which
he or she is not a national, nor impact on Australia’s
health requirements for non-nationals seeking to enter or remain in
where these requirements are based on legitimate, objective and reasonable
McCallum R. Nothing About
us Without us: National Responses to the UN Convention Six Years on. The Castan
Centre for Human Rights
Law, King & Wood Mallesons Annual Lecture. Friday 22
August 2014, transcript, page 8.
Implementation of the UN
Convention on the Rights of People with Disabilities, Initial reports submitted
by States parties under
article 35 of the UN Convention, Australia, 3 December
2010 (Australian initial response 2010).
Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disability. Concluding observations on the initial report of
Australia, adopted by the Committee
at its tenth session 2-13 September 2013,
CRPD/C/AUS/CO/1 21 October 2013 (UN Committee observations on Australia 2013):
UN Committee observations
on Australia 2013 – see note
paragraphs 32-36
UN Committee observations
on Australia 2013 – see note
paragraph 9.
ALRC Discussion Paper 2014
ALRC Final Report
2014– see note
UN Convention – see
: Preamble, sub-section (e).
UN Convention – see
: Preamble, subsections (n) and
UN Convention – see
: Preamble, subsection (x).
Note the Australian
Government’s reservation for this Article as well – see note
Decide? Legal Decision making for Others
, Aged and Community Care Service
Development and Evaluation Reports, No 19, Department of Human Services
and Health, Aged
and  Community Care Division 1995, page 38.
World Health Organisation
(WHO) and World Bank,
World Report on Disability
, 2011 WHO Geneva
(Switzerland). Available at
http://www.who.int/disabilities/world_report/2011/en/
: pages 4-5.
National Association of the
Deaf – see note
UN Committee on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities (UN Committee).
General comment on Article 12:
Equal recognition before the law
. 25 November 2013, CRPD/C/11/4 (UN
Committee general comment 2013): paragraph 11, page 3.
Office of the Public
Advocate (Victoria) Supported
Decision making: Background and Discussion
, November 2009, page 10. Available online:
http://www.publicadvocate.vic.gov.au/file/file/Research/Discussion/2009/0909_Supported_Decision_Making.pdf
Victorian Law Reform
Commission (VLRC).
Guardianship Final Report 24.
2012 VLRC Melbourne
(Australia) (VLRC Final Report 2012); Queensland Law Reform Commission (QLRC).
A Review of Queensland’s Guardianship Laws. Report No 67
. 2010 QLRC
Brisbane (Australia) (QLRC Final Report 2010); ALRC Discussion Paper 2014
: page 28; and ALRC Final
Report 2014 – see note
For example, UN Convention
: Articles 13, 14,
17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
ALRC Discussion Paper 2014
: paragraph 1.14, page 24.
Productivity Commission.
Disability Care and Support.
2011 Productivity Commission Inquiry Report
No. 54, Canberra, volume 1: page 98.
UN Committee General
Comment 2013 – see note
: paragraph
23, page 6.
UN Committee General
Comment 2013 – see note
: paragraph
24, page 6.
Australia 2014.
2014 ACOSS, Sydney (Australia). Available at
http://www.acoss.org.au/images/uploads/ACOSS_Poverty_in_Australia_2014.pdf
: The data in this paragraph relating to disability can be found on pages
For a useful discussion
on the interrelationship between poverty, the UN Convention and disability, see:
Quinn G. Courtis C. Poverty,
Invisibility and Disability – the liberating
potential of economic, social and cultural rights. Chapter 9 in Van Bueren G.
Freedom from poverty as a human right – Law’s duty to the
Volume 4, 2010 UNESCO Publishing, Paris (France).
Productivity Commission.
Access to Justice Arrangements: Overview.
2014 Inquiry Report No 72,
Canberra: page 20.
Productivity Commission
2014 – see note
: page 6, noting the
comments of the Chief Justice of Western Australia.
VLRC Final Report 2012
: page 127.
See also the Application
for Appointment of Guardian and/or Manager and the accompanying instructions on
the ACAT website:
http://www.acat.act.gov.au/guardianship/guardianship_management_of_property
UN Committee General
Comment Nov 2013, see note
: paragraph 11,
A useful discussion of
the concept of the concept of determination of ‘own good’ can be
found in; Arstein-Kerslake A.
An empowering dependency: exploring support for
the exercise of legal capacity. 2014
Scandinavian Journal of Disability
. Available at:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15017419.2014.941926
For example, Submission
16 from the ACT Law Society and Submission 13 from the Mental Health Community
Decision-Making Capacity Act 2015
(Irish Republic): this Act uses a will,
preferences and rights supported decision making approach.
Mental Capacity Act
: while this legislation provides an integrated framework, it
retains best interest substitute decision making.
ALRC Final Report 2014
ALRC Final Report
ALRC Final Report
: page 6-7.
QLRC Final Report 2010
: paragraph 4.83, page
QLRC Final Report 2010
: pages 62 -149.
QLRC Final Report 2010
: pages 70- 149, see
especially paragraphs 4.138-4.144; VLRC Final Report 2012 - see note
Reflects Articles 3(a)
and 12(4), UN Convention – see note
Reflects Articles 3(c)
and 12(4), UN Convention – see note
QLRC Final Report 2010
: pages 7-10.
VLRC Final Report 2012 -
ALRC Final Report
Council of Australian
Governments (COAG).
2010-2020 National Disability Strategy
pages 35, available for download at
https://www.coag.gov.au/node/197
Guardianship A
section 4(2)(f).
ALRC Final Report
64 and pages 67-69.
McCallum R. 2014 –
Wilkinson H. Empowerment
and Decision‐making for People with Dementia: The Use of Legal
Interventions in Scotland, 2001 5(4)
Aging & Mental Health
5(4), pages
322-328, at page 324.
Gordon RM. The Emergence
of Assisted (Supported) Decision‐Making in the Canadian Law of Adult
Guardianship and Substitute
Decision‐Making. 2000
International Journal
of Law and Psychiatry
, volume 23(1), pages
61-77, page 65.
NSW SDM Pilot Report
2015 – see note
VLRC Final Report 2012 -
: page 126.
In all of the Australian
supported decision making pilots to date, preparation of people requiring
support for their decision making
so they were ‘decision-ready’ was
seen as crucial. Issues identified which can affect this are limited literacy
communication skills and lack of confidence. See, eg, NSW SDM Pilot Report
2015 – see note
: pages 66-67
Disability Services
(ACT), Schedule 1 – Human Rights principles to be further in
relation to people with disabilities, principle 5.
VLRC Final Report 2012 -
: page 136.
VLRC Final Report 2012 -
: page 136.
Article 12 UN Convention
VLRC Final Report 2012 -
: page 122.
VLRC Final Report 2012 -
QLRC Final Report 2010
: page 270.
QLRC Final Report 2010
: page 265.
VLRC Final Report 2012 -
: page, 102
Attorney-General’s Department
. Capacity Toolkit: Information for
Government and Community Workers, Professionals, Families and Carers in New
South Wales
2009 NSW Attorney-General’s Department, Sydney
(Australia): page 27.
QLRC Final Report 2010
: page 270.
QLRC Final Report 2010
QLRC Final Report 2010
QLRC Final Report 2010
: page xiv.
See for example, ALRC
Final Report – note
: recommendations
7-1, 7-3, 9-3 and 11-3.
Molloy DW, Darzins P,
. Capacity to decide – a practical, comprehensive and clear
guide on how to measure capacity
.1999 New Grange Press, Troy (Ontario,
Molloy etal. 1999
: page 230.
See Phelan M. et al.
The Camberwell Assessment of Need: the validity and reliability of an instrument
to assess the needs of people
with severe mental illness. 1995
Journal of Psychiatry
, volume 167(5), pages 589-595.
Socialstyrelsen (Swedish
National Board of Health and Welfare).
A New Profession is Born –
Personligt ombud
, (PO Booklet) 2008, Stockholm, available at
http://www.personligtombud.se/publikationer/pdf/A%20New%20Proffession%20is%20Born.pdf
See, eg, Carrillo JE et
al. Defining and targeting health care access barriers. 2011
Health Care for the Poor and
Underserved, May, volume 22 (2), pages 562-575:
see especially cognitive barriers sections. See also, eg, Jonas W.
Sidelines – Disability and People from Non-English Speaking Background
Communities
. Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission 2000: see
especially Chapters 4 and 5.
See for example:
Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care.
Consumers, the
health system and health literacy: Taking action to improve safety and
Consultation Paper June 2013: see especially pages 26-29.
The Australian Charter
of Public Service in a Culturally Diverse Society, agreed between the
Commonwealth Government and State and
Territory Governments in 1998, identified
quality client services as requiring access to information about the services
by Government through the availability of language assistance and
interpreters, and noted the need to address the ‘double disadvantage
by indigenous or ethnic women, youth, older persons and disabled people, when
seeking access to government services’.
See also Jonas W.
Sidelines – Disability and People from Non-English Speaking Background
Communities
. Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission 2000: see
especially good practice examples, listed on page 57 and conclusions on
58-61. See also: Zanchetta M. Poureslami IM. Health literacy within the reality
of immigrants’ culture and language.
Canadian Journal of Public
, May-June, volume 97 Supplement 2, pages S26-S30.
Efforts to produce more
comprehensible and ‘easy to understand’ legal documents have a long
history in Australia. See,
eg, Butt P. Speaking Plainly: Plain language law for
non-lawyers, 2002:
http://www.plainlanguage.org
the work of the Law and Justice Foundation of NSW at
http://www.lawfoundation.net.au/information
NSW SDM Pilot Report
2015 – see note
: page 74-75, where
suggestions for modifications to the kit were made eg Factsheets, using the web
NSW SDM Pilot Report
2015 – see note
: pages 11-12.
Centre for Disability
Law and Policy. New trial of supported decision making in Australia – a
sneak peek. 17 June 2015. Available
http://righttoactcampaign.com/breaking-news-new-trial-of-supported-decision
making-in-australia-a-sneak-peak/
NSW SDM Pilot Report
2015 – see note
Family Planning NSW 2015
: see especially Tips for
Communication.
WWILD Sexual Violence
Prevention Association Inc Disability training Program – Victims of Crime.
How to hear me: A resource kit for counsellors and other professionals
working with people with intellectual disability
. 2012 funded by the
Department Justice and Attorney General (Queensland) Building Capacity for
Victims of Crime Services Funding
See eg Advocacy for
Ask me. I make my own decisions – Report on the findings of
a study into the experience of control and choice of people with
disabilities in
, May 2013: This Report looks at the situation of people with
disabilities at the beginning of the National Disability Insurance Scheme
implementation in the ACT, about the readiness of people with disabilities to
exercise control and choice over their own lives
and supports, which are central
underpinnings of the NDIS.
COAG 2011 – see
In its 2013 report on
the control and choice of people with disabilities discussed in note
, Advocacy for Inclusion discussed the
Planning Alternative Tomorrows with Hope (PATH) program, which was available in
See, eg, ADACAS has
developed the web-based tool:
http://www.support-my-decision.org.au/
. Once a user registers they can keep records of their decision making
processes and access them at a later date to complete or
re-consider.
See, eg, Advocacy for
Inclusion has developed a mobile app for the IPad called Supported Decision
making, which is available from
the IOS App Store for $A9.99.
NSW SDM Pilot Report
2015 – see note
: page 12, but also
pages 58, 66 and 69.
Submission 6 –
Advocacy for Inclusion, page 15.
ACT Disability, Aged and
Carer Advocacy Service (ADACAS).
Spectrums of Support – a Report on a
project exploring supported decision making for people with disability in the
September 2013, ADACAS, available at
http://www.adacas.org.au/decision-support/copy_of_SupportedDecisionMakingProjectFinalReport.pdf
: pages 5-6.
Submission 6 –
Advocacy for Inclusion, page 32;
Submission 17 - ADACAS,
Submission 1 –
John Smith, pages 5, and 7: Mr Smith’s main criticisms related to the NSW
Public Trustee. His experiences
with the ACT Public Trustee and Guardian
appeared to be better, but he believed the staff there were too busy.
ALRC Final Report
: page 70, Recommendation
Advocacy for Inclusion.
2013. – see note
: at page 5. An
example showing this model working can be seen at
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A3osS0gmP0I&list=PLF3907E73E8D8A8B2&index=3
PATH is a facilitated graphic planning process, which is designed to create a
plan of action, to help someone achieve their aspirations,
consistent with their
values. The method was developed by Marsha Forest, Jack Pearpoint and John
O’Brien in the early 1990s.
Pearpoint J. O’Brien J and Forest M.
PATH: Planning Alternative Tomorrows with Hope: A workbook for Planning
Possible Positive Futures.
2001 Inclusion Press, Toronto.
Williams R.
Citizenhood Support
Edition JFA Purple Orange, Unley
(South Australia): see especially section 9, pages 46-62. This publication also
describes how many
of the ‘special’ services set up originally to
opportunities to have a broader network of support. Williams is at the Julia
Farr Association which worked in collaboration with
the South Australian Office
of the Public Advocate on the South Australian Supported Decision making
Socialstyrelsen (Swedish
National Board of Health and Welfare).
A New Profession is Born –
Personligt ombud
, (Swedish PO Booklet) 2008, Stockholm, available at
http://www.personligtombud.se/publikationer/pdf/A%20New%20Proffession%20is%20Born.pdf
: page 17, see also page 24.
Further information can
be obtained from the PO-Skåne website at:
http://www.po-skane.org/ombudsman-for-psychiatric-patients-30.php
and Swedish PO Booklet - see note
Swedish PO Booklet 2008
: see pages 16-17.
Decision-Making (Capacity) Act 2015
(Irish Republic), Chapter 4. The Council
received a comprehensive submission from the Centre for Disability Law and
Policy, National
University of Ireland - Galway, which provided additional
information: see Submission 7.
VLRC Final Report 2012 -
: see chapter 9.
VLRC Final Report 2012 -
: paragraph 9.34, page 156.
Assisted Decision
making (Capacity) Act 2015
(Irish Republic), section 19(5).
The VLRC report was
released prior to the ALRC Report, so does not use its terms, but its reference
to ‘least intrusive’
is consistent with the ALRC Safeguards
Guidelines which requires support to be ‘the least restrictive of the
human rights’.
VLRC Final Report 2012 -
: recommendations 284-286.
VLRC Final Report 2012 -
: recommendation 78, page 167; see
also chapter 12.
VLRC Final Report 2012 -
: paragraph 9.65, page 161.
ALRC Final Report 2014
, paragraph 2.106, page
Denmark, Submission No
19 to the UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
General Comment on Article 12 of the UN Convention–Equal Recognition
before the Law
There are a number of
case studies in the NSW SDM Pilot Report 2015 (see note
) that illustrate this, eg, Mandy’s iPad
experience on page 73, Abdul’s experience with managing his anger safely
70; Michael and catching the bus on page 67.
NSW SDM Pilot Report
2015 – see note
: at page 67 in
Michael’s box.
This can happen in a
supported decision making context. In the NSW SDM Report case-study of Michael
discussed above, it is recorded
that the facilitator decided that Michael
prioritised good relationships over his desire for independence. Such a
judgement may
well limit the exploration of other options which might lead to
his desire for independence and his family’s concern about
the additional
burden being better accommodated eg with a friend or professional aide to assist
him, rather than imposing further
on the family. See note
: at page 67 in Michael’s box
See, eg, Submission 17 -
ADACAS, page 5;
NSW SDM Pilot Report
2015 – see note
: at page 70.
NSW SDM Pilot Report
2015 – see note
: section 9.1, page
65 and following.
ACT Disability, Aged and
Carer Advocacy Service (ADACAS)
Spectrums of Support – A Report on a
project Exploring Supported Decision Making for People with Disability in the
September 2013, ADACAS Canberra (Australia).
Disability Care
Australia. My pathway, my choices, my goals – Information for
participants. 2013 FAHCSIA: pages 8-10
National Disability
Insurance Scheme Act 2013
(Cth). This provision appears in Chapter 3
dealing with participants and their plans. There are a range of other areas
legislation sets out principles which could support this form of
assistance eg
, dealing with principles relating to plans, especially
, which discusses the participant’s statement of goals and
aspirations and
, covering reasonable and necessary supports.
ALRC Final Report 2014
: pages 129-157.
ALRC Final Report 2014
: paragraphs 5.131-5.138,
pages 155-156.
National Disability
Insurance Scheme.
Operational Guideline – General Conduct –
Supporting Participants’ Decision making (v 1.01)
19 December 2013,
paragraph 9, which states that ‘Plan nominees have a duty to support the
participant to make his or her own
decisions wherever possible and to build the
participant’s capacity for decision making.’
Submission 4 from
various staff at Calvary Health Care.
A health care matter is
defined under section 12 of the
Power of Attorney Act 2006
. It excludes
matters which are considered ‘special health care matters’ under
section 37. While the power in relation
to health matters is wide, an
interested person can appeal to ACAT about the exercise of this power if it is
believed that the attorney
is not acting in the principal’s best interests
(section 85). It is also subject to the principles outlined in Schedule 1
the Act, which includes specific requirements under Principle 1.11.
The objectives of this
Act are ‘to protect the rights of patients to refuse unwanted medical
treatment’ and ‘to
ensure the right of patients to receive relief
from pain and suffering to the maximum extent that is reasonable in the
circumstances’
(section 5).
http://www.health.act.gov.au/public-information/consumers/respecting-patient-choices
http://advancecareplanning.org.au/resources/australian-capital-territory
Respecting Patient
Choices Information Sheet: page 2, accessed though
http://advancecareplanning.org.au/resources/australian-capital-territory
Consultation meeting
with ACT Health Care Consumers Association, 19 August 2015.
Dr Michelle Weise,
speaker on Palliative Care and Intellectual Disability, at Disability Forum
organised by Palliative Care Australia
as part of their
Palliative Care and
Planning for your Future Program.
, Canberra 23 July 2015.
See for eg Shepardson
LB. Youngner SJ. Speroff T. Rosenthal GE. Increased risk of death in patients
with do-not-resuscitate orders.
Care, August, volume 37(8),
pages 727-737; Sulmasy DP. Do patients die because they have DNR orders or do
they have DNR orders because
they are going to die? 1999
Medical Care
August, volume 37(8), pages 719-721
Submission 2 - ACT
Public Trustee, Addendum: the Law Society of Scotland, paragraph 14.
Submission 21- ACT
NSW SDM Pilot Report
2015 – see note
NSW SDM Pilot Report 2015
NSW SDM Pilot Report
2015 – see note
NSW SDM Pilot Report
2015 – see note
Williams R.
Citizenhood Support
Edition 2013 Purple Orange Julia Farr
Association: 9.2.2 The Problem of Special and 9.2.3 The Tyranny of Special:
pages 51-54.
This was highlighted in
Submission 6 - Advocacy for Inclusion, ‘The concept of
vulnerability’, pages 20-22.
Submission 6 - Advocacy
for Inclusion: page 21.
Submission 6 - Advocacy
for Inclusion, page 21.
ALRC Final Report 2014
: paragraph 2.76, page
ALRC Final Report 2014
–see note 1: paragraph 3.49, page 75, and pages 69-75 re the Support
Guidelines more generally.
ALRC Final Report 2014
: paragraph 3.91, page
Swedish PO Booklet
For an in-depth
discussion of these issues, see Gardner D. Risk The science and politics of
fear. 2008 McClelland and Stewart, Toronto
(Canada); Gigerenzer G. Dread risk,
September 11 and Fatal Traffic Accidents,
2004 Psychological Science
volume 15(4) pages 286-287; Gaissmaier W. Gigerenzer G. 9/11, Act II: A
fine-grained analysis of regional variations in traffic
fatalities in the
aftermath of the terrorist attacks. 2012
Psychological Science
23(12), pages 1449-1454.
NSW SDM Pilot Report
2015 – see note
: pages 69-70.
NSW SDM Pilot Report
2015 – see note
: pages 75-76.
UN Convention –
: Article 12(4).
UN Convention –
: Article 12(5)
ALRC Final Report 2014
ALRC Final Report 2014
ALRC Final Report 2014
: page 6-7.
ALRC Final Report 2014
ALRC Final Report 2014
: at pages 52-62.
ALRC Final Report 2014
: paragraph 2.72: at page
ALRC Final Report 2014
: paragraph 3.60, at page
60. This text clarifies further the intention to move away from a ‘best
interests’ paradigm.
ALRC Final Report 2014
: Recommendation 10-1
The above following
account of the pilot program is based on an evaluation report: Margaret Wallace,
Evaluation of the Supported Decision Making Project, Final Independent
, Office of the Public Advocate (South Australia), November 2012.
For further information about the Pilot, see also M A De Mestre,
‘Supported Decision making: an Alternative to Guardianship Orders –
the South Australian Trial’, 2014 (8)
Elder Law Review
, volume 8,
Article 10, at
http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/ElderLawRw/2014/10.html
Office of the Public
Advocate of Queensland Systems Advocacy. A journey towards autonomy? Supported
decision making in theory and
practice – A review of the literature.
February 2014, Queensland Government, Brisbane: page 22. Available at
http://www.justice.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/249404/Decision
making-support-for-Queenslanders-with-impaired-capacity-A-review-of-literature-March-2014.pdf
Office of the Public
Advocate of Queensland 2014 – see note
, page 22, citing Office of the Public
Advocate of South Australia.
Annual Report 2012
. 2013, South Australian
Government, Adelaide: page 15.
Melanie Oxenham,
Supported Decision Making. Paper presented at Direct Support Professionals
Conference, Centre for Disability Studies,
University of Sydney, 22 and 23 July
2013: page 6.
Email from Cher
Nicholson, Supported Decision making Project Officer, Office of the Health &
Community Services Complaints Commissioner
(South Australia), to Nelson
Mendonca, 24 March 2015.
Cher Nicholson 2015 see
South Australian Office
of the Public Advocate.
Annual Report 2013
. 2013: pages 55-58; see also
51-61 more generally.
South Australian Office
of the Public Advocate. Annual Report 2013. 2013: pages 15-20.
The following account of
the pilot program is based on the Health & Community Services Complaints
Commissioner (South Australia),
Annual Report 2013-14
; Westhorp G.
HCSCC Supported Decision Making: Interim Evaluation Report, Interim
Independent Evaluation
, Health & Community Services Complaints
Commissioner’s Office (South Australia), August 2014 (SA SDM Pilot Interim
2014); and Westhorp G.
HSCC Supported Decision Making Program 2014-15:
Evaluation Report
. Health & Community Services Complaints
Commissioner’s Office (South Australia), September 2015 (SA SDM Pilot
Report 2015).
The following account of
the pilot program is based on: ACT Disability, Aged and Carer Advocacy Service
Spectrums of Support: A Report on a Project Exploring Supported
Decision making for People with Disability in the ACT
, September 2013.
Office of the Public
Advocate (Queensland) - Systems Advocacy.
A Journey towards Autonomy?
Supported Decision making in Theory and Practice: A Review of Literature
Office of the Public Advocate (Queensland), February 2014: page 24.
Telephone discussion with Fiona
May, Chief Executive Officer, ACT Disability, Aged and Carer Advocacy Service,
30 March 2015.
Office of the Public Advocate
(Queensland) 2014, see note
, at page 25,
citing ADACAS 2013
Rea K. May F.
Self-Determination
and Cultural Change: A Report on Supported Decision Making for People
Experiencing Psychosocial and Intellectual
ADACAS 2014; Telephone
discussion with Fiona May, Chief Executive Officer, ACT Disability, Aged and
Carer Advocacy Service (ADACAS),
30 March 2015.
See also Guardianship Act, section
The following account of
the pilot program is based on the evaluation report – NSW SDM Pilot Report
2015 – see full citation
Unless otherwise noted,
the following account of the pilot program is based on email and telephone
discussion with Brenda Burgen,
Supported Decision making Coordinator, Office of
the Public Advocate (Victoria) on 16 and 17 March 2015, and updated through
attributable to the project, with tangible steps taken towards
participants’
achieving their goals and boosting their confidence are set
out in a presentation on 10 December 2014 to the 8
roundtable on disability policy: Burgen B. Chesterman J. Supported Decision
Making and the Office of the Public Advocate.
of Supported Decision making Pilot Project Report.
Prepared by the Centre of
Program Evaluation, University of Melbourne for the Victorian Office of the
Public Advocate, February 2016.
The project is described
on VALID ‘s website
http://www.publicadvocate.vic.gov.au/advocacy-research/supported-decision
Office of the Public
Advocate (Victoria).
Project Description – Supported Decision making
Pilot Project
. Office of the Public Advocate (Victoria), Fact Sheet.
Available at:
http://www.publicadvocate.vic.gov.au/file/file/Research/Current%20projects/SDM%20project%20flyer%20FINAL.pdf
Disability Services.
Supporting decision making -A guide to supporting people with a disability to
make their own decisions
Depart of Human Services, Melbourne (Australia).
Available at:
http://www.dhs.vic.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/690680/dsd_cis_supporting_decision_making_0212.pdf
Disability Services
(Department of Human Services). Making decisions and getting help if you need
it. Department of Human Services,
Melbourne (Australia) available at:
http://www.dhs.vic.gov.au/about-the-department/documents-and-resources/reports-publications/making-decisions-and-getting-help-if-you-need-it
SA SDM Pilot Evaluation
Report 2015 – note
Submission 21, Appendix
A, page 5, paragraph 25.
Submission 21, Appendix
A, page 5, paragraph 26.
Herczegfalvy v
(1992) 15 European Human Rights Reports 437 at paragraph 82.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (30.8 MB)
PDF format (1.77 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter