URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCIP/2001/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:37:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sentencing: Corporate offenders - Issues Paper [2001] NSWLRCIP 20
Issues Paper 20 (2001) - Sentencing: Corporate offenders
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
1. INTRODUCTION
THE COURSE OF THE COMMISSION’S REFERENCE
"CORPORATE OFFENDER” DEFINED
"CORPORATE CRIMES”
PURPOSE OF THE PAPER
STRUCTURE OF THE PAPER
2. CURRENT FRAMEWORK FOR LIABILITY AND SENTENCING
THE CRIMINAL LIABILITY OF CORPORATIONS
Principles of liability
EXISTING CRIMINAL SANCTIONS FOR CORPORATE OFFENDERS
WHY PUNISH CORPORATIONS?
3. SENTENCING STRATEGIES FOR CORPORATE OFFENDERS
CRIMINAL VERSUS CIVIL SANCTIONS
INADEQUACIES OF THE FINE
ADVANTAGES OF THE FINE
ALTERNATIVE SENTENCING OPTIONS
Pre-sentence reports
CONSOLIDATION: A GENERAL SENTENCING SCHEME?
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Issues Paper 20 (2001) - Sentencing: Corporate offenders
Terms of reference
History of this Reference (Digest)
To inquire into and report on the laws relating to sentencing in New South Wales with particular reference to:
(i) the formulation of principles and guidelines for sentencing;
(ii) the rationalisation and consolidation of current sentencing provisions;
(iii) the adequacy and use of existing non-custodial sentencing options with particular reference to home detention and periodic detention;
(iv) the adequacy of existing procedures for the release of prisoners by the Offenders Review Board and the Serious Offenders Review
Council and the benefits that might accrue from the review of the decisions of the Offenders Review Board and the Serious Offenders
Review Council by judicial officers; and
(v) any related matter.
In undertaking this reference, the Commission should have regard to the proposals in relation to sentencing contained in the Australia
Labor Party policy documents formulated in Opposition.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 20 (2001) - Sentencing: Corporate offenders
Participants
History of this Reference (Digest)
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act
(NSW) the Chairperson of the Commission constituted a Division for the purpose of conducting the reference. The members of the Division
The Hon Justice Michael Adams*
The Hon Justice Greg James
Her Hon Judge Angela Karpin
The Hon Gordon Samuels QC AC CVO
(* denotes Commissioner-in-Charge)
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Legal Research and Writing
Ms Rebecca Kang
Ms Dita Kruze
Desktop Publishing
Ms Rebecca Young
Administrative Assistance
Ms Wendy Stokoe
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 20 (2001) - Sentencing: Corporate offenders
Submissions
History of this Reference (Digest)
The Commission invites submissions on the issues relevant to this review, including but not limited to the issues raised in this
Issues Paper.
All submissions and enquiries should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
postal addresses
GPO Box 5199, Sydney NSW 1044 or DX 1227 Sydney
street address
Level 17, 8-12 Chifley Square, Sydney NSW
nsw_lrc@agd.nsw.gov.au
telephone (02) 9228 8230
facsimile (02) 9228 8225
TTY (02) 9228 7676
There is no special form required for submissions. If it is inconvenient or impractical to make a written submission you may telephone
the Commission and either direct your comments to a Legal Officer over the telephone, or else arrange to make your submission in
The closing date for submissions is 30 March 2002.
Use of submissions and confidentiality
If you would like your submission to be treated as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Submissions made to the
Commission may be used in two ways:
Since the Commission’s process of law reform is essentially public, copies of submissions made to the Commission will normally
be made available on request to other persons or organisations. However, if you would like all or part of your submission to be treated
as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Any request for a copy of a submission marked “confidential”
will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
In preparing further papers on this reference, the Commission will refer to submissions made in response to this Issues Paper. However,
requests for confidentiality will be respected by the Commission in relation to the publication of submissions.
Other publication formats
The NSW Attorney General’s Department is committed to fully meeting its obligations under State and Commonwealth anti-discrimination
legislation. These laws require all organisations to eliminate discriminatory practices which may prevent people with disabilities
from having full and equal access to our services.
This publication is available in alternative formats. If you have any difficulty in accessing this document please contact the Law
Reform Commission.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 20 (2001) - Sentencing: Corporate offenders
List of issues
History of this Reference (Digest)
When, if ever, is it desirable to impose criminal sanctions on corporations, as opposed to civil and/or administrative penalties?
What should be the main aim(s) of sentencing of corporate offenders?
In what circumstances, if ever, is a fine an appropriate sentencing option for a corporation?
What factors should a sentencing court take into account when fixing the appropriate amount to impose as a fine on a corporate offender?
Which, if any, of the following sentencing options would be an effective sanction against a corporation, and in what circumstances:
equity fines, publicity orders, corporate probation, community service orders, disqualification and dissolution.
Are there any problems or disadvantages in including these sanctions in the sentencing regime for corporations?
Are there other sanctions that should be included?
Should a sentencing court be entitled or required to consider a pre-sentence report in determining an appropriate sentence for a
corporate offender? What information would be relevant to include in such a report?
Should legislation consolidate sentencing options for corporate offenders under a general sentencing scheme?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 20 (2001) - Sentencing: Corporate offenders
1. Introduction
History of this Reference (Digest)
The course of the Commission’s reference
“Corporate offender” defined
“Corporate crimes”
Purpose of the paper
Structure of the paper
1.1 This Issues Paper discusses the sentencing of “corporate offenders”.
It is part of the NSW Law Reform Commission’s reference on sentencing law. It raises issues concerning the sentencing of corporations,
in particular the range of sentencing options that are available for this group of offenders.
THE COURSE OF THE COMMISSION’S REFERENCE
1.2 The then Attorney General, the Hon Jeff Shaw QC, referred the reform of sentencing law to the Law Reform Commission on 12 April
In 1996, the Commission released a discussion paper and a report on the general principles of sentencing as the first phase of its
The Commission is currently undertaking the second phase of its inquiry, which involves consideration of sentencing issues concerning
specific groups of offenders. Particular problems face the sentencing of these groups, which require separate discussion. In the
third and last phase, the Commission will examine the maximum penalties that legislation makes applicable to criminal offences in
New South Wales.
1.3 As part of this second phase, the Commission has released a report on the sentencing of Aboriginal offenders,
and an issues paper on young offenders.
“CORPORATE OFFENDER” DEFINED
1.4 This paper uses the term “corporate offender”. This is commonly understood to mean one of two things. It can refer
to a corporation that has been convicted of a criminal offence. Alternatively, it can refer to a person who commits a “white
collar crime”, generally understood as a business or commercial crime, often committed on behalf of or against a corporation.
1.5 At this stage, the Commission is confining its discussion of corporate offenders to corporations. We will not examine other entities
such as unincorporated associations or partnerships.
A corporation is an artificial entity that the law treats as having its own legal personality,
separate from and independent of the persons who make up the corporation. This means, for example, that a corporation can own and
sell property, sue or be sued, or commit a criminal offence. In New South Wales, an entity generally
becomes a corporation on registration, according to the requirements of the
Corporations Act 2001
1.6 Because corporations are not natural persons and cannot be subject to the usual sentencing options such as imprisonment, they
require special consideration in an inquiry into sentencing law. Individuals who commit white collar crimes, on the other hand, are
natural persons, and, in theory at least, are subject to the general sentencing options for individual offenders as discussed by
the Commission in the first phase of its inquiry. There is criticism from time to time that the sentences imposed on white collar
criminals are too lenient, and that this group of offenders are given special treatment in the criminal justice system.
While this is a matter of concern, it involves more consideration of the maximum penalties applicable to such offenders, and the
exercise of judicial discretion in imposing those penalties. These are issues that were discussed in the first stage of the Commission’s
inquiry, and will be examined again in the third stage.
“CORPORATE CRIMES”
1.7 Corporations can commit the same offences as natural persons.
However, it is probably correct to say that the most common examples of corporate crime committed against the laws of the state
involve cases of environmental pollution and dangerous industrial practices, as well as other breaches of workplace safety. There
was a recent example of this in Victoria, in the case of the Longford gas explosion, in which two men were killed and eight others
injured, and gas supplies to Victorian homes and businesses were cut.
There are numerous, less sensational examples of corporate misconduct arising in the many areas of corporate activity which are regulated
by legislation in New South Wales, including, for example, legislation relating to fair trading, food production and handling, building
and construction, as well as environment protection legislation and workplace health and safety laws.
Breaches of such legislation result in criminal sanctions, civil and/or administrative penalties.
1.8 Corporate crime poses a significant threat to the welfare of the community. Given the pervasive presence of corporations in a
wide range of activities in our society, and the impact of their actions on a much wider group of people than are affected by individual
action, the potential for both economic and physical harm caused by a corporation is great. There is a substantial body of literature
that considers corporate crime to be a serious social problem,
despite what some may argue to be relatively less media coverage than crimes committed by individuals, at least in the tabloid newspapers,
and despite the lack of comprehensive empirical research into the costs and incidence of corporate misconduct. In the area of workplace
safety, for example, statistics from WorkCover NSW
reveal that there was a total of 163 reported employment fatalities in New South Wales in the financial year 1998/99, and 55,492
employment injuries for that same period, 25.8% of which were reported as permanent disability cases. The gross incurred cost of
employment injuries for that year was $854 million.
1.9 It is important to ensure that there are effective means of reducing the risk of corporate misconduct. One way of doing this is
to impose appropriate criminal sanctions on corporate offenders. There are many who argue that the existing sanctions are inadequate.
A number of suggestions have been made for more effective sanctions against corporations that breach the law. These are discussed
in this paper.
PURPOSE OF THE PAPER
1.10 This Paper aims to provide a basis for consulting with interested members of the community on sentencing of corporate offenders.
It gives a general overview of the area as a starting point for more detailed discussion following community consultation. The Paper
asks a number of questions, appearing in Chapter 3. These questions are designed to direct attention to what the Commission considers
to be the main issues concerning sentencing of this category of offenders. You are invited to respond to these questions, or to make
comments about other issues of concern. For details on how to make a submission and the closing date for submissions, see pages vi-vii.
Following a period of consultation, the Commission will prepare a report on sentencing of corporate offenders, including recommendations
for reform to this area if, based on our consultation with the community, we consider this to be necessary or desirable.
STRUCTURE OF THE PAPER
1.11 The Issues Paper is divided into three chapters. The first chapter provides an introduction to the subject and the progress of
the Commission’s sentencing reference. The second chapter gives a very brief overview of the principles of criminal liability
for corporations and the criminal sanctions generally available for corporate offenders. The third chapter discusses the weaknesses
or disadvantages of the existing sentencing regime, makes suggestions for alternative or additional sanctions, and raises the possibility
of consolidating sentencing options for corporations into a single sentencing scheme. The chapter raises issues for consideration
and invites comments on these issues.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. See para 1.4-1.6 below for a definition of “corporate offender”.
. The terms of reference are set out on page iv.
. See New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
(Discussion Paper 33, 1996), (Report 79, 1996).
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
(Discussion Paper 33, 1996) at para 1.13-1.20.
. See New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Sentencing: Aboriginal Offenders
(Report 96, 2000).
. See New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Sentencing: Young Offenders
(Issues Paper 19, 2001).
. See Australian Law Reform Commission,
Sentencing: Penalties
(Discussion Paper 30, 1987) at para 283; H Croall,
White Collar Crime: Criminal Justice and Criminology
(Open University Press, Buckingham, 1992) ch 1.
. For both unincorporated associations and partnerships, primary liability falls on the individual members or partners, the entity
itself not being considered as a separate legal personality. Professor Fisse questioned the principle which confines corporate criminal
liability to corporations, noting that the problem of imposing responsibility on individuals within an organisation extends to large
partnerships and government bureaucracies: see B Fisse,
Howard’s Criminal Law
(5th ed, Law Book Company Limited, Sydney, 1990) at 595. The imposition of criminal liability on entities other than corporations
is an issue that lies beyond the Commission’s immediate terms of reference.
Corporations Act 2001
The term “company” is often used interchangeably with “corporation”. “Corporation” is the wider
Corporations Act 2001
defines “corporation” to include a company, as well as any body corporate and unincorporated body that may sue or be
sued, or hold property in the name of its secretary or an officer of the body duly appointed for that purpose: see
. “Company” is defined generally as any company registered under the
Corporations Act 2001
See also CCH Corporations Law Editors,
Australian Corporations and Securities Law Reporter
(CCH Australia Limited, Sydney, 1990) vol 1 at �21-500; H Gibbs and D Heydon (eds),
Halsbury’s Laws of Australia
(Butterworths, Sydney, 1993) vol 7 at para 120-121; R Tomasic and S Bottomley,
Corporations Law in Australia
(Federation Press, Sydney, 1995); R Baxt, K Fletcher and S Fridman,
Afterman and Baxt’s Cases and Materials on Corporations and Associations
(7th ed, Butterworths, Sydney, 1996).
. Incorporation may also be conferred by statute, which is often done with State or Commonwealth corporations, such as the Australian
Broadcasting Corporation: see
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Act 1983
Corporations Act 2001
. See, for example, recent reports in the media, such as A Fels, “Jail Would Hurt More Than Fines”
Canberra Times
(5 July 2001) at 11; Australian Associated Press, “Jail Over False Ads: Fels”
West Australian
(11 July 2001) at 14.
. See Chapter 2.
. Other common examples of corporate crime involve breaches of the corporations legislation and trade practices legislation,
Corporations Act 2001
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth). Both of these are predominantly within the jurisdiction of the federal rather than state legislature (with the mechanism for
the states’ consent for amendments to the
Corporations Act 2001
). They are therefore areas over which the New South Wales Law Reform Commission would have no power to recommend legislative reform.
. Esso was found criminally liable for this incident and convicted for several breaches of Victorian work safety legislation. The
case received extensive media coverage: see, for example, B Crawford, “20,000 line up to sue Esso”
The Australian
(29 June 2001) at 1, 4; M Shaw, P Gregory, G Tippet, “Esso guilty over blast at gas plant”
Sydney Morning Herald
(29 June 2001) at 7.
. See, for example,
Environmentally Hazardous Chemicals Act 1985
Forestry Act 1916
Marine Pollution Act 1987
Ozone Protection Act 1989
Wilderness Act 1987
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2000
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Food Act 1989
Fair Trading Act 1987
. For example, Australian Law Reform Commission,
Sentencing: Penalties
(Discussion Paper 30, 1987); M Block, “Optimal Penalties, Criminal Law and the Control of Corporate Behavior”
Boston University Law Review
; Canada, Law Reform Commission,
Criminal Responsibility for Group Action
(Working Paper 16, 1976); JC Coffee Jnr, “‘No Soul to Damn: No Body To Kick’: An Unscandalised Inquiry into the
Problem of Corporate Punishment”
Michigan Law Review
; J Duns, “A Silent Revolution: the Changing Nature of Sanctions in Companies and Securities Legislation” (1991) 9
Company and Securities Law Journal
365; B Fisse,
Howard’s Criminal Law
(5th ed, Law Book Company Limited, 1990) ch 7; B Fisse, “Sentencing Options Against Corporations” (1990)
Criminal Law Forum
211; B Fisse, “Reconstructing Corporate Criminal Law: Deterrence, Retribution, Fault, and Sanctions”
Southern California Law Review
; B Fisse and J Braithwaite,
Corporations, Crime and Accountability
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1993); P Grabosky and A Sutton (eds),
Stains on a White Collar: Fourteen Studies in Corporate Crime or Corporate Harm
(Federation Press, Sydney, 1989); R Gruner, “Towards An Organizational Jurisprudence: Transforming Corporate Criminal Law Through
Federal Sentencing Reform” (1994) 36
Arizona Law Review
407; T Hoffman, “Corporate Compliance Programs and US Sentencing Guidelines” (1998) 21
Pennsylvania Law Weekly
13; S Pilchen, “When Corporations Commit Crimes: Sentencing Under the Federal Organizational Guidelines”
; South Australia, Criminal Law and Penal Methods Reform Committee,
The Substantive Criminal Law
(Report 4, Government Printer, Adelaide, 1977); C Stone, “Sentencing the Corporation”
Boston University Law Review
; R Tomasic, “Sanctioning Corporate Crime and Misconduct: Beyond Draconian and Decriminalization Solutions” (1992)
Australian Journal of Corporate Law
82; R Tomasic,
Corporate Crime and Corporations Law Enforcement Strategies in Australia
(Centre for National Corporate Law Research, Discussion Paper 1/93, Canberra, 1993); United States of America, Sentencing Commission,
Supplementary Report on Sentencing Guidelines For Organizations
(August 1991).
. See WorkCover NSW,
Statistical Bulletin 1998/99, NSW Workers Compensation
at 4. It should be noted that, by 1998/99, the number of employment injuries had actually been decreasing for the last four years
at a rate of 3% each year. Of course, not all employers in these cases would have been corporations. The figures do no more than
provide a general idea of the incidence and cost of corporate misconduct in this one particular area.
Issues Paper 20 (2001) - Sentencing: Corporate offenders
2. Current framework for liability and sentencing
History of this Reference (Digest)
The criminal liability of corporations
Existing criminal sanctions for corporate offenders
Why punish corporations?
2.1 This chapter provides a brief summary of the principles governing corporate criminal liability and the sentencing options available
for corporate offenders.
THE CRIMINAL LIABILITY OF CORPORATIONS
2.2 As we noted in Chapter 1, a corporation can generally be convicted of the same offences as a natural person,
such as offences involving fraud or theft,
some drug offences,
offences that pervert the course of justice,
and contempt of court. Corporations can attract criminal liability as accessories to a crime as well as principals,
and as parties to a conspiracy.
It is open to question whether a corporation can be convicted of murder, at least in New South Wales,
or manslaughter.
Some commentators have suggested that corporations cannot be convicted of certain crimes that inherently require an act by a natural
such as perjury or a sexual offence. Others have disputed this claim, arguing that, in this context, corporate liability should arise
if the criminal acts were committed by a manager or employee of the corporation, in accordance with general principles of corporate
criminal liability.
2.3 As we also noted in Chapter 1,
corporate criminal liability more commonly arises from a wide range of disparate statutes relating to areas of commercial activity
in which corporations are typically involved. Breaches of such legislation are generally investigated and dealt with by separate
enforcement agencies, such as WorkCover or the Environment Protection Agency, rather than a central enforcement body, such as the
police and/or the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Principles of liability
2.4 A corporation may attract criminal liability in one of two ways.
It can be convicted of an offence that is committed by an employee or agent acting within the scope of his or her employment or agency,
following the principles of vicarious liability.
Alternatively, it can be directly liable for acts committed by certain senior officers of the corporation, or others to whom they
have delegated their powers, where their acts are viewed as constituting the acts of the corporation.
2.5 It is outside the scope of this reference to review the principles of corporate criminal liability. However, in formulating an
appropriate approach to the sentencing of corporate offenders, it is important to note that the principles by which a corporation
attracts a criminal conviction have been widely criticised. It has been argued that it is unfair to impose vicarious liability in
the criminal context, at least for more serious offences, and that it is out of touch with modern corporate structures and the way
in which large corporations conduct business to impose direct liability according to the acts of senior corporate officers. Both
principles could be criticised for failing to require proof of “organisational blameworthiness”,
as opposed to the blameworthiness of one individual within the organisation. Proposals have been made for reforming the principles
of corporate criminal liability to accommodate modern corporate structures often involving delegation to relatively junior officers.
These proposals have been implemented in Commonwealth legislation.
EXISTING CRIMINAL SANCTIONS FOR CORPORATE OFFENDERS
2.6 The fine is the most common sentencing option for corporate offenders. The
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW) makes general provision for the imposition of a fine on bodies corporate convicted of an offence for which imprisonment is
otherwise the only available sentence.
The maximum amount that can currently be fixed under that general legislative provision is, in most cases, $220,000.
For offences arising from the various statutes impacting on corporate commercial activities, the fine is also the most commonly available
sanction. The maximum amounts fixed by these statutes vary widely.
2.7 There is no provision for sanctions other than fines for corporate offenders in general state sentencing legislation. It is possible
that, in theory at least, the regime of sentencing options in the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW) could apply to the sentencing of corporate offenders. This Act provides, among other things, for a range of sentencing options
as alternatives to imprisonment for sentencing generally.
These options include community service orders, good behaviour bonds, and suspended sentences. The Act applies to certain courts,
most of which have jurisdiction to sentence corporate offenders.
The sentencing options are stated to apply to an “offender”, which is defined as a person whom a court has found guilty
of an offence.
The word “person” is generally interpreted as including a corporation or a body corporate.
However, the range of sentencing options applies “instead of imposing a sentence of imprisonment”.
As corporations cannot be sentenced to a term of imprisonment, it may be that they are precluded from this regime of alternative
sanctions. In any case, even if the legislation could be interpreted in a way that allows its application to corporate offenders,
it may be preferable that sentencing legislation make provision for a separate regime of sanctions for corporations, rather than
trying to accommodate the general regime to this particular group of offenders.
2.8 There have been some innovations towards more creative sentencing of corporate offenders in the disparate pieces of legislation
governing corporate activities. While the primary sanction on conviction of such offences remains the fine, some legislation now
provides for additional ways of dealing with the convicted corporation (as well as with individual offenders). For example, environmental
protection legislation provides for a court to order an offender to take such steps as specified in a court order to prevent, control,
abate, or mitigate any harm to the environment caused by the commission of the environmental offence, or to make good any resulting
environmental damage, or prevent the continuance or recurrence of the offence.
2.9 The new
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2000
(NSW) goes further in introducing non-monetary penalties as additional sanctions for corporate offenders. On conviction of an offence
under that Act, in addition to, or instead of, imposing a fine, a court may order publication of the offence and its penalty, order
an offender to carry out a specified project for the general improvement of occupational health, safety and welfare, or make an order
for restoration. These provisions follow on from a review into the occupational health and safety legislation, which recommended
a broadening of the range of non-monetary penalties available for corporate offenders. It was noted that occupational health and
safety problems often reflect a failing in work organisation and management practices, and that fines are ineffective in modifying
or rectifying these practices, since they do not require a corporation to review its management structure.
Since the Act has only recently commenced operation,
the effectiveness of these non-monetary sanctions remains as yet largely untested.
WHY PUNISH CORPORATIONS?
2.10 A fundamental issue underlying a discussion of sentencing corporate offenders is whether it is appropriate to impose criminal
liability on corporations at all. Is it appropriate to impose criminal liability on the corporation, in addition to or instead of
individuals within the corporation? Is it appropriate to impose criminal liability or rely instead solely on civil liability as a
response to corporate misconduct?
2.11 In response to the first question, it may be easier, at a pragmatic level, to prosecute a corporation than an individual. It
may be difficult and costly for the government to investigate and determine which individuals within a corporation are actually responsible
for the unlawful conduct. It is generally the corporation that has the resources and is perceived by the community as the beneficiary
in most cases where the conduct in question is designed to benefit the corporation. By prosecuting the corporation, it may be hoped
that the corporation will itself discover those responsible and punish them. At a more fundamental level, the unlawful conduct may
arise from the corporation as a collective body, rather than from the acts of an individual or individuals. The criminal conduct
may result from the culmination of individual acts, each act in itself being too minor to prosecute. It may be the very structures
or procedures by which the corporation operates that are at fault, rather than the conduct of any one individual. For example, it
could be argued that cases of environmental pollution or dangerous work practices typically arise from defective systems rather than
the wrongful conduct of a single individual or group of individuals.
Individual officers may have committed no crime for which a sanction may be imposed, whether or not they are morally blameworthy
for conduct leading to the offence. In this situation, the only way of establishing their accountability, or bringing them to account,
is by imposing sanctions on the corporation that will also affect them. An issue that lies beyond the scope of our reference is whether
it is possible or appropriate, at least in cases where the offence in question arises from a statutory breach, to enact more provisions
establishing individual liability of directors and managers.
2.12 As for the question of whether to impose criminal liability at all, rather than simply relying on civil liability to address
corporate misconduct, it is usually argued that the imposition of criminal liability is necessary to express the proper degree of
condemnation of the conduct as morally reprehensible, and deter potential offenders.
Having said that, questions have also been raised about the effectiveness of relying on existing criminal sanctions to deter corporate
misconduct. These are discussed in greater detail in Chapter 3.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW) provides that, unless a contrary intention appears, a provision of an Act relating to an offence applies to a body corporate
as well as to individuals.
. See, for example, provisions relating to property offences under
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW), such as fraudulent misappropriation (s 178A); obtaining money by deception (s 178BA) or by a false or misleading statement
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985
Crimes Act 1900
R v Robert Millar (Contractors) Ltd
[1970] 2 QB 54.
R v ICR Haulage Ltd
[1944] 1 KB 551.
. It has been said that a corporation cannot be convicted of a crime for which imprisonment is the only available sanction, murder
typically being such a crime: see
R v ICR Haulage Ltd
[1944] 1 KB 551 at 554; C Corns, “The Liability of Corporations for Homicide in Victoria”
Criminal Law Journal 351
; P Gillies,
Criminal Law
(4th ed, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1997) at 132-133; but see B Fisse,
Howard’s Criminal Law
(5th ed, Law Book Company Limited, Sydney, 1990) at 611. In New South Wales,
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW) provides that a fine may be imposed on a body corporate for an offence for which imprisonment is the only sentence. Arguably,
this overcomes the difficulty typically put forward.
R v ICR Haulage Ltd
[1944] 1 KB 551; but see
R v Cory Bros & Co Ltd
[1927] 1 KB 810. A company was tried for (and acquitted of) manslaughter in New Zealand: see
R v Murray Wright Ltd
[1970] NZLR 476.
. See P Gillies,
Criminal Law
(4th ed, LBC Information Services, Sydney, 1997) at 133;
R v ICR Haulage Ltd
[1944] 1 KB 551 at 554.
. See B Fisse,
Howard’s Criminal Law
(5th ed, Law Book Company Limited, Sydney, 1990) at 609. Professor Fisse argues that, while it is unlikely that a sexual assault
would come within the scope of employment so as to attract liability, it is not completely impossible, such as where a company producing
pornographic videos engages in the business of performing actual rather than simulated sexual acts without consent.
. See para 1.7.
. See B Fisse,
Howard’s Criminal Law
(5th ed, Law Book Company Limited, Sydney, 1990) at 599-608; P Gillies,
Criminal Law
(4th ed, LBC Information Services, 1997) at 134-146; D Brown, D Farrier, S Egger, L McNamara,
Brown, Farrier, Neal and Weisbrot’s Criminal Laws: Materials and Commentary on Criminal Law and Process in New South Wales
(3rd ed, Federation Press, 2001) at para 4.8.1-4.8.6.
. For example,
Proceeds of Crime Act 1987
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) impose vicarious liability on a body corporate for crimes committed by employees.
Tesco v Nattrass
[1971] UKHL 1
[1972] AC 153
Hamilton v Whitehead
[1988] HCA 65
(1988) 166 CLR 121.
. See B Fisse,
Howard’s Criminal Law
(5th ed, Law Book Company Limited, Sydney, 1990) at 606; B Fisse and J Braithwaite,
Corporations, Crime and Accountability
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1993), especially ch 2.
. B Fisse and J Braithwaite,
Corporations, Crime and Accountability
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1993) at 140-157; Australia, Criminal Law Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of
Attorneys General,
Model Criminal Code: Chapter 2: General Principles of Criminal Responsibility
(Final Report, December 1992) at 104-113. The Committee proposed, among other things, that in cases where intention, knowledge, or
recklessness is an element of an offence, that element exists on the part of a body corporate that expressly, tacitly, or impliedly
authorised or permitted the commission of the offence. It then proposed various means of satisfying this test, including that a corporate
culture existed within the body corporate that directed, encouraged, tolerated or led to non-compliance with the relevant provision:
see proposed section 501.2-501.2.2.
Criminal Code (Cth)
Pt 2.5 Div 12.
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
. This is the maximum amount that can be imposed by the NSW Supreme Court, Court of Criminal Appeal, the Land and Environment Court,
the Industrial Relations Commission, or the District Court. In any other case,
sets a maximum amount of $11,000. See
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW) for the amount fixed for a penalty unit.
. For example, for certain offences under the new
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2000
(NSW), a corporation may be fined as high as $825,000: see
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
. See the definition of “court” in the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure Act) 1999
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Interpretation Act 1987
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Protection of the Environment Operations Act 1997
(NSW) s 245.
. See Review of the Occupational Health and Safety Act 1983,
Final Report of the Panel of Review
(February 1997) at 105, 113. This was an independent review to the Legislative Council’s Standing Committee on Law and Justice,
as part of the Committee’s inquiry into occupational health and safety: see Parliament of NSW, Legislative Council, Standing
Committee on Law and Justice,
Final Report of the Inquiry into Workplace Safety
(Report 10, November 1998, 2 volumes). See also New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council, 26 May 2000 at 5936; 6 June 2000 at 6581; 7 June 2000 at 6691; Legislative Assembly, 7 June 2000 at 6804; 21
June 2000 at 7325.
. The Act commenced operation on 1 September 2001: see Government Gazette No 129 of 24 August 2001 at 6186.
. See, for example, B Fisse,
Howard’s Criminal Law
(5th ed, Law Book Company Limited, 1990) at 591-594; C D Stone, “The Place of Enterprise Liability in the Control of Corporate
Yale Law Journal
. For example, see J Braithwaite, “Challenging Just Deserts: Punishing White-Collar Criminals” (1982) 73
Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology
723-763; J Duns, “A Silent Revolution: The Changing Nature of Sanctions in Companies and Securities Legislation” (December
Company and Securities Law Journal
365; B Fisse, “Reconstructing Corporate Criminal Law: Deterrence, Retribution, Fault, and Sanctions”
Southern California Law Review
; B Fisse and J Braithwaite,
Corporations, Crime and Accountability
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1993); Review of the Occupational Health and Safety Act 1983,
Final Report of the Panel of Review
(February 1997) at 100.
Issues Paper 20 (2001) - Sentencing: Corporate offenders
3. Sentencing strategies for corporate offenders
History of this Reference (Digest)
Criminal versus civil sanctions
Inadequacies of the fine
Advantages of the fine
Alternative sentencing options
Consolidation: a general sentencing scheme?
CRIMINAL VERSUS CIVIL SANCTIONS
3.1 In Chapter 2,
the Commission raised the
question of whether it is appropriate to impose criminal liability at
all on corporations, instead of relying
solely on the civil law. It has
been suggested from time to time
that a more effective
sentencing strategy to control corporate behaviour would be to place
greater reliance on civil penalties and
persuasive techniques through
self-regulation. The focus of law reform in this area would then shift
to exploring the range of civil
penalties and self-regulatory measures
available. It is worth noting here that the Australian Law Reform
Commission is currently
conducting a general inquiry into the place of
civil and administrative penalties within the (federal) legal system,
including the
relationship between criminal, civil and administrative
There is the potential for some overlap between
our reference and the ALRC’s reference, involving an analysis of
civil, administrative,
and criminal sanctions as modes of social
3.2 Deterrence is generally cited as the primary aim of and justification for sentencing corporate offenders.
This is because, in theory at least, corporations can be deterred from
committing wrongful conduct. Unlike individuals, corporations
commit crimes of passion, nor are they generally committed to crime as
a way of life. They tend instead to engage in wrongful
conduct as a
calculated risk, often economically motivated. They can be deterred if
that conduct represents a risk that is not worth
taking. Similarly, it
has been argued that rehabilitation should not be ignored as an
achievable objective of sentencing corporations.
said to be easier to rehabilitate a corporation than an individual,
because the causes for offending, such as defective structures
processes, are more malleable and open to change than individual human
personalities. These assertions, if accepted, provide
support for
imposing criminal sanctions on corporations.
3.3 However, it may be argued that criminal prosecution and
criminal sanctions are both unnecessary and ineffective in dealing with
corporate misconduct because, in their current state at least, they
have little deterrent and rehabilitative effect.
practical level, difficulties in investigating and proving corporate
crime beyond a reasonable doubt may result in few successful
prosecutions against corporations. The criminal law then poses little
threat to potential offenders. Added to this is the delay that
arises in obtaining a verdict in a criminal matter, and reliance on
public enforcement bodies for the decision to take action
corporation. Even if a criminal prosecution is successful, the sentence
that is imposed, in most cases a fine, is said
to be inadequate in
deterring and rehabilitating the offender. Lastly, there may be a range
of offences affecting corporations that
should properly be considered
“regulatory” rather than truly criminal, because they are
not so much morally reprehensible
as a means of regulating corporate
activity. It may be questioned whether the imposition of criminal
sanctions for these offences
lessens the impact of the criminal law in
condemning more serious cases.
3.4 In contrast to criminal sanctions, civil penalties are
imposed according to a lower standard of proof. They do not rely solely
or primarily on public enforcement. They are also arguably more quickly
available, with greater flexibility for the court to fashion
that is appropriate in the particular circumstances. Moreover, measures
can be taken to prevent the misconduct, rather than
having to wait for
damage from the misconduct to occur. Support has also been given to
self-regulation as a means of persuading corporations
to comply with
the law and placing the burden on them to ensure compliance, since they
are often in the best position to monitor
behaviour and discover
3.5 The usual response to a suggested shift of emphasis from
criminal sanctions to the civil law and self-regulation is, as noted
that the criminal law is necessary to express
the appropriate level of denunciation of the conduct. While it is
recognised that the
existing sentencing scheme for corporate offenders
is inadequate in meeting the objectives of deterrence and
rehabilitation, it is
argued that the proper approach is to reform the
criminal sanctions available, rather than reject altogether the
imposition of criminal
3.6 A number of commentators have suggested that the most
effective sentencing strategy for corporate offenders is one that
both on criminal and civil sanctions, and some degree of
self-regulation.
A possible model is one that relies first
on self-regulation to persuade corporations to comply with the law,
with criminal sanctions
used as the ultimate threat for non-compliance.
It may still be desirable, however, to widen the range of criminal
sanctions available
to ensure that they pose sufficient threat.
When, if ever, is it desirable to impose criminal sanctions on
corporations, as opposed to civil and/or administrative penalties?
What should be the main aim(s) of sentencing of corporate offenders?
INADEQUACIES OF THE FINE
3.7 As we noted in Chapter 2, the fine is the most common
sentencing option for corporate offenders, and, in most instances, is
only sanction available. Not only is it claimed that the amounts
for fines are at times too low to provide any meaningful punishment
deterrence, but that monetary penalties of any amount are often an
ineffective means of achieving the objectives of sentencing
corporate offenders. The following are the main arguments against the
fine as a sentencing option for corporate offenders.
Fines trivialise the gravity of corporate crime.
It is argued that fines do not act as sufficient denunciation of
serious criminal misconduct. They convey the message to the community
that corporate crime is less serious than other crime and that
corporations can buy their way out of trouble. Moreover, corporate
crime causes harm to society that is more than economic. Sole reliance
on a monetary sanction tends to diminish the significance
non-economic harm caused, such as irreparable damage to the
environment, or death or injury sustained from a workplace accident.
Fines do not deter corporate crime.
corporations may treat relatively low fines as mere business losses,
which are outweighed by the economic gain in committing
the crime. They
may pass on the cost of the fine to their shareholders, employees, or
consumers of their products. In that case,
the fine loses any deterrent
effect it may have had.
3.10 In contrast, for smaller corporations, or for subsidiaries
of larger corporations, fines of an amount necessary to reflect the
gravity of an offence may be beyond their means to pay. It has been
that, in this situation, a large fine can have as
little impact as a fine for a small amount. Unlike an individual who is
and for whom imprisonment is the ultimate threat for failing to
there is no such final sanction that may be imposed
on the corporation that does not or cannot pay. The final sanction for
a corporation
is civil action to recover the amount of the fine,
including, for example, seizure of the corporation’s property, or
placing a charge over land owned by it. It is questionable
civil action is necessarily an effective means of enforcing a fine
(and, ultimately, acting as an adequate deterrent), particularly
corporations that are not asset rich. Even where a corporation has
sufficient assets to cover the amount of the fine, enforcing
through seizure may drive it out of business, with disastrous effects
on workers and creditors. And whereas an individual
has the opportunity
to “work off” a fine by performing community service,
there is no such option for corporations. Therefore, there may be no
action taken against a corporation that does not pay. In those
situations, the fine has minimal deterrent effect.
3.11 Another ground for arguing that the fine is not an
effective deterrent is that it does not address the non-economic
motivations
for a corporation to commit a crime. These may include, for
example, the desire for greater power or prestige, or the need for
Different divisions of the corporation may have different
motivations for offending, such as preventing closure of a plant or
office. In that situation, the threat of a monetary penalty will
not necessarily deter.
Fines do not address the rehabilitative aims of sentencing.
When a corporation is sentenced to pay a fine, it is not compelled to
review its management structure or reform the internal procedures
policies that contributed to or caused the wrongful conduct giving rise
to the offence. It is left to the corporation to take
that initiative
itself, on the assumption that it will be motivated to do so in order
to avoid reoffending and incurring further
fines. As noted above,
however, a fine may offer little such deterrence.
Large corporations may avoid the punitive effect of a fine through subsidiaries.
Subsidiary corporations are regarded as separate legal entities from
their parent corporation. A fine that is imposed on a subsidiary
therefore measured according to the resources of the subsidiary, rather
than the parent corporation. In this way, large corporations
business through subsidiaries may avoid the punitive effect of a fine
that is imposed on the subsidiary rather than the parent,
even if the
subsidiary is acting on the orders of the parent corporation.
Fines may punish the “innocent”.
It has been argued that fines may punish the innocent as well as, and
sometimes, instead of, those responsible for the criminal conduct.
noted in paragraph 3.9 above, in the case of larger corporations in
particular, the costs of a fine may be passed on to shareholders,
employees, or consumers. These people may not have the power to
influence the conduct of the corporation that gave rise to the offence.
As also noted in paragraph 3.10, in the case of smaller corporations,
or corporations that cannot pay the fine imposed, civil action
recover the fine can have disastrous effects on employees or
shareholders if the corporation is put out of business.
3.15 Concern for the effect of a sentence on innocent parties
is not in itself a reason for rejecting that sentence as the proper
response to criminal conduct. Sanctions will often have a punitive
effect on those not responsible for the crime, such as the effect
dependent children where a parent is sentenced to imprisonment. This
last argument serves as an illustration of the limited deterrent
of the fine as noted in paragraph 3.9-3.10, in so far as the
corporation may avoid or minimise the impact of a fine by passing
to others or by avoiding payment by pointing to the effect this will
have on others.
ADVANTAGES OF THE FINE
3.16 Despite these criticisms, there are certain advantages to
imposing a monetary penalty on corporate offenders. Fines are
inexpensive and easy to administer and enforce, and also
generate revenue for the state. As well, they do not involve government
intervention into the internal affairs of a corporation.
3.17 In the United States of America, the fine remains the
primary sentencing option for corporate offenders convicted of federal
offences, following sentencing guidelines first developed by the US
Sentencing Commission in 1991.
The Sentencing
Commission’s approach to formulating an effective sentencing
regime for “organizational defendants”
was to re-evaluate
the ways in which amounts of fines were determined, rather than
exploring other, non-monetary sanctions (besides
corporate probation).
The Sentencing Commission set out equations for calculating suitable
amounts for fines, which involved consideration
of the seriousness of
the offence and the culpability of the offender. The seriousness of the
offence was given a cash value, taking
into account the pecuniary gain
or loss from the offence.
3.18 This approach assumes that a fine can provide adequate
deterrence and punishment. That assumption has been criticised for
fundamentally flawed, for the reasons set out above. That does
not mean, however, that the fine should be rejected altogether as
sentencing option for corporate offenders. Arguably, the advantages of
the fine make it a useful and appropriate sanction for the
serious, more “regulatory” offences.
In what circumstances, if ever, is a fine an appropriate sentencing option for a corporation?
What factors should a sentencing court take into account when
fixing the appropriate amount to impose as a fine on a corporate
ALTERNATIVE SENTENCING OPTIONS
3.19 Numerous suggestions have been made for sentencing options for corporate offenders as alternatives to the fine.
These are listed and explained below.
Equity fines:
An order to pay an equity fine
requires the corporation to authorise and issue a number of its shares
to the state’s crime
victim compensation fund. The fund is then
able to liquidate the securities in whatever manner maximises its
return. Legislation
could list potential beneficiaries to receive the
shares in addition to the victim compensation fund. One advantage of
fine over the cash fine is that the amount imposed is not
restricted by the corporation’s resources, which may be less than
the amount that is required to reflect the gravity of the crime.
Another advantage is that its effect could not be avoided or minimised
by passing it on to “innocent” employees and consumers. It
would, however, affect shareholders, including shareholders
relatively little control over the corporation’s activities.
Publicity orders:
The sentencing court could
require the convicted corporation to give appropriate publicity to the
conviction by notice to the class,
or classes, of persons, or sector of
the public, interested in or affected by the conviction. Publicity
orders are directed primarily
towards the infliction of loss of
corporate prestige. It is argued that many corporations are sensitive
interest over and above profits, and
potential loss of prestige plays an important part in corporate
decision-making. The shame generated
by negative publicity therefore
punishes the offending corporation and deters it from reoffending.
Although publicity orders cannot
guarantee reform of the procedures or
policies that contributed to or caused the commission of the offence,
they could be used to
put public pressure on the corporation to carry
out such reforms. There is a danger, however, that if used
indiscriminately or inappropriately,
the public may simply become bored
of long lists of advertisements reporting convictions, and in that way
the effect of the publicity
order would be lost. The new
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2000
(NSW) includes provision for the use of publicity orders as a
sentencing option for corporations. The legislation does not include
any details as to the form of the publicity or when a publicity order
is to be imposed. It is presumably left to the discretion of
sentencing court to make these determinations.
Corporate probation:
Probation is aimed primarily
at rehabilitating the offender to prevent further offending. As with an
individual on probation, corporate
probation suspends the imposition of
a more serious sanction conditional on the corporation complying with
certain requirements.
For example, the sentencing court may appoint
probation officers, paid for by the corporation, to monitor operating
procedures over
a period of time to make sure that the corporation
complies with the law. Probation may be particularly appropriate for
small corporations, where offences can often be attributed
to ignorance of the law or poor financial management.
If New South Wales legislation were to provide for probation as a sentencing option for corporate offenders,
it would need to be determined what sanction would follow breach of the probationary order.
3.23 Suggestions have been made
for two specific
forms of corporate probation, internal discipline orders and
organisational reform orders. Internal discipline orders
require the
corporation to investigate an offence committed by it, carry out
appropriate disciplinary proceedings against the individuals
responsible, and return a detailed and satisfactory compliance report
to the court. The main advantage of an internal discipline
that it places the burden of investigation and, to an extent,
punishment, on the corporation, in circumstances where it
difficult or impossible for a government body with limited resources to
investigate and prosecute those responsible for the
criminal conduct.
It would not, however, be appropriate where such conduct is properly
attributable to the corporation as an institution,
rather than to the
acts of a few individuals within it. There is also a risk that
injustice will arise from a corporation undertaking
investigation and discipline without the safeguards of the criminal
trial process to protect the rights of the individual,
corporation using an individual as a scapegoat to attribute blame. On
the other hand, it has been argued
that internal
discipline is not the same as criminal proceedings in terms of stigma
or the imposition of a sentence such as a term
of imprisonment,
although this may be small comfort to an individual who is wrongly
accused and loses his or her job.
3.24 Organisational reform orders require revision of corporate
policies and procedures under court supervision for a limited time.
They have been described as a “soft” sentencing option,
with more serious crimes calling for more punitive sanctions.
3.25 One concern with corporate probation is the possibility
that it will subject a corporation to inefficient and excessively
governmental intervention. In response, it has been argued
that this is the price that may need to be paid in order to maintain an
effective crime control system over this group of offenders.
Precautions could also be taken to ensure that the degree of state
over a corporation does not become overbearing, such as
allowing corporate offenders an opportunity to set out, before
sentencing,
the initiatives they propose to take in response to their
conviction.
Corporate probation would appear to have the
particular advantage of forcing the corporation to identify and correct
the defective
system that gave rise to the offence. A probationary
order could require remedial work to be performed and to satisfy
when completed. This would require the sentencing court to
supervise the performance of its order, a role that courts do not
take on. It may however be necessary for the courts to
undertake a supervisory role over orders that are designed to remedy
established
defects or poor practices which might again produce
widespread damage if they are not remedied.
Community service orders:
As with individuals
sentenced to perform community service, corporations could be ordered
to undertake a socially useful project
involving a commitment of their
time, effort, and skills. For example, a corporation that has been
criminally negligent in manufacturing
and distributing a drug causing
birth defects could be ordered to set up and administer a facility to
manufacture aids such as prosthetic
limbs for those affected.
Community service orders would not in themselves guarantee proper
corporate reform to prevent reoffending. However, it has been suggested
that such reform could be achieved if community service were combined
with probation.
Fisse cites two potential problems with the use of community service orders for corporate offenders.
First, there is opportunity for judicial officers to channel corporate
resources into pet charity programs. That concern could be
addressed by
a legislative requirement that the community service bear a reasonable
relationship with the offence or with the offender’s
for rehabilitation, or by listing an authorised range of projects in
the legislation or subordinate legislation. The second
problem is the risk of a corporation “cheating” on its
community service. Professor Fisse suggests that this
problem could be
overcome by setting up certain safeguards, such as court-appointed
monitors paid for by the corporation.
Disqualification and dissolution:
draconian sanctions are disqualification and dissolution. A corporate
offender could be disqualified from engaging in certain
business, such
as disqualification from government contracts. It is questionable
whether it is appropriate for the courts to become
involved in the
government’s decision whether or not to enter into a contract
with a particular corporation. A corporation
could also be dissolved
by, for example, placing it in the hands of a receiver or nationalising
it. This has been described as a
form of “corporate capital
punishment” and for some may be ideologically repugnant.
Which, if any, of the following sentencing options would be an
effective sanction against a corporation, and in what circumstances:
equity fines, publicity orders, corporate probation, community service
orders, disqualification and dissolution.
Are there any problems or disadvantages in including these
sanctions in the sentencing regime for corporations? Are there other
that should be included?
Pre-sentence reports
3.29 In determining an appropriate sentence for a corporate
offender, it may be useful for the sentencing court to have before it
information in a form similar to the pre-sentence report that is
commonly tendered when sentencing individual offenders.
For example, information relating to the company’s accounts, and
the salary packages (including bonuses and option deals) of
executives, may be relevant in determining the appropriate sentence.
Should a sentencing court be entitled or required to consider a
pre-sentence report in determining an appropriate sentence for a
What information would be relevant to include in such a report?
CONSOLIDATION: A GENERAL SENTENCING SCHEME?
3.30 As we have noted,
criminal liability and the
imposition of criminal sanctions for corporations typically arise from
disparate pieces of legislation
that affect various areas of corporate
activity. In reviewing sentencing issues concerning corporate
offenders, a fundamental question
is whether it is appropriate to
devise a general sentencing scheme for corporations, and consolidate at
least the more serious corporate
offences in a single piece of
legislation, or whether it is preferable to continue with individual
models specific to these various
areas of activity.
3.31 One suggested reason
why corporate crime may
not be treated as seriously as other crime is that there is no central
statute dealing with corporate offenders.
Instead, corporate offences
and criminal sanctions are scattered over a wide range of statutes that
are outside the mainstream criminal
legislation for New South Wales. It
is argued that “statutory segregation” of this kind tends
to depreciate the gravity
of corporate crime. Moreover, it could be
argued that a principled and properly considered approach to sentencing
corporations is
better achieved by developing a general model, rather
than leaving such reform to ad hoc amendments of various pieces of
legislation,
or to separate reviews of each area of activity.
3.32 On the other hand, it could be argued that it is
inappropriate and perhaps even impossible to devise a general
sentencing scheme
that could readily apply to the various areas of
corporate activity.
Should legislation consolidate sentencing options for corporate offenders under a general sentencing scheme?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. See para 2.10-2.12.
. See, for example, South Australia, Criminal Law and Penal Methods Reform Committee,
The Substantive Criminal Law
(Report 4, Government Printer, Adelaide, 1977) at para 5.1-5.12; H Croall,
White Collar Crime
(Open University Press, Buckingham, 1992) ch 9; J Braithwaite and P Grabosky,
Occupational Health and Safety Enforcement in Australia: A Report to the National Occupational Health and Safety Commission
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra, 1985), particularly ch
8; V Khanna, “Corporate Criminal Liability: What Purpose
Harvard Law Review
Note also J
Duns, “A Silent Revolution: The Changing Nature of Sanctions in
Companies and Securities Legislation” (December
Companies and Securities Law Journal
365, which discusses and assesses the shift in the sanctioning scheme
of the Australian companies and securities legislation from
reliance on
the criminal to the civil sanction.
. See Australian Law Reform Commission,
Civil and Administrative Penalties
(Consultation Paper, December 2000).
. See Australian Law Reform Commission,
Civil and Administrative Penalties
(Consultation Paper, December 2000).
. See, for example, R Tomasic,
Corporate Crime and Corporations Law Enforcement Strategies in Australia
(Discussion Paper 1/93, Centre for National Corporate Law Research, Canberra, 1993) at 6-7; B Fisse and J Braithwaite,
Corporations, Crime and Accountability
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1993) at 31-44; B Fisse,
“Reconstructing Corporate Criminal Law: Deterrence, Retribution,
Fault, and Sanctions”
Southern California Law Review
; J Braithwaite and P Grabosky,
Occupational Health and Safety Enforcement in Australia: A Report to the National Occupational Health and Safety Commission
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra, 1985) at 78-79.
. Brent Fisse argues that, in the context of corporate crime,
rehabilitation and incapacitation are subgoals of deterrence: see B
Fisse, “Reconstructing Corporate Criminal Law: Deterrence,
Retribution, Fault, and Sanctions”
Southern California Law Review
at 1159-1160. See also J Braithwaite and P Grabosky,
Occupational Health and Safety Enforcement in Australia: A Report to the National Occupational Health and Safety Commission
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra, 1985) at 78-79.
. See, for example, J Duns, “A Silent Revolution: The
Changing Nature of Sanctions in Companies and Securities
Legislation”
(December 1991)
Companies and Securities Law Journal
365; H Croall,
White Collar Crime: Criminal Justice and Criminology
(Open University Press, Buckingham, 1992); V Khanna, “Corporate
Criminal Liability: What Purpose Does It Serve?”
Harvard Law Review
. See para 2.12.
. See J Braithwaite and P Grabosky,
Occupational Health and Safety Enforcement in Australia: A Report to the National Occupational Health and Safety Commission
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra, 1985) at 83-90; B Fisse and J Braithwaite,
Corporations, Crime and Accountability
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1993) at 141-145.
. See, for example, B Fisse, “Sentencing Options Against Corporations”
Criminal Law Forum
; B Fisse, “Reconstructing Corporate Criminal Law: Deterrence, Retribution, Fault, and Sanctions”
Southern California Law Review
; Australian Law Reform Commission,
Sentencing: Penalties
(Discussion Paper 30, 1987) at para 290; B Fisse,
Sanctions Against Corporations: Economic Efficiency or Legal Efficacy?
(Transnational Corporations Research Project, Sydney, 1986); J Braithwaite and P Grabosky,
Occupational Health and Safety Enforcement in Australia: A Report to the National Occupational Health and Safety Commission
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra, 1985) at 89.
. B Fisse, “Sentencing Options Against Corporations”
Criminal Law Forum
at 217-219; JC Coffee, “‘No Soul To Damn No Body To
Kick’: An Unscandalized Inquiry Into the Problem of Corporate
Punishment”
Michigan Law Review
Fines Act 1996
Fines Act 1996
applies, among other things, to any monetary penalty imposed by a
“court”. A “court” includes the Supreme,
and District Courts, and the Industrial Relations Commission, the Land
and Environment Court, or “any other court”.
Fines Act 1996
. See United States of America, Sentencing Commission,
Supplementary Report on Sentencing Guidelines for Organizations
(August 1991).
. For example, B Fisse, “Sentencing Options Against Corporations”
Criminal Law Forum
Sanctions Against Corporations: Economic Efficiency or Legal Efficacy?
(Transnational Corporations Research Project, Sydney, 1986); Australian Law Reform Commission,
Sentencing: Penalties
(Discussion Paper 30, 1987) at para 291-307; J Braithwaite and P Grabosky,
Occupational Health and Safety Enforcement in Australia: A Report to the National Occupational Health and Safety Commission
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra, 1985) at 89-90.
. H Croall,
White Collar Crime: Criminal Justice and Criminology
(Open University Press, Buckingham, 1992) at 159.
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
does make general provision for courts to impose a bond on an
“offender”:
As noted at paragraph 2.7,
“offender” could be interpreted to include corporations.
However, as
empowers a court to impose a bond
a term of imprisonment, it seems doubtful that a corporation could be brought within this provision.
. See South Australia, Criminal Law and Penal Methods Reform Committee,
The Substantive Criminal Law
(Report 4, Government Printer, Adeliade, 1977) at para 5.6 (recommendation for internal discipline orders); B Fisse,
Sanctions Against Corporations: Economic Efficiency or Legal Efficacy?
(Occasional Paper No 13, Transnational Corporations Research Project, November 1986) at 18-22.
. B Fisse, “Sentencing Options Against Corporations”
Criminal Law Forum
at 234-235.
. See B Fisse,
Sanctions Against Corporations: Economic Efficiency or Legal Efficacy?
(Occasional Paper No 13, Transnational Corporations Research Project, November 1986) at 21.
. See B Fisse and J Braithwaite,
Corporations, Crime and Accountability
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1993) at 43-44.
. Professor Fisse used this example, drawn from the thalidomide disaster, in
Sanctions Against Corporations: Economic Efficiency or Legal Efficacy?
. B Fisse, “Sentencing Options Against Corporations”
Criminal Law Forum
. B Fisse, “Sentencing Options Against Corporations” (1990) 1 at 248.
. H Croall,
White Collar Crime: Criminal Justice and Criminology
(Open University Press, Buckingham, 1992) at 158.
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
. See para 1.7 and 2.3.
. See B Fisse,
Howard’s Criminal Law
(5th ed, Law Book Company Limited, Sydney, 1990) at 614.
Issues Paper 20 (2001) - Sentencing: Corporate offenders
Bibliography
History of this Reference (Digest)
AUSTRALIA, Criminal Law Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code: Chapter 2: General Principles of Criminal Responsibility
(Final Report, December 1992)
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Sentencing: Penalties
(Discussion Paper 30, 1987)
BLOCK, M, “Optimal Penalties, Criminal Law and the Control of Corporate Behavior”
Boston University Law Review
BRAITHWAITE, J, AND GRABOSKY, P,
Occupational Health and Safety Enforcement in Australia: A Report to the National Occupational Health and Safety Commission
(Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra, 1985)
CANADA, Law Reform Commission,
Criminal Responsibility for Group Action
(Working Paper 16, 1976)
COFFEE, JC Jnr, “‘No Soul To Damn: No Body To Kick’: An Unscandalised Inquiry into the Problem of Corporate Punishment”
Michigan Law Review
White Collar Crime: Criminal Justice and Criminology
(Open University Press, Buckingham, 1992)
DUNS, J, “A Silent Revolution: the Changing Nature of Sanctions in Companies and Securities Legislation” (1991) 9
Company and Securities Law Journal
ENGLAND, Law Commission,
General Principles: Criminal Liability of Corporations
(Working Paper 44, 1972)
FISSE, B, “Reconstructing Corporate Criminal Law: Deterrence, Retribution, Fault, and Sanctions”
Southern California Law Review
FISSE, B, “Sentencing Options against Corporations”
Criminal Law Forum
Howard’s Criminal Law
(5th ed, Law Book Company Limited, Sydney, 1990)
FISSE, B, AND BRAITHWAITE, J,
Corporations, Crime and Accountability
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1993)
GRABOSKY, P, AND SUTTON, A (eds),
Stains on a White Collar: Fourteen Studies in Corporate Crime or Corporate Harm
(Federation Press, Sydney, 1989)
GRUNER, R, “Towards an Organizational Jurisprudence: Transforming Corporate Criminal Law through Federal Sentencing Reform”
Arizona Law Review
HOFFMAN, T, “Corporate Compliance Programs and US Sentencing Guidelines” (1998) 21
Pennsylvania Law Weekly
LAVENUE, L, “The Corporation as a Criminal Defendant and Restitution as a Criminal Remedy” (1993) 18
Journal of Corporation Law
LOFQUIST, W, “Legislating Organizational Probation: State Capacity, Business Power, and Corporate Crime Control” (1993)
Law and Society Review
NEW SOUTH WALES, Parliament, Legislative Council, Standing Committee on Law and Justice,
Final Report of the Inquiry into Workplace Safety
(Report 10, November 1998)
ORLAND, L, “Beyond Organizational Guidelines: Toward a Model Federal Corporate Criminal Code”
Washington University Law Quarterly
PILCHEN, S, “When Corporations Commit Crimes: Sentencing under the Federal ‘Organizational Guidelines’”
RAKOFF, J, “Corporate Indictment and the Guidelines (Sentencing Guidelines for Corporate Criminals)”
New York Law Journal
SOUTH AUSTRALIA, Criminal Law and Penal Methods Reform Committee,
The Substantive Criminal Law
(Report 4, Government Printer, Adelaide, 1977)
STONE, C, “Sentencing the Corporation”
Boston University Law Review
TOMASIC, R, “Sanctioning Corporate Crime and Misconduct: Beyond Draconian and Decriminalization Solutions” (1992)
Australian Journal of Corporate Law
TOMASIC, R,
Corporate Crime and Corporations Law Enforcement Strategies in Australia
(Discussion Paper 1/93, Centre for National Corporate Law Research, University of Canberra, Canberra, 1993)
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Sentencing Commission,
Supplementary Report on Sentencing Guidelines For Organizations
(August 1991)
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter