URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/CLRC/1999/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:33:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Simplification of the Copyright Act: Part 2 - Categorisation of Subject Matter and Exclusive Rights, and Other Issues [1999] CLRC 14
The Committee
The Expert Advisory Group
ABBREVIATIONS
CHAPTER 1 Introduction
Part 1 of the report
The Committee’s consultations
Digital Agenda reforms
CHAPTER 2 Consolidated recommendations
Chapter 4 – Consideration of new rights provided in the WCT and WPPT
Chapter 5 – Proposal of the majority of the Committee
Chapter 6 – Dissenting view
Chapter 7 – Outstanding CCG and
Computer Software Protection
Section 1 Simplification of Subject Matter and Exclusive Rights
CHAPTER 3 Background
CHAPTER 4 Consideration of new rights provided in the WCT and WPPT
CHAPTER 5 Proposal of the majority of the Committee
CHAPTER 6 Dissenting view
Section 2 Outstanding Issues from Copyright Convergence Group report
Highways to Change
, and from CLRC report Computer Software Protection
CHAPTER 7 Outstanding CCG and
Computer Software Protection Issues
APPENDIX A The Committee’s terms of reference and further matters for consideration, as identified by the Copyright Convergence
APPENDIX B Alternative approaches considered
APPENDIX C Original submissions
APPENDIX D Consideration of outstanding CCG and
Computer Software Protection
issues - submissions
APPENDIX E Organisations represented at the consultations on the reform of exclusive rights and categories of subject matter
APPENDIX F Follow-up submissions to the consultations on the reform of exclusive rights and categories of subject matter
Simplification of the
Categorisation of Subject Matter and Exclusive Rights, and
Other Issues
February 1999
© Commonwealth of Australia 1999
Requests to reproduce this document for commercial purposes should be
directed to the Manager, Legislative Services, AusInfo, GPO
Box 1920, Canberra
The Copyright Law Review Committee is a specialist advisory body established
in 1983 to inquire into and report to government on specific
ISBN 0 624 20961 8
In 1983 the Federal Attorney-General established the Copyright Law Review
Committee as a specialist advisory body to report to government
on specific
From 1983 to 1995 the Committee was chaired by the
Hon. Justice I F Sheppard AO, a Judge of the Federal
Court of Australia and President
of the Copyright Tribunal. During that period
the Committee reported on eight references: the meaning of
‘publication’
; the use of copyright
material by churches; performers’ protection; moral rights; the
importation provisions of the Act; conversion
damages; journalists’
In 1995 the Minister for Justice reconstituted the Committee and asked it to
advise on simplification of the
. Mr Peter Banki, formerly a
member of the Committee, was appointed Chairman. Following the 1996 federal
election, the Attorney-General
reviewed the structure and function of the
Committee and relocated its Secretariat to Canberra. In May 1996 Mr Banki
resigned from
the Committee.
In September 1996 Professor Dennis Pearce was appointed Chairman of the
Committee. The other members of the Committee are Dr Andrew
Mr Chris Creswell, Mr Malcolm Colless, Ms Victoria Rubensohn and
Ms Rhonda Smith.
Expert Advisory Group
The Committee is assisted by a panel of experts who represent the interests
of the creators and users of copyright material. The current
members of the
Expert Advisory Group (EAG) are Ms Libby Baulch, Mr Tom Cochrane and
Ms Anne Fitzgerald. Mr Nicholas Hasluck QC AM
member of the EAG until 31 December 1997, when he sought not to be
reappointed.
ABBREVIATIONS
Australian Copyright Council
Australian Council of Library and Information Services
Australia New Zealand Land Information Council
Australian Publishers Association
Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum
Australasian Performing Right Association
Australian Recording Industry Association
Berne Convention
Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works
Computer Software Protection
Derivative Production
Expert Advisory Group
Federation of Australian Commercial Television Stations
Federation of Australian Radio Broadcasters Ltd
Law Council of Australia
Motion Picture Association
National Film and Sound Archive
National Library of Australia
Original Literary and Artistic Work
Office of Regulation Review
Phonograms Convention
Convention for the Protection of Producers of Phonograms against
Unauthorised Duplication of their Phonograms
Rome Convention
Rome Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms
and Broadcasting Organisations
WIPO Standing Committee on Copyright and Related Rights
TRIPS Agreement
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
Visual Arts Copyright Collecting Agency
WIPO Copyright Treaty
World Intellectual Property Organisation
WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty
World Trade Organisation
1 Introduction
1.01 This report is the second part of the Committee’s report on its
‘Simplification Reference’. It addresses matters
paragraphs 1(b), (ba), (c), (d) and (e) of the Committee’s revised terms
of reference. The report proposes an approach
to simplify the categories of
protected subject matter and the exclusive rights of copyright owners. It also
considers the implementation
of a distribution right and addresses issues
identified by the Copyright Convergence Group for further consideration by the
The Committee’s terms of reference are set out in
Appendix A to this report.
1 of the report
1.02 Part 1 of the report deals with matters raised in paragraph 1(a) of the
Committee’s terms of reference. It is primarily
concerned with
simplification of the exceptions to the exclusive rights of copyright owners. A
copy of that report is available on
the Committee’s web site at
http://www.agps.gov.au/clrc.
Committee’s consultations
1.03 In July 1998 a subcommittee of the Committee, comprising the Chairman,
Dr Christie and Ms Smith, held public consultations with
approximately
40 representatives of copyright collecting societies and copyright owner and
user interests. The consultations, which
were held in Sydney, focused on
paragraphs 1(b), (ba) and (c) of the Committee’s terms of reference which
address the simplification
of the existing categories of exclusive rights, the
possible implementation of a distribution right, and the categorisation of
subject matter. The consultations were conducted having regard to
paragraphs 2(c), (d) and (e) of the Committee’s terms of
reference which
direct it to have regard to ongoing developments in international copyright
forums, technological developments and
the effect of any changes on the
structure and operation of public and private sector organisations.
1.04 The subcommittee sought comments on a number of specific issues as a
basis for discussion. Those issues included matters relevant
to the exclusive
rights of copyright owners such as the proposed right of communication to the
public, a broadly based right of
distribution, whether a broadly defined and
inclusive system of rights modelled on the approaches found in France and the
Netherlands
might be adopted, and the implications of an adaptation right for
artistic works. Categorisation of protected subject matter was
also discussed.
Interests were asked to consider the need for the present distinction between
Parts III and IV of the Act, conflation
of literary, dramatic and musical works
into the one category, a possible new category of audiovisual materials, and the
of computer-generated materials and databases. Following the public
consultations the subcommittee invited further written submissions.
subcommittee subsequently received eleven written submissions.
1.05 The above consultations were carried out in addition to consideration of
the comments the Committee had received in response
to its initial call for
submissions pursuant to its original terms of reference.
1.06 The Committee also sought comments on the various issues identified by
the CCG. Again, those comments were sought in addition
to the comments the
Committee had received in response to its original terms of reference. The CCG
issues are discussed in Chapter
Digital Agenda
1.07 Pursuant to paragraph 2(a) of the Committee’s terms of reference,
the Committee is required to have regard to the Government’s
reforms. As noted in Part 1 of the Committee’s report the Government
announced its decision on the ‘Digital Agenda’
30 April 1998. Among the matters proposed in those reforms is the new
broadly based, technology-neutral right
of communication to the public. That
right, together with other relevant proposals contained in the Digital Agenda
reforms, has been
considered by the Committee in the development of its
recommended approach to simplification as well as in the development of the
alternative approaches outlined in Appendix B to this report.
2 Consolidated recommendations
4 – Consideration of new rights provided in the WCT and WPPT
Implementation of a right of distribution
2.01 If the Government decides to implement the right of distribution as
provided in the WCT and the WPPT, the Committee recommends
that it be exhausted
after the first sale or other transfer of ownership of the original or a copy of
the copyright material with
the authorisation of the copyright owner. [paragraph
droit de suite
2.02 The Committee recommends that the
droit de suite
implemented as a component of a ‘distribution right’. However, the
Committee notes that the issue of whether the
droit de suite
recognised in Australia is a significant policy issue which may warrant further
examination. [paragraph 4.53]
5 – Proposal of the majority of the Committee
2.03 The majority of the Committee recommends that the Australian copyright
legislation be structured so as to implement the following
principles in
relation to protected subject matter:
there be two categories of protected
subject matter, to which different levels of protection
both categories encompass all
embodiments of material within the literary and artistic domain, wherein that
concept reflects its usage
in the Berne Convention but is given a flexible
interpretation so as to embrace both traditional and non-traditional expressions
of textual, aural and visual
the factor for determining
the category into which protected material falls, and hence the level of
protection it is afforded, is
the efforts of the person who undertakes its
creation or production;
material will
be protected at the higher level only if it is the result of significant
intellectual effort by the person who undertakes
its creation, while material
will be protected at the lower level only if it is the result of the application
of time, effort and
resources by the person who undertakes its
production;
there be no requirement
that subject matter be in any particular, or indeed any, form of tangible
embodiment for it to be protected
under either category;
where public policy so requires,
express provision be made to exclude specified material from either or both of
the two categories
of protected subject matter. [paragraph
2.04 The majority of the Committee recommends that the
Australian copyright legislation be structured so as to implement the following
principles in relation to exclusive rights:
there be two exclusive economic
rights, the right of reproduction and the right of dissemination to the public,
and two exclusive
moral rights, the right of attribution and the right of
the two economic rights
apply to both categories of protected subject
the two economic rights apply
to activities that are conducted in relation to material that is in tangible
form, and material that
is in intangible
as far as practicable, for both
categories of economic rights there be a harmonisation of the application of the
activities that comprise
the right to all the material within each category of
protected subject matter;
the two moral
rights apply only to the category of protected subject matter that is the result
of significant intellectual effort
by the person who undertakes its
where public policy so
requires, express provision be made to exclude specified activities from either
or both of the two categories
of economic and moral rights, whether that
exclusion be general or in relation to specific
the economic and moral rights
in material protected at the higher level subsist until 50 years after the death
of the person who undertakes
the material’s creation, or 50 years from the
first dissemination of the material to the public, whichever is the
the economic rights in
material protected at the lower level subsist for a period of 50 years from the
first dissemination of the
material to the public, unless a shorter period is
specified, either generally or in relation to specific material, as a matter of
public policy;
the first owner of the
economic and moral rights in material protected at the higher level be the
person who undertakes its creation,
subject to express provision maintaining the
exceptions that apply under the current legislation;
the first owner of the economic
rights in material protected at the lower level be the person by whom the
arrangements necessary for
its production are undertaken, subject to express
provision maintaining the exceptions that apply under the current legislation.
[paragraph 5.03]
6 – Dissenting view
2.05 This member proposes that the following categorisation of works should
text works (present literary works,
except for compilations, with the addition of film
musical works (same as
choreographic works (present
dramatic works except for film
artistic works (same as
collective works (new—would
include compilations presently within literary works, but would exclude
audiovisual works)
sound recordings
(same as now)
audiovisual works
(present cinematograph
broadcasts (same as
published editions (same as
performances (same as now).
[paragraph 6.16]
7 – Outstanding CCG and
Computer Software Protection
Issue 1 – Multimedia
2.06 The majority of the Committee recommends that multimedia entities be
protected in accordance with the principles set out in its
description of the
‘technology-neutral’ approach to categorisation of exclusive rights
and subject matter. Should the
‘technology-neutral’ approach not be
accepted by the Government, the majority considers that the protection of
entities under a new broadly defined category of ‘audiovisual
works’ would be a suitable alternative to its recommended
[paragraph 7.16]
2.07 One member of the Committee is of the view that multimedia entities
should be protected by redesignating the present ‘cinematograph
film’ definition as ‘audiovisual work’. That member’s
position on this issue is set out in Chapter 6. [paragraph
Issue 2 – Definitions of ‘record’ and
‘cinematograph film’
2.08 In light of the interpretation given to the concept of
‘embodiment’ in the
Sega v Galaxy
the Committee recommends that no
amendment be made to the definitions of ‘cinematograph film’ and
in s. 10 or the definition of ‘embodied’
in s. 24. [paragraph 7.22]
Issue 5 – Definition of ‘publication’
2.09 The majority of the Committee recommends that s. 29(1) be amended
to clearly apply to the publication of copyright materials
in the digital
environment. The dissenting member is concerned that the full implications of
the majority recommendation may need
further consideration. [paragraph 7.43]
Issue 6 – Jurisdiction of Copyright Tribunal
2.10 There is clear support, from submissions and from both reports
mentioned, for the proposal to extend the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal, and the Committee is minded to recommend such an extension. However,
the Committee would support a more general
review of the Tribunal’s
extension be considered more
fully in that context. [paragraph 7.51]
Issue 7 – Section 199(1), (2) and (3) and sections 46 and
2.11 The Committee recommends that no change be made to the Act to restrict
the operation of s. 199(1), (2) and (3) to ‘free
broadcasts. As a matter of policy, the Committee is of the view that the
provisions should continue to be limited to
licensed transmissions. [paragraph
2.12 The Committee recommends that ss. 46 and 106 be retained in the Act
without amendment. [paragraph 7.86]
Issue 8 – Untraceable copyright owners
2.13 The Committee recommends that:
no amendments be made to the Act to
establish a mechanism for the use of copyright material where the copyright
owner is unknown or
untraceable;
comprehensive review of the jurisdiction of the Copyright Tribunal consider
whether a simple scheme may be set up by the Tribunal;
the Government consider whether a
scheme similar to the Scandinavian model would be feasible in Australia.
[paragraph 7.97]
Issue 9 – Section 23
2.14 The Committee recommends that no amendment be made to s. 23(1).
[paragraph 7.102]
Issue 10 – Ephemeral copying provisions
2.15 The Committee, while supporting the extension of ss. 47, 70 and 107
to all broadcasts, recommends that these sections not be
further extended to
other transmissions to the public. [paragraph 7.106]
Issue 11 – Section 109 statutory licence
2.16 The Committee notes the Government’s recent amendment to the
to free-to-air broadcasts and
its intention to extend the jurisdiction of the Copyright Tribunal to arbitrate
any disputes that may
arise between the subscription broadcasters and owners of
decision on this issue, the Committee does not recommend any further changes to
the operation of
at this time. [paragraph 7.111]
Issue 12 – Transnational transmissions
2.17 The Committee recommends that should the issue of transnational
transmissions become a matter of increasing concern for Australian
owners, the Government raise the issue at an appropriate international forum.
[paragraph 7.117]
Issue 13 – Legal deposit
Extension of the scheme
2.18 The Committee recommends that:
both the National Library of
Australia and the National Film and Sound Archive be named as repository
institutions;
the complementary roles
of the National Library and the National Film and Sound Archive be recognised in
the legislation;
the definition of
‘library material’ be broadened to include audiovisual materials,
and materials in electronic form;
revised deposit scheme operate prospectively in respect of the new materials it
covers; and
deposit of all materials
remain compulsory. [paragraph 7.125]
Purpose of the
2.19 The Committee recommends that the breadth of the present provision, in
respect of the materials to which it applies, remain as
is presently provided
for under the Act. [paragraph 7.129]
Penalty for failure to deposit
2.20 The Committee recommends that the Government review the level of the
penalty prescribed in s. 201(1) bearing in mind the policy
provision and the need to ensure compliance with the deposit requirement.
[paragraph 7.131]
2.21 The Committee recommends that under the revised scheme the repository
institutions have the discretion to select materials for
inclusion in their
collections. [paragraph 7.135]
2.22 The Committee also recommends that the Act require notification to be
given to the repository institutions within one month of
the date of publication
or the making available to the public of the copyright material. The publisher
of that material should have
a further one month from the date it receives a
request for deposit to deliver a copy of the material to the repository
institution
or provide reasons why delivery is not possible within the one-month
period. [paragraph 7.136]
2.23 The Committee recommends that the development of any guidelines be left
to the repository institutions in consultation with relevant
groups. [paragraph 7.139]
2.24 The Committee is of the view that the National Library and the National
Film and Sound Archive should not need to seek the authorisation
does not recommend any special exceptions
to moral rights of authors under the
revised scheme. [paragraph 7.142]
2.25 The Committee recommends that under the revised scheme deposited
materials be made available on the basis of restricted access.
CSP Issue 1 – Published edition copyright
2.26 A majority of the Committee recommends that published edition copyright
remain confined to print editions in hard copy form.
It should not extend to
publications in computer or machine-readable format. The Committee, with the
exception of one member, acknowledges
that published edition copyright will
consequently remain a technology-specific provision. [paragraph 7.153]
CSP Issue 2 – Proof of subsistence and ownership of
2.27 The Committee recommends that a section equivalent to the proposed
not be introduced regarding proof of subsistence and ownership of
1 Simplification of Subject Matter and Exclusive Rights
3 Background
Examination
of international conventions
3.01 Australia is a signatory to a number of international conventions
relating to copyright which broadly set out the categories
of protected subject
matter and provide a minimum statement of rights to be accorded to that subject
matter. The rights accorded
to copyright owners under the
(the Act) are therefore derived from these international agreements.
3.02 For the purpose of considering the categorisation of subject matter and
the exclusive rights of copyright owners, the relevant
international treaties
the Berne Convention for the
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (the Berne
Convention);
the Rome Convention for
the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting
Organisations (the Rome
Convention);
the Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (the TRIPS
Agreement).
3.03 In December 1996 two new treaties were agreed to
at the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) Diplomatic Conference
Certain Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Questions held in Geneva. Those
treaties are the WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT) and the
WIPO Performances and
Phonograms Treaty (WPPT). The Committee is aware that many countries have signed
these two new treaties, including
the United States, countries in the European
Union and Indonesia. However, neither treaty is yet in force since, in each
countries must have deposited instruments of ratification or accession
for this to occur. Australia is yet to accede to the treaties,
obligations they contain do not apply to Australia. It should be noted that the
Government has decided to adopt many of the
standards contained in the two
treaties through its decision on the Digital Agenda copyright reforms. These
reforms, as they relate
to the remainder of the Committee’s inquiry, are
discussed further in Chapters 4 and 5.
3.04 The different subject matter covered by the international treaties has
provided the basis for the distinction that exists between
authored works
(subject matter within the Berne Convention and the WCT) and other subject
matter (subject matter that is not considered
to be an authored work, but is
within the neighbouring rights conventions, such as the Rome Convention and the
Authored works
3.05 The Berne Convention contains provisions for the protection of the
economic and moral rights that subsist in ‘literary
and artistic
works’. Under art. 2 of the Berne Convention the expression
‘literary and artistic works’ includes
‘every production in
the literary, scientific and artistic domain’ and in particular literary,
dramatic, musical and
artistic works, and cinematograph films. As stated by
Ricketson, the rights that are accorded to these works by the Berne Convention
have been added in a piecemeal way, usually in response to particular
contemporary needs and pressures, and without any attempt at
organisation.
It is not surprising therefore
that the Berne Convention describes at least 16 economic rights and two moral
rights. The economic
rights described under the Berne Convention can be
generally classified into two types of rights: those relating to the
reproduction
of a work in a material form, and those relating to the public
dissemination of works in a non-material form.
The first class includes the reproduction right (art. 9(1)), the
translation right (art. 8), the adaptation right (art. 12), and
distribution right (art. 14). The second class of rights includes the
performance right (art. 11) and the right of communication
to the public
(arts. 11(1)(ii), 11
(1)(i) and (ii), 11
(1)(ii) and
14(1)(ii)). The moral rights described under art. 6
(1) are the
right of attribution and the right of integrity.
3.06 The term of protection granted under the Berne Convention is the life of
the author plus 50 years (art. 7(1)). However, in the
cinematographic works, member countries may provide that the term of protection
shall expire 50 years after the work has
been made available to the public
(art. 7(2)). Also, it is left to member countries to determine the term of
protection of photographic
works and works of applied art, which in both cases
must be at least 25 years from the making of the work
(art. 7(4)).
3.07 The WCT incorporates and extends the minimum statement of rights
provided under the Berne Convention. In particular, the WCT
extends the existing
right of communication to the public in the Berne Convention, and provides to
authors of ‘literary and
artistic works’ the exclusive right of
authorising any communication to the public of their works (art. 8). This
extended right
also introduces a new right of making available, designed to
provide copyright protection to ‘literary and artistic works’
available through on-demand, interactive transmissions, including via the
Internet. The WCT also extends the right of distribution
from cinematograph film
(under art. 14(1)(i) of the Berne Convention) to other works (art. 6).
Finally, the WCT contains provisions
(similar to those under the TRIPS
Agreement) in relation to the copyright protection of computer programs and
original databases,
and on the right of rental that subsists in computer
programs, cinematograph films, and works embodied in sound recordings
4, 5 and 7).
Neighbouring rights
3.08 The expression ‘neighbouring rights’ is used to cover the
rights granted to performers, producers of phonograms (sound
recordings) and
broadcasting organisations. These rights are based upon what are sometimes
called ‘derivative works’,
that is, copyright material that results
from the distribution or exploitation of a literary, dramatic, musical or
artistic work.
The scope of the neighbouring
rights is more limited than the scope of protection afforded to ‘literary
and artistic works’
described under the Berne Convention. The minimum
level of protection granted to performers, producers of phonograms and
broadcasting
organisations was originally granted primarily under arts. 7,
10, 12 and 13 of the Rome Convention.
level of protection, however, has been substantially strengthened and extended
by the TRIPS Agreement and the WPPT.
3.09 Under the TRIPS Agreement, the minimum term of protection available to
producers of phonograms and to performers has been extended
from 20 years (as
provided under art. 14 of the Rome Convention) to 50 years from the end of
the calendar year in which the fixation
was made or the performance took place
(art. 14(5)). In relation to broadcasts the minimum term of protection
required under the
treaties remains at 20 years. The TRIPS Agreement also
introduced a rental right for performers (in relation to their performances
fixed in phonograms), and for the producers of phonograms (art. 14(4)).
3.10 The WPPT further strengthened and extended the rights of performers and
producers of phonograms as described under the Rome Convention
and the TRIPS
Agreement. In particular, the WPPT introduced for performers (in relation to
their performances fixed in phonograms:
art. 10), and for the producers of
phonograms (art. 14), the new exclusive right of making available online.
It should be noted,
however, that performers (in relation to their performances
fixed in phonograms) and producers of phonograms were granted a right
equitable remuneration only for broadcasting and communication to the public
(art. 15(1)). It should also be noted that full or
partial reservation may
be taken to this article (art. 15(3)). Further, under the WPPT, performers
(for their performances fixed
in phonograms) and producers of phonograms
received the exclusive right of distribution (arts. 8 and 12).
3.11 Under the WPPT the moral rights of a performer were recognised (the
right of attribution and the right of integrity under art.
5). Also, under
the new treaty the protection of performers was upgraded to provide them with
exclusive rights in relation to the
broadcasting and communication to the public
of their unfixed performances, the fixation of their performances, and the right
reproduction of their performances fixed in phonograms (arts. 6 and
3.12 It should be noted that ‘published editions’ as recognised
under the Australian Act are neither recognised nor given
a minimum level of
protection under the international agreements.
Implications for reform
3.13 Having considered the relevant international conventions, the Committee
is of the view that the form of implementation of the
rights described under the
international agreements is a matter for the legislation of the member
countries. There is no specific
formula for the enactment of the specified
rights into legislation, the only requirement being that the minimum level of
be provided. Similarly, the particular categorisation of subject
matter is not specified by the conventions. For example, the Berne
uses the very broad category of ‘literary and artistic works’. The
Committee notes that it is at the discretion
of the member countries how they
categorise their subject matter to cover this broad category.
3.14 The above analysis is confirmed through the significant variations that
exist across the member countries in the way they have
chosen to structure their
exclusive rights and categories of subject matter in compliance with the
international agreements. The
variation is most noticeable when the legislation
of common law and civil law countries is compared (see paragraphs
3.41–3.51).
Categorisation
of subject matter and exclusive rights under the Australian Act
3.15 Under the Australian
, the distinction between traditional
authored works (protected under the Berne Convention and the WCT) and derivative
(protected under the neighbouring rights conventions) is
generally recognised. This can be seen in the structural distinction that
in the Act between
‘works’ and
matter other than works’.
of the Act covers traditional copyright
subject matter through the categories of literary, dramatic, musical and
artistic works.
An anomaly exists, however, in relation to cinematograph films
which, although protected under the Berne Convention, are dealt with
category of subject matter under
of the Act.
otherwise deals
with the neighbouring rights convention subject matter. In addition to
cinematograph films, the other categories
of subject matter included within
are sound recordings, television and radio broadcasts, and published
editions. As noted in paragraph 3.12, there is no international
obligation for
the recognition or protection of published editions.
3.16 A further anomaly exists in the Australian Act in relation to the
protection of performers which, despite having their rights
recognised under the
neighbouring rights conventions, are not included within Part IV. Performers
have their rights recognised separately
under Part XIA of the Act (see paragraph
3.17 The categories of subject matter described above are an exhaustive
statement of the material protected under the
. To receive
protection, therefore, the material in question must come within one of the
specified categories (in addition to meeting
the other requirements for
subsistence described in paragraph 3.19).
3.18 The development of the protected categories of subject matter under the
Australian Act has been incremental, with additional
categories of material
being added as required under international treaties or in response to public
policy demands resulting from
technological change. As can be seen from the
subject matter described, the current categories are defined in a relatively
and often technology-specific way. However, the definitions of certain
subject matter such as literary and dramatic works are inclusive
(s. 10(1)), and the definition of other types of subject matter such as
artistic works (s. 10(1)) and performances (s. 248A) are,
exclusively defined, very broad categories. The remaining subject matter is
described through more narrow exclusive definitions.
3.19 A number of differences exist in the treatment of Part III and Part IV
subject matter under the Act. First, the subsistence requirements
stringent for Part III materials. To receive protection under Part III, subject
matter must not only come within one of
the four specified categories, but it
must also satisfy the requirements of being original, in a material form, and
connected with
the territory of Australia. In contrast, subject matter protected
under Part IV of the Act must come within only one of the four
categories and have a sufficient connection with the territory of Australia.
However, it should be noted that the Part
IV materials that are a cinematograph
film and a sound recording are defined under s. 10 of the Act by reference
to embodiment in
a material form, and published editions are described as an
edition of a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work that has been
published—all of which are subject matter existing in a material form.
3.20 Secondly, owners of copyright material under Part III enjoy a wider
array of exclusive rights than copyright owners of Part IV
subject matter. This
can be most clearly seen in the table below, which summarises the rights
currently granted under the Act. The
exercise of an exclusive right described in
the table below, without the authorisation of the copyright owner (unless the
falls within one of the statutory exceptions), is often referred to as
a direct infringement of copyright.
Table 1 Current subject matter and exclusive rights
Part III Subject Matter
Part IV Subject Matter
Literary, Dramatic and Musical
Sound Recordings
Published Editions
to reproduce the work in a material form (s. 31(1)(a)(i))
to reproduce the work in a material form (s. 31(1)(b)(i))
to make a copy of the sound recording (s. 85(a))
to make a copy of the film (s. 86(a))
to make a cinematograph film of a television broadcast, or a copy of such a
film (s. 87(a)), or to make a sound recording of a television
broadcast or
radio broadcast, or make a copy of such a sound recording (s. 87(b))
to make a reproduction of the edition (s. 88)
to publish the work (s. 31(1)(a)(ii))
to publish the work (s. 31(1)(b)(ii))
to perform the work in public (s. 31(1)(a)(iii))
to cause the recording to be heard in public (s. 85(b))
to cause the film, in so far as it consists of visual images, to be seen in
public or, in so far as it consists of sounds, to be heard
to broadcast the work (s. 31(1)(a)(iv))
to include the work in a television broadcast (s. 31(1)(b)(iii))
to broadcast the recording (s. 85(c))
to broadcast the film (s. 86(c))
to rebroadcast a television or sound broadcast (s. 87(a))
Table 1 (continued)
Part III Subject Matter
Part IV Subject Matter
Literary, Dramatic and Musical
Sound Recordings
Published Editions
to cause the work to be transmitted to subscribers to a diffusion service
(s. 31(1)(a)(v))
to cause a television program which includes the work to be transmitted to
subscribers to a diffusion service (s. 31(1)(b)(iv))
to cause the film to be transmitted to subscribers to a diffusion service
to make an adaptation of the work (s. 31(1)(a)(vi))
to do in relation to an adaptation of the work any of the above acts
(s. 31(1)(a)(vii))
to enter into a commercial rental arrangement in respect of the work
reproduced in a sound recording (s. 31(1)(c)), or in the case
of a computer
program, to enter into a commercial rental arrangement in respect of the program
(s. 31(1)(d))
to enter into a commercial rental arrangement in respect of the recording
3.21 Other fundamental differences exist between Part III and IV subject
matter, including differences in treatment relating to the
duration of
protection and the ownership of copyright.
3.22 From Table 1 it can be seen that the Act specifically recognises the
following eight exclusive rights: copying, reproduction,
publication,
performance, broadcasting, diffusion, adaptation and rental. It should be noted
that this set of defined economic rights
exhaustively describes the economic
rights of a copyright owner under the Act.
3.23 The Committee also notes that the Act provides further acts of
infringement which are often referred to as indirect infringements.
infringements involve the unauthorised dealing with infringing articles or
permitting the use of a place of public entertainment
for an infringing purpose
(ss. 37, 102, 38, 103 and 39).
3.24 As noted in paragraph 3.16, performers’ rights are recognised
separately under Part XIA of the Act. Under this Part a performer
may bring an
action in regard to the unauthorised use of his or her performance. Unauthorised
uses are extensively defined under
s. 248G of the Act and include:
making of an unauthorised sound
recording or film of the live
performance;
broadcasting or
transmitting the live performance or unauthorised film or sound recording of the
performance without permission;
commercial use of an unauthorised film or sound recording of the performance;
possession of an unauthorised film
or sound recording for the purpose of a commercial
3.25 Although a duty not to falsely attribute the
authorship of a work is provided under Part IX of the Act, the Committee
that the moral rights of authors under the Act are probably not
recognised to the extent required under art. 6
of the Berne
Convention.
Submissions
received and comments made on reform of exclusive rights and categorisation of
subject matter
3.26 From the submissions received by the Committee over the course of its
current reference, and the comments made directly to it
at consultations held in
Sydney on 13 July 1998, the Committee is able to make the following general
observations.
3.27 As could be expected, interest groups representing copyright owners and
interest groups representing copyright users expressed
a number of opposing
views in relation to the general reform of exclusive rights and subject matter.
The interest groups representing
strengthening of protection through open-ended categories of rights and subject
matter that
contained inclusive examples. They argued that such an approach
would enable the protection of new forms of sufficiently innovative
material created through technological advances. Copyright owners also stated
that such an approach would allow for the
recognition of new means of
exploitation.
3.28 However, some copyright owners warned that judges from common law
exploitation found in civil law systems. They stated that such a problem may
arise where judges are accustomed to narrowly
interpreting specific and
exclusive rights similar to the ones found under the Australian Act. They argued
that there was a danger
that the introduction of broader categories could lead
to a dilution of the rights of copyright owners where judges were hesitant
enforce rights unless specifically recognised.
3.29 In contrast, copyright user interests stated that there was a danger
that the introduction of broad categories would lead to
overprotection. Users
stated that broader categories should be recommended only where there was
unequivocal evidence pointing to
underprotection. Further, user interests stated
that the current delineation of exclusive rights and categories of subject
served a vital function in maintaining the balance between protection and
3.30 Significantly, some collecting societies stated that although the
introduction of broadly based categories would affect current
arrangements, collecting societies will, in any event, be reviewing these
arrangements in order to reflect legislative
amendments, technological change
and the impact of convergence.
3.31 Copyright owner interests argued that works should not be discriminated
against purely on the basis of the material form in which
they subsisted. In
this regard, the Visual Arts Copyright Collecting Agency (VI$COPY) stated that
artistic works should be protected
at the same level as literary, dramatic and
musical works. Similarly, Copyright Agency Limited (CAL) argued that, upon
a certain level of originality, copyright material should be protected
at the highest level, regardless of the particular category
into which it
3.32 From the perspective of an economic analysis, the Office of Regulation
Review (ORR) stated
that the general extension
of copyright protection (through the reduction in number and broadening of
rights and subject matter)
under simplification would have few (if any) tangible
benefits, and holds the risk of substantial costs in that:
(a) it represents an unjustifiable redirection of funds (i.e. economic rents)
from Australian consumers and secondary producers without
commensurate
(b) it would be likely to cause an increase in net royalty flows to overseas
authors and publishers;
(c) there is no evidence that it would provide a significant incentive to
produce works not already being produced;
(d) for many authors and distributors, the proposed rights would be
unenforceable in a digital realm; and
(e) the limits of increased protection are not clear.
3.33 Apart from the views of the ORR, there appeared to be general support
from both copyright owner and user interests for simplifying
the Act at least by
amalgamating Parts III and IV of the Act on the condition that the differences
in treatment of the two categories
of subject matter continued to be maintained.
It was generally agreed that this would remove the unnecessary duplication
under the present structure, while continuing to recognise the
fundamental differences that existed between Parts III and IV subject
3.34 Copyright owners supported the introduction of a broadly based,
technology-neutral right of communication to the public. It was
stated by many
organisations that this right should subsist in all categories of subject
3.35 Copyright owners also generally supported the introduction of a broadly
based right of distribution which would include the right
to publish, the right
of distribution (to make available to the public in tangible form the original
and copies of the material through
sale or other transfer of ownership as
provided in art. 6 of the WCT and arts. 8 and 12 of the WPPT), and the
rental right. Copyright
owner interests noted, however, that the right of
publication and the right of distribution were conceptually different activities
and that the distinction between the two should be maintained. Copyright user
interests were particularly concerned about the broadening
of the rental and
distribution rights, and argued that they should not be expanded to cover
non-commercial lending activities.
3.36 There was a mixed reaction from both copyright owners and users in
regard to the granting of an adaptation right to artistic
works. Both interests
had difficulty in identifying an activity that could be described as an
adaptation beyond a transdimensional
transformation of an artistic work, which
is currently an activity which falls within the right of reproduction. At the
Sydney consultations
two examples of a possible adaptation of an artistic work
were provided. First, a detailed literary description of an artistic work.
Secondly, the translation of a physical sculpture into x, y and z coordinates,
and the storage of these coordinates in a digital
file which, using the correct
software, could generate what would appear to be a three-dimensional image of
the sculpture.
3.37 A number of suggestions were provided to the Committee regarding how
The suggestions
simply relabelling the category
‘cinematograph film’ with a more modern term such as
‘audiovisual
protecting multimedia
entities under an amended definition of
‘compilation’;
‘compilations’ as a subcategory of literary works and creating a new
category of subject matter called ‘compilations’
which would include
multimedia entities;
introducing a new
US-style category of subject matter titled ‘audiovisual works’,
which would include cinematograph
creating another type of new
category of subject matter which would include all forms of
multimedia.
3.38 It was noted that the term ‘cinematograph
film’ as defined in the
was referred to in other
legislation, such as the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
(Cth), and should
therefore be maintained, even if the subject matter it embraces is
3.39 Again there was a varied reaction with regard to how non-original
may exclude many commercially valuable databases
from protection. Others stated
that non-original databases should be protected under the
matter other than works’ part of the Act. Others argued that Australia
should adopt a similar approach to that
found in the
EC Database Directive
96/9 of 11 March 1996
, which sought to harmonise the copyright protection of
right to prevent unauthorised extraction or re-utilisation of the
contents of a database. Despite these various suggestions, it was
nonetheless
commonly stated that the issue of the protection of non-original databases
should be held in abeyance until the result
of the draft international treaty
for their protection (which is currently under consideration within WIPO) is
3.40 The related issue of the protection of computer-generated material
(where there is no clearly identifiable human author) provoked
similar differing
responses. It was argued by some copyright owner interests that such material
did not have a requisite degree of
originality and could not be protected as an
original ‘work’ and should therefore be protected as
matter. Proponents of this view therefore supported the recommendation of the
CLRC in the
Computer Software Protection
report that stated that
protection should be afforded to computer-generated material as a class of
‘subject matter other than
works’. Others argued that copyright was
not a suitable form of protection for such material, and that it would be more
appropriately
protected through a new
sui generis
right similar to that
afforded to non-original databases under the EC directive.
of international legislation
Categorisation of subject matter
3.41 Common law countries such as Britain and the United States (and
Australia) tend to provide specific categories of subject matter
protected under their copyright laws. For example, under the UK
Designs and Patents Act 1988
(the UK Act), copyright material is protected
under the six defined categories of:
literary, dramatic and musical works
artistic works
sound recordings and films
cable programs
(s. 7); and
published editions
3.42 Similarly to the Australian Act, under the UK
Act the rights of performers are protected separately from the other categories
of subject matter (ss. 181–184). Further, again as with the
Australian Act, copyright protection under the UK Act is limited
protection of material that falls within these specific categories. Such
similarity is to be expected given that the current
Australian Act is derived
primarily from the UK Act (albeit an earlier version).
3.43 Under s. 102 of the US
the following
eight defined categories of subject matter are provided:
musical works, including any
accompanying words;
dramatic works,
including any accompanying
pantomimes and choreographic
pictorial, graphic and
sculptural works;
motion pictures and
other audiovisual works;
recordings; and
architectural
3.44 It is important to note however that, unlike the UK
or Australian approach, these categories are illustrative and not exhaustive,
and therefore protection of copyright material under the US Act is open-ended.
Performers’ rights are not recognised under
the US copyright law, although
performers are regarded as joint authors with producers of sound recordings. In
this regard it should
be noted that the United States is not a member of the
Rome Convention.
3.45 In contrast to the specific categories of subject matter described
above, the copyright laws of civil law countries tend not
to attempt to define
the works protected by copyright, and rely on broadly defined open-ended
categories of subject matter. For example,
under the heading of ‘Protected
Works’, art. L.112-1 of the French
Law on the Intellectual
Property Code 1992
The provisions of this code shall protect the rights of authors in all works
of the mind, whatever their kind, form of expression,
merit or purpose.
3.46 The French Act also provides specific examples of what is included
within this very broad category, similar to the way art. 2(1)
of the Berne
Convention provides inclusive examples as to what falls within the broad
category of ‘literary and artistic works’.
3.47 In addition to the very broad category of ‘works’ stated in
art. L.112-1, the French Act describes the ‘neighbouring
rights’ categories as the ‘rights of performers’
(art. L.212-2), ‘rights of phonogram producers’
L.213-1), ‘rights of videogram producers’
(art. L.215-1) and the ‘rights of audiovisual communication
enterprises’
(broadcasting organisations) (art. L.216-1).
Exclusive rights
3.48 Under the legislation of different countries there is considerable
variation in the way the exclusive rights are prescribed.
In relation to the
Berne Union countries, these differences may be explained by the different
judicial theories of the nature of
authors’ rights that underlie each law.
Notwithstanding these differences, the rights accorded in the Berne Union
still correspond to a considerable
3.49 The basic economic rights protected in each country fall into the two
main categories of reproduction of copyright material and
public dissemination
of copyright material. In civil law countries the economic rights are commonly
prescribed through an ‘open
ended’ system. In such countries,
besides authors’ moral rights, rights holders enjoy broadly defined and
interpreted
economic rights. For example, under the French
Intellectual Property Code 1992
, the technology-neutral rights holders
primarily enjoy two general rights of exploitation: the right of performance and
of reproduction (arts. L.122-1–L.122-3). Similarly, the
Dutch legislation provides for the right of reproduction and the right
communication to the public. After a general reference to these broad economic
rights, the legislation of these countries then
prescribes their content in more
detail. It is important to note that the central concept of an ‘open
ended’ rights system
is that the specific rights described are given only
as examples of the broader right of exploitation.
3.50 The civil law model should be contrasted with that found in common law
countries such as Australia, Britain and the United States.
In these countries
the economic rights are prescribed through the definition of a specific and
exhaustive set of rights, with the
consequence that nothing is included that is
not expressly stated to be so.
3.51 A further distinction that exists between civil law countries and common
law countries is the extent of the express recognition
of moral rights. Civil
law countries expressly recognise the moral rights of an author. For example,
under the French Act the moral
rights of an author are given prominence and
stated in Chapter 1 of the code, and appear before the authors’
economic rights,
which are described in Chapter 2. Not all common law
countries have explicit moral rights provisions in their legislation. In some
countries the protection of moral rights as stated under art. 6
of the Berne Convention occurs only indirectly through other areas of the law
such as passing off, defamation, unfair competition
or contract. It should be
noted, however, that in other common law countries such as in Britain, the
United States and New Zealand,
there is now express recognition of moral
4 Consideration of new rights provided in the WCT and WPPT
4.01 Before the
Committee’s envisaged approach is discussed,
specific consideration is given to the new broadly based ‘right of
communication
to the public’ and the ‘right of distribution’
as provided for under the WCT and WPPT.
Implementation
of a new broadly based right of communication to the public
4.02 As discussed at paragraph 3.07, the WCT extends the existing right of
communication to the public in the Berne Convention, and
provides to authors of
‘literary and artistic works’ the exclusive right of authorising any
communication of their works
to the public (art. 8). This extended right
also introduces a new right of making available, designed to provide copyright
to ‘literary and artistic works’ made available through
on-demand, interactive transmissions, such as via the Internet.
4.03 Further (as stated at paragraph 3.10), under the WPPT, performers (in
relation to their performances fixed in phonograms) and
producers of phonograms
are granted a right to equitable remuneration for the broadcasting and the
communication of their copyright
material to the public (art. 15(1)). Full
or partial reservation may be taken to this article (art. 15(3)). The WPPT
also introduced
the new exclusive right of making available online to performers
for the making available of their performances fixed in phonograms
(art. 10), and to the producers of phonograms for the making available
online of their phonograms (art. 14).
4.04 As also discussed at paragraph 3.03, Australia is yet to accede to the
treaties, so the obligations they contain do not apply
to Australia.
Importantly, the Government has decided to adopt many of the standards contained
in the two treaties through its decision
on the Digital Agenda copyright
reforms. These reforms include the adoption of the ‘broadly based’
right of communication
to the public which is to subsist as an exclusive right
in literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works, sound recordings,
cinematograph
films and broadcasts. The Committee understands that the new right
of communication to the public will replace and extend the existing
technology-specific transmission-type rights (i.e. the wireless broadcast right
and the limited cable diffusion right will be replaced
by the new right). The
Committee also understands that because the new communication right will be
couched in technology-neutral
terms, it is capable of encompassing future
developments in technology and transmission methods, such as Web TV.
4.05 Further, the Committee understands that the proposed right will include
the ‘right of making available’ so as to
provide copyright
protection to copyright material made available through on-demand, interactive
transmissions, including via the
4.06 The Committee’s proposed model (see paragraphs 5.28–5.112)
accommodates the implementation of a right of communication
to the public
(regardless of its specific form). For the purposes of presenting the proposed
model and the options considered in
paragraphs 5.14–5.27, and having
regard to paragraph 2(a) of the Committee’s terms of reference (see
Appendix A) and
to Australia’s possible future international obligations
under the WCT and WPPT, the Committee has proceeded on the assumption
exclusive right of communication to the public, including the right of making
available, will subsist as described in the
Digital Agenda reforms.
4.07 It should be noted that a specific decision was made by the Government
that the new right should not subsist in published editions.
The Committee notes
that there was some support from copyright owners both in the submissions it
received and at the Sydney consultations
for the subsistence of such a right in
this subject matter.
4.08 The granting to performers (in relation to their performances fixed in
phonograms) of an exclusive right of making available
online, and the granting
of a right to equitable remuneration for the broadcasting and the communication
to the public of their copyright
material, are currently being considered by the
Government as part of a larger issue as to whether or not Australia should
to the WPPT.
4.09 The Committee notes that there are significant policy considerations
involved as to whether or not, and to what extent, the new
communication to the public should be granted to the owners of copyright in
published editions. Such a matter requires a
fuller examination than has been
possible under the Committee’s current reference, and therefore the
Committee is unable to
make a recommendation on this issue. Further, as the
Government is currently considering whether or not, and to what extent, the
right of communication to the public should be granted to performers, the
Committee makes no recommendation in relation to this
issue. However, for the
purposes of presenting the proposed model and the options considered in Chapter
5, the Committee has proceeded
on the basis that an exclusive right of
communication to the public, including the right of making available, will be
performers (in relation to their performances fixed in phonograms)
and will not be granted to the owners of published editions.
Implementation
of a right of distribution
4.10 Under paragraph 1(ba) of the Committee’s terms of reference, the
Committee is required to report on how a redefined set
of exclusive rights could
implement the right of distribution provided in art. 6 of the WCT and
arts. 8 and 12 of the WPPT (see Appendix
International treaties
4.11 As noted at paragraph 3.07, the WCT extends the right of distribution
for cinematograph films (under art. 14(1)(i) of the Berne
Convention) to
other works (art. 6). As also noted at paragraph 3.10, the WPPT grants
performers (for their performances fixed in
phonograms) and producers of
phonograms the exclusive right of distribution (arts. 8 and 12). Under both
these treaties the exclusive
right is described as the copyright owner’s
right of authorising the making available to the public of the original and
of their copyright material through sale or other transfer of ownership
(art. 6(1) of the WCT and arts. 8(1) and 12(1) of the WPPT).
‘original and copies’ used in the above articles refers exclusively
to fixed copies that can be put into circulation
as tangible
4.12 It is important to note that, under both the WCT and WPPT, a signatory
country is free to determine the conditions, if any, under
which the exhaustion
of the right of distribution applies after the first sale or other transfer of
ownership of the original or
a copy of the copyright material with the
authorisation of the copyright owner (art. 6(2) of the WCT and
arts. 8(2) and 12(2) of
4.13 Apart from being expressly recognised in the treaties described above,
distribution rights are also recognised in arts. 14
and 16 of the
Berne Convention. Article 14
contains an optional provision concerning
droit de suite
(or right of subsequent disposal) in respect of
original works of art and manuscripts of written works, and art. 16
provides for the
seizure of infringing copies of works.
4.14 With regard to the distribution of copyright material in intangible
form, such as the distribution of digital material via the
Internet, the
Committee notes that this activity falls within the right of communication to
the public. Specifically, such distribution
is covered by the ‘right of
making available’ as provided under art. 8 of the WCT and
arts. 10 and 14 of the WPPT. As
part of the Digital Agenda reforms the
Government has decided to implement a ‘broadly based’ right of
communication which
includes a ‘right of making available’. The
Committee therefore envisages that the distribution of copyright material
both tangible and intangible form would be controlled through the exercise of
rights that include the ‘distribution right’
and the ‘right of
making available’. The Committee notes that this approach should be
contrasted with that taken in the
United States where the right of distribution
includes distribution by ‘transmission’ (s. 106 of the US
Current Australian position
4.15 In Australia the right to control the distribution of copyright material
is recognised in a limited form. Although there is no
specific recognition of a
distribution right as provided under the WCT or WPPT, a subset of the activities
controllable under the
right is recognised in the form of the right of
publication (s. 31(1)(a)(ii) and (1)(b)(ii) of the Act), the right to
control the
importation for sale or hire of certain copyright materials
(ss. 37 and 102) and the right to control the sale or hire of infringing
articles (ss. 38 and 103).
of publication in relation to copyright material in tangible form can be seen as
a specific example of the exercise of
the broader distribution right as
contained under the treaties. In the Committee’s view, the publication
right is equivalent
to the right of authorising the
first making
to the public of the original and copies of the material in
tangible form, through sale or other transfer of ownership (see further
paragraph 4.40).
4.16 Further, in regard to the right to control the importation of certain
be seen as a limited
instance of the exercise of the distribution right as provided for under the
treaties. The right to control
the importation of copyright material falls
within a distribution right that is not exhausted at an international level
first sale or other transfer of ownership of the original or a copy of
the copyright material with the authorisation of the copyright
further paragraphs 4.38–4.39).
4.17 The scope of a limited distribution right is therefore prescribed in
Australia through the operation of a publication right and
a right to control
the importation of certain copyright materials and their subsequent
distribution.
4.18 In addition to these rights, the Australian Act also recognises a
limited rental right (ss. 31 and 85), which although not within
of the distribution right as set out in the WCT and WPPT, could be regarded as
falling within the broad category of ‘distribution
right’. The
rental right does not fall within the scope of the distribution right as
provided for under the treaties as it
does not involve a transfer of ownership
(see paragraph 4.30). This is confirmed by the fact that the rental right is
specifically
recognised as a right separate from the distribution right under
art. 7 of the WCT and arts. 9 and 13 of the WPPT.
International legislation
4.19 Most national laws provide the copyright owner with some measure of
control over the way in which their copyright material is
distributed to, and
subsequently dealt with by, the public. However, the extent of this control
varies between countries and it is
impossible to make any generalisation that is
applicable across the whole range.
4.20 From the laws of various countries it can be observed that the control
of the distribution of copyright material is governed
by a number of different
rights which fall within a general category of ‘distribution
rights’. Such rights include controlling
distribution for the purposes of
importation, publication, sale, lease, commercial rental, public lending and the
droit de suite
4.21 In some civil law countries (including France), the rights in relation
to distribution are not granted as distinct rights, but
are accorded through an
expansive interpretation of the very broad economic right of
reproduction.
This practice is consistent
with the theory that the right of distribution flows from the right of
reproduction.
4.22 Many civil law countries (including France) confer on their authors the
droit de suite
, or right of subsequent disposal of their works and
reproductions of their works, as part of their distribution rights. As stated
droit de suite
is optional under the Berne Convention and is
therefore recognised by only a minority of Berne Union countries. Of those
that do recognise the right there is considerable variation as to how
the right is implemented.
Such rights are
distinct from the contractual obligations that an author may impose in a
publishing agreement, and are enforceable
against third parties. Thus, if an
author gives notice on the copies of his or her work of restrictions that he or
she wishes to
place on the way in which the copies are dealt with, these
restrictions will be binding upon third
droit de suite
entitles an author to a share of proceeds of
further sales of his or her work, and is usually limited to works that are of
significant
value in their original form such as works of art and original
manuscripts. The purpose of this right is to enable artists and authors
participate in profits made from subsequent sales of their work, whether or not
they have disposed of their copyright.
4.24 In other countries (mainly common law countries such as Britain, the
United States and Australia), distribution rights are specifically
recognised in
a more limited form. Under s. 18 of the UK Act, the right to ‘issue
copies of the work to the public’ (the
equivalent of the Australian
publication right) also includes the granting of a rental right to the owners of
sound recordings, cinematograph
films, and computer programs. It should be
noted, however, that although the granting of the rental right is expressed in
Act to be an exclusive right, the UK Government retains the power to
introduce statutory licensing in relation to this right (s.
4.25 Under the US Act, the right of public distribution is specifically
recognised. Under s. 106(3) the right is stated as the right
distribute copies or phonorecords of the copyright work to the public by sale or
other transfer of ownership, by rental,
lease, or lending, or by
transmission’. This right includes the right of publication and extends to
all copyright material
under the US Act. However, this right is not as
comprehensive as it may initially appear, as it is subject to the ‘first
doctrine provided under s. 109 of the US Act.
4.26 Under the US ‘first sale’ doctrine the purchaser of a copy
of copyright material that was lawfully made under the
US Act may sell or
otherwise dispose of that copy without the copyright owner’s consent
(s. 109(a)). This doctrine does not
extend to users who have possession
only, as distinct from ownership (s. 109(d)). The US courts have held that
the first sale doctrine
applies to copyright material manufactured and sold in
the United States, but not to imports manufactured
The recent case of
Quality King
Distributors Inc v L’Anza Research, International
held that the first sale doctrine
applies to the importation into the United States of copyright material that is
manufactured in
the United States for export, sold abroad and then reimported
without the US copyright owner’s consent. Thus, the right of
distribution
cannot be used by the US copyright owner as a means of controlling the
reimportation of such material.
4.27 Two further exceptions exist in relation to the US ‘first
sale’ doctrine in order to provide the owners of phonorecords
recordings) and computer programs with a rental right. Under s. 109(b) of
the US Act the owner of a sound recording or a computer
program may not rent,
lease or lend that copy for direct or indirect commercial advantage without the
authorisation of the copyright
4.28 Public lending rights or non-commercial renting rights are a further
species of the distribution right. This right is designed
to compensate owners
for lost sales in copyright material resulting from the free (or for token
payment in some cases) borrowing
of such material from public libraries. Hence,
compensation is drawn from public revenue and not directly from users. The
of a public lending right is found mostly in those countries where there
is a long-established and well-developed system of many
public libraries and a
high ratio of borrowing to buying books.
such countries, only Germany specifically recognises the lending right as a
provide a form of public lending
right, but the United States does not.
4.29 The Australian Council of Library and Information Services (ACLIS)
stated that the protection afforded by current rental and
distribution style
rights should not be broadened to cover non-commercial lending activities such
as those carried out by libraries
and educational
institutions.
The Committee believes that
such an extension is not required under the international treaties as the
‘rental right’
is limited to ‘commercial rental’
(art. 7 of the WCT and arts. 9 and 13 of the WPPT) and the
‘distribution right’
is limited to distribution resulting in the
‘transfer of ownership’ (see paragraph 4.30). The Committee
therefore does
not contemplate an extension of such rights to non-commercial
lending activities.
Implementation of the distribution right as provided under the
What does the distribution right include?
4.30 The general nature of the various distribution rights can be observed
from the above discussion. The question that therefore
arises is which of these
rights falls within the distribution right provided under art. 6 of the WCT
and arts. 8 and 12 of the WPPT.
The Committee notes that the
‘distribution right’ described in the new treaties is ‘the
exclusive right of authorising
the making available to the public of the
original and copies of their [the copyright owners] works through sale or
transfer of ownership
’ (emphasis added). On the basis of the
italicised words it is clear that the distribution right prescribed in the new
applies only to those species of distribution right that include a
transfer of ownership
. This therefore includes ‘distribution
rights’ such as distribution through publication, sale, other transfer of
droit de suite,
but not ‘distribution
rights’ such as the commercial rental, lease and public lending rights
where a user may acquire
possession of the original or copy of the physical item
embodying the copyright material without acquiring ownership of that item.
Should a distribution right be implemented?
4.31 The Committee believes that there are substantial policy considerations
involved in deciding whether to implement a ‘distribution
provided under the WCT and WPPT. The Committee considers that such
considerations are in fact beyond the scope of
its current reference given that
it is required to report on how a redefined set of exclusive rights
the right of distribution (see paragraph 1(ba) of the
Committee’s terms of reference at Appendix A).
4.32 The Committee’s proposed model (see Chapter 5) accommodates a
right of distribution should the Government decide to implement
the right as
provided under the new treaties. For the purposes of describing the proposed
model and the options considered, the Committee
has assumed that a right of
distribution will be implemented. The Committee has also assumed that such a
right will subsist in works,
cinematograph films, sound recordings and
performances fixed in sound recordings as specified by the new treaties.
Exhaustion of the distribution right
4.33 If the Government decides to implement a distribution right, the main
issue that arises is at what level, if any, should exhaustion
of the right
occur. In examining this issue the Committee notes the important qualification
on the distribution right contained in
art. 6(2) of the WCT, and
arts. 8(2) and 12(2) of the WPPT, which provides that a signatory country
is free to determine the conditions,
if any, under which the exhaustion of the
right of distribution applies after the first sale or other transfer of
ownership of the
original or a copy of the copyright material with the
authorisation of the copyright owner.
4.34 As noted earlier, common law countries tend to have a more restricted
interpretation of distribution rights in comparison to
civil law countries.
Stewart states that traditionally the distribution right has been limited by the
‘first sale’ doctrine.
However, he acknowledges that limited
exceptions to the doctrine have been recognised in the rental right, the
droit de suite
and the public lending
It should be noted that in this
statement Stewart refers to the ‘distribution right’ in its broadest
sense, which includes
the exercise of rights that do not involve the transfer of
4.35 The Committee is not aware of any clear justification for the
application of the distribution right in Australia beyond the first
other transfer of ownership. The Committee is of the view that the
implementation of a distribution right with such a limitation
will still provide
an effective new form of protection to the copyright material in which it
subsists, and will therefore generate
greater incentives for the production of
such copyright material. The Committee notes that there is no obvious lack of
to creating copyright material under the current copyright law
resulting from a failure to recognise the distribution right as provided
WCT and WPPT. The Committee believes that this provides a further justification
for the introduction of a distribution right
in a more limited form. Finally,
the Committee notes that given Australia’s position as a net importer of
intellectual property,
and the operation of the principle of national treatment,
the implementation of a distribution right in a more limited form may reduce
net flow of royalties overseas.
Recommendation
4.36 If the Government decides to implement the right of distribution as
provided in the WCT and the WPPT, the Committee recommends
that it be exhausted
after the first sale or other transfer of ownership of the original or a copy of
the copyright material with
the authorisation of the copyright owner.
4.37 The Committee notes that, in implementing the above limitation on the
distribution right, the US ‘first sale’ doctrine
may provide a
useful model.
4.38 The next issue to arise is whether exhaustion of the distribution right
should occur at a national or international level. Although
conclusively determined at the Diplomatic Conference on the WCT and
the Committee notes, and agrees with,
the Australian Government’s understanding that the entitlement to
determine if there
shall be exhaustion of the right (as provided under
art. 6(2) of the WCT and arts. 8(2) and 12(2) of the WPPT) includes
international level
. The Committee notes that if the
exhaustion of the distribution right were to occur only at a national level, the
right as provided
in the treaties could be used to control the importation of
controlling the importation of copyright material seems to be inconsistent with
recent developments, given that Parliament has
passed amending
legislation
allowing the parallel
importation of copyright packaging and labelling on imported goods and the
parallel importation of sound recordings.
Further, the Committee understands
that the Government is currently considering allowing the parallel importation
of other types
of copyright material such as computer programs.
4.39 The Committee believes that the issue of whether the exhaustion of the
distribution right should occur at a national or international
level is in
itself a significant policy consideration. Such a matter requires a fuller
examination than has been possible under the
Committee’s current
reference, and therefore the Committee is unable to make a recommendation on
this issue.
Publication right
Publication of copyright material in tangible form
4.40 It was strongly submitted to the Committee by various copyright owner
interests (such as the ACC and CAL) that publication and
distribution are
distinct concepts. The Committee agrees with this analysis and notes that the
right of distribution attaches to
each tangible embodiment of the copyright
material, whereas the right of publication relates to the
first making available copies to satisfy the reasonable requirements of the
Thus the right of publication under
the Act has no application to reprint copies of a published work, whereas the
right of distribution
under the WCT could apply to such copies. Notwithstanding
this distinction, the Committee believes that the exercise of the right
publication is a specific instance of the exercise of the right of distribution.
In this regard, the Committee notes that the
publication of copyright material
in a tangible form is the equivalent to the
making available to the
public of the original and copies of the copyright material through sale or
other transfer of ownership.
4.41 This analysis is based upon the case of
Avel v Multicoin Amusements
where the High Court of
Australia held
that the words ‘to publish’ in s. 31(1)
of the Act should be read as meaning to make public that which has not
been made public in the copyright territory. In this case the Court
followed the UK decision in
Infabrics Ltd v Jaytex Shirts Co
which held that publishing a work
first publication
of the work in Britain.
Implementation of the distribution right resulting in the granting of a
publication right
4.42 Under the current Act the right of publication subsists only in
literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works (see Table 1).
On the basis of
the new treaties, the ‘distribution right’ must be granted not only
to the owners of literary, dramatic,
musical and artistic works, but also to the
owners of cinematograph films, sound recordings and performers (in relation to
performances fixed in sound recordings). Therefore, based upon the above
analysis that the right of publication is a specific instance
of the exercise of
the right of distribution, the consequence of an implementation of the
distribution right would in effect be to
grant the owners of cinematograph
films, sound recordings and performers (in relation to their performances fixed
in sound recordings)
a publication right that they did not previously enjoy.
Publication of copyright material in intangible form
4.43 The following discussion is not directly related to the implementation
of the right of distribution as provided under the new
treaties. However, as the
discussion of the distribution right includes an examination of the publication
of material in tangible
form, the Committee believes that this is an appropriate
point at which to discuss the related issue of publication of copyright
in intangible form.
4.44 The Committee (with the exception of one member) is of the view that
publication of copyright material in intangible form may
occur through the
exercise of the right of communication to the public. In this regard the
majority of the Committee notes the meaning
of ‘issued to the
public’, which was used in s. 49(2)(c) of the UK
, and which is regarded as having a similar meaning to
‘supplied’ under s. 29(1) of the Australian
In the UK case of
British Northrop
Ltd v Texteam Blackburn Ltd
held that a work is ‘issued to the public’ when reproductions of it
are put on offer to the public, whether
for sale or gratis, and whether or not
there is an advertisement or announcement, provided that the person concerned is
to supply on demand.
4.45 The majority of the Committee believes that such a broad interpretation
of the term ‘issued to the public’ may include
the making available
of material through an exercise of the right of communication to the public. It
could be argued that the act
of making available copyright material in digital
form to the public over an electronic network, such as the Internet, is the
of placing reproductions of that material on offer to the public. The
fact that the copyright material made available to the public
might not in fact
be downloaded and therefore reproduced by anyone, does not preclude a finding
that an exercise of the publication
right has occurred. In this regard the
majority of the Committee notes the case of
Francis, Day & Hunter v
Feldman & Co
where it was held
that a song was published when six copies of it were exposed for sale, even
though no member of the public purchased
a copy until some time later.
4.46 Further, the majority of the Committee notes that the electronic
transmission of unpublished copyright material to the public
may also result in
an exercise of the publication right, as through such an activity reproductions
of the copyright material in digital
form can be supplied to the public.
4.47 The majority of the Committee notes that the High Court in
Ltd v Multicoin Amusement Pty Ltd
that s. 29(1) provides a definition of publication for the purpose of
determining when publication takes place and that it does
not provide a
definition for the purpose of infringement of the right of publication under
s. 31(1); the latter was held to be confined
what is deemed to amount to publication under s. 29. Subject to this point,
the majority of the Committee is of the view that
publication for the purposes
of subsistence and publication for the purposes of infringement are essentially
the same concepts, and
that the analysis provided by Megarry J provides useful
guidance as to what activities should fall within the right of publication,
carried out for the first time.
4.48 One member of the Committee does not hold the above view, and doubts
whether under the current law the right of publication can
be infringed through
the first making available of copyright material in intangible form.
4.49 The Committee notes the restriction provided under art. 3(3) of the
Berne Convention which states that ‘the communication
by wire or the
broadcasting of literary or artistic works ... shall not constitute
publication’. The Committee believes that
its analysis in regard to the
exercise of the publication right through the performance of an activity within
the right of communication
to the public is not necessarily inconsistent with
this article. The Committee comes to this conclusion as it is of the view that
art. 3(3) should be considered as limiting the meaning of publication only
for the purpose for which the concept of publication is
art. 3—namely, for determining the country of origin of a
Further, the Committee notes that the
comments of the Chairman of the Committee of
appear to indicate that the wording
of art. 3(3) does not preclude the extension of publication into the
digital environment (see
paragraphs 7.40–7.41).
4.50 From the above analysis it can be seen that the issue of whether the
publication of copyright material in intangible form can
be exercised through
the right of communication to the public is unclear. The Committee is of the
view, however, that the publication
right should embrace the first making
available of copyright material to the public in any form, including intangible
embodiments
of the material. The Committee’s recommendation regarding
‘publication’ is set out at paragraph 7.43.
4.51 The definition of ‘publication’ under s. 29 is one of
the issues identified by the CCG and is considered further
at paragraphs
The droit de suite
4.52 As noted above, the
droit de suite
is not a widely recognised
right and its implementation is only optional under the Berne Convention. The
Committee believes that
droit de suite
should not operate as an
exception to its recommendation at paragraph 4.36 that the distribution right
should be exhausted after the
first sale or other transfer of ownership of the
original or a copy of the copyright material with the authorisation of the
Recommendation
4.53 The Committee recommends that the
droit de suite
implemented as a component of a ‘distribution right’. However, the
Committee notes that the issue of whether the
droit de suite
recognised in Australia is a significant policy issue that may warrant further
examination.
4.54 The Committee’s proposed model (see paragraphs 5.28–5.112)
accommodates a right of distribution should the Government
decide to implement
the right as provided under the new treaties.
4.55 For the purposes of describing the proposed model and the options
considered, the Committee has assumed that a right of distribution
after the first sale or other transfer of ownership of the original or a copy of
the copyright material with the authorisation
of the copyright owner) will be
implemented. The Committee has also assumed that such a right will subsist in
works, cinematograph
films, sound recordings and performances fixed in
phonograms as specified by the new treaties.
4.56 For the reasons described above (see paragraph 4.42), the Committee has
also assumed that any implementation of the distribution
right will result in a
right of publication of copyright material in tangible form being granted to the
owners of cinematograph films,
sound recordings and performers (in relation to
their performances fixed in phonograms). The Committee is of the view that
publication
of copyright material in intangible form should be controlled
through the exercise of the right of communication to the public.
5 Proposal of the majority of
the Committee
5.01 This chapter contains the recommendations supported by all of the
Committee, with the exception of one member. The member who
dissents supports an
alternative approach, which is described in Chapter 6 of this report.
Recommendations
of the majority of the Committee
5.02 The majority of the Committee recommends that the Australian copyright
legislation be structured so as to implement the following
principles in
relation to protected subject matter:
there be two categories of protected
subject matter, to which different levels of protection
both categories encompass all
embodiments of material within the literary and artistic domain, wherein that
concept reflects its usage
in the Berne Convention but is given a flexible
interpretation so as to embrace both traditional and non-traditional expressions
of textual, aural and visual
the factor for determining
the category into which protected material falls, and hence the level of
protection it is afforded, be
the efforts of the person who undertakes its
creation or production;
material will
be protected at the higher level only if it is the result of significant
intellectual effort by the person who undertakes
its creation, while material
will be protected at the lower level only if it is the result of the application
of time, effort and
resources by the person who undertakes its
production;
there be no requirement
that subject matter be in any particular, or indeed any, form of tangible
embodiment for it to be protected
under either
where public policy so
requires, express provision be made to exclude specified material from either or
both of the two categories
of protected subject matter.
5.03 The majority of the Committee recommends that the Australian copyright
legislation be structured so as to implement the following
principles in
relation to exclusive rights:
there be two exclusive economic
rights, the right of reproduction and the right of dissemination to the public,
and two exclusive
moral rights, the right of attribution and the right of
the two economic rights
apply to both categories of protected subject
the two economic rights apply
to activities that are conducted in relation to material that is in tangible
form, and material that
is in intangible
as far as practicable, for both
categories of economic rights there be a harmonisation of the application of the
activities that comprise
the right to all the material within each category of
protected subject matter;
the two moral
rights apply only to the category of protected subject matter that is the result
of significant intellectual effort
by the person who undertakes its
where public policy so
requires, express provision be made to exclude specified activities from either
or both of the two categories
of economic and moral rights, whether that
exclusion be general or in relation to specific
the economic and moral rights
in material protected at the higher level subsist until 50 years after the death
of the person who undertakes
the material’s creation, or 50 years from the
first dissemination of the material to the public, whichever is the
the economic rights in
material protected at the lower level subsist for a period of 50 years from the
first dissemination of the
material to the public, unless a shorter period is
specified, either generally or in relation to specific material, as a matter of
public policy;
the first owner of the
economic and moral rights in material protected at the higher level be the
person who undertakes its creation,
subject to express provision maintaining the
exceptions that apply under the current legislation;
the first owner of the economic rights
in material protected at the lower level be the person by whom the arrangements
necessary for
its production are undertaken, subject to express provision
maintaining the exceptions that apply under the current
legislation.
with the current Act
5.04 The main features that characterise the current legislation’s
approach to categorisation of protected subject matter and
exclusive rights are
the use of a relatively large number of categories of subject matter and rights,
wherein those categories are
defined in a relatively narrow and often
technologically specific way. There are a number of consequences of this
approach which,
in the view of the majority of the Committee, are problematic.
These consequences are an element of unnecessary legislative complexity,
instances of unjustifiable differential treatment of similar subject matter, and
an undesirable degree of technological specificity
of protected subject matter
and exclusive rights. Each of these consequences are described in more detail,
and illustrated by examples,
5.05 One consequence of the current legislation’s approach to
categorisation is that it is long and complex. This arises from
the treatment of
works and subject matter other than works in different parts of the Act. As a
result, there is a degree of duplication
within those two parts of provisions
relating to the same issues—including, in particular, in relation to the
exceptions and
limitations to the exclusive rights
The majority of the Committee
agrees with the general view contained in the submissions it received that there
is a fundamental difference
between the types of subject matter that fall within
Parts III and IV of the Act. However, the majority of the Committee does not
believe that it is necessary to recognise this difference through the current
unwieldy structural distinction, and is of the view
that the difference can
continue to be maintained in a more efficient and simplified form.
5.06 Another consequence is that there is a difference in the protection
granted to different categories of subject matter within
the same part of the
Act, even where the different categories of subject matter satisfy the same
requirements for subsistence of
protection. In certain instances at least, this
difference in treatment seems, to the majority of the Committee, to be
unjustified.
An example is the lesser protection given to artistic works
compared with other works in Part III of the Act. In contrast to other
artistic works do not receive the exclusive right of adaptation. The majority of
the Committee believes that this result has
the appearance, and may have the
practical effect, of artists being discriminated against in comparison to other
5.07 To the majority of the Committee, however, the most problematic
consequence of the current legislation’s approach to categorisation
technological specificity. This arises from the relatively narrow definitions
used for both protected subject matters and
exclusive rights, from the
distinction drawn in those definitions between tangible and intangible
embodiments, and from the requirement
for Part III subject matter to be
identified with a human ‘author’. Technological developments have
produced new means
of creating copyright subject matter, and new means of
exploiting that subject matter. The majority of the Committee is of the view
that those new means are being utilised now, and are likely to be utilised with
increasing frequency in the future, to produce subject
matter of a type, and to
exploit subject matter in a way, that does not easily or at all come within the
existing categories. The
majority of the Committee is concerned that without a
significant change in approach to categorisation of subject matter and rights,
there will be increasing uncertainty in the application of the Act in the
digital environment, and an increasing pressure on the
legislature to make ad
hoc amendments to deal with these uncertainties. Both of these outcomes are
undesirable.
5.08 One example of a new type of subject matter arising from technological
developments, for which there is already uncertainty about
application and calls for ad hoc legislative amendment, is the so-called
‘multimedia entity’.
discussed in more detail in Section 2 of this
it is unclear whether a multimedia
entity as such, as distinct from its component parts, is protected at all under
the Act. The majority
of the Committee is of the view, however, that a
sufficiently creative multimedia entity should receive protection in its own
It is also of the view that any other new media material, including
material that has not yet been identified as such, should also
protection if it is sufficiently creative. In short, the majority of the
Committee is concerned that the current Act discriminates
against creative
material on the basis of its physical (or non-physical) form, and hence fails to
protect material that, as a matter
of policy, is deserving of protection.
5.09 An example of a new act of exploitation of protected subject matter
arising from technological developments, for which likewise
there is uncertainty
to the public by computer network.
Uncertainty about the application of the
current legislation lay behind the Copyright Convergence Group’s 1994
recommendation
for a new, broadly defined right of transmission to the public,
to replace the technology-specific rights of broadcast by wireless
and transmission to subscribers to a diffusion service. By 1996, developments in
communications technology, and in particular
the Internet, resulted in the
adoption in both the WCT and the WPPT of an even broader new right—the
right of communication
to the public by wire or wireless means, which is defined
to include making available to the public by interactive means. While the
Committee supports the Government’s Digital Agenda decision to implement
this new right in the current legislation, the majority
of the Committee is
concerned that these changes do not go far enough. In particular, the majority
of the Committee considers problematic
the fact that the provisions of the Act
relating to exclusive rights will still distinguish between activities on the
basis of whether
they are carried out on a tangible or intangible embodiment of
protected material. For example, it may be argued that the right of
publication
is confined to the first dissemination of a work to the public by distribution
copies of it. Yet a majority of the Committee believes that
the publication right should embrace first dissemination of a work to
by any means, including by distribution of intangible embodiments of the
5.10 The Act’s distinction between tangible and intangible embodiments
of copyright material is potentially problematic in another
way. Currently the
legislation requires a work to be in a tangible embodiment to qualify for
protection under Part III. As a result,
material that has only an intangible
embodiment, such as an extempore speech, is not protected even though arguably
as deserving
of protection as a speech that is written down prior to recitation.
Also of concern to the majority of the Committee is the extent
to which the
current legislation accommodates the increasing, indeed almost ubiquitous, use
of computers in the creation of copyright
subject matter. The Act currently
requires the identification of a human as the ‘author’ of a Part III
work. While a
majority of the Committee recognises there is an ongoing need for
current requirement of ‘authorship’ may preclude the grant of
protection to material that is deserving of protection,
simply because the
extent to which a computer was utilised in its creation exceeds a particular
(currently uncertain) level.
5.11 The majority of the Committee notes that there has been some discussion
relating to the ‘overlapping’ of the current
exclusive rights when
applied to the digital environment. In particular, the majority of the Committee
notes that at the Sydney consultations
it was stated by some interests that the
overlapping of rights should be avoided, as it would unjustifiably allow for the
of a number of separate licences and the collection of separate
royalties for what was primarily the performance of the one activity.
regard, the majority of the Committee also notes the comments made in the US
Intellectual Property and the National Information Infrastructure
(1995). The US report stated:
The exclusive rights, which comprise the so-called bundle of rights that is
... the fact that more
than one right may be involved in infringing activity does not, and should not,
mean that only the one right
should apply. Each of the exclusive rights is
distinct and separately alienable and different parties may be responsible for
infringements
or licensing of different rights—and different rights may be
owned by different people.
5.12 On this issue the majority of the Committee agrees with what was stated
in the US report. Although the majority of the Committee
recognises that rights
appear to be ‘overlapping’ to an increasing extent as a result of
digital technology,
it does not believe
that this fact alone will result in the overprotection of copyright material. In
the majority of the Committee’s
view each right represents a specific and
separately remunerable activity. The fact that the performance of an activity
may involve
the exercise of more than one right is justified. The majority of
the Committee notes that the overlapping of rights is not peculiar
digital environment—for example, the act of publication of a literary work
in hard copy form traditionally involves
the exercise of both the right of
reproduction and the right of publication.
5.13 In summary, a majority of the Committee is of the view that the current
legislation’s technologically specific approach
to categorisation of
protected subject matter and of exclusive rights is suboptimal in a number of
key respects. It considers that
the Act should be recast, in a manner that
simplifies it and enables it better to deal with the challenges, both foreseen
yet unforeseen, raised by the digital environment.
5.14 The majority of the Committee examined a number of options as a possible
basis for reform of the categorisation of the protected
subject matter and the
exclusive rights of copyright. In doing so, the majority of the Committee
endeavoured to develop a model that
both simplified the Act and improved its
ability to accommodate technological change, while generally maintaining the
current level
of protection provided to copyright subject matter. The majority
of the Committee believes that such an approach is necessary to
discharge its
terms of reference, particularly paragraphs 1(a), (b), (ba) and (c) (see amended
terms of reference attached at Appendix
Minimalist change approach
5.15 The first approach considered by the majority of the Committee,
described as the ‘minimalist change approach’ (see
Approach 1 at
Appendix B), involves simply:
the removal of the structural (but
not conceptual) distinction that currently exists in the Act between Part III
and Part IV ‘subject matter other than
the inclusion of two new
rights—the right of communication to the public adopted as part of the
Government’s Digital Agenda
reforms, and the distribution right as
described by the Committee in the previous chapter.
5.16 The aim
of this approach is to eliminate, as far as possible, the unnecessary
duplication that presently exists in the Act in
the treatment of the two groups
of subject matter. It should be noted that this approach involves merely a
structural change to the
Act, and continues to treat the two types of subject
matter differently (e.g. applying the originality requirement to Part III works
only, and providing the owners of Part IV works with a more limited set of
exclusive rights). The resulting structure of this approach
resembles that
currently found in the UK
a similar change has been implemented.
5.17 Although this approach incorporates the technology-neutral right of
communication to the public, the majority of the Committee
is of the view that
it falls far short of providing a simplified, flexible model that is capable of
adapting to new technologies.
In particular, this approach maintains the current
technology-specific categories of subject matter, which does not easily
accommodate
existing technology, and which, without the use of creative judicial
interpretation, may not be able to adapt adequately to future
developments.
Further, the approach maintains distinctions based upon the tangible and
intangible embodiments in which copyright
material subsists, and continues the
need to be able to identify a human ‘author’ of a work.
5.18 On the basis of these problems with the minimalist approach, the
majority of the Committee is of the view that this model should
not be adopted
(see Appendix B for a further description of the possible advantages and
disadvantages associated with this model).
Conflation approach
5.19 The second approach considered by the majority of the Committee,
described as the ‘conflation approach’ (see Approach
2 in Appendix
B), involves examination of a number of options (described as (a), (b) and (c))
which are based upon the following
changes to the current Act:
the removal of the Part III and Part
IV distinction, along the lines described in the minimalist
the conflation of categories
of protected subject matter that have similar subsistence requirements and
exclusive rights, resulting
in a smaller number of categories, which are broadly
based and defined exclusively by reference to the current categories of subject
matter; and
the conflation of related
exclusive economic rights, resulting in a smaller number of rights, which are
broadly based and defined
exclusively by reference to the current categories of
5.20 This approach was rejected by the majority of the
Committee, primarily on the basis that it did not adequately address the need
for technological neutrality. So long as the new categories resulting from the
conflations are defined exhaustively by reference
to the current categories of
which they are comprised, this approach continues the technological specificity
of the current legislation.
It does not, therefore, provide the necessary
flexibility to adapt to new technologies.
5.21 The majority of the Committee also notes that it is arguable that the
conflation of rights as provided by this approach does
not simplify the Act, but
rather adds a further level of complexity. This is because the approach
continues the current legislation’s
differential application of the
exclusive rights across the various categories of subject matter. That is to
say, this approach does
not harmonise the application of the exclusive rights to
the different types of subject matter within the broadly based categories.
example, under the conflation approach, specific provision needs to be made to
maintain the differences that exist in the application
of the exclusive rights
to literary, dramatic and musical works, or to reflect the possible differences
in the application of future
moral rights to ‘audiovisual works’
where such rights may subsist in a cinematograph film but not in a sound
5.22 On the basis of the above problems inherent in the various options
considered as part of the conflation approach, the majority
of the Committee is
of the view that this model should not be adopted (see Appendix B for a further
description of the possible advantages
and disadvantages associated with this
International conventions approach
5.23 The third approach considered by the majority of the Committee (see
Approach 3 in Appendix B) is drawn from Ricketson’s
1997 article entitled
‘The New Copyright Act 1997’.
The majority of the Committee refers to it here as the ‘international
conventions’ approach because, in its view, this
model reflects the
general approach of the international conventions on copyright and neighbouring
rights, and the implementation
of them in civil law systems. Thus, this approach
continues the dichotomy between material that is the product of some
contribution of the author (subject matter that is within
the authors’ rights conventions, such as the Berne Convention and
enterprise and investment (subject matter that is
within the neighbouring rights
conventions, such as the Rome and Geneva Conventions and the WIPO Performances
and Phonograms Treaty).
The dichotomy turns on the ‘innovation
threshold’ which applies to the two categories of subject matter. The
phrase ‘innovation
threshold’ is used to refer to the threshold
requirements that must be satisfied before material comes within one or the
category of subject matter, and especially the requirement that equates
with ‘originality’ under the current
legislation.
5.24 This approach involves:
the major reduction of protected
subject matter to the two historical categories of original creations and
derivative productions.
The two categories of protected subject matter use a
broad and open definition, combined with an inclusive listing of particular
the less major
reduction of economic rights based primarily upon the exploitation of copyright
in material or non-material form.
5.25 The majority of the
Committee recognises that this approach produces a simplified structure, is less
technology-specific than
the current Act, and yet retains most of the current
principles of law including the key distinction between ‘works’
‘other subject matter’. Against this, however, the majority of the
Committee notes that this approach maintains the
distinction between tangible
and intangible embodiment in relation to the exclusive rights, and the need for
a human ‘author’.
5.26 In addition, and more specifically, the majority of the Committee
considers the category of derivative productions to be unduly
limited, by virtue
of the requirement in the definition that it ‘uses or embodies
literary or artistic works’. This definition would seem to
exclude items such as a recording or broadcast of literary or artistic
that is not original, even if that recording or broadcast was the result of the
application of time, effort and resources
by the maker (being the level of
originality required for protection under this approach). Also, the majority of
the Committee is
unclear as to the extent of protection provided to
compilations, cinematograph films and other multimedia entities under this
Furthermore, this approach does not appear to provide an exclusive
right that encompasses the current performance right.
5.27 On the basis of these problems, the majority of the Committee considers
that this approach should not be adopted (see Appendix
B for a further
description of the possible advantages and disadvantages associated with this
model—the technology-neutral approach
General approach
5.28 In this section of its report the majority of the Committee sets out an
approach by which it envisages its recommendations of
the principles it
considers should form the basis of the Copyright Act might be implemented. This
approach is illustrative only,
and in particular should not be seen as supposing
it is the only approach by which these principles could be implemented.
5.29 The envisaged approach provides for two categories of protected subject
matter. Material will be protected under one or other
category only if it is
material in the literary or artistic domain, where that phrase is interpreted in
a flexible manner. Furthermore,
material will be protected under one or other
category only if it satisfies one of the threshold innovation
requirements—that
is, if it is subject matter resulting from significant
intellectual effort by the person undertaking its creation, or is subject
resulting from the application of time, effort and resources of the person
undertaking its production. So long as one of these
threshold requirements is
satisfied, no particular form of tangible embodiment, or indeed any tangible
embodiment, is required for
the subject matter to gain protection.
5.30 The envisaged approach provides for two exclusive economic rights, the
right of reproduction and the right of dissemination to
the public, and two
exclusive moral rights, the right of attribution and the right of integrity. The
two exclusive economic rights
apply to both categories of protected subject
matter. The two economic rights also both apply to activities that are conducted
relation to material that is in tangible form, and material that is in
intangible form. However, the activities that fall within
the broad economic
rights may themselves be based upon a distinction between the exploitation of
material in a tangible or intangible
form. For example, the right of
distribution (discussed at paragraphs 4.10–4.56), which describes a subset
of the activities
that fall within the broad right of dissemination to the
public, is limited to the distribution of material in tangible form. Further,
for both categories of economic rights, there is a significant degree of
harmonisation of the application of the activities that
comprise the right to
all the material within each category of protected subject matter. The two
exclusive moral rights apply only
to the category of protected subject matter
that is the result of significant intellectual effort by the person who
undertakes its
5.31 It can be seen that the envisaged approach blends, in varying degrees,
aspects of the conflation approach and the international
conventions approach.
In particular, it blends the conflation approach of conflating subject matter
and rights with the international
conventions approach of broadly and
inclusively defining categories of protected subject matter. The envisaged
approach resembles
the international conventions approach in that there are only
two categories of protected subject matter, wherein the distinguishing
between the two categories is the innovation threshold (see paragraphs
5.37–5.41 below). In contrast to the international
conventions approach,
however, the category of subject matter to which the lower innovation threshold
applies is not limited to embodiments
‘original’ literary
or artistic works. Also, the envisaged approach removes the link between the
innovation threshold
and the traditional concept of human authorship, and has no
requirement of tangible embodiment in relation to either category of
matter. Furthermore, like the conflation approach and unlike the international
conventions approach, the exclusive rights
under the envisaged approach do not
distinguish between activities on the basis of whether they are carried out on
tangible or intangible
embodiments of protected material.
5.32 The key features of the envisaged approach are described in more detail
Protected subject matter
5.33 Under the envisaged approach, each category of protected subject matter
is defined broadly and non-exhaustively. For illustrative
purposes, the two
categories of protected subject matter are referred to hereafter as a
‘Creation’ and a ‘Production’.
5.34 A Creation is defined as a tangible or non-tangible embodiment of
subject matter in the literary or artistic domain that is the
result of a
significant intellectual effort by the person who undertakes its creation. A
Production is defined as a tangible or non-tangible
embodiment, other than a
Creation, of subject matter in the literary or artistic domain that is the
result of the application of
time, effort and resources by the person who
undertakes its production. Without limiting the generality of this definition, a
is defined to include a broadcast and a published edition, as those
two subject matters are defined under the current legislation.
5.35 Both a Creation and a Production encompass material that is within the
‘literary or artistic domain’—that is,
the wide range of
material of the sort to which the Berne Convention is directed—but
interpreted in a flexible manner that
takes account of the changing means by
which this sort of material is created and the changing forms this sort of
material may take.
In essence, the Berne Convention is directed towards
expressions of textual, aural and visual material. Under the envisaged approach,
it is intended that the concept of the ‘literary or artistic domain’
include material that is considered to be a literary,
dramatic, musical or
artistic work under the current legislation. In addition, however, it is
intended that the concept also include
other expressions of textual, aural and
visual material, including those that would not satisfy a narrow understanding
of the phrases
‘literary’ and ‘artistic’. Thus, for
example, a sound recording under the current legislation is an embodiment
material in the ‘literary or artistic domain’ under the envisaged
approach, because a sound recording is a tangible
embodiment of aural
5.36 Article 10(1) of the TRIPS Agreement and art. 4 of the WCT require
computer programs to be protected as literary works within
the meaning of
art. 2 of the Berne Convention. It follows that, under the envisaged
approach, a computer program is protected as
a Creation. For the sake of
certainty, specific provision would be made to the effect that the category of
Creation includes a computer
Innovation threshold for protection
5.37 The point of distinction between the two categories of protected subject
matter is the innovation threshold. Under the Berne
Convention a specific level
of innovation is not explicitly required by art. 2(1). It was stated at the
Brussels Conference, however,
that requirement of an ‘intellectual
creation’ was implicit in the notion of ‘literary or artistic
(1) provides that a cinematograph film shall be protected
as an ‘original work’, and states that the owner of copyright
cinematograph film shall have the same rights as the ‘author of an
original work’. The Convention provides no guidance,
however, as to the
degree of intellectual creativity necessary to make material in the literary or
artistic domain an ‘original
work’, and this issue has been left to
the discretion of the Berne Union
5.38 The majority of the Committee recognises that there is uncertainty in
Australia, and in other countries including Britain, as
to the level of
innovation required for a work to be ‘original’. One view is that
originality is inherent in the concept
of a literary, dramatic, musical or
artistic work, such that to identify material as a ‘work’ by
definition means it
is original. The problems with this view, in the majority of
the Committee’s opinion, are as follows. First, it fails to recognise
the current legislation expressly requires as a condition of protection that
there be an ‘original work’, not just
Secondly, it fails to provide an answer as to when material that is textual,
aural or visual in character qualifies
for protection as an original work.
Thirdly, and more importantly, it fails to appreciate that the courts have
recognised that material
that is textual, aural or visual in character can be a
literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work and yet not be
5.39 It is the view of the majority of the Committee that under copyright law
the innovation threshold requirement is and should continue
to be independent
from the requirement of a specific type of subject matter. As to the latter
requirement, the majority of the Committee
has proposed the adoption of a
flexibly interpreted description of material within the ‘literary and
artistic domain’.
As to the former requirement, the majority of the
Committee proposes an approach that reflects the basic principle of the Berne
Convention,
but modified to achieve a greater degree of technological
neutrality.
5.40 In particular, the majority of the Committee recommends that the
innovation threshold for the new category of Creation be ‘significant
intellectual effort’ by the person who undertakes its creation. The
majority of the Committee recognises that this may be higher
than the current
level of originality required for protection of
This is justified, in the majority
of the Committee’s view, by the principle that the higher level of
protection that attaches
to a Creation should not apply to material that results
from the investment of time, effort and/or money, but that is not an
intellectual
creation. It follows that the higher level of protection that is
now afforded to material such as timetables, directories and similar
compilations which do not constitute ‘intellectual creations’ would
no longer apply under the envisaged approach. Such
material would receive only
the lower level of protection given to a Production, and only then so long as it
satisfied the innovation
threshold for a Production (note the dissenting view
described at paragraph 5.56).
5.41 The majority of the Committee proposes that the innovation threshold for
the new category of Production be ‘the application
of time, effort and
resources’ by the person who undertakes its production. It considers that
this level equates to that which
currently applies to subject matter in Part IV
of the Act.
Relationship of protected subject matter to a human
5.42 The current legislation requires an original work to be the product of
an ‘author’ for it to be entitled to protection
under Part III of
the Act. This requirement arises by virtue of s. 32, which provides that
original work and in a published
original work if the ‘author’ of the work was a qualified
at the time the work was
In this respect, the Act follows the
terminology of the Berne Convention. The existence of an ‘author’ is
not, however,
a requirement for protection of subject matter other than works
under Part IV of the Act. There the legislation makes reference to
‘maker’ of the relevant subject
5.43 It is generally accepted that only a human can be the
‘author’ of a work. This acceptance reflects the historical
understanding that works are the products of the human intellect; in this sense
it is said works are creations as distinct from artefacts
of production. This
acceptance also explains the application of moral rights to works but not to
other subject matter protected by
their non-economic (i.e. moral) interests. The fact is, of course, that the
of all works involves the utilisation of tools by the author. In early
times such tools were quills, paintbrushes, chisels and the
like. In later times
the tools have included typewriters, cameras and printing presses. Most
recently, information technology, especially
the computer, has been utilised by
authors in the creation of their works.
5.44 To date the courts have not had undue difficulty in assimilating
computers to less sophisticated types of tools utilised by
The majority of the Committee
recognises, however, that developments in information technology will continue
to change the role that
computers play in the creation of certain types of
or at all foreseeable. The majority of the Committee is concerned that in
the future it might not be sensible or even possible to
continue the
courts’ current approach of analogising computers with the historical
tools of authors. If the analogy were to
break down, computer-created material
will not receive the higher level of protection even though that material
reflects significant
intellectual effort by the person who undertakes its
creation. That is an outcome that differentiates between creators on the basis
of the tools used by them, and discriminates against those using the most
advanced (i.e. computer-based) tools. It would result,
for example, in a lower
level of protection being given to a ‘techno-artist’ using computer
media compared with a traditional
artist using traditional media. In the
majority of the Committee’s opinion, differentiation and discrimination on
of tool technology are not appropriate.
5.45 The majority of the Committee recognises, however, that it will continue
to be necessary to be able to connect copyright subject
matter with a human, not
the least for the purpose of determining which, if any, innovation threshold is
satisfied. The approach
that the majority of the Committee recommends is to
conceptualise the connection not as one of ‘authoring’ the work,
instead as one of ‘undertaking the creation or production of’ the
the Committee intends that the
focus be moved from the issue of whether the computer utilisation can be
analogised with traditional
tool utilisation, to the more germane issue of which
human should be the one identified as sufficiently associated with the creation
or production of the material for the purpose of the innovation threshold.
5.46 The concept of a human who ‘undertakes the creation or production
of’ copyright material has a degree of similarity
to the deemed author of
a ‘computer-generated work’, as provided in the UK copyright
legislation.
In the majority of the
Committee’s view, however, this is a concept that is applicable to all
computer-generated works. For example, in the case
of an artist who utilises traditional tools in the creation of a work, that
is clearly the person who undertakes the creation of the work.
5.47 The majority of the Committee believes that it is not only possible, but
in fact desirable, to extend the concept of undertaking
the creation or
production of material beyond ‘computer-generated’ subject matter,
to all copyright subject matter. In
making this proposal, the majority of the
Committee is mindful that the Committee previously, in its 1995
Software Protection
report, proposed that a distinction be drawn between
‘material created with the assistance of computer programs’ and
‘material created by computer
The majority of the
Committee now considers that the use of computers in the creation of copyright
material is now so widespread,
and the types and degree of computer involvement
in the creation of copyright material are so varied, that an approach that
distinguishes
between material created ‘with the assistance of’ a
computer and material created ‘by’ a computer is likely
difficult to understand and apply in practice. The majority of the Committee
instead prefers the envisaged approach described
herein, since this avoids the
need to identify which types of subject matter are
‘computer-generated’—a task that
might require complex
distinctions to be drawn between computer-generated, computer-assisted and other
degrees of computer-mediated
involvement in the making of copyright subject
matter. Accordingly, the majority of the Committee proposes that the innovation
for all material within both categories of protected subject matter be
related to the efforts of the human who undertakes the creation
or production of
the material.
Requirement of tangible embodiment
5.48 The current legislation requires subject matter to be in a tangible
embodiment (i.e. in some material form) for it to be protected.
In relation to
works, this requirement arises indirectly, pursuant to the references in
s. 32 to the ‘making’ of a work
and to the time when a work is
‘made’. As a result of this requirement, protection is not available
to literary, dramatic,
musical or artistic material that does not have tangible
embodiment. Thus, for example, spoken words and extempore music are not
protected by copyright unless written down or otherwise recorded in a tangible
5.49 The requirement of material form in relation to Part IV subject matter
arises by way of the definitions of the particular subject
matter. Thus a sound
recording is defined to be the aggregate of sounds embodied in a
a cinematograph film is defined to
be the aggregate of visual images embodied in an article or
and a published edition is an
edition of a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work that has been
—all of which are subject
matters constituting tangible embodiments. The exceptions are television and
sound broadcasts, which
are defined to be the visual images and/or sounds
transmitted by wireless telegraphy.
visual images and sounds are protected even though not in a tangible
embodiment.
5.50 Under the approach envisaged by the majority of the Committee, tangible
embodiment is not a precondition to protection as a Creation
or a Production.
Thus, subject matters lacking tangible embodiment (such as broadcasts,
performances and extempore music) are as
capable of protection as subject
matters with tangible embodiment (such as drawings on paper, recordings of
sounds on CD, and audiovisual
images stored in a computer chip). Further, the
particular material form a tangible embodiment of a subject matter may take is
determinative of the category of protection, if any, into which it
5.51 The majority of the Committee considers that developments in information
technology may challenge the traditional notion that
all protected subject
matter other than broadcasts should be in a tangible embodiment. It recognises
the potential for material in
the literary and artistic domain to come into
existence and yet not have a tangible embodiment that fully corresponds with the
requirements of the legislation. To date, with the exception of spoken
words and extempore music, the courts have generally accommodated
such material
within the framework of the legislation. A recent example is the decision in
Galaxy Electronics Pty Ltd v Sega Enterprises
in which the Full Court of the
Federal Court held that a computer video game was a ‘cinematograph
film’. It so held despite
the fact that the game’s visual images
were not pre-existing images embodied in an article or thing in the traditional
but instead were created ‘on the fly’ by a computer running a
computer program.
5.52 The court in
Galaxy v Sega
stated that the definition of
‘cinematograph film’ is expressed in terms of the result achieved
(images shown as a moving
picture), rather than the means employed to achieve
that result. This definitional approach was consistent with the legislative
which showed Parliament intended to take a broad view and not tie
technology. The
majority of the Committee recognises that the approach of the court in
is along the lines of the technologically neutral approach the
majority of the Committee recommends be implemented generally into
technological developments may lead to
the creation of material in the literary
or artistic domain that is not so readily accommodated within the existing
categories of
works or other subject matter that require some form of tangible
embodiment. Also, the majority of the Committee finds it difficult
justification for tangible embodiment to be a precondition to protection,
especially in light of the fact that subject
matters not in a tangible form,
such as broadcasts and performances, currently receive protection under the
legislation.
Further, the majority of the
Committee recognises that the Berne Convention expressly provides that it is a
matter for individual
countries to determine whether or not tangible embodiment
is a precondition to protection of copyright
and notes that the copyright
legislation of certain civil law countries clearly embraces material not in a
tangible embodiment.
5.53 The majority of the Committee recognises that a person seeking to
enforce copyright in material not in a tangible embodiment
may face substantial
difficulties in satisfying the evidentiary burden of proof concerning existence
of the material and subsistence
of copyright in it. However, in cases where a
person can prove those matters, the majority of the Committee believes the lack
a tangible embodiment should not of itself be a bar to protection where the
material satisfies the requirements for protection. Accordingly,
the majority of
the Committee proposes that there be no requirement of a particular form of
tangible embodiment, or indeed of tangible
embodiment at all, for material in
the literary and artistic domain to be protected as either a Creation or a
Production.
Categorisation of protected material
5.54 It is informative to consider how material within the current categories
of protected subject matter would be treated under the
approach outlined
Literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works
5.55 The majority of the Committee envisages that most material that
currently constitutes an original literary, dramatic, musical
or artistic work
would qualify for protection as a Creation. An exception would be a compilation,
or any other type of work, which
currently qualifies for protection under Part
III of the Act only because the application of the originality requirement is
than the innovation threshold proposed for a Creation. Unless specific
exception is made for such material, under the envisaged approach
that material
would qualify only for the lower level of protection, as a Production. The
majority of the Committee does not consider
this to be an undesirable
consequence of its approach.
5.56 It should be noted that one of the members of the majority of the
Committee, which supports the ‘technology-neutral’
believes that all compilations should remain protected at the highest level, and
therefore fall within the category of
a Creation.
Audiovisual material and sound recordings
5.57 A significant change may occur in relation to the protection of material
currently within the definition of one of the Part IV
categories of subject
matter other than works. Audiovisual material that currently constitutes a
cinematograph film will attract
a higher level of protection than it currently
does, if it satisfies the innovation threshold of a Creation. If, however, it
only the innovation threshold of a Production, it would continue to
receive a similar level of protection. The envisaged approach
thus rectifies the
current anomaly whereby cinematograph films are protected only under Part IV of
the Act, even though the Berne
Convention mandates their assimilation with
‘original works’.
The envisaged
approach provides the potential to protect cinematograph films at the higher
level, but only where the cinematograph
film satisfies the higher innovation
5.58 The case of material that would currently constitute a sound recording
is somewhat different. In principle, such material will
be capable of protection
at the higher level if it satisfies the higher innovation threshold. In
practice, however, the majority
of the Committee expects that most, if not all,
sound recordings will satisfy only the lower innovation threshold, and hence
attract only the lower level of protection.
Broadcasts and published editions
5.59 As discussed in paragraph 5.34, the majority of the Committee envisages
that the category of Production should be expressly defined
to include the
categories of subject matter currently called a broadcast and a published
edition. The majority of the Committee intends
that only the lower level of
protection apply to such subject matters. In relation to broadcasts, it
justifies this approach on the
ground that it does not consider that textual,
aural and/or visual images transmitted by either material means (e.g. by cable)
non-material means (e.g. by wireless telegraphy) would, as transmitted
material, ever satisfy the higher innovation threshold. For
reasons discussed in
paragraphs 7.146–7.153, the majority of the Committee envisages that the
current category of subject matter
called a published edition should continue as
a recognised category of copyright material only in relation to embodiments in
material. As is the case with broadcasts, the majority of the Committee
does not consider that circumstances could arise in which
a published edition
would satisfy the higher innovation threshold. Accordingly, such material should
be specifically protected only
as a Production.
5.60 It should be noted that one of the members of the majority of the
Committee, which supports the ‘technology-neutral’
believes that published editions should not be confined to embodiments in print
material, and should be extended to include
publication in computer or
machine-readable format as recommended in the
Computer Software
Material not within the current categories of protected subject
5.61 It is a key feature of the approach envisaged by the majority of the
Committee that the categories of protected material are
defined broadly and
inclusively. It follows that material that does not come within one of the
current categories of subject matter
is not necessarily precluded from
protection, and indeed could qualify for protection, within one or other of the
two categories
of protected subject matter under the envisaged approach.
5.62 Should a court hold that material falls within a copyright category but
the Government considers that it should not be protected,
the Government can
legislate to remove material from the Act. The Committee considers this to be a
preferable method of dealing with
and unpredictable technological age than the present method where the Act has to
amended to provide protection—often long after the material has needed
that protection.
Performances
5.63 Unless specific exception is made, the case of a performance is on a
similar footing to other material not within one of the
current categories of
protected subject matter. Thus, a performance of subject matter within the
literary or artistic domain will
qualify for protection as a Creation if it
satisfies the higher innovation threshold, or as a Production if it satisfies
lower innovation threshold.
5.64 The majority of the Committee recognises that the Government is
currently considering whether and, if so, how to implement the
rights provided
by the WPPT to performers as regards their live performances and their
performances fixed in phonograms.
provides performers with both moral rights and economic rights in relation to
such performances. Since the matter is a serious
policy issue currently under
consideration by the Government, the majority of the Committee makes no
recommendation as to whether
these rights should apply under Australian
decision is
made in relation to these matters, the effect of that decision can
be accommodated by the envisaged approach. Thus, for example,
if it was decided
to grant performers moral rights as regards their live performances and their
performances fixed in phonograms,
this could be effected by deeming a
performance to be a Creation. To the extent to which the other rights that apply
to a Creation
are determined by the Government to be inappropriate in relation
to a performance, such a decision could be implemented by expressly
that those rights do not apply to a Creation that is a performance. Likewise,
special provision could be made excepting
a performance from the rights provided
to a Production, should the Government decide that such protection is
inappropriate.
Exclusive rights
5.65 Under the envisaged approach there are two economic rights and two moral
rights. The economic rights are the right of ‘reproduction’
and the right of ‘dissemination to the public’. Each is open-ended,
by virtue of being defined by reference to an inclusive
list of entitlements
forming a subset of the right. The moral rights are the right of
‘attribution’ and the right of
‘integrity’.
5.66 Both the right of reproduction and the right of dissemination to the
public will apply to a Creation and a Production, albeit
to varying degrees (see
paragraphs 5.71–5.94). The moral rights of attribution and integrity will
apply to a Creation only.
5.67 As far as practicable, for both categories of economic rights there
should be harmonisation of the application of the activities
that comprise the
right to all the material within each category of protected subject matter. The
majority of the Committee, however,
does not envisage that the harmonisation of
rights within the category of Production will result in the owners of published
being granted any further rights other than the right to make an exact
reproduction of the published edition that they currently
enjoy. The majority of
the Committee believes that this is a desirable result given the special nature
of published editions. The
Committee notes that the protection of this subject
matter is not required under the international conventions, and that published
editions exhibit a relatively low level of innovation in comparison to most
other forms of copyright material.
5.68 It should be noted that one of the members of the majority of the
Committee, which supports the ‘technology-neutral’
dissents from the view stated above, and believes that the harmonisation of the
rights should include the granting of the
right of dissemination to the owners
of published editions.
5.69 At the Sydney consultations, and in its follow-up submission to the
consultations, APRA stated that judges of common law countries
are accustomed to
narrowly interpreting rights that are traditionally defined in a specific and
exhaustive fashion, with the consequence
that nothing is included that is not
expressly stated to be so.
APRA suggested
that judges working in the common law tradition may therefore experience
difficulty if there is insufficient particularity
in the mode of expression
adopted or if the parliamentary intent is not clearly expressed. Further, APRA
suggested that the use of
broadly based rights may lead to a narrower
interpretation of rights than if the rights were specifically recognised.
5.70 The majority of the Committee notes that the broadly based rights of
‘reproduction’ and ‘dissemination to the
public’ (as
included in the recommended model) are inclusively defined by reference to a
list of entitlements forming a subset
of the right. The majority of the
Committee therefore believes that such a model, while providing a flexible and
technology-neutral
approach, also provides a sufficient level of specificity so
as to make the spirit of the legislation clear. The majority of the
also notes that judges in common law jurisdictions often interpret broadly based
rights. Indeed there are many examples
of judges developing the law from broad
statutory formulae. For example, both the definition of ‘invention’
and the broad
right to ‘exploit’ an invention under the
have been effectively
interpreted by the courts.
Right of reproduction
5.71 Under the approach envisaged by the majority of the Committee, the
‘right of reproduction’ includes activities within
the current right
to make a literal copy (which subsists in
subject matter), the current
right of reproduction and the current adaptation right.
Exact reproduction (literal copying)
5.72 With the current Act, a major difference in the protection provided to
Part III works compared with Part IV subject matter is
the fact that Part IV
subject matter does not receive the exclusive rights of non-exact reproduction
and of adaptation. For Part
IV subject matter, the equivalent exclusive right is
limited to exact reproduction (i.e. literal copying) of the whole or a
substantial
part of the subject matter. The majority of the Committee considers
that this lower level of protection provided to Part IV subject
justified by the fact that Part IV subject matter does not need to satisfy the
requirement of originality that applies
to Part III works.
5.73 Under the approach envisaged by the majority of the Committee, only the
more limited right of exact reproduction (i.e. literal
copying) will apply to a
Production. This outcome would be achieved by making express provision to that
effect, such as by way of
an exclusive definition. For example, the legislation
implementing the envisaged approach would provide that, in relation to copyright
material being a Production, the right of reproduction means only the right to
make an exact reproduction (i.e. a literal copy) in
relation to the whole or a
substantial part of the material.
Non-exact reproduction and adaptation
5.74 The majority of the Committee intends that the right of reproduction not
be limited in this way in relation to a Creation. To
make this clear, provision
would be made to the effect that, in relation to a Creation, the right of
reproduction includes making
a non-exact reproduction and an adaptation of the
whole or a substantial part of the Creation. A consequence of this approach is
that the adaptation right would apply to a category of work to which it does not
currently apply—namely, an artistic work—unless
provision is made to
the contrary.
5.75 The majority of the Committee notes that art. 12 of the Berne
Convention provides that ‘authors of literary and artistic
works shall
enjoy the exclusive right of authorising adaptations, arrangements and other
alterations of their works’. Ricketson
states that in general usage the
term ‘adaptation’ implies the changing of a work so as to enable it
to fulfil another
purpose than that for which it was originally
and that, in relation to
art. 12 of the Berne Convention, the exclusive right of
‘adaptation’ is the right to rewrite
or remodel the work into
another form.
Ricketson refers to what he
describes as an obvious example of an ‘adaptation’ as the making of
a three-dimensional version
of a two-dimensional artistic work and vice
It should be noted that under
s. 21(3) of the Act this activity is deemed to be an exercise of the
reproduction right that subsists
in an artistic work. Further, the treatment of
transdimensional transformations of artistic works varies in that some national
define them as reproductions rather than adaptations.
5.76 As stated earlier (see paragraph 3.36), there was a mixed reaction at
the Sydney consultations to the suggestion of granting
an adaptation right to
artistic works. Beyond a transdimensional transformation of an artistic work,
participants at the consultations
were able to provide two examples of a
possible adaptation of an artistic work—first, a detailed literary
description of an
artistic work; and secondly, the translation of a physical
sculpture into x, y and z coordinates, and the storage of these coordinates
digital file which, using the correct software, could generate a
three-dimensional image of the sculpture. Another example of
the adaptation of
an artistic work could be the creation of a picture using the same theme or
style of another picture, but without
directly copying its essential
5.77 In the opinion of the majority of the Committee, the right to make an
adaptation, being a subset of the reproduction right under
the envisaged
approach, should apply to artistic works. This approach is consistent with the
wording and intent of the Berne Convention.
Further, it more accurately
recognises the true nature of the exclusive right to make a transdimensional
transformation currently
given to artistic works. In addition, it ensures that
material currently considered to be an artistic work is not discriminated
compared with literary, dramatic and musical works.
5.78 The majority of the Committee recognises that, as a consequence of
applying the adaptation right to all subject matter within
the category of
Creation, the right will apply to any audiovisual material that satisfies the
higher threshold of this category.
As noted previously (see paragraph 5.58), the
majority of the Committee expects that most, if not all, sound recordings would
only the innovation threshold of a Production, but accepts that a
cinematograph film, a multimedia entity and other audiovisual material
certain circumstances might satisfy the innovation threshold of a Creation.
Accordingly, the majority of the Committee recognises
that the latter types of
In the opinion of the majority
of the Committee, this is not an undesirable
result. The fact that the material satisfies the higher innovation threshold
the grant of this right. Also, this outcome is consistent with the
Berne Convention, which requires a cinematograph film be given
the same rights
as an original work, including an adaptation
Right of dissemination to the public
5.79 Under the approach envisaged by the majority of the Committee, the
‘right of dissemination to the public’ includes
activities within
the current performance right, the current publication right, the broadly based
right of communication to the public
proposed by the Government as part of its
Digital Agenda reforms (see paragraphs 4.02–4.09), and the right of
distribution
under the WCT and WPPT to the extent recommended by the majority of
the Committee (see paragraphs 4.54–4.56).
5.80 It is informative to consider how the current categories of exclusive
rights would apply to the current categories of protected
subject matter under
this approach.
Performance
5.81 The Act currently does not afford a right of performance to artistic
works, broadcasts and published editions. As explained at
5.67–5.68, the majority of the Committee proposes that the right of
dissemination to the public, which encompasses
the act of performance, should
not apply to subject matter that comes within the current category of published
5.82 The subsistence of a performance right in artistic works is not
supported by the main commentators. Stewart states that ‘for
reasons’ the public performance right extends only to those works that are
capable of being performed, namely literary,
dramatic and musical
Similarly, Ricketson states that
‘public performance rights make little sense as far as an artistic work is
concerned’.
The Spicer Committee
considered the issue, and recommended that the performance right should not
subsist in artistic works.
5.83 The equivalent of a performance right in relation to an artistic work
would seem to be the right of ‘public exhibition’
of the work.
Although the Berne Convention does not require such a right, a few countries in
the Berne Union have expressly provided
a public exhibition right in their
domestic laws, in some cases as a component of an artist’s moral
Beyond the general arguments made
for equality in the treatment between artistic works and other works (for
example, those comments
made by VI$COPY), no specific argument was made to the
Committee for an exhibition right to be granted to artists. For these reasons,
the majority of the Committee proposes that the envisaged approach not provide
an exhibition right for artistic works. To achieve
this, special provision
should be made in the implementing legislation to the effect that the right of
dissemination to the public
does not include exhibition of an artistic work.
5.84 The equivalent of a performance right in relation to a broadcast would
seem to be the causing of a broadcast to be seen and/or
heard by the public. The
majority of the Committee accepts that there are valid policy reasons why the
current legislation does not
provide such a right in relation to broadcasts, and
can see no reason for a change in this respect. Accordingly, specific provision
would be made to the effect that the right of dissemination to the public does
not include causing a broadcast to be seen or heard
Publication
5.85 The current legislation provides a right of publication in relation to
works, but not subject matter other than works. This right
has been held by the
High Court to be a right to put into public circulation a tangible embodiment of
a work for the
time; it does not include any subsequent
distribution.
As discussed elsewhere at
paragraphs 4.40–4.41, the majority of the Committee considers that any act
with copyright material
in tangible form which currently comes within the
exclusive right of publication will also come within a right of distribution
the lines of that provided in art. 6(1) of the WCT and arts. 8
and 12 of the WPPT. Thus, under the approach envisaged by the majority
Committee, any copyright material to which the dissemination right applies will
have in effect a publication right, unless
provision to the contrary is made in
the implementing legislation.
5.86 The majority of the Committee has considered the desirability of
granting such a right in relation to each of the current categories
subject matter to which the right of dissemination will apply—namely,
sound recordings, cinematograph films and
broadcasts (the right does not apply
to published editions, as explained in paragraphs 5.67–5.68). As regards
sound recordings
and cinematograph films, the majority of the Committee is of
the view that if a distribution right along the lines of that provided
WCT and the WPPT is to apply to such material, there is no reason to exclude
from such a right the act of first distribution
to the public of a tangible
embodiment of the material. Also, given that a right of communication to the
public (including by making
available) applies to such material under the WCT
and the WPPT, the majority of the Committee can see no reason for excluding from
such a right the more limited instance of communicating the material to the
public for the first time.
5.87 As regards broadcasts, the majority of the Committee notes that the
concept of a publication right might be thought inapplicable
given that the
material is in non-tangible form. However, as stated elsewhere (see paragraphs
4.43–4.51), the majority of the
Committee believes technological
developments have made it conceivable that the act of ‘publication’
can occur by non-tangible
means (e.g. by making material available from a web
site). In this sense, then, publication of a broadcast, like publication of a
sound recording or film, is merely a more limited instance of the general act of
making the material available to the public or communicating
the material to the
public—being the making available or communicating of it for the first
time. Again, the majority of the
Committee can see no reason to exclude the act
of first publication from the general right of dissemination to the public.
5.88 Under the current Act, an exclusive right to prevent rental applies in
relation to embodiments of certain copyright material—namely,
programs, sound recordings, and literary, dramatic and musical works reproduced
in a sound recording. Article 11 of the
TRIPS Agreement and art. 7 of the
WCT both provide a right to authorise commercial rental to the public of the
originals or copies
of a cinematograph film. However, the obligation to provide
for such a right is conditional upon commercial rental having led to
widespread copying of films such as to materially impair the exclusive right of
reproduction. The Committee notes that s. 18A
Designs and Patents Act 1988
provides an exclusive right to authorise or
prohibit rental of originals or copies of works, films and sound recordings.
5.89 The majority of the Committee sees no reason to extend the right of
rental beyond the circumstances in which it currently applies.
The right of
rental can continue to apply in its current form under the envisaged approach,
by the making of express provision to
that effect. For example, the legislation
implementing the envisaged approach should state that the right of dissemination
include rental of copyright material, except where the copyright
material is a computer program, a sound recording, or a literary,
dramatic or
musical work reproduced in a sound recording.
Communication to the public
5.90 The Government’s Digital Agenda reforms include the introduction
of a broadly based right of communication to the public,
which the majority of
the Committee understands will embrace activities within the current rights of
broadcasting and transmitting
to subscribers to a diffusion service, and the
right of making available to the public as provided in art. 8 of the WCT
10 and 14 of the WPPT. The majority of the Committee recommends
that the Government define the right of communication to the public
inclusively,
so as to achieve the greatest level of technology neutrality. The Government has
decided that this new right shall apply
to all subject matter currently
protected by copyright, with the sole exception of published editions.
5.91 Under the approach envisaged by the majority of the Committee,
activities within the Government’s proposed right of communication
public are included within the broader right of dissemination to the public, and
this broader right applies to both a Creation
and a Production, with the sole
exception of material that is a published edition. The envisaged approach is
thus consistent with
the Government’s decisions in relation to the
communication right.
5.92 As noted earlier, one of the members of the majority of the Committee,
which supports the ‘technology-neutral’ approach,
believes that the
right of dissemination, and therefore the right of communication to the public,
should subsist in published editions.
Distribution right
5.93 As discussed at paragraphs 4.54–4.56, the envisaged approach of
the majority of the Committee accommodates a right of distribution
Government decide to implement the right as provided under the new treaties. As
also discussed in those paragraphs, the
majority of the Committee has assumed
that such a right will subsist in works, cinematograph films, sound recordings
and performances
fixed in phonograms as specified by the new treaties. Under the
approach envisaged by the majority of the Committee, this right would
subset of the more general right of dissemination to the public. Accordingly,
express provision should be made to the effect
that the right of dissemination
does not apply to published editions, and that in relation to broadcasts, the
right of dissemination
does not include the distribution of tangible embodiments
of a broadcast.
5.94 Again it is noted that one of the members of the majority of the
Committee, which supports the ‘technology-neutral’
believes that the right of dissemination should subsist in published editions.
Consequently, the right of distribution
should apply to a published edition.
Moral rights of attribution and integrity
5.95 The moral rights of attribution and integrity are the rights provided in
(2) respectively of the Berne
Convention, implemented along the general lines initially proposed by the
Government in the
Under the envisaged approach moral
rights will subsist only in copyright material that falls within the category of
a Creation.
Duration of exclusive rights
5.96 The current legislation uses two reference points for determining the
duration of protection. One reference point is to the author
of a work. The
other reference point is to the time of first dissemination to the public of the
work or other subject matter.
The authorial point of reference
5.97 The Act makes reference to the author of a work for the purpose of
determining the duration of a work. For example, the duration
of copyright in a
work depends, in the first instance, on whether a work (other than a photograph)
has been disseminated to the public
(on this concept, see paragraphs
5.99–5.103) before the author’s
If such a work has been so
disseminated, the duration of protection is determined by reference to the
calendar year in which the
author died.
5.98 Under the approach envisaged by the majority of the Committee, these
points of reference to the author of a work are replaced,
where appropriate, by
points of reference to the person who undertakes the creation of a Creation.
The dissemination point of reference
5.99 The Act also uses the concept of dissemination to the public of the
duration of
dissemination to the public that are relevant
for determining duration of
public, the broadcasting of
the work, or the exposing for sale to the public of
records of the work.
In relation to a
photograph, a sound recording, a cinematograph film and a published edition, the
relevant act of dissemination to
the public is the act of
publication.
In relation to a broadcast,
the relevant act of dissemination to the public is the act of making the
In relation to a live
performance protected under Part XIA of the Act, the relevant act of
dissemination to the public, for duration
purposes, is the giving of the
performance.
5.100 Under the approach envisaged by the majority of the Committee, the
point of reference for determining the duration of copyright
continues to be the
concept of dissemination to the public. In contrast to the current legislation,
however, this concept is not
limited to the specified acts of dissemination to
the public, but includes all such acts, in relation to all subject matter. This
is not a significant change in relation to subject matter that is currently
categorised as a work (other than a photograph), because
the current legislation
already recognises a number of acts of dissemination, being acts of
dissemination by both tangible and intangible
means. This change is significant,
however, in relation to other subject matter, because the current legislation
recognises only
one instance of dissemination as relevant to duration.
5.101 As regards subject matter currently categorised as a photograph, a
sound recording, a cinematograph film or a published edition,
the instance of
dissemination currently recognised is the act of publication. As discussed in
the previous chapter (see paragraphs
4.40–4.51), the Committee is of the
view that publication of copyright material is an act that should be regarded as
capable of being carried out in regard to copyright materials in both
tangible and intangible form. For example, the Committee believes
that the act
of making copyright material available to the public by way of placing a digital
embodiment of it on a computer server
connected to the Internet should be
treated as a publication of that material. The proposal of the majority of the
Committee that
any act of dissemination to the public be relevant for
determining duration is consistent with this view.
5.102 In making this proposal, the majority of the Committee is mindful of
art. 3(3) of the Berne Convention, which provides, inter
alia, that the
acts of performance, communication by wire and broadcasting of a work do not
constitute ‘publication’
of it. As mentioned in the previous
the Committee is of the view that
art. 3(3) should be considered as limiting the meaning of publication only
for the purpose for
which the concept of publication is used in
art. 3—namely, for determining the country of origin of a
Accordingly, the majority of the
Committee considers that the envisaged approach, which regards any act of
dissemination to the public
as relevant for determining duration of protection,
is not inconsistent with the Berne Convention.
5.103 As regards a broadcast, the act of dissemination currently recognised
as relevant to determining duration is the act of making
the broadcast. This
will continue to be the relevant act under the envisaged approach, because the
making of the broadcast is itself
an act of dissemination to the public, and
will, of course, be the first act of dissemination to occur in relation to this
matter. For the same reasons, the giving of a performance will continue
to be the relevant act of dissemination for the purpose of
determining the
duration of protection.
The period of protection
5.104 The period of protection under the current legislation differs
according to the category of subject matter. Put simply, the
protection for a work (other than a photograph) is the life of the author plus
50 years, or 50 years from first dissemination
to the public (as that term is
described immediately above), whichever is the
The period of protection for a
photograph, a sound recording and a cinematograph film is 50 years from first
publication;
for a broadcast it is 50 years
from the making of the broadcast;
published edition it is 25 years from first
publication.
5.105 Under the approach envisaged by the majority of the Committee, these
periods of protection generally would be maintained. That
is to say, the
majority of the Committee proposes that the period of protection of a Creation
is the life of the person who undertakes
its creation plus 50 years, or 50 years
from its first dissemination to the public, whichever is the greater. The period
of protection
of a Production is 50 years from its first dissemination to the
public. In recognition of the special nature of a published edition
paragraph 5.67), the majority of the Committee proposes that its period of
protection remain 25 years, to run from its first
dissemination to the public.
This exception would be implemented by way of special provision to this
5.106 The majority of the Committee notes that the envisaged approach
produces an outcome different from the current position on duration
in relation
to subject matter within the current definition of cinematograph film, where
that subject matter satisfies the higher
innovation threshold for protection as
a Creation. Should the Government wish to maintain the essence of the current
position on
duration of copyright in relation to all films, including those that
qualify for protection as a Creation, it could do so by express
provision to the
effect that copyright in subject matter that is a cinematograph film subsists
for 50 years from first dissemination
to the public. The approach envisaged by
the majority of the Committee and the alternative approach of maintaining the
current position
are both consistent with the Berne Convention. Article 7(1)
provides that the term of protection granted by the Convention shall
be the life
of the author and 50 years after his death; whereas art. 7(2) states that,
in the case of cinematographic works, Union
countries may provide that the term
of protection shall expire 50 years after the work has been made available to
the public.
5.107 The majority of the Committee notes that the duration of the moral
rights proposed by the Government in the Copyright Amendment
Bill (No. 1) 1997
is coterminous with the duration of copyright in the material in respect of
which the moral rights subsist. Although
the moral rights legislation has yet to
be reintroduced following the report of the Senate Legal and Constitutional
Legislation Committee,
the Committee understands that the duration of the rights
is not under review. Accordingly, under the approach envisaged by the majority
of the Committee, the moral rights in a Creation have the same duration as the
economic rights that apply to the Creation.
Ownership of exclusive rights
5.108 The current legislation uses one general point of reference for
determining the initial ownership of copyright in protected
subject matter,
namely, the person who has created or produced the subject matter. Thus, subject
to any agreement to the contrary
various exceptions provided in the Act, the owner of copyright in a Part III
work is the ‘author’ of it,
owner of copyright in a sound recording
a cinematograph film
‘maker’ of it, the owner of copyright in a broadcast is the
specified broadcaster,
and the owner of
‘publisher’.
exceptions are made in the Act for ownership of literary, dramatic and artistic
works made by an employed journalist,
works made in pursuance of the terms of a contract of
employment,
and of photographs,
portraits and engravings,
and cinematograph
made for another person under an
agreement for valuable consideration.
5.109 The majority of the Committee does not propose any major change to the
current position on ownership under the envisaged approach.
That approach
provides that the owner of copyright in a Creation is the person who undertakes
creation of it, and that the owner
of copyright in a Production is the person by
whom the arrangements necessary for its production are undertaken. The envisaged
also makes express provision to maintain the current exceptions to
ownership, including the right to modify the effect of any of
the provisions by
way of an agreement to the contrary.
5.110 The majority of the Committee considers that the current position on
ownership is maintained under the envisaged approach in
relation to all Part III
and Part IV subject matter, with the possible exception of cinematograph films.
The person who creates a
Creation equates with the person who authors a work, in
those instances where it is possible to identify an author. The person who
undertakes the arrangements for the production of a Production equates with the
person who owns the first record embodying the sound
recording at the time it
with the broadcaster of a
broadcast, and with the publisher of a published edition.
5.111 The majority of the Committee considers that the envisaged approach may
produce an outcome different from the current position
on ownership in relation
to subject matter within the current definition of cinematograph film, where
that subject matter satisfies
the higher innovation threshold for protection as
a Creation. Currently, copyright in a cinematograph film is owned by the person
who undertakes the arrangements for its
production.
Usually that is a person
different from the person who creates the film. Of course, the position of first
ownership by the latter
person could, and usually would, be overridden by an
agreement to the contrary with the former person. Nevertheless, the majority
the Committee recognises that should the Government consider it desirable to
maintain the current position on first ownership
of copyright in a cinematograph
film, express provision would be made in the implementing legislation to the
effect that copyright
in a cinematograph film is owned by the person by whom the
arrangements necessary for its creation or production are undertaken.
5.112 The envisaged approach may also produce an outcome different from the
current position on ownership of rights in relation to
a performance. Under Part
XIA of the Act, a performer may bring an action for an unauthorised use of his
or her performance.
previously,
because the matter is
currently under consideration by the Government, the majority of the Committee
makes no recommendation on whether
a performance should be protected by
be accommodated
under the envisaged approach. Should it be considered
appropriate to protect a performance by copyright, ownership of whatever rights
are granted should be owned by the performer. This is so, whether or not the
performance is categorised as a Creation or a Production.
Since the performer
equates with the person who undertakes the performance, express provision would
be made to the effect that the
exclusive rights in subject matter that is a
performance are owned by the person who undertakes that performance.
Justification
for proposed approach
5.113 The majority of the Committee recommends the principles upon which the
envisaged approach is based for the following reasons:
it achieves simplification of form
the adoption of broadly and
inclusively defined categories;
removal of unnecessary duplication and complexity resulting from the structural
distinction between Part III ‘works’
and Part IV ‘subject
matter other than works’;
achieves a greater degree of technology neutrality
the introduction of broadly
and inclusively defined categories of subject matter and exclusive rights, which
appear flexible enough
to adapt to new technologies for the creation and
exploitation of copyright material;
removal of the current distinctions based upon the tangible and intangible
embodiments of copyright material;
removal of the current requirement of tangible embodiment (i.e. ‘material
form’) for protection;
introduction of a technology-neutral means of distinguishing between the two
categories of subject matter, through the use of
‘innovation
thresholds’;
moving the focus
from a human author to the person who undertakes the creation or production of
the copyright material;
it removes the
problem of having to narrowly categorise difficult subject matter such as
multimedia entities and unoriginal
it limits the unjustifiable
differential treatment of similar types of subject
it continues to recognise the
traditional distinction between authored works (which fall within the broadly
based category of Creations),
and other copyright material (which falls within
the broadly based category of
Productions);
it generally retains the
existing jurisprudence, while allowing for the development of further
jurisprudence in order to ascertain
the nature of the broadly and inclusively
defined categories of rights and subject
its implementation does not
necessarily force any changes upon the current structure or operation of
Simplification of the Act
5.114 The majority of the Committee is of the view that the implementation of
the envisaged approach can lead to a significant simplification
of the copyright
law. First, simplification would be achieved through the adoption of broadly and
inclusively defined categories.
As noted in paragraph 5.21 (when analysing
Approach 2—the ‘conflation approach’), the conflation of
subject matter into broadly defined categories may result in the
adding of an extra layer of complexity to the Act.
5.115 The majority of the Committee believes that this criticism does not
apply to a similar extent to the envisaged approach, as
under this approach
reliance is placed upon the broadly defined categories rather than their
component parts. Reference therefore
does not necessarily need to be made to a
particular component part of the broader category for the protection of
or for the classification of an activity. Further, the
majority of the Committee believes that the component parts of the broadly
defined categories will become less relevant as users and owners become more
familiar with the envisaged structure, and as advances
in technology continue to
make the current distinctions less relevant.
5.116 The second means by which the envisaged approach can lead to the
simplification of the Act is through an efficient implementation
distinction between the broadly based categories of subject matter in contrast
to the unwieldy distinction that currently
exists between Part III
‘works’ and Part IV ‘subject matter other than works’.
The majority of the Committee
believes that the broadly based categories of
subject matter should be dealt with simultaneously under headings such as
nature, duration,
ownership, infringement, defences, etc, thereby removing the
complexity and duplication that currently exist.
5.117 A third means by which the proposed structure simplifies the Act is
through the inclusion of performances within one of the
broadly based categories
of subject matter determined by the application of the innovation thresholds.
This will remove the extra
complexity that exists in the current Act, where the
rights of performers are specifically dealt with under a separate part (Part
Technological neutrality
5.118 The majority of the Committee believes that the most attractive aspect
of the envisaged approach is the high level of flexibility
and technological
neutrality achieved. As stated earlier, this is gained through the
implementation of a number of changes, the most
significant of these being the
introduction of broadly and inclusively defined categories of subject matter and
exclusive rights.
The majority of the Committee believes that the implementation
of the envisaged approach will result in greater certainty in the
application of
the copyright law to new technologies and reduce the need for ad hoc legislative
amendments in response to technological
Technology-neutral categories
5.119 The majority of the Committee believes that through the use of broadly
and inclusively defined categories, which are based upon
technology-neutral concepts such as ‘creation’,
‘production’, ‘reproduction’ and
‘dissemination’,
the envisaged approach will be more capable of
adapting to new technologies. As noted earlier in paragraph 5.61, this is one of
key factors of the approach, as it does not preclude protection to material
that does not fall within the current categories of subject
5.120 The majority of the Committee believes that the adoption of broadly
based categories has removed the need for reliance to be
placed on the numerous
technology-specific distinctions that exist in the present Act. Such
distinctions have resulted in reliance
being placed on relatively narrow
definitions used for both protected subject matter and exclusive rights, and
unnecessary references
being made to tangible and intangible embodiments of
distinctions
will become increasingly blurred and less relevant as a result of
the further development of digital technology. On this point the
majority of the
Committee notes that its view is supported by the comment made in the US
Report on Intellectual Property and the National Information Infrastructure
(when dealing with the issue of the categorisation of multimedia):
The somewhat strained analysis needed to find a category for multimedia works
and the increasing ‘cross-breeding’ of types
of works demonstrate
that categorisation may no longer be useful or necessary. While the Working
Group does not recommend at this
time the consolidation or elimination of
categories (and the harmonisation of the different application of rights and
limitations
on those rights), it is likely that such consolidation or
elimination will be appropriate in the
5.121 The majority of the Committee notes that its envisaged approach accords
with the above reference to a likely future model, as
it involves both the
consolidation of categories and the harmonisation of rights where
practicable.
Removal of the requirement for material form
5.122 The majority of the Committee believes that the subsistence requirement
of ‘material form’ is a main cause of the
technology-specific
approach to categorisation of subject matter found in the present Act. As noted
earlier in paragraph 5.51, the
majority of the Committee considers that
developments in digital technology may challenge the traditional notion that all
subject matter other than broadcasts should be in a tangible
embodiment. It recognises the potential for material in the literary
artistic domain to come into existence and yet not have a tangible embodiment
that fully corresponds with the current requirements
of the legislation.
Further, the majority of the Committee notes that reference to a particular
material form is becoming increasingly
irrelevant as certain types of copyright
material are generated and disseminated in intangible form via digital
5.123 Under the envisaged approach, the subsistence requirement of
‘material form’ is removed. Thus, non-material subject
matters (such
as broadcasts, performances and extempore music) are capable of protection to
the same extent as material subject matters
(such as drawings on paper,
recordings of sounds on CD, and audiovisual images stored in a computer chip).
Further, the particular
material form a subject matter may take is not
determinative of the category of protection, if any, into which it falls.
Technology-neutral ‘innovation thresholds’
5.124 As described above (see paragraphs 5.37–5.41), the envisaged
approach applies innovation thresholds to determine the categorisation
material as either a Creation or a Production, or as material not receiving
approach is the categorisation
of broadcasts and published editions in printed form, which for policy reasons
are specifically categorised
as Productions. The majority of the Committee
believes that the level of innovation specified by these thresholds can be
to material generated through the use of
thus ensuring that the categorisation of subject matter remains
technology-neutral.
‘Authorship’ of the copyright material
5.125 The majority of the Committee believes that the linking of the concept
of human ‘authorship’ to originality, and
therefore the
classification of copyright material, places an unnecessary technological
restriction on the operation of the Act.
As noted earlier, the majority of the
Committee recognises that there is an ongoing need for copyright legislation to
connect a work
with a human. However, it is concerned that the current
requirement of ‘authorship’ may preclude the grant of protection
material that is deserving of protection, simply because the extent to which a
computer was utilised in its creation exceeds a
particular (currently uncertain)
level. The majority of the Committee notes that this is of particular concern
given that developments
in digital technology will continue to change the role
that computers play in the creation of certain types of copyright material,
that they will be involved in the creation of copyright materials to an
ever-increasing extent.
5.126 The majority of the Committee believes that the envisaged approach
resolves this potential problem through conceptualising the
connection between
protected material and a human not as one of ‘authoring’ the
material, but instead as one of ‘undertaking
the creation or production
of’ the copyright material. In so doing (as noted earlier in paragraph
5.45), the majority of the
Committee intends that the focus be moved from the
issue of whether the computer utilisation can be analogised with traditional
utilisation, to the more germane issue of which human should be the one
identified as sufficiently associated with the creation or
production of the
material for the purposes of the innovation threshold.
5.127 The majority of the Committee anticipates some questioning of this
approach as it may be argued that copyright material that
relies heavily upon
the use of a computer for its creation should not be protected at the higher
level of a Creation (if it satisfies
the higher innovation threshold). It might
be further argued that such copyright material should not attract the moral
rights that
are granted to material that falls within this category. The
majority of the Committee believes that such matter should not be determinative
of the classification of such material. The majority of the Committee notes that
the application of the innovation thresholds to
the efforts of the human who
undertakes the creation or production of the material should be the only
determinative factor.
Traditional distinction between ‘works’ and ‘subject
matter other than works’
5.128 The majority of the Committee believes that the fundamental distinction
that exists between authored works and other copyright
material as provided in
the international treaties, is reflected in the distinction between a Creation
and a Production. The majority
of the Committee believes that this distinction
may in fact be more fully implemented under the envisaged approach than is
reflected in the present Act, particularly with regard to the possible
categorisation of a cinematograph film as a Creation (see
paragraph 5.57), and
the possible categorisation of performances as a Production (see paragraphs
5.63–5.64).
Problematic subject matter
5.129 The majority of the Committee believes that the envisaged approach
provides an appropriate solution to the categorisation and
protection of subject
matter that has proven difficult under the current Act. Under the envisaged
approach such material is categorised
through the application of the innovation
thresholds. The example of a multimedia entity is illustrative of this general
previously noted, a multimedia entity currently may not receive any
the multimedia
entity may be in relation to its component parts, such as the individual items
of content and the underlying computer
program. Under the approach envisaged by
the majority of the Committee, a multimedia entity could receive protection in
its own right,
as either a Creation or a Production. As with more traditional
audiovisual material, the key issue would be whether the protection
higher or lower level.
5.130 The analysis that applies to a multimedia entity also applies to any
other material in the literary or artistic domain not currently
within one of
the categories of protected subject matter, including, for example, so-called
‘unoriginal databases’. Further,
the analysis applies to material
whose existence is not yet foreseen or indeed foreseeable.
5.131 A potential problem with the envisaged approach is that categorisation
in most instances is performed on a case-by-case basis
through the application
of the innovation thresholds. The majority of the Committee acknowledges that
the application of the innovation
thresholds initially may not be clear. It
therefore anticipates potential disputes arising between the owners and users of
material as to what innovation threshold the copyright material
satisfies, and the extent to which the rights apply.
5.132 The majority of the Committee believes that this problem will be
resolved by various test cases, which will provide guidance
as to the category
in which a certain type of copyright material falls. The majority of the
Committee notes that test cases regarding
the categorisation of subject matter
occur regularly under the current Copyright Act. For example, litigation often
arises as to
whether a compilation incorporates the necessary level of skill,
labour and judgment necessary for protection as a literary
The majority of the Committee is
therefore of the view that the implementation of the proposed approach will not
necessarily lead
to an overall increase in litigation.
Retention of current jurisprudence
5.133 The majority of the Committee believes that an advantage of the
envisaged approach is that it generally retains the existing
jurisprudence, as
the majority of the principles included within the current Act can be
incorporated within the new structure. The
majority of the Committee believes
that this will provide a basis upon which the envisaged approach can be
interpreted, and will
minimise the initial level of uncertainty that may be
generated through its introduction.
5.134 The envisaged approach also allows for the development of further
jurisprudence in order to ascertain the nature of the broadly
and inclusively
defined categories of subject matter and rights. The majority of the Committee
acknowledges that this may lead to
an initial period of litigation as owners and
users of copyright material test the new structure.
Differential treatment of similar types of subject matter
5.135 The majority of the Committee believes that another advantage of the
envisaged approach is that it limits the degree of unjustifiable
differential
treatment of similar types of subject matter. As noted earlier, differences
exist in the protection granted to different
categories of subject matter within
the same part of the Act, even where the different categories of subject matter
satisfy the same
subsistence requirements necessary for protection.
5.136 The majority of the Committee notes that the envisaged approach limits
such differential treatment through the harmonisation
of rights within the
broadly based categories of subject matter where practicable. An example of this
is the proposal to harmonise
the rights within the broadly based category of a
Creation, through the granting of the right of adaptation to the owners of
works. The majority of the Committee believes that this will assist in
preventing artists being discriminated against in comparison
to other creators,
such as the authors of literary and dramatic works, and the composers of musical
Impact on collecting societies and other organisations
5.137 The Committee is required to have regard to the effect of any
recommended changes on the structure and operation of public and
private sector
organisations under paragraph 2(e) of its terms of reference (see Appendix A).
In this regard the Committee notes
the important comments made by some
collecting societies, particularly CAL (see paragraph 3.30), that although the
introduction of
broadly based categories would affect current licensing
arrangements, collecting societies are already undergoing a period of
significant
5.138 The majority of the Committee agrees with these comments, and believes
that any changes made as a result of the implementation
of the envisaged
approach will be part of the wider changes currently being (or to be) undertaken
by most organisations as a result
of the rapid development of digital
technology. The majority of the Committee notes, however, that the envisaged
approach will not
in itself force any changes upon the current structure and
operation of copyright organisations dealing with copyright material,
the approach continues to recognise the current exclusive rights and categories
of subject matter within a more technology-neutral
and flexible structure.
6 Dissenting view
Categorisation
6.01 One member does not share the view that the present categories of works
and other subject matter in the Act are so constrained
by attachment to current
or past technology that they all have to be cast aside or radically revised.
6.02 Generally, the majority says that the current legislation uses ‘a
relatively large number of categories of copyright subject
rights’ and that ‘the categories are defined in a relatively narrow
and often technological specific way’.
It is said that this has led to
‘unnecessary legislative complexity’ and ‘unjustifiable
differential treatment
of similar subject matter and an undesirable degree of
technological specificity of protected subject matter and exclusive
This member does not
share that perspective as a general proposition.
Legislative complexity
6.03 This member agrees that the division of the protection of subject matter
between Part III and Part IV of the Act is unnecessary.
This member also agrees
that the complexity and multitude of exceptions to exclusive rights are
unjustified, and refers to the Committee’s
previous report on
Exceptions to the Exclusive Rights of Copyright Owners
Different protection
6.04 The majority cites as an example of different protection the denial to
owners of copyright in artistic works of an adaptation
right such as that
accorded to owners of literary, dramatic and musical
This member agrees that the right
of adaptation in both the Act and the Berne Convention is problematic. As has
been implicitly noted
earlier in this
the notion of
‘adaptation’ is used inconsistently within the Berne Convention. The
term is defined more narrowly, exhaustively
and quite specifically in the Act.
Some acts constituting adaptation as intended by some references in Berne would
be covered by
the reproduction right under the Act, as extended by
s. 21(3). In the circumstances, including the very specific definition of
‘adaptation’
in the Act, this member agrees that the adaptation
right should, in principle, be absorbed into a more general reproduction right.
However, the member is not convinced that the Act’s denial to owners of
adaptations as so defined
represents an unfair treatment of such owners.
Technological specificity
6.05 The majority refers to new technological means of creating copyright
subject matter of a type ‘that does not easily or
at all come within the
existing categories’. It is of the view that ‘without a significant
change in approach to categorisation
of subject matter and rights, there will be
increasing uncertainty in the application of the Act in the digital
environment’.
6.06 This member believes that this pays insufficient regard to the
open-ended nature of the existing categories, and that their incapacity
to new technological developments has not been established. Apart from including
computer programs and compilations (which
are discussed below), the definition
of ‘literary works’ is open-ended. ‘Musical works’ are
not defined at
all. ‘Dramatic works’ (also further discussed below)
are defined inclusively, i.e. not exhaustively. Thus ‘artistic
works’ are the only category of works defined exhaustively.
6.07 The majority appears to be concerned that the existing categories of
works might be inappropriate or inadequate to apply to works
stored in digital
media or other new forms of media.
However, the media in which a work is stored should not be confused with the
essential nature of what is stored. If what is stored
is, when printed out or
otherwise displayed for human perception, a passage of words or notes or images
that are sufficiently original
to attract copyright protection, then they are
still words, notes or images. This member accepts completely that the definition
‘material form’, which is another requirement for works to
attract copyright protection, must be such as to accommodate
the use of new
technology. The present definition, in s. 10(1) of the Act, does seem to
this member to satisfy that need.
Change the nomenclature rather than jettison the categories
6.08 This member believes that there is a positive case for retaining the
existing categories of works and other subject matter, with
adjustments. Until
such time as verbal communication between humans is superseded (perhaps by
thought transfer?), there will be creations
using words, i.e. literary works,
regardless of the means of storage or retrieval for reading or hearing. Until
such time as humans
cease totally to perform music using instruments, musical
notation will continue to be produced, whatever be the means of storage
retrieval for reading. Until such time as all humans eschew all interest in
looking at art, designing buildings or taking photographs,
these works will
continue to be produced. In the case of each of those categories, which are
readily recognisable by their distinctive
characteristics—quite apart from
the medium of their storage, they will require copyright protection.
6.09 In the case of ‘cinematograph films’, it is the nomenclature
that has become out of date, rather than the terms of
its definition, which on
close examination is not
technology-specific
and has remained
remarkably resilient. As will be argued more fully below, the redesignation of
films as ‘audiovisual works’
will, in this member’s view, go
most, if not all, of the way to covering multimedia works—whatever
productions that loosely
used term may encompass. There is no need to throw out
the baby with the bathwater.
6.10 This member accepts that the nomenclature ‘literary’ works
does have connotations that would make the uninitiated
think that it applied
only to works of literature and might cause them surprise that it included not
only computer programs but also
such items as instructions for operating
electrical appliances and racing guides. Accordingly, this member proposes for
consideration
the substitution of ‘textual works’ or, if the correct
adjective is thought arcane, ‘text works’ to convey
more fully the
essence of this category. ‘Verbal works’, while also a possibility,
might raise the unintended impression
that the category defined includes oral
works, because of the common use of ‘verbal’ to convey the meaning
‘New’ works—multimedia
6.11 The majority gives multimedia works as an example of the inadequacy of
the present categorisation of subject matter under the
The difficulty of knowing what is
encompassed by ‘multimedia’ has already been referred to. So far as
multimedia include
moving pictures, it seems to this member reasonable that they
should come within the definition of ‘cinematograph film’
redesignated as ‘audiovisual work’ as has been proposed. This member
feels that the analysis of multimedia in the
Committee’s report on
Computer Software Protection
which leads to the same conclusion, is still valid.
New category of works—‘collective works’
6.12 However, this member acknowledges that the present categorisation of
works and other subject matter does not satisfactorily address
the protection of
collective productions, other than those coming within the definition of
‘cinematograph film’. These
can range from a book with pictures, a
diagram with text, a compact disc comprising a compilation of sound recordings,
disc with text that can be displayed, and other digital collections of
words, musical score, sounds and non-moving images. Article
1(5) of the Berne
Convention confirms that ‘collections of literary and artistic works ...
which, by reason of selection and
arrangement of their contents, constitute
intellectual creations shall be protected as such’. The TRIPS
extend this protection of collective
creations to ‘compilations of data or other materials’. This member
suggests that
the existing protection of compilations, by way of inclusion
within the definition of literary work, be replaced by a new category
‘collective works’ defined in the terms of the Berne, TRIPS and WCT
provisions referred to and covering collections
or compilations of works, data
or other material. This would not overlap any of the other categories of
that protection of collections or compilations is
‘without prejudice to the copyright in each of the works forming part of
such collections’
compilation’.
6.13 Self-evidently, the proposed new category of collective works would not
address the protection of databases lacking in originality,
computer-generated works of that nature. This member is of the view that, if any
intellectual property protection is to
be afforded to such databases, it should
lie in the direction of a
sui generis
regime such as that in the EC
directive on databases (although not necessarily that particular form of
regime), rather than copyright
protection.
Redesignation of dramatic works as ‘choreographic
6.14 This member believes that there is further scope for rationalisation of
the present categories. The guiding principle in identifying
a category is
that the materials covered be distinguished by readily identifiable features.
Thus text works would consist of creations
using words. Musical works are and
would continue to be creations expressed by musical notation. Artistic works are
and would continue
to include imagery expressed in both two-dimensional form
(paintings, drawings, photographs, charts, maps, plans) and three-dimensional
form (sculptures, buildings, works of artistic craftsmanship). While
‘artistic’ is less than ideal as a description,
having aesthetic
connotations corresponding to ‘literary’, more aesthetically neutral
words, such as ‘graphic’
or ‘pictorial’, would be less
inclusive as far as three-dimensional works are concerned.
6.15 This member believes that the category of dramatic works could be made
more appropriately distinctive and meaningful if it was
confined to
choreographic works, with their distinct notation and mode of performance, and
renamed as such. Film scripts, which are
presently dramatic works, could be
brought under the category of text works, just as plays already are.
Summary of the dissenting member’s proposal
6.16 This member proposes that the following categorisation of works should
text works (present literary works,
except for compilations, with the addition of film
musical works (same as
choreographic works (present
dramatic works, except for film
artistic works (same as
collective works (new—would
include compilations presently within literary works, but would exclude
audiovisual works)
sound recordings
(same as now)
audiovisual works
(present cinematograph
broadcasts (same as
published editions (same as
performances (same as
Extempore works
6.17 The majority evidently proposes that protection be extended to works in
a non-material form such as extempore speech and music,
citing performances and
broadcasts as subject matter that are already protected in a non-material form.
Admittedly such protection
is afforded in some other countries; indeed the
publication
WIPO General
Information
in explaining
‘literary works’, says that ‘in most countries ... “oral
works”, that is, works not reduced
to writing, are also protected by
While, therefore,
protection to oral literary works is not without precedent in other countries,
extension of protection in Australia
to oral and extempore speech and music
would be a major immediate expansion of copyright protection that this member is
not prepared
to support without more consideration than has been possible for
the purposes of this report.
‘Originality’ or ‘innovation’?
6.18 This member questions whether the two-tiered concept of
‘innovation threshold’ that the majority proposes in place
concept of originality will be an improvement on the uncertainty perceived to
attend the latter concept. It appears that what
are now Part III works and at
least some Part IV subject matter will be divided between those that are
‘creations’ by
reason of ‘significant intellectual
effort’ of the creator and those that are ‘productions’
resulting from
‘the application of time, effort and resources’ of
the producer. The majority notes that timetables, directories and
compilations that are now protected as literary works will be protected as
‘productions’, not ‘creations’.
6.19 To this member’s understanding, the majority’s proposal
would introduce three categories of work in place of the
current categories of
original works and those lacking in originality. Under the majority proposal, a
text work could be a ‘creation’,
a ‘production’ or an
unprotected work. While accepting that there is inherent uncertainty in the bare
requirement in
the present Act that works be ‘original’ and that the
requirement of ‘significant intellectual effort’ is
more precise,
this member feels that the majority’s two-tiered approach will work
against simplification, which is the mandate
of the Committee. This member is
concerned that there should be serious reflection on the implications of
depriving works involving
less originality than ‘significant intellectual
effort’ of their existing level of protection, as a result of their being
classified as ‘productions’—for instance, a reduction in the
duration of protection.
6.20 The majority has also been motivated by concern that
‘originality’ is ill-suited to determine appropriate protection
works produced with extensive use of computers. In its report
Software Protection
, the Committee recommended the establishment of a new
category of ‘computer-generated material’, to be protected as
matter other than works in Part IV of the Act. This member now thinks
that the use of computers is so ubiquitous that the impact
of their use is a
‘horizontal’ issue affecting all classes of existing works and other
subject matter. This member believes
that the existing requirement that a work
be authored by a natural person is sufficiently adaptable to determine the
protection of
works ‘made’ by computer.
6.21 Assuming that computers are still incapable of deciding of their own
volition to create works, it must still be the case that
any work that is the
output of a computer must have originated in a human decision that the computer
be applied to whatever data
was provided to it to produce the work. If the work
is original, i.e. not a copy, then the person or persons who caused the computer
to produce the work should be credited with authorship. If the work is only just
original by reason of being derived from but not
a copy of another work, or by
reason of being not much above commonplace, then it will receive correspondingly
protection against copying—as is the case with works
created without using computers. As to the possibility that the output
what the human operator expected, this is not unique to computer-aided works:
many an artist or photographer would have the
same experience.
6.22 The member believes that the uncertainty or generality of the existing
requirement of ‘originality’ is not so vague
as to warrant
replacement. On the contrary, its long history and familiarity make it
preferable, in this member’s view, to
the new two-tiered approach of the
majority—at least as far as simplicity is concerned.
Performances
6.23 The majority proposes that ‘a performance of subject matter within
the literary or artistic domain will qualify for protection
as a Creation if it
satisfies the higher innovation threshold, or as a Production if it satisfies
only the lower innovation
threshold’.
This member sees
problems in dividing performances into two classes, and feels that designating
lower level performances as ‘productions’
looks like shoehorning
such performances into a concept into which they ill fit for the sake of
preserving the integrity of the categorisation
proposed by the majority. Also,
denial of moral rights to such performances would be inconsistent with the WPPT,
if Australia is
to join it.
6.24 This member questions generally the wisdom of merging the protection of
performances with protection of ‘creations’
‘productions’, as proposed by the majority, and whether it is in the
interests of simplification.
believes it inappropriate that any adaptation or inexact copying right, such as
is proposed for ‘creations’,
should attach to performances that
qualify as such. This would seem to result in performers being able to exercise
the right to prevent
performances of the same works by other,
‘look-alike’ or ‘sound-alike’ performers, which is a
development
that this member is not prepared to support. The member also notes
that categorising some performances as ‘creations’
will considerably
extend their term of protection from 50 years to life of the performer plus 50
comprising copyright
6.25 This member broadly agrees with the simplification proposed by the
majority, and notes the following comments or qualifications.
Right of reproduction
6.26 This member agrees that the right in sound recordings, broadcasts and
published editions should be confined to exact copying
(of all or a substantial
amount). The wider right presently applicable to works should remain. As already
this member believes that
performances should have only an exact reproduction right.
6.27 With regard to adaptive reproduction, this member does not favour
extending the existing right in artistic works, noting the
extended definition
of reproduction of those works in s. 21(3). The member has already drawn
attention to the lack of correspondence
between ‘adaptation’ as
exhaustively and restrictively defined in s. 10(1) of the Act and the
concept as used inconsistently
in various provisions of the Berne
Convention.
As noted in the majority
report, some acts of adaptation as referred to in Berne would be covered by the
reproduction right in works
in Part III of the Act, particularly as extended by
6.28 This member has some difficulty in reaching a conclusion about the
adaptation right that the Berne Convention requires to be
accorded to the owner
of copyright in a film. It may be satisfied by allowing the reproduction right
to cover a copy of a substantial
part of a film (a new ‘cut’ of a
film). On the other hand, this member doubts that it requires the owner of
to be given the right to authorise the ‘remake’ of his or
her film, i.e. a new filming of the same storyline, with or
without all or some
of the same actors as were in the original.
Right of dissemination to the public
6.29 This member agrees with the majority’s conclusions regarding the
performance right, including its non-application to artistic
works, broadcasts
and published editions. As regards publication, distribution and making
available online, this member believes
that their relationship with each other
needs to be kept in mind.
6.30 The essence of publication as now provided for in the Act is the act of
making publicly available tangible copies for the first
time, that is, it is
exhausted once that act has occurred. The right does not attach to the copies.
However, the distribution right
as required by the WCT and WPPT does attach to
each copy, although countries may provide for exhaustion of the right after the
authorised sale or other transfer. As it is an element of the distribution
right that the original or copy be made available to the
public, this member is
inclined to the view that the distribution right and publication right could be
merged. The notion of publication
as a point in time when a simultaneous release
of copies to meet the needs of the public occurred could be retained as it now
to sound recordings under the Act. This member would favour exhaustion
of the distribution right by first sale anywhere (‘international
exhaustion’).
6.31 The right of making available online, being part of the proposed broad
communication right, does not involve transfer of property
in the original or
any copy and, as such, is distinguishable from the distribution right.
6.32 This member agrees with the majority’s view of the application of
the rental right and of the non-application of the distribution
rights to published editions.
2 Outstanding Issues from Copyright Convergence Group report
Highways to
, and from CLRC report
Computer Software Protection
7 Outstanding CCG and
Computer Software
Introduction
7.01 The rapid pace of technological developments in the 1990s has, in many
cases, left the law behind. The Copyright Convergence
Group (CCG) was
established in January 1994 to report to the then Government about proposals for
reform of the
in the light of these technological
advancements. The CCG had a short time in which to consult with interest groups
and report. The
CCG’s report,
Highways to Change
, was published in
August 1994, just seven months after the terms of reference were settled.
7.02 Due to the time pressure that the CCG was under, it identified a number
of issues that were significant but unable to be dealt
with in the time
available, or beyond the scope of its terms of reference. When the CLRC was
given its reference to simplify the
, the Committee was
specifically asked to address issues left outstanding in
Highways to
The Committee also realised
that there were two issues from the CLRC’s 1995 report on
Software Protection
that required further consideration.
7.03 The Secretariat to the Committee wrote to representatives of copyright
owners and users in June 1998 seeking comments on these
issues. The Committee
received 33 submissions which have been helpful in guiding the thinking of the
Committee. Each issue is discussed
discretely below. The paragraph references
after the headings refer to the relevant paragraph in
Highways to Change
Similarly, the recommendation references in the final papers refer to the
relevant recommendations in
Computer Software Protection
7.04 In some instances, developments in case law and recent government
reforms (particularly the Digital Agenda reforms) have overtaken
the course of
the Committee’s work and provided solutions to the particular issues.
Where this has happened, the discussion
below acknowledges that fact.
1 – Multimedia (paragraphs 7.4 and 7.8)
7.05 In its report
Highways to Change
, the CCG recommended that
further consideration be given to the continuing adequacy and appropriateness of
‘cinematograph film’
as a category of copyright protection or
whether it should be replaced by a new broad category of ‘audiovisual
to expressly cover multimedia.
What is ‘multimedia’?
7.06 For the purpose of the Committee’s discussion of this issue the
Committee adopts the following definition. ‘Multimedia’
collection of copyright and/or non-copyright materials that are textual, aural
and/or visual in nature, and that are accessible
in a non-linear way by the use
of a computer program. The non-linear accessibility of the content of a
multimedia entity is referred
to as its interactivity. It is this feature that
distinguishes multimedia entities from other collections.
7.07 It is the protection of the multimedia entity as a collection of
materials rather than the individual materials themselves that
is of primary
concern to multimedia developers. It is this issue that is raised by the
CCG’s reference to the Committee.
Existing protection of multimedia under the Act
7.08 The Committee notes that a multimedia entity as a whole may be protected
under the Act if it can be categorised as one or more
of the following: a
computer program, a compilation or a cinematograph film.
Protection as a computer program
7.09 Section 10 of the Act defines ‘computer program’ to
an expression, in any language, code or notation, of a set of instructions
(whether with or without related information) intended,
either directly or after
either or both of the following:
(a) conversion to another language, code or notation;
(b) reproduction in a different material form
to cause a device having digital information processing capabilities to
perform a particular function;
If the words in parentheses, i.e. ‘with or without related
information’, are given wide application, it is arguable that
the scope of
the definition is broad enough to encompass all multimedia entities that consist
of a computer program and associated
materials stored as related digital
information. However, the Committee notes that the Explanatory Memorandum to the
, which introduced the definition of
‘computer program’, states that the phrase ‘with or without
related information’
may include material such as ‘information for
programmers or users of the program, or data to be used in connection with the
execution of the program’. If the ‘related information’ is
limited to such materials, then most multimedia entities
would not fall within
the definition.
7.10 In its 1994
Computer Software Protection
report the CLRC
recommended that the definition of ‘computer program’ be deleted and
the following definition be substituted:
A ‘computer program’ is a set of statements or instructions to be
used directly or indirectly in a computer in order to
bring about a certain
The Committee understands that the Government has decided to give effect to
this recommendation as part of the Digital Agenda reforms.
To the extent that
some multimedia entities may presently be protected as computer programs, that
protection will no longer be available
once the definition of computer program
is amended. Of course, the computer program embodied in the multimedia entity
will continue
to be protected separately.
Compilation
7.11 The concept of compilation under the Act protects the skill and labour
used in the selection or arrangement of material. Multimedia
entities by their
nature consist of a collection of materials. The concept is referred to in the
definition of ‘literary work’
in s. 10, which provides in part
that a ‘literary work’ includes:
a table, or compilation, expressed in words, figures or symbols (whether or
not in a visible form).
7.12 The inclusion of a compilation within the definition of a
‘literary work’ does not necessarily preclude the concept
extending to compilations that include or are made up solely of artistic
The definition of
‘literary work’ is inclusive but the concept of compilation appears
to be limited to an expression
in ‘words, figures or symbols’. If
the effect of these words is to preclude the protection of compilations that
films, sound recordings and broadcasts, then there is a real possibility
that most multimedia entities would not be protected as
a compilation. It could
also be argued that because multimedia entities are non-linear and all the
collected material is accessible
by the use of the associated search program,
there may be insufficient skill and labor involved in the arrangement (as
distinguished
from the selection of the materials) to give rise to a copyright
Protection as a cinematograph film
7.13 ‘Cinematograph film’ is defined in s. 10 of the Act to
the aggregate of the visual images embodied in an article or thing so as to
be capable by the use of that article or thing:
(a) of being shown as a moving picture; or
(b) of being embodied in another article or thing by the use of which it can
and includes the aggregate of the sounds embodied in a sound-track associated
with such visual images.
Several submissions to the Committee argued that there are many multimedia
entities that would not receive protection under this category
because they do
not utilise ‘moving pictures’, or these form only a minor component
of the entities. The most commonly
cited examples of such entities are digital
encyclopedias and other reference materials.
The Committee’s proposal
7.14 It is clear from this brief examination of the protection afforded to
multimedia entities under the Act that protection under
the Act is at best
piecemeal and incomplete. Many of the submissions to the Committee that
supported the adoption of a new broad
category of ‘audiovisual
works’ argued that the definition of ‘audiovisual works’ in
provides a suitable model. Section 101 of the
US Act provides:
‘Audio-visual works’ are works that consist of a series of
related images which are intrinsically intended to be shown
by the use of
machines or devices such as projectors, viewers, or electronic equipment,
together with accompanying sounds, if any,
regardless of the nature of the
material objects, such as films or tapes, in which the works are embodied.
Under the US Act, ‘motion pictures’ operate as a subcategory of
‘audiovisual works’. ‘Motion pictures’
are defined under
that Act as:
Audio-visual works consisting of a series of related images which, when shown
in succession, impart an impression of motion, together
with accompanying
sounds, if any.
7.15 The Committee acknowledges that the introduction of a new category of
‘audiovisual works’, which includes cinematograph
films, based on
the approach adopted in the US Copyright Act, could substantially clarify the
protection of multimedia entities.
However, the majority of the Committee notes
that under the ‘technology-neutral’ approach it has recommended for
simplification
of the Act, a separate category for the protection of multimedia
entities is unnecessary.
Recommendation
7.16 The majority of the Committee recommends that multimedia entities be
protected in accordance with the principles set out in its
description in
Chapter 5 of the ‘technology-neutral’ approach to categorisation of
exclusive rights and subject matter.
Should the ‘technology-neutral’
approach not be accepted by the Government, the majority considers that the
of multimedia under a new broadly defined category of
‘audiovisual works’ would be a suitable alternative to its
recommended
7.17 One member of the Committee is of the view that multimedia entities
should be protected by redesignating the present ‘cinematograph
film’ definition as ‘audiovisual work’. That member’s
position on this issue is set out in Chapter 6.
2 – Definitions of ‘record’ and ‘cinematograph
film’ (paragraph 7.5)
7.18 The CCG queried whether the present definitions in s. 10 of the Act
of a ‘record’ and a ‘cinematograph film’
are sufficient
to provide for the protection of sounds and visual images created and stored
digitally, having regard to s. 24 of
the Act concerning ‘References
to sounds and visual images embodied in an article’. Section 24
Sounds or visual images shall be taken to have been embodied in an article or
thing if the article or thing has been so treated in
relation to those sounds or
visual images that those sounds or visual images are capable, with or without
the aid of some other device,
of being reproduced from the article or thing.
The CCG took the view that it was unclear whether s. 24 required sounds
and images to exist prior to their embodiment in the article
or thing from which
they are capable of being reproduced. As the CCG suggested in its report, the
uncertainty arises because digitised
sounds and visual images are often created
as a result of their embodiment in an article or thing (such as a RAM or hard
disc drive),
rather than first being created and then recorded.
7.19 Most of the submissions received by the Committee on this issue took the
view that the
Sega v Galaxy
decision has now resolved the question of the application of the Act to sounds
and visual images created and stored digitally. The
Committee agrees with this
view. It notes that the judge at first instance was concerned with giving the
concept of ‘embodiment’
as it is referred to in s. 10 in
respect of cinematograph films, and defined more generally in s. 24, a
liberal interpretation.
7.20 Burchett J stated that the word ‘embodied’, as is made clear
New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary
, generally refers to the
‘giving of a material or discernible form (to an abstract principle,
concept, etc)’.
He proceeded to
broadly interpret the term as it appears in ss. 10 and 24 by saying:
Against the background of previous legislation, of technological
developments, and of the Gregory report, it seems to me that the
definition of
‘cinematograph film’, expressed as it is in terms of the result
achieved rather than of the means employed,
points very strongly to an intention
to cover new technologies which do actually achieve the same result. This view
is, of course,
strengthened by the terms of s. 24. That section was plainly
inserted to ensure that the word ‘embodied’ did not receive
construction. It applies quite literally in the present case. With the aid of
‘some other device’, namely the
input device utilised by the player
of the video game, the apparatus is capable of reproducing quite precisely the
aggregate of the
visual images created by Sega Enterprises Limited so that they
are shown as a moving picture.
7.21 Wilcox J in the Full Federal Court stated that it seemed inherent in the
dictionary definition referred to by Burchett J that
‘the abstraction must
pre-exist the material
manifestation’.
He then referred
to counsel’s argument on this point as follows:
Counsel for the appellants argue that the images visible to players of the
games do not exist before the moment of visibility; accordingly,
it cannot be
said that they represent an embodiment of pre-existing images. Counsel make the
point that computer-generated images
are fundamentally different to film or
video images; in the latter case the images are fixed on celluloid or videotape
moment of projection or
His Honour dealt with this argument by taking the same liberal interpretation
of ‘embodiment’ as the trial judge and holding:
The visual images depicted in these video games did exist before the game was
played. They existed in the minds of their creators
and the drawings and models
they made. The images were embodied in the computer program built into the video
game machine so as to
be capable, by the use of that program, of being shown as
a moving picture. It does not matter that they were embodied in a different
form; that is, three-dimension vertices of the polygon model, rather than a
two-dimensional image ...
Recommendation
7.22 In light of the interpretation given to the concept of
‘embodiment’ in the
Sega v Galaxy
case, the Committee
recommends that no amendment be made to the definitions of ‘cinematograph
film’ or ‘record’
in s. 10 or the definition of
‘embodied’ in s. 24.
3 – ‘Reproduction’ (paragraph 7.6)
7.23 The CCG asked the CLRC to consider whether there was a need to provide a
definition of reproduction in the Act to ensure that
new uses of copyright
materials would be controllable by copyright owners (paragraph 7.6).
7.24 The CCG appears to have been concerned about the protection of works
stored electronically after their initial creation in some
other (usually
printed) format. The CGG referred to the CLRC’s consideration of this
issue in the
Computer Software Protection
draft report. The issue arises
because of the common law rule that, for the purposes of determining whether an
infringement of copyright
has taken place, there must be ‘objective
similarity’ between the original work and the reproduction. It is
whether, pursuant to this rule, the reproduction must be in the same
material form as the original work.
7.25 This issue will be addressed as part of the proposed Digital Agenda
reforms. The Committee understands that the Government proposes
to adopt the
recommendations made by the CLRC in relation to the definition of
‘reproduction’ in its final
Computer Software Protection
report. Pursuant to rec. 2.04(e)(i), a majority of the CLRC recommended that
a clarifying definition of reproduction be added to the
Act in respect of works
stored electronically. The recommendation states:
The Act should deem that the mere conversion of a work or an adaptation of a
work from its hard copy human-readable form to an electronic
form of storage,
such as digital, which is machine-readable and which, when printed out is
unintelligible by reason of consisting
of machine-readable symbols to be a
reproduction of the work or the adaptation. Similarly the instance of converting
a work or an
adaptation from an electronic form to a hard copy, such as making a
print-out of a work stored electronically should be encompassed
in the deeming
definition. (paragraph 6.55)
4 – Temporary copies (paragraph 7.6)
7.26 The CCG queried whether the scope of the reproduction right needs to be
extended to material stored temporarily in an electronic
form. The CCG was
concerned that if this form of copying was not controllable by copyright owners,
they could suffer adverse consequences.
7.27 This issue has now been resolved by the Digital Agenda reforms. The
Government has decided to expressly exclude from the scope
of the reproduction
right temporary and incidental reproductions made in the course of the technical
processes of transmission and
browsing on the Internet. In its Digital Agenda
discussion paper the Government justified these exclusions on the basis that
would counter-balance its proposal to grant new transmission and making
available rights to copyright owners. The discussion paper
also noted that,
while there was much debate leading up to the adoption of the WIPO Copyright
Treaty over whether the reproduction
right in the Berne Convention already
covers or should be extended to cover temporary copies made in the course of
electronic transmissions,
these issues were not resolved.
7.28 In announcing the Digital Agenda decision, the Attorney-General also
said the temporary copies exception would be subject to
a provision that would
safeguard the rights of owners of copyright. Apparently alluding to the
‘three-step test’ in art.
9(2) of the Berne Convention, which
exceptions to the reproduction right must satisfy, the Attorney-General said
that the safeguard
provision would ensure that the temporary copies exception
was consistent with Australia’s international copyright obligations.
5 – Definition of ‘publication’ (paragraph 7.7)
7.29 The CCG recommended consideration of whether the definition of
‘publication’ in s. 29(1)(c) of the Act should be
amended so as
to encompass the delivery of sound recordings by digital or electronic means,
and therefore provide copyright protection
for sound recordings first
distributed to the public in an intangible form (paragraph 7.7). While the
CCG’s concerns were limited
to ‘publication’ as it applies to
the digital delivery of sound recordings, the Committee received submissions
argued that the concept, as it is defined under the Act, should be
extended to cover the digital delivery of all copyright materials.
Section 29(1) definition of ‘publication’
7.30 Section 29(1) defines ‘publication’ in respect of works,
films and sound recordings as follows:
A literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, or an edition of such a work,
shall be deemed to have been published if, but only
if, reproductions of the
work or edition have been supplied (whether by sale or otherwise) to the public.
(s. 29(1)(a))
A cinematograph film shall be deemed to have been published if, but only if,
copies of the film have been sold, let on hire, or offered
or exposed for sale
or hire, to the public. (s. 29(1)(b))
A sound recording shall be deemed to have been published if, but only if,
records embodying the recording or a part of the recording
have been supplied
(whether by sale or otherwise) to the public. (s. 29(1)(c))
7.31 The above definitions serve to give meaning to the conditions stipulated
by the Act for the subsistence of copyright in published
material. Section
89(3), for example, provides that copyright in a published sound recording
subsists if the first publication of
the recording took place in Australia.
Sections 32(2) and 90(3) similarly provide that copyright subsists in a
published work and
film respectively if the first publication of the work or
film took place in Australia. The other significance of s. 29(1) is that
respect of several kinds of works and subject matter.
In respect of published
sound recordings and films, for example, the Act provides that copyright
subsists for 50 years after the
end of the year of first publication
(ss. 93 and 94(2) respectively).
7.32 The application of s. 29(1) to the right of publication comprised
in copyright in works is considered elsewhere in the
The exclusive right of
publication does not appear to have been the object of the CCG’s
Submissions to the Committee
7.33 The Queensland Government argued in a 1995 submission on the CCG issues
Irrespective of a change of copyright rights, new communications technologies
challenge traditional concepts of publication and publishing.
bulletin boards and other new methods of ‘publishing’ are passive
and make available copyright material rather
than supply
7.34 APRA stated that its position on the definition of
‘publication’ was ‘in sharp contradistinction’ to
view that the
Sega v Galaxy
decision has extended the application of the
definitions of ‘cinematograph film’, ‘record’,
‘reproduction’
and ‘copy’ into the digital
environment.
In APRA’s view,
Sega v Galaxy
is limited by its facts to the provision of copies that are
in a tangible form. APRA accordingly argued that the amendment of
29(1)(c) was essential for the following reasons:
The distribution of copyright matter in intangible forms already occurs in
commercial contexts (for instance, the Cerberus On Line
Jukebox). Such methods
of distribution will only increase because of the efficiency and low cost,
particularly in relation to the
distribution of popular sound recordings
(containing musical works) and audiovisual material. It is predicted that such
systems will become the principal means of distribution in the future.
Any failure to include intangible forms within the scope of
s. 29(1)(c)
will thus unfairly limit the author’s right of
remuneration.
7.35 The LCA submitted that the extension of the definition of
‘publication’ to ‘include situations where the material
made available on a server for downloading by the public ... is necessary in
view of existing commercial practices and the desirability
of technology
neutrality’.
It also submitted
that ‘the expanded definition of “publication” should apply to
all copyright subject matters,
not just sound recordings, as distribution via
server is increasingly
The Committee’s position
7.36 The CCG’s concerns about this issue together with the submissions
received by the Committee indicate a generally held view
that the definition of
publication in s. 29(1) does not apply to the electronic distribution of
acknowledges that there is some uncertainty
part to the use of the word ‘supply’ in the provision.
7.37 The Committee is of the view that, given the increasing use of digital
technology for the delivery of copyright materials to
consumers, the definition
of ‘publication’ in s. 29(1) should be amended so that it
clearly applies to the electronic
distribution of copyright materials. As the
Committee has noted in paragraphs 4.43–4.51, it is of the view that
publication
of copyright material in intangible form may occur through the
exercise of the right of communication to the public as provided in
the WCT and
the WPPT. The Government has decided to implement these new rights as part of
its Digital Agenda reforms.
7.38 The Committee notes, however, that extending s. 29(1)(a) and (b) to
apply in the digital environment can be done only if such
an extension is
consistent with the requirements of the Berne Convention. Article 3(3) of
the Berne Convention contains the following
definition of ‘published
The expression ‘published works’ means works published with the
consent of their authors, whatever may be the means of
manufacture of the
copies, provided that the availability of such copies has been such as to
satisfy the reasonable requirements
of the public having regard to the nature of
7.39 The second half of the article provides for certain exclusions from the
coverage of the definition:
The performance of a dramatic, dramatico-musical, cinematographic or musical
work, the public recitation of a literary work, the communication
by wire or the
broadcasting of literary or artistic works, the exhibition of a work of art and
the construction of a work of architecture
shall not constitute publication.
7.40 The scope of art. 3(3) was considered in the basic proposal for the
WCT and WPPT.
The conclusion of the
Chairman of the Committee of Experts was that art. 3(3) may be applied to
new forms of electronic publication.
It was noted that the key requirement of
the provision is the availability of copies sufficient to satisfy the reasonable
requirements
of the public and that electronic publication over a computer
network easily satisfied this requirement. It was also noted that,
materials are published electronically, copies of the materials are produced by
the recipient of the transmission. The ‘means
of manufacture’ in
such cases is presumably the copying into computer memory or the printing out of
a hard copy.
7.41 At the October 1996 meeting of the Committee of Experts, the Chairman
commented on the scope of the second part of art. 3(3)
and stated that it
was directed at ‘copyless communication’. In light of the foregoing
comments it appears to the Committee
that the wording of art. 3(3) does not
preclude the extension of the concept of publication into the digital
environment. The Committee
notes, furthermore, its view as expressed in
paragraph 5.102 that the concept of publication encapsulated by art. 3(3)
applies only
to determine the country of origin of a work.
7.42 A majority of the Committee recommends that s. 29(1) be amended to
clearly apply to the publication of copyright materials in
the digital
environment. One member is concerned that the full implications of the majority
recommendation may need further consideration.
Having a work on a web site makes
that work accessible to those connected to the Internet in Australia—and
elsewhere—regardless
of where the web site or the person placing it
thereon is physically located. If that act constitutes publication, it
essentially
means worldwide publication. This member’s concern is that the
implications—including economic considerations—of
Australian copyright protection in this manner need more consideration than has
been possible in this report.
Recommendation
7.43 The majority of the Committee recommends that s. 29(1) be amended
to clearly apply to the publication of copyright materials
in the digital
environment. The dissenting member is concerned that the full implications of
the majority recommendation may need
further consideration.
6 – Jurisdiction of Copyright Tribunal (paragraph 7.9)
7.44 The CCG considered that there was value in considering whether the
Act, should be
extended so as to include all forms of collective licensing and, if so, whether
this can be done consistently with
Australia’s obligations under the Berne
Convention. The CCG noted that while there is a case for such an extension, this
not be done without a detailed review of its operations.
7.45 Chapter 32 of the Simpson
Review of Australian Collecting
(1995) considers the ‘Jurisdiction and Role of the Copyright
Tribunal’. It recommended that the Copyright Tribunal:
should have jurisdiction over all collectively administered licensing
schemes. That its jurisdiction should be limited by the nature
of the copyright
material licensed is specious. [The Copyright Tribunal] should be the
appropriate forum for the variation, approval
and interpretation of all
licensing schemes, proposed/negotiated by collecting
7.46 Alternatively, Simpson suggested that if the Government chose not to
extend the jurisdiction as recommended, the definition of
s. 136(1) should be amended to cover all licences, in a way similar to
s. 116(3) of the UK
Government has not yet responded to the recommendations in this report.
7.47 In May 1998 the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs released its
Don’t Stop the Music!
into copyright, music and small business. It noted the Simpson recommendations
7.48 There was very wide support for the proposal to extend the jurisdiction
in the submissions received on this issue. ACLIS commented
that ‘it is
important to have a reasonably accessible forum for the independent resolution
of disputes about issues relating
to collective licensing, voluntary and
statutory’.
Many other submissions
supported this sentiment.
noted that there is
potential for collecting societies to abuse their monopolistic status and argued
that the Copyright Tribunal
should have the widest possible jurisdiction,
including the power to deal with anti-competitive conduct. FARB submitted that
obligations
under the Berne Convention must be balanced with the power of
authors acting collectively and that an extension of jurisdiction would
‘diminution in the nature of the protection granted, but regulation of how
the protected activities may be exercised’.
7.50 A number of submissions raised the need for a comprehensive review of
the Copyright Tribunal’s jurisdiction, rather than
another ad hoc
extension. Indeed, some submissions argued that it would be unhelpful to extend
the jurisdiction in this instance
without fully considering all
ramifications.
Recommendation
7.51 There is clear support for the proposal to extend the jurisdiction of
the Copyright Tribunal, from submissions and from both
reports mentioned, and
the Committee is minded to recommend such an extension. However, the Committee
would support a more general
review of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and, if
such a review were to occur, recommends that this extension be considered more
fully in that context.
7 – Section 199(1), (2) and (3) (paragraph 7.11) and
sections 46 and 106
Scope of the exceptions to public performance right in s. 199(1), (2)
7.52 The CCG proposed that consideration be given to the circumstances in
which the broadcast of literary and dramatic works, sound
recordings and films
that are performed or exhibited to the public by means of a receiving device
constitute a public performance
for the purposes of the exemption under
s. 199(1), (2) and (3) of the Act. The CCG’s concern was the effect
of the proposed
broadening of the definition of ‘broadcast’ in the
Act combined with the rise of electronic means to transmit copyright
It suggested that consideration be given to confining the operation of
s. 199(1), (2) and (3) to their intended purpose
(paragraph 7.11).
7.53 Under the Act, one of the rights contained in a literary, dramatic or
musical work, a sound recording, and a cinematograph film
is the right to
perform that work or cause that sound recording or film to be heard or seen in
7.54 Section 199(1), (2) and (3) of the Act provide:
(1) Where the inclusion in a television broadcast or sound broadcast of a
reading or recitation of an extract from a published literary
or dramatic work,
or from an adaptation of such a work, does not constitute an infringement of the
who, by the reception of the broadcast, causes
the work or adaptation to be performed in public does not, by doing so, infringe
(2) A person who, by the reception of a television broadcast or sound
broadcast, causes a sound recording to be heard in public does
not, by doing so,
infringe the copyright, if any, in that recording under Part IV.
(3) A person who, by the reception of an authorized television broadcast,
causes a cinematograph film to be seen or heard in public
shall be treated, in
any proceedings for infringement of the copyright, if any, in the film under
Part IV, as if the person had been
the holder of a licence granted by the owner
of that copyright to cause the film to be seen or heard in public by the
reception of
the broadcast.
7.55 Section 199(1), (2) and (3) of the Act thus qualify the public
performance right. In particular these subsections affect the
right to perform a
work in public (s. 31(1)(a)(iii)), the right to cause a sound recording to
be heard in public (s. 85(b)) and the
right to cause a cinematograph film
to be seen or heard in public (s. 86(b)).
7.56 The issue raised by the CCG is whether the exceptions to the performance
right provided by s. 199(1), (2) and (3) remain appropriate
definition of ‘broadcast’ were extended to include wireless and
cable transmissions. The CCG recommended that
this could be achieved by defining
‘broadcast’ to incorporate any transmission that is made pursuant to
a licence under
the Broadcasting Services
‘Broadcast’ could
therefore be defined as ‘the transmission of a television or radio
programme by any means or
combination of means whatsoever to persons having the
equipment appropriate for receiving such
transmissions’.
The definition
would exclude services such as on-demand services (regardless of the means of
transmission) and computer networking
The Committee notes that the
Government has decided to implement this recommendation as part of the Digital
Agenda reforms.
7.57 Historically, the definition of ‘broadcast’ under the Act
has encompassed ‘free-to-air’ transmissions
only. Revision of the
definition would mean that it would include new services such as cable,
satellite and narrowcast broadcasts.
These services could be either free-to-air
or subscription transmissions to the public. In its submission the Law Council
of Australia
(LCA) noted that s. 199 (1), (2), and (3) ‘appear to be
based on the presumption that the only form of broadcasting is free-to-air
broadcasting and so need to be
7.58 The CCG was of the view that s. 199(1), (2) and (3) are not
justified ‘where payment is received in respect of the viewing
broadcast’. It appears that the CCG considered the public performance
right in material used in those new services would
be more valuable than that of
material used in ‘free-to-air’ transmissions. However, the Committee
notes that commercial
free-to-air broadcasters obtain their revenue from
advertising, while subscription broadcasters obtain revenue from subscriptions.
The ‘value’ of each service is determined by their audience reach.
For this reason, it is not at all clear why the nature
of the revenue base of
the broadcaster is relevant to determining whether the exceptions should operate
in respect of different types
of broadcasts. Also, the exceptions in s. 199
(1), (2) and (3) apply not to the broadcaster but to a person who receives the
and causes the copyright material it contains to be performed in
The provisions
Section 199(1)
7.59 All three of the provisions under consideration were included in the Act
as a result of the recommendations made by the Spicer
Committee in its report of
1959. The Committee notes that s. 45 of the Act permits the reading or
recitation in public or the inclusion
in a broadcast of a reading or recitation
of an extract of reasonable length if sufficient acknowledgment of the work is
provision is broadly consistent with the uses permitted under
art. 10 of the Berne Convention. Section 199(1), in effect, merely
that the public performance of such quotations or extracts, by a person who
operates a radio or television in a public place,
does not infringe
Section 199(2) and (3)
7.60 The Spicer Committee examined a number of provisions in the UK’s
(the 1956 UK Act), including s. 40(1) and (2),
the equivalents of s. 199(2) and (3) of the 1968 Act, respectively.
7.61 When considering the need for s. 199(2) and (3) to be included in
the Act, the Spicer Committee referred to its recommendation
that the act of
broadcasting should not itself constitute performance in public, but a work or
subject matter should be deemed to
be caused to be seen or heard by the
operation of a receiving set (paragraph 407). It then stated:
If [these] recommendations were put into effect without qualification, a
person who operated a television set in public (say a restaurant)
required to obtain licences from and pay royalties to the copyright owners of
(a) original works, (b) sound recordings and
(c) films, insofar as any of them
were heard by or shown to the public by means of the television set. (paragraph
7.62 The Committee commented that ‘the harshness of this position is,
in the 1956 UK Act, mitigated by section 40’. It
then set out the
provisions of s. 40(1) and (2) which, as already stated, are identical to
s. 199(2) and (3). It also set out the
provisions of s. 40(3), which
provided an exception to the public performance right in television and sound
broadcasts which the
Spicer Committee had recommended. Section 40(3) provided
for an exception in identical terms to s. 40(2) except that it applied to
the transmission to subscribers of a diffusion service by the reception of a
television or sound broadcast of a program comprising
a literary, dramatic or
musical work (or an adaptation thereof) or an artistic work or a cinematograph
7.63 The Spicer Committee stated the effect of s. 40 as being that
‘a person who causes works, films or records to be seen or
heard in public
by means of the operation of a receiving set is liable to obtain a
“performing right” licence only from
the copyright owners of the
original literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works performed’
(paragraph 410). It concluded
by saying ‘we think that the provisions of
section 40 are desirable and recommend the enactment of provisions to the same
(paragraph 413).
7.64 It seems clear from the foregoing that the Spicer Committee considered
that public policy favoured the exemption of small business
from an obligation
to pay licence fees for the public performance of works, sound recordings, films
and broadcasts.
Submissions to the Committee
7.65 Submissions from copyright owners claimed that s. 199(1), (2) and
(3) are technologically outmoded.
7.66 The Motion Pictures Association (MPA) submitted:
All communications of protected works should require authorization of the
protected work which takes place privately among family members in the same
The MPA also commented:
Such broad exceptions [that is, s. 199(1), (2) and (3)] were not
intended to be applicable to digital technology and should not be
manner which may unreasonably prejudice the interests of copyright owners. These
exemptions were developed in the past,
do not account for the effect of digital
technology and are inappropriate in this digital
7.67 In its submission ARIA also referred to the outdated nature of
s. 199(1), (2) and (3) from a technological point of view. ARIA
opposes these derogations from copyright owners’ rights ... The
provisions were adopted in a vastly different and now largely
technological environment. These provisions severely cut across the licensing of
music video and live performance as
commercial establishments simply exploit television and radio transmissions.
This is free riding
contrary to the objectives of copyright as commercial
establishments are able to secure the benefits of the copyright material for
generation of their own profits, but do not have to pay market value for the use
of the input (copyright material) which provides
that benefit ... If the
provisions are retained (which ARIA opposes), they should be limited only to
free to air transmissions.
7.68 However, submissions from the users of copyright materials such as FACTS
and the Federation of Australian Radio Broadcasters
(FARB) highlighted what they
considered to be difficulties in understanding the CCG’s concerns. FACTS
It is unclear what precise concerns motivated the CCG in relation to these
provisions. If a broadcast is made by electronic transmission,
why is this
different to a transmission by wireless. It may be that the CCG was concerned
broadcast on, for example, a computer
network but it is hard to make sense of the report in this regard
7.69 FARB took the same position as FACTS; it stated that the CCG’s
concerns about the operation of s. 199 possibly ‘centre
subsequent dissemination of the broadcast in a manner that was not contemplated
in an era of limited purpose reception
equipment’.
7.70 The Committee notes the public policy position taken by the Spicer
Committee when the provisions were introduced. Also, the Committee
consider that the revenue base of the broadcaster is relevant to whether or not
the exception should apply to a public performance
caused by the operator of the
receiving device. Accordingly, it can see no reason for confining the operation
of the provisions to
‘free-to-air’ broadcasts. The only ground for
either repealing or limiting the application of these provisions would
they were shown to be inconsistent with Australia’s international
obligations under the Berne Convention and the other
relevant copyright
conventions. Such a case has not been made out in the submissions nor is the
Committee aware that the provisions
have been criticised by other States party
to those conventions.
7.71 The present operation of s. 199(1), (2) and (3) is confined to the
public performance of licensed broadcasts. Copyright owners
are compensated for
the broadcast of their materials through licence agreements with broadcasters.
The policy behind s. 199(1), (2)
and (3) considers this remuneration as
sufficient compensation for the subsequent public performance of their material
who receive the broadcast.
7.72 The maker of a transmission other than a broadcast or a transmission to
subscribers to a diffusion service is presently not required
to obtain a licence
from copyright owners. Accordingly, no fee is paid that can be characterised as
compensating copyright owners
for the subsequent public performance of their
materials by persons who receive those transmissions. For this reason, the scope
s. 199(1), (2) and (3) should continue to be confined to licensed
broadcasts.
Recommendation
7.73 The Committee recommends that no change be made to the Act to restrict
the operation of s. 199(1), (2) and (3) to ‘free-to-air
broadcasts’. As a matter of policy, the Committee is of the view that the
provisions should continue to be limited to licensed
transmissions.
Review of ss. 46 and 106
7.74 In addition to s. 199(1), (2) and (3), the Act contains at least
two other exceptions to the public performance right, namely
106. These provisions limit the scope of the public performance right in musical
and other works and sound recordings
respectively. In Part 1 of the
Simplification Report these provisions were considered among the miscellaneous
exceptions in Chapter
9 and identified by the Committee for subsequent
7.75 Section 46 provides:
where a literary, dramatic, or musical work (or an adaptation thereof), is
performed in public, by the operation of wireless telegraphy
apparatus or by the
use of a record, at premises where persons reside or sleep, as part of the
amenities provided exclusively for
residents or inmates and their guests, the
performance does not constitute an infringement of the copyright in the work or
adaptation.
7.76 Section 106 extends the exception in s. 46 to sound recordings. It
where a sound recording is caused to be heard in public at premises where
persons reside or sleep, as part of the amenities provided
exclusively for
residents or inmates of the premises or their guests, this does not constitute
an infringement of copyright in the
recording (s. 106(1)(a)).
The exception does not apply if a specific charge is made for admission to
the part of the premises where the recording is to be heard
(s. 106(2)(a)).
7.77 Section 106 provides a second exception with respect to the public
performance of sound recordings. It states:
where a sound recording is caused to be heard in public as part of the
activities of, or for the benefit of, a club, society or other
organisation that
is not established or conducted for profit and the principal objects of which
are charitable or are otherwise concerned
with the advancement of religion,
education or social welfare, the act of causing the record to be heard does not
constitute an infringement
of copyright in the recording
(s. 106(1)(b)).
This exception does not apply if a charge is made for the admission to the
place where the recording is to be heard and any of the
proceeds are applied
otherwise than for the purposes of the organisation (s. 106(2)(b)). The
‘charge’ may be made partly
for admission and partly for other
purposes (s. 106(3)).
Spicer Committee
7.78 As with the provisions in s. 199(1), (2), and (3), the inclusion of
ss. 46 and 106 in the Act arose from recommendations made
by the Spicer
Committee. The Committee examined a number of provisions in the 1956 UK Act,
including s. 12(7), the equivalent to
s. 106 of the 1968 Act. The
exception provided for in s. 46 of the 1968 Act had no equivalent in the
1956 Act, a fact noted by the
Committee in its report (paragraph 68). The
Chairman of the Spicer Committee suggested:
this situation might have something to do with the Berne Convention [which]
requires members to give protection to the head copyright
owner in respect of
public performances but does not provide for copyright in gramophone records
7.79 The Spicer Committee, however, was of the view that the exception
provided for by s. 46 would not be contrary to the Berne Convention,
it stated ‘obviously allowed some latitude to individual countries to
determine within reasonable limits the definition
performance”’.
commented on the s. 46 exception as follows:
We have received representations that the performance of a work in a private
hotel or guest house to inmates or residents should not
be regarded as a
performance in public so as to require the proprietors of those establishments
to obtain licences from the Australasian
Performing Right Association Limited.
It is argued that for many persons a private hotel or boarding house is their
expect to find the facilities, such as a radio or television set,
which one would find in their average home ...
In our opinion, a performance in a guest house or hotel to residents or their
guests should not be treated as a public performance
where there is similarity
between the type of performance given in such an establishment and the
performance that a person might
receive in his own home.
Accordingly, we recommend that where a broadcast or gramophone record is
performed at any premises where persons reside or sleep,
as part of the
amenities provided exclusively for residents or their guests, it shall not be
regarded as performance in public of
the work. (paragraphs 67, 69 and 70)
7.80 The submissions referred to by the Spicer Committee in paragraph 67 of
its report were concerned with a line of judicial decisions
that had given the
term ‘performance in public’ a wide
construction.
One submission stated the
law as being that ‘there was no public performance if the only persons who
view a television set
in a guest house or private hotel or listen to a radio
there are residents of the
establishment’.
nevertheless, that ‘the question is not free from difficulty’ and
that ‘it would be highly desirable
for the question to be clarified and
put beyond doubt in the new
legislation’.
7.81 The Spicer Committee took the same position on s. 106 as it did
with respect to s. 46. It adopted the position under s. 12(7)
1956 UK Act, which extended the s. 46 exception to sound recordings. The
Spicer Committee recommended the adoption of a provision
substantially similar
to s. 12(7) of the 1956 Act. Subsection (1) of that provision was identical
to s. 106(1)(a) of the 1968 Act
except that it referred to ‘any
premises where persons reside or sleep, as part of the amenities provided
exclusively or mainly
for residents or inmates therein’. The Spicer
Committee stated that, ‘in line with our recommendations made above
the performance of literary, dramatic and musical works in guest
houses and hotels (paragraph 69), we think that the words “or
mainly” should be deleted from paragraph (a) and the words “or their
guests” should be added after “therein”’
The Committee’s position
7.82 It is the Committee’s view that, generally speaking, ss. 46
and 106 are reasonable provisions. Their intended purpose appears
to have been
to clarify the scope of the public performance right in a manner consistent with
prevailing common law principles. Those
principles continue to state that a
performance given to members of the public is a performance in public unless it
is shown to be
domestic or quasi-domestic in
The character of the audience
is the prime consideration, and the principal question to be asked is whether
the audience for the
performance are persons who come together, not bound by a
domestic or private tie but as an aspect of their public
One must also ask whether the
audience is of a type that can be described as the copyright owner’s
public. If the performance
occurs as an adjunct to a commercial activity the
performance is likely to be regarded as
An overriding consideration in
determining what is a performance in public is the aim of copyright law to
preserve the copyright
owner’s right of property in their work against
infringement and prevent unauthorised third parties from using the work to
owner’s financial
disadvantage.
7.83 The Committee notes a concern that has been expressed regarding
ss. 46 and 106. The concern is that the two provisions provide
‘loophole’ for accommodation providers who, according to the general
principles relating to the public performance
right, should be paying licence
fees in respect of the playing of music. The problem was described in
ARIA’s submission to
the Committee in relation to the Miscellaneous
Exceptions. ARIA submitted:
There is a growing incidence of resort-style enterprises which provide a
variety of entertainments including accommodation, sporting
activities as well
as areas where music is played, in particular night clubs. By amalgamating the
variety of amenities provided and
failing to charge a specific fee for entry to
the night club area, these clubs are able to claim a section 106 exemption.
These enterprises
are highly commercial and the playing of sound recordings
incontrovertibly adds to their appeal and the revenue of such enterprises.
nature of their business is no different from other businesses which derive
commercial gain from playing sound recordings in
public and recognise copyright
interests accordingly. Only the structure of the business is
ARIA suggested that s. 106 should possibly be limited to those premises
that use sound recordings as background music
7.84 The Committee also notes that, according to the minutes of a meeting
held by the Spicer Committee on 26 May 1958, it was agreed
that the ss. 46
and 106 exceptions should not extend to performances in dance halls or similar
venues of hotels or guest houses.
It is clear that the circumstances identified
by the ARIA submission are performances in dance halls of resort-style
accommodation
complexes. It is also clear that in such cases, where the
performance of the copyright material is provided as part of the amenities
‘exclusively for residents or inmates and their guests’, the
performance comes within ss. 46 and 106 and does not infringe
7.85 In the Committee’s view, an insufficient case has been made out
for the repeal or limitation of ss. 46 and 106. Accordingly,
the Committee
recommends no change to the provisions. The Committee suggests that the problems
identified by ARIA in respect of the
provisions would best be tested before the
courts. The Committee notes that it would be open to the courts to read down the
of ss. 46 and 106 to apply only in the circumstances that they
were originally intended to cover, namely, those that are domestic
quasi-domestic in character.
Recommendation
7.86 The Committee recommends that ss. 46 and 106 be retained in the Act
without amendment.
8 – Untraceable copyright owners (paragraph 7.12)
7.87 The CCG queried whether there should be some mechanism that allows use
of copyright material when the owner cannot be found.
Some parties making
submissions to the CCG had commented that they had difficulties when they wanted
to use material but could not
find the copyright owner and therefore obtain a
licence. The CCG recommended that the issue be given further consideration and
generated a lot of comment in the current submissions to the Committee.
7.88 There was support for some mechanism to be developed, particularly from
the libraries, archives and educational bodies. Each
submission in support noted
that the mechanism should operate only after reasonable searches have been made
and that remuneration
should be paid to the copyright owner if she or he becomes
known at a later date. The main arguments in favour of the development
mechanism were:
the lack of a mechanism creates
practical problems for obtaining approval for the use of copyright material and
making payment for
electronic delivery and creation of copyright material can be expected to result
in an increase in the number of cases where the
identified or located;
a lot of time
and expense are expended by the users of copyright materials, trying
unsuccessfully to locate copyright owners unrepresented
by copyright collecting
agencies, or other licensing
the introduction of a mechanism
would allow the freeing of access to valuable copyright material that presently
cannot be accessed
because to do so would constitute a breach of copyright;
the introduction of a mechanism
would allow for the saving of costs associated with searching beyond what would
reasonably be required
to satisfy the reasonable search standard specified in
the mechanism.
7.89 The contrary arguments were put by the
Australian Publishers Association
some collecting societies, and notes of caution were sounded by the Law Council
of Australia
and Telstra Corporation.
The main arguments against the proposition to develop a mechanism were:
a fear that such a mechanism would
be an invitation to infringe copyright after inadequate
any statutory licence would
be a fundamental change to the nature of copyright, altering an exclusive right
to a ‘mere right
remuneration’,
and would be
contrary to the Berne
Convention;
poorly known copyright
owners may find that the only way to enforce their rights would be through the
membership of large groups,
such as collecting societies, which facilitate their
identification. This may effectively empower collecting societies with a
over the enforcement of copyright holders’
7.90 A number of submissions either referred directly to,
or alluded to, the Canadian Copyright Act, which provides a mechanism for
use of copyright materials where the copyright owner is untraceable. Section 77
of the Canadian Act empowers the Copyright Board
of Canada to issue a licence to
use a published work for which the owner of copyright cannot be located after
‘reasonable efforts
to locate the owner’ have been made. The
Australian Copyright Tribunal. The licence is non-exclusive and the owner of
the copyright has five years in which to claim the royalties.
7.91 The Canadian scheme was introduced in 1989 and the Board has made a
number of determinations under this provision. The licence
is issued with
certain terms and conditions as to duration and the royalty to be paid, should
the owner be found. On some occasions,
the royalty is paid in trust to a body,
such as a collecting society, and the body may distribute the funds if the owner
been found after a certain period of time has expired. The Board issues
reasons when it grants a licence, setting out the enquiries
that have been made
and the nature of the licence.
7.92 While the Canadian scheme balances the needs of copyright owners and
users by requiring diligent searching and payment of royalties,
any introduction
of a similar scheme in Australia would require a high level of administrative
resources and the Committee believes
that the costs are likely to outweigh the
benefits, considering the size of the problem.
7.93 The Committee also considered a number of other schemes, such as a
registration scheme. Under such a scheme, any use of a work
where the owner was
untraceable would be entered into a publicly accessible, centralised register.
The register would identify the
user of the material, the work being used, and
the circumstances of the use. Entry upon the register would give immunity to the
of the material, and such a system would allow copyright owners who are not
easily traceable to check the register for any use of
their work and claim
remuneration for its use. However, the Committee again concluded that such a
scheme would be too complex, and
that problems existed in relation to the cost
of designing, implementing and operating the proposed register.
7.94 Another possible mechanism considered was one based on s. 115(3) of
the Act, which deals with cases of innocent infringement.
Under that mechanism,
if an action for an infringement of copyright were brought by a previously
untraceable copyright owner (plaintiff),
and it was established that at the time
of the infringement the defendant did not, and could not reasonably have been
expected to,
locate the copyright owner, the court would be restricted to
awarding damages, and the plaintiff would not be entitled to an injunction.
However, the Committee rejected the scheme on the basis that it would provide
inadequate protection to an untraceable copyright owner
where the copyright
material was unpublished, and the copyright owner did not want its material
7.95 CAL drew the Committee’s attention to a Scandinavian model, where
a collecting society is deemed to represent all rights
holders in a group for
the purposes of a licensing scheme if the society represents a substantial
proportion of the relevant group.
wish to be covered and will therefore not be included
in the licensing scheme.
CAL contended that this scheme successfully addresses some difficulties faced by
users in contacting individual
rights holders and that this system does not
contravene the Berne Convention because the rights holder has a choice about
or not to be covered, thus not losing their exclusive rights.
7.96 While the Scandinavian model may provide a solution for users of
will not obtain any
royalties if they are untraceable. This model would also lead to a substantial
change in the role and operation
of collecting societies and to the
‘default position’ regarding the rights of copyright owners. It
would require a large-scale
education campaign among the owners of copyright so
that they understood the change to the way that their rights were protected and
administered. The Committee is not minded to recommend such a substantial change
without consultation, but recommends that it is
an option that the Government
may wish to investigate.
Recommendation
7.97 The Committee recommends that:
no amendments be made to the Act to
establish a mechanism for the use of copyright material where the copyright
owner is unknown or
untraceable;
comprehensive review of the jurisdiction of the Copyright Tribunal consider
whether a simple scheme may be set up by the Tribunal;
the Government consider whether a
scheme similar to the Scandinavian model would be feasible in
9 – Section 23 (paragraph 7.11)
7.98 The CCG raised the issue whether the operation of
is justified (paragraph
Section 23(1)
For the purposes of this Act, sounds embodied in a sound-track associated
with visual images forming part of a cinematograph film
shall be deemed not to
be a sound recording.
7.99 The CCG noted concerns had been expressed that, in light of the new
means of the embodiment of sound recordings such as CD-ROM,
the effect of
s. 23(1) may have a significant effect on the remuneration for uses of
sound recordings. Accordingly, the CCG stated
that the justification for, and
effect of, s. 23 should be examined.
7.100 As it has turned out, events have overtaken the consideration of this
issue. The CCG had thought that a consequence of this
section was that any
broadcast of a film soundtrack did not involve the broadcast of the underlying
sound recording. This interpretation
was upheld by a majority of the Full Court
of the Federal Court
but overturned by a
3:2 majority of the High Court in
Phonographic Performance Company of
Australia v Federation of Australian Commercial Television
The High Court held that
the section simply prevents the owner of copyright in the film having a separate
This means, for example, that
if a television station wants to broadcast a film, it can rely upon s. 109
but must be able to identify
every sound recording that has been incorporated
into the soundtrack so that the Copyright Tribunal can set the appropriate
It also means that owners of sound recordings have a certain level of
protection when it comes to the incorporation of their material
into CD-ROMs or
multimedia material.
7.101 The Committee sought comments in relation to this issue as the judgment
had only just been delivered. However, there was not
much interest in the issue
and, aside from FACTS, the commentators supported the decision. The Committee
concludes that, as a result
of the decision, the meaning of s. 23(1) has
been clarified and there is no need to amend the section.
Recommendation
7.102 The Committee recommends that no amendment be made to
10 – Ephemeral copying provisions (paragraph 6.2)
7.103 The CCG queried whether the ephemeral copying provisions in
ss. 47, 70 and 107 should be extended to broadcasters other than
broadcasters and other non-broadcast service providers. While the CCG supported
the extension of the provisions to all broadcasters,
it was not convinced that
their extension with respect to other transmissions to the public was necessary
(paragraph 6.2).
7.104 In so far as it relates to broadcasts other than wireless broadcasts,
the Committee understands that the Government’s
proposed Digital Agenda
reforms will address this issue by extending the ephemeral copying provisions to
all broadcasts.
7.105 However, the Government’s proposed Digital Agenda reforms do not
address the issue whether the ephemeral copying provisions
should apply to other
transmissions to the public. The Committee notes that the use of copyright
materials by broadcasters is subject
to licensing agreements with the relevant
these broadcasters
who have paid for the right to broadcast the copyright
materials used in their broadcast programs. The Committee understands that
makers of other transmissions to the public are not technically broadcasters. A
consequence of this is that there is presently
no obligation for them to obtain
a licence for the transmission of the copyright materials they use. Accordingly,
the Committee is
of the view that extending the ephemeral copying provisions to
the makers of such transmissions is not justified.
Recommendation
7.106 The Committee, while supporting the extension of ss. 47, 70 and
107 to all broadcasts, recommends that those sections not be
further extended to
other transmissions to the public.
11 – Section 109 statutory licence (paragraph 6.3)
7.107 The CCG queried whether the scope of the statutory licence for the
broadcast of sound recordings, provided under
should be extended to include broadcasts offered for valuable
consideration. This section provides that it is not an infringement
broadcast right in a published sound recording for a person to broadcast the
recording if a licence fee is paid or agreed
to be paid. If the parties are
unable to agree, the Copyright Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine the fee
pursuant to
Section 109
was enacted to balance the interests of broadcasters, the
public and the owners of copyright subsisting in sound recordings and was
intended to prevent record companies from refusing to licence broadcasters. The
CCG noted that some concerns about the continued
justification of the similar
statutory licences for the broadcasting of works had been raised by WIPO. The
Committee notes that at
the WIPO Diplomatic Conference on Certain Copyright and
Neighbouring Rights Questions, held in December 1996, there was a proposal
phase out the application of art. 11
(2) of the Berne Convention
to primary broadcasting of works. However, despite some early support, this
proposal was defeated by a
vote on the final day of the conference.
7.109 Recent reforms mean that the question whether the statutory licence in
should extend to broadcasts offered for valuable consideration has
been answered. The
(Cth) amends
s. 109 to confine the statutory licence to the free-to-air broadcasting of
sound recordings. Accordingly, subscription
broadcasters will have to negotiate
voluntary licences to broadcast sound recordings. As part of the Digital Agenda
the Government has decided that the jurisdiction of the
arise between the subscription broadcasters and owners of copyright in sound
recordings.
7.110 A consequence of the High Court’s decision in
Phonographic
Performance Company of Australia v Federation of Australian Commercial
Television Stations
is that any
broadcaster of cinematograph films will need to acquire a licence to broadcast
any pre-existing sound recordings that
have been incorporated into the
soundtrack of a film. Free-to-air broadcasters will be able to rely upon
s. 109 but a consequence
of the recent amendment to s. 109 is that
subscription broadcasters will not be able to use this provision.
Recommendation
7.111 The Committee notes the Government’s recent amendment to the
to free-to-air broadcasts and
its intention to extend the jurisdiction of the Copyright Tribunal to arbitrate
any disputes that may
arise between the subscription broadcasters and owners of
decision on this issue, the Committee does not recommend any further changes to
the operation of
at this time.
12 – Transnational transmissions (paragraph 3.3)
7.112 The CCG considered a number of issues to do with transnational
transmissions and noted that the question of how to deal with
transmissions
originating outside Australia is particularly complicated. It considered that
the maker of a transmission that originated
outside Australia but is intended
for reception in Australia should obtain a licence from the owner of copyright
in Australia. However,
there are private international law difficulties with
this approach, and the CCG noted that it would have practical significance
if the maker of the transmission had some commercial presence in Australia.
7.113 Since the CCG issued its report in 1994, the rapid development of
technology such as the Internet has meant that the concept
‘point-to-point transmissions’ is not limited to satellite
transmissions, which was the focus of the CCG’s interest.
Indeed, as FACTS
noted, the dissemination of information across the Internet renders territorial
boundaries meaningless.
7.114 Most of the submissions that addressed this issue acknowledged the
complexity of the legal issues involved. For example, the
LCA submitted that
once a copyright owner has given permission for the broadcast of her/his
material, the broadcaster should not
need further permission to deliver this
material by the most efficient means. However, it expressed concern that any
‘legislation
to achieve this could severely detract from the copyright
owner’s legitimate interests since many uses of the new technologies
in fact point-to-point
transmission’.
7.115 FACTS and ANZLIC
that any proposal regarding such transmissions would require very detailed
consideration, particularly given the disparity
between intellectual property
regimes in different countries and the increasing globalisation of geographic
information services.
7.116 The Committee considers that an appropriate way to deal with the
be through bilateral
or multilateral treaties. The Australian Law Reform Commission published a
report on cross-border civil remedies
in 1996 (ALRC 80:
Legal Risk in
International Transactions
), which noted the value of multilateral work in
intellectual property. Some of this work is being conducted through the World
Intellectual
Property Organisation, the World Trade Organisation and the Asia
Pacific Economic Co-operation. The ALRC recommended that there could
value in a regional law reform program being developed through APEC to address
intellectual property issues generally. The
Committee notes that the inaugural
meeting of the WIPO Standing Committee on Copyright and Related
(SCCRR) will be held in November
1998, and recommends that the Australian Government could raise this issue at
that meeting if it
is considered of significance to Australian copyright
Recommendation
7.117 The Committee recommends that should the issue of transnational
transmissions become a matter of increasing concern for Australian
owners, the Government raise the issue at an appropriate international
13 – Legal deposit (paragraph 7.1)
7.118 The CCG recommended the further review of the application of the legal
deposit provisions in the Act to cover electronically
networked information
(paragraph 7.1). It made this recommendation as part of a number of
recommendations dealing with the library
copying provisions in the Act. The
Committee has treated the legal deposit provisions as separate from the
exceptions in the Act
relating to copying by libraries. In April 1997 the
Committee released an issues paper on legal deposit in which it sought comments
on the question of whether the legal deposit provision in s. 201 of the Act
should be extended. The issues paper noted that the deposit
requirement applies
to any ‘library material’ that is published in Australia and in
which copyright subsists.
7.119 Section 201(1) provides:
The publisher of any library material that is published in Australia and in
which copyright subsists under this Act shall cause a
copy of the material to be
delivered at his or her own expense to the National Library.
Penalty: $100.
‘Library material’ is defined in s. 201(5) as:
a book, periodical, newspaper, pamphlet, sheet of letter-press, sheet of
music, map, plan, chart or table, being a literary, dramatic,
artistic work or an edition of such a work, but does not include a second or
later edition of any material unless that
edition contains additions or
alterations in the letter-press or in the illustrations.
This definition effectively limits the deposit requirement to items in a
printed form.
7.120 In response to the Committee’s original terms of reference the
Committee received a joint submission concerning legal
deposit from the National
Film and Sound Archive and the National Library of Australia. In response to the
issues paper, and following
the public forum on access to copyright materials,
the Committee received eight submissions addressing this issue. The submissions
commented on both the Committee’s issues paper and the joint submission of
the National Film and Sound Archive and the National
Library. The specific
issues raised in those submissions are examined below.
National repository
7.121 The National Library of Australia (the National Library) and the
National Film and Sound Archive (NFSA) jointly submitted that
the Commonwealth Government’s responsibility to preserve the national
heritage’. The joint submission
also noted that the NFSA, which came into
being subsequent to the enactment of the
mandate for the care and preservation of heritage sound and moving picture
materials similar to the National Library’s
mandate for other types of
published material. Accordingly, both submitted that the Committee should
recommend that both the National
Library and the NFSA be named as repository
institutions and their complementary roles be recognised in the legislation.
This proposition
was supported by the State Library of New South Wales in its
submission.
Extension of the scheme
7.122 The majority of submissions received by the Committee accepted or
supported the retention of the library deposit scheme. Some
also recommended
extending the scope of coverage of the scheme. The State Library of NSW
submitted that retention of the legal deposit
provisions in the Act was
necessary to ensure the survival of published heritage materials and that,
because of the increased number
of formats, the provision must be extended to
cover all forms of copyright materials including audiovisual and electronic
publications.
The Law Council suggested that all archival organisations should
act cooperatively to facilitate access and deposit. LCA’s
submission noted
that extension of the definition of ‘library material’ may result in
the deposit of materials that the
National Library is not qualified to select or
to store. In this regard the Committee does not understand that any of the
submissions
it received (which urged an extension of the scope of the legal
deposit scheme) contemplated that it should extend the Act’s
coverage to
include original artistic works or works of artistic craftsmanship as these
would be collected, as appropriate, by the
National Gallery of Australia.
7.123 In relation to films and other broadcast materials FACTS submitted that
it favoured the continuation of the existing informal
arrangements with the
NFSA. Under those arrangements, FACTS noted that the NFSA supplies the storage
medium, e.g. video cassette,
and the television broadcaster dubs the program at
its own cost. FACTS indicated that it opposed the introduction of legislation
back up the scheme.
7.124 The Committee regards the legal deposit provision as important for the
preservation of materials that are part of the nation’s
cultural heritage.
It is also quite apparent that, as presently worded, s. 201 is only of
limited value in achieving this purpose.
The Committee is not confident that a
voluntary deposit scheme would ensure the collection and preservation of all the
that should form part of the national cultural collection. The
Committee is also of the view that the same obligation to deposit
should apply
to all materials that come within the scheme. For these reasons the Committee
agrees with the joint submission by the
National Library and the NFSA that these
two organisations should have a complementary role to play in the collection and
preservation
of these materials and in making the contents of those collections
accessible to the public on display, or for the purposes of research
Recommendation
7.125 The Committee recommends that:
both the National Library of
Australia and the National Film and Sound Archive be named as repository
institutions;
the complementary roles
of the National Library and the National Film and Sound Archive be recognised in
the legislation;
the definition of
library material be broadened to include audiovisual materials, and materials in
electronic form;
the revised deposit
scheme operate prospectively in respect of the new materials it covers;
deposit of all materials remain
compulsory.
Purpose of the scheme
7.126 A number of submissions recommended that the purpose of the legal
deposit scheme should be made clear. Also, FACTS submitted
that legal deposit
should be for a number of specific purposes, namely, safeguarding and preserving
materials, and for limited cultural
and educational purposes, e.g. exhibitions
to the public, and academic research.
7.127 The Committee notes the comments of the Spicer Committee in its 1959
report, which considered s. 40, the equivalent provision
. At paragraph 468 of the 1959 report the Committee
recommended that the provision should be limited to ‘books published in
the Commonwealth that have not been previously published elsewhere’. The
Spicer Committee took the view that the main purpose
of the provision should be
to ‘build up a complete collection of Australian literature’. The
ACC suggested that the purpose
of the provision should be clearly stated if it
is to be different from that contemplated by the Spicer Committee. However, the
notes that the present wording of s. 201 indicates that the
Government was minded to take a broader view of the scope of the legal
scheme which, as s. 201(1) clearly indicates, presently applies to any
library material published in Australia.
7.128 The Committee has had regard to the respective roles of the National
Library and the NFSA in ensuring the preservation of the
nation’s cultural
heritage. The Committee also notes that many materials from many different
sources, both domestic and foreign,
shape or form part of the national cultural
identity and heritage. Accordingly, it does not consider it advisable to limit
of the legal deposit scheme in the manner suggested by the Spicer
Recommendation
7.129 The Committee recommends that the breadth of the present provision, in
respect of the materials to which it applies, remain
as is presently provided
for under the Act.
Penalty for failure to deposit
7.130 To ‘encourage’ compliance with the deposit requirement in
s. 201(1), the subsection presently prescribes a $100
penalty for failure
to deposit a copy of any ‘library material’ within one month of its
publication. Both the National
Library and the NFSA submitted (and the Law
Council agreed) that the penalty was too small to ensure the obligation to
met. In relation to the one-month period allowed, FACTS submitted the
period in which to respond to a deposit request for audiovisual
material should
be 12 months. The Committee considers that a penalty of $100 is unlikely to
encourage observance of the Act’s
requirements.
Recommendation
7.131 The Committee recommends that the Government review the level of the
penalty prescribed in s. 201(1) bearing in mind the policy
provision and the need to ensure compliance with the deposit requirement.
7.132 In their joint submission the National Library and the NFSA commented
that ‘it is neither possible nor desirable to preserve
everything that is
published’. Accordingly, they submitted that institutions acting as
repositories should have the power to
select what is judged to be of lasting
cultural value. (This was supported by the State Library of NSW in its
submission.) Further,
the submission noted that flexibility was required so the
relevant institutions should have the right to initiate or decline deposit,
the right to deselect material judged not to be of continuing value or that
might more appropriately be housed elsewhere.
7.133 The ACC submitted that the scheme should operate so that publishers are
obliged to notify the National Library of publications
that meet specific
criteria set out in the Act. Pursuant to the Act, the National Library would be
entitled to demand deposit. The
ACC further submitted that the National Library
should be obliged to pay costs to the publisher of producing and delivering the
publication
(if those costs were above an amount specified in the regulations).
The Library and Information Service of WA also suggested that
there may be a
need to have a registration requirement that enables the library to select
according to guidelines. FACTS submitted
that selection guidelines for
audiovisual and broadcast materials should be developed in consultation with the
broadcasting industry.
7.134 The Committee has considered the submissions on this issue and agrees
that it is neither practical nor economically feasible
for the repository
institutions to collect, house, catalogue and make available all material first
published or made available in
Australia. For this reason it recommends that
under the scheme the repository institutions have the discretion to select
for inclusion in their collections. The Committee does not agree with
the ACC’s submission that the repository institutions
should pay the costs
of producing and delivering the material. To do so would most likely
significantly limit the capacity of the
institutions to compile an adequate
collection of materials. The Committee considers that the costs involved in the
obligation to
deposit are a reasonable burden that copyright owners should carry
in the public interest. The Committee acknowledges that in some
cases the nature
of the material required for deposit might be such that the cost to an
individual copyright owner could be significant.
However, it also expects that
this will be the exception rather than the rule. Under the revised scheme as
envisaged by the Committee
selection for deposit would be in accordance with
published guidelines. Not all materials would be selected and not all materials
would necessarily be of limited supply or high value.
Recommendation
7.135 The Committee recommends that under the revised scheme the repository
institutions have the discretion to select materials for
inclusion in their
collections.
7.136 The Committee also recommends that the Act require notification to be
given to the repository institutions within one month
of the date of publication
or making available to the public of the copyright material. The publisher of
that material should have
a further one month from the date it receives a
request for deposit to deliver a copy of the material to the repository
institution
or provide reasons why delivery is not possible within the one-month
7.137 Submissions to the Committee identified a range of matters for
consideration in the development of any guidelines or selection
criteria that
might be applied by the depository in determining which materials it required
for deposit. The National Library and
the NFSA submitted that the operational
details of the legal deposit scheme should be specified in regulations rather
than in the
Act. The Committee is reluctant to recommend the creation of further
delegated legislation where this can be avoided. It is expected
that the revised
legal deposit scheme recommended by the Committee should not add significantly
to the length of s. 201.
7.138 It is clear to the Committee from a consideration of the submissions it
received that a large range of factors will need to
be considered in developing
any deposit guidelines. The guidelines themselves may need to go into some
detail to ensure that only
suitable materials are identified as falling within
the deposit requirement. Although the submissions to the Committee identified
number of factors that need to be considered for the purpose of selecting
materials, as well as some of the problems posed by materials
created and
distributed in the digital domain, the Committee does not consider that it is
the appropriate body to formulate any such
guidelines.
Recommendation
7.139 The Committee recommends that the development of any guidelines be left
to the repository institutions in consultation with
relevant copyright owner
7.140 A number of submissions raised the issue of storage of materials
collected in an electronic form and the problems of ensuring
these materials are
preserved and maintained in a form that maintains their accessibility to the
public. FACTS submitted that tapes,
CD-ROMs or other storage formats should be
supplied by the collecting institution and that all costs relating to storing,
and caring for materials must be borne by the collecting institution.
Further, if the material needed to be reformatted, the collecting
institution
should have the onus to get permission from underlying rights owners. However,
the State Library of NSW endorsed the
submission by the National Library and the
NFSA that as repository institutions they should have the right to reformat
material to
guarantee its long-term access and preservation. The Committee
agrees that, for the limited purposes of preservation and ensuring
access to deposited material, the National Library and the NFSA should not need
to seek the authorisation of the copyright
owner with respect to the storage of
the material.
7.141 In its submission the Law Council noted that reformatting material also
raised potential moral rights issues relating to the
integrity of the work. The
Committee does not recommend any special exceptions to moral rights of authors
for the purposes of preservation
or ensuring continued accessibility.
Recommendation
7.142 The Committee is of the view that the National Library of Australia and
the National Film and Sound Archive should not need
to seek the authorisation of
the copyright owner with respect to the storage of deposited materials. The
Committee does not recommend
any special exceptions to moral rights of authors
under the revised scheme.
7.143 The ACC submitted that the purpose for which legal deposit copies may
be used should be stated in the legislation. CAL agreed
with the ACC’s
submission. CAL submitted that materials collected under the legal deposit
provision should be clearly marked
as such and should not form part of the
library collection. CAL submitted that it is inappropriate that such materials
be used for
purposes such as inter-library loan or copying where copyright
owners have been deprived of royalties they would have received if
the materials
had been purchased by the library. The Law Council also noted that repositories
would need to control access to and
dealings with materials submitted in an
electronic form if these materials were to be made available in a networked
environment.
7.144 The Committee regards the primary purpose of the legal deposit
provisions as ensuring the preservation of aspects of Australia’s
heritage. It does not understand that either the National Library or the NFSA
seeks to use this provision to supplement
their general holdings. At the same
time the deposited materials must be accessible to the public whether by being
displayed, or
being available on site for research or study purposes.
Accordingly, the Committee recommends that under the scheme deposited materials
be made available on the basis of restricted access. Hard copies of materials
should be available for inspection only at the repository
institution, and
likewise electronic materials should be accessible only at the repository
institution. The Committee acknowledges
that this will prejudice many people who
might wish to view or access these materials. However, it believes, having
regard to the
nature of the deposited materials, that this is an appropriate
restriction, which is required to protect the legitimate interests
Recommendation
7.145 The Committee recommends that under the revised scheme deposited
materials be made available on the basis of restricted access.
Issue 1 –- Published edition copyright (rec. 2.65(B))
7.146 In Chapter 15 of its report on
Computer Software Protection
CLRC considered the nature of published edition copyright, and recommended that
it be extended to include material in computer-readable
formats. The Government
has not yet responded to this recommendation and is awaiting further
consideration of the nature of published
edition copyright by the Committee in
this review.
7.147 As its name suggests, published edition copyright protects the
published edition itself, rather than the work contained in it.
A traditional
example of its use is where a publisher has produced a volume of
Shakespeare’s work—the copyright in the
literary work has long
expired but the effort of the publisher in setting up the typographical
arrangement is protected by published
edition copyright. This right is limited
to preventing a reproduction of the edition (
and the Full Court of the Federal Court has recently held that there
must be a reproduction of a substantial part of the edition
to constitute
infringement.
Published edition
neighbouring treaties. It appears to have
arisen from a recommendation by the
Gregory Committee in England in response to a request from the Publishers’
Association,
which sought protection for the effort that went into new printing
techniques.
7.148 In considering whether published edition copyright should be extended
to include publication in computer or machine-readable
format, it is useful to
consider more fully the policy behind the right. Sackville J set out a
comprehensive analysis in his judgment
Nationwide News
, a judgment
with which Jenkinson and Burchett JJ agreed. In a lengthy but informative
passage, Sackville J explained:
The general principle of copyright law is that copyright does not extend to
ideas, but only to the expression of those ideas. But
in the case of a published
edition copyright, what is protected is not a particular collocation of words or
musical notes, or a photographic
representation. Published edition copyright
protects the presentation embodied in the edition. This form of copyright, as
the legislative
history shows, protects such matters as typographical layout.
However, it also protects other aspects of presentation, such as juxtaposition
of text and photographs and use of headlines ... It is clear that layout is
often extremely important in attracting readers to read
a particular story or
magazine. It is also clear that the choice of layout, type-size, headings and
colour is a skilled operation.
Published edition copyright thus protects the product of skill, labour and
judgment in presenting material in an edition.
Of course, copyright in a
published work can be held by one person and the published edition copyright in
relation to the same publication
can be held by another person. A single act of
copying can therefore infringe both copyright in the work and the published
In relation to a published edition, the quality of what is taken must be
assessed by reference to the interest protected by the copyright.
That interest,
as has been seen, is in protecting the presentation and layout of the edition,
as distinct from the particular words
or images published in the edition. The
quantity of the material reproduced, assessed by reference to the whole of the
edition, is relevant in determining whether what has been taken is a
substantial part of the edition. But since it is the quality
of the material
taken that is the key issue, the quantity is not the only, nor necessarily the
principal, criterion.
An assessment of the impact of the reproduction on the interest protected by
published edition copyright requires a number of matters
to be considered. As
Copinger and Skone James on Copyright
(13th ed., 1991), 175:
‘In deciding (the quality or importance of the part taken), regard must
be had to the nature and objects of the selection made,
the quantity and value
of the materials used, and the degree to which the use may prejudice the sale,
or diminish the profits, direct
or indirect, or supersede the objects of the
original work ... In short, the question of substantiality is a matter of degree
each case and will be considered having regard to all the
circumstances.’
Although this statement was not made specifically in relation to published
edition copyright, it is, in my opinion, applicable to
a case where it is said
that a substantial part of a published edition has been
reproduced.
7.149 The facts in the case involved the copying of two articles, one each
The Australian
newspaper and
The Australian Magazine
first article was spread over two pages of the newspaper, but did not take up
the whole two pages. The second article extended
over eight pages and was the
longest of four articles in the magazine. Neither article was held to constitute
a substantial portion
of the relevant newspaper or magazine. Sackville J
commented that proportion alone was not the determining factor, but that one
also consider the ‘extent of the interference with the interest
protected by the published edition copyright and the objects
of selection made
by the copier’.
In this case, the
copies were made by a primary school and a TAFE college, neither of which had an
intention to ‘utilise the
typography, layout or presentation of the
published edition as a whole’.
7.150 In its initial consideration of this matter in the
Computer Software
report, the Committee noted that a published CD-ROM consisting of
public domain works could not rely on copyright for protection and
would be a situation where the skill and effort of the publisher should be
protected by published edition
If the reasoning of the
Nationwide News
decision was applied to this situation, there would be an
infringement of the CD-ROM only if a substantial proportion was copied and
intention behind the copying was to reproduce the exact format of the
information.
Submissions
7.151 The Australian Publishers Association warned that the proposal is a
‘tangled web’.
It noted that
the digital published edition should be separately identified from the hard-copy
published edition, as they are separate
copies, and that ownership of the
hard-copy published edition copyright will not automatically give ownership of
the digital version.
The ACC also did not support the proposal to extend the
7.152 A majority of the Committee considers that the rationale behind the
current published edition copyright should be limited to
the paper editions of
offset printing was an emerging
technology. The majority is of the view that the
right should not be translated into the digital environment. It follows that a
of the Committee does not agree with the CLRC’s recommendation in
Computer Software Protection
report (rec. 2.65), which provides
in part that ‘the Act be amended to provide published edition copyright be
extended to include
publication in computer or machine readable format’.
One member of the Committee is of the view that published edition copyright
should be extended to include publication in computer or machine-readable
format, as recommended by the CLRC in its
Computer Software Protection
Recommendation
A majority of the Committee recommends that published edition
extend to publications in computer or machine-readable format. The Committee,
with the exception of one member, acknowledges
that published edition copyright
will consequently remain a technology-specific provision.
Issue 2 – Proof of subsistence and ownership of copyright (rec.
7.154 Clause 11 of the
provided for the
inclusion in the
that reads as
Presumptions as to subsistence of copyright etc. in
sound recordings
126A (1) In an action brought under this Part in relation to a sound
recording, copyright is presumed to subsist in the sound recording
(a) the plaintiff files an affidavit:
(i) stating that the record embodying the sound recording or its container
bore a label or mark specifying the date and place of first
publication of the
sound recording; and
(ii) specifying that date and place; and
(b) the date and place of first publication specified in the affidavit are
such as, if proved, would support the subsistence of copyright
in the sound
recording on the day on which the action is instituted.
(2) If the subsistence of copyright is presumed under subsection (1), the
plaintiff is presumed to be entitled to bring the action
under this Part in
relation to the sound recording if the affidavit filed by the plaintiff
(a) that the plaintiff is the maker of the sound recording and is specified
on the label or container of the record embodying the
sound recording as the
maker of the sound recording; and
(b) that the plaintiff has not assigned the copyright in the sound
(3) If the plaintiff is not the maker of the sound recording, the plaintiff
is presumed to be entitled to bring the action under this
Part in relation to
the sound recording if the affidavit filed by the plaintiff:
(a) asserts that the plaintiff is entitled to bring the action as assignee or
exclusive licensee of the copyright in the sound recording:
(i) from the maker; or
(ii) from a person other than the maker; or
(b) asserts that the plaintiff is entitled to bring the action as owner of
the copyright under
subsection 97(3).
(4) An affidavit filed by the plaintiff under paragraph (3)(a) must list all
the persons through whom the plaintiff claims to have
the assignment or
exclusive licence of the copyright in the sound recording.
(5) The presumptions under subsections (1), (2) and (3) operate unless the
contrary is established.
7.155 The proposed section was part of a package of measures relating to the
parallel importing of sound recordings. The 1992 Bill
lapsed when Parliament was
prorogued prior to the 1993 federal election.
7.156 When parallel importation of sound recordings was dealt with in the
(Cth), no provision similar to the
proposed s. 126A was included. In the meantime, in its
Computer Software
report, the CLRC had recommended that a provision similar to
s. 126A be introduced in relation to proof of subsistence and ownership
7.157 In the course of consultation relating to the CLRC’s review of
protection for computer software, the ACC suggested that
the proposal should
apply to all materials in computer-readable format. The CLRC deferred
consideration of the issue as there had
been no detailed submissions on the
7.158 The proposal to adopt such a section and extend it to all materials in
computer-readable format received support in the current
consultations. Indeed,
the Law Council,
Corporation
recommended that a presumption of
ownership should be adopted in relation to all copyright material.
7.159 The Committee notes that the proposal to include s. 126A in the
Act recognised the need to assist owners of copyright in sound
recordings to
resist the importation of pirated copies when parallel importing was prohibited.
However, it is significant, in the
Committee’s view, that the 1998
amendments on this topic, which removed the right to prohibit parallel
importation of sound
recordings, did not include such a provision.
7.160 The Committee appreciates that owners of copyright can have problems in
establishing their right to title, particularly of foreign
However, ss. 126–131 of the Act already provide for a number of
presumptions relating to the subsistence
and ownership of copyright. Section
134A allows for evidence of such material to be given by affidavit. The
Committee considers that
the reversal of onus of proof in relation to
subsistence and ownership could lead to problems, particularly in the digital
environment.
Ownership could be asserted over material that is no longer
available, but it would be up to an alleged infringer to refute the claim
7.161 The Committee is of the view that owners of copyright must properly
document their claim to title and not be permitted to rely
on assertion.
7.162 The Committee notes that the previous recommendation of the CLRC
relating to proof of ownership of computer software is under
consideration by
the Government. The Committee makes no recommendation in relation to this
Recommendation
7.163 The Committee recommends that a section equivalent to the proposed
s. 126A not be introduced regarding proof of subsistence
and ownership of
A The Committee’s terms of reference and further matters for
consideration, as identified by the Copyright Convergence
of reference
1. The CLRC, having regard to Australia’s international obligations as
a member of the relevant international multilateral conventions
protection of copyright,
is to inquire into and report on:
(a) how to simplify the
to make it able to be
understood by people needing to understand their rights and obligations under
the Act, with particular attention
to simplification of the various provisions
and schemes that provide exceptions to the exclusive rights comprising
(b) whether the existing exclusive rights comprising copyright in works and
other subject matter under the
can realistically be
reduced to a smaller number of broadly based rights and, if so, what those
rights should be;
(ba) in advising on the redefining of the exclusive rights comprising
, how those
rights could implement the right of distribution provided for in Article 6 of
the WCT and Articles 8 and 12 of the WPPT;
(c) whether a more practical and suitable categorisation of protected subject
matter can be devised and, if so, how those categories
should be described;
(d) outstanding issues identified by the Copyright Convergence Group in its
Highways to Change
to the extent that they are not the
subject of a specific request for consideration under this reference or
of other processes of Federal Government inquiry; and
(e) incidental matters arising from the examination of points (a) to (d) and
which are able to be addressed by the CLRC within the
time frame for the
2. In undertaking the inquiry the CLRC will have regard to:
(a) any amendments to the
that are introduced into Parliament,
or which the Government announces are proposed to be introduced or are being
considered;
(b) the recommendations and reports made to Government by other relevant
expert or advisory bodies in intellectual property;
(c) ongoing developments in the relevant international copyright forums;
(d) technological developments;
(e) the effect of any changes on the structure and operation of public and
private sector organisations;
(f) the possible effect of changes in the nature of rights in the
on other intellectual property regimes;
(g) the history and nature of amendments to the
since 1968 and the effect these changes have had on the understanding, use and
operation of the
(h) the possible effect on the operation and complexity of any future
transitional
provisions to the
3. The CLRC must report to the Attorney-General by 31 August 1998.
identified by the Copyright Convergence Group
The matters the Copyright Convergence Group (CCG) identified in its report
Highways to Change
as requiring further consideration—referred to
in paragraph 1(d) of the Committee’s terms of reference—are as
the development of guidelines for
‘fair use’ of copying of materials by libraries and archives.* In
particular, the CCG
identified the following matters as warranting
the copying of subject
matter other than works by libraries for the purposes of
preservation;
electronic transmission
of requests for materials for inter-library
viewing and copying of
electronically transmitted material held by
application of legal deposit
provisions in s. 201 of the Act to cover electronically networked
information;
the conditions applying to
the copying of works for preservation and other purposes in s. 51A in
relation to the reformatting of electronic
information, as well as standard
current preservation
techniques;
whether the statutory
licence scheme provided for in Part VA of the Act concerning the educational
copying of radio and television
programs, which is currently limited to services
delivered by wireless telegraphy, should be extended to include all broadcasts,
including pay television and narrowcasting services* (paragraph 7.2 of the CCG
the scope of the existing
statutory licence schemes and exceptions to infringement, having regard to the
increasing use of electronic
transmission and copying of copyright materials
(including digital copying and electronic scanning of a work onto a database).*
particular, the CCG identified the following
provisions:
the statutory licences in
Part VB of the Act for the copying of works
– educational institutions;
– institutions assisting handicapped readers;
– institutions assisting intellectually handicapped people;
those provisions in Division 5 of
Part III of the Act providing for the copying of articles, unpublished works,
and other works for
preservation purposes in libraries and
the copying by libraries or
archives of films and sound recordings pursuant to ss. 110A and
the copying of various materials
by parliamentary libraries for Members of Parliament pursuant to
whether the present
definition of ‘cinematograph film’, provided in s. 10 of the
Act, remains an adequate category of
be replaced by a new broad category of ‘audiovisual work’ to
expressly cover
multimedia works (paragraph
whether the present definitions,
in s. 10 of the Act, of a ‘record’ and a ‘cinematograph
film’ are sufficient
to provide for the protection of sounds and visual
images created and stored digitally having regard to s. 24 concerning
‘References
to sounds and visual images embodied in an
article’—the CCG took the view that it was unclear whether
s. 24 required
sounds and images to exist before their embodiment in the
article or thing from which they are capable of being
reproduced;
whether there is a need to
provide a definition of ‘reproduction’ in the Act to ensure that new
uses of copyright materials
would be controllable by copyright owners (paragraph
the scope of the definition of
‘copy’, provided in s. 10 of the Act, which extends only to
cinematograph films, and whether
it does or should extend to material stored in
a non-permanent medium such as electronic memory—the CCG suggested that
matter be considered together with the scope of the ‘proposed right
of reproduction’ (paragraph
whether the definition of
‘publication’ in s. 29(1)(c) of the Act should be amended so as
to encompass the delivery of
sound recordings by digital or electronic means and
therefore provide copyright protection for sound recordings first distributed
the public in an intangible form (paragraph
whether the jurisdiction of the
include all forms of collective
licensing and, if so, whether this can be done
in keeping with Australia’s obligations under the Berne Convention
whether the
circumstances in which the broadcast of literary and dramatic works, sound
recordings and films that are performed or
exhibited to the public by means of a
receiving device constitute a public performance for the purposes of the
exemption under ss.
199(1), 199(2) and 199(3), having regard to the
increasing number of types of electronic delivery of these materials and the
of the proposed broadening of the definition of ‘broadcast’
(paragraph 7.11);
whether there is a
need to provide a mechanism for the use of copyright material where the
traced (paragraph
whether the operation of
s. 23 of the Act, which in effect deems a sound recording that has been
synchronised with a film not to be
a sound recording, is justified (paragraph
whether the scope of the
statutory licence for the broadcast of sound recordings, provided under
s. 109 of the Act, should be extended
to include broadcasts offered for
valuable consideration (paragraph
the copyright treatment of
point-to-point transmissions where the originator or recipient is outside
Australia (paragraph 3.3).
* These issues (except the legal deposit provisions in s. 201 of the
Act) were dealt with by the Committee in Part 1 of its simplification
B Alternative approaches considered
1 – Minimalist change approach (removal of Part III and IV
distinction)
General approach
B.01 This approach involves removal of the structural (but not conceptual)
distinction contained in the Act between Part III ‘works’
IV ‘subject matter other than works’, while continuing to treat the
two types of copyright material differently
(e.g. applying the originality
requirement only to Part III works and providing owners of Part IV material with
a more limited set
of exclusive rights). The approach also involves the
inclusion of two new rights—the right of communication to the public as
described at paragraphs 4.02–4.09, and the right of distribution as
described at paragraphs 4.10–4.56.
B.02 Under this approach performances continue to be dealt with separately
and are not included with the existing categories of subject
B.03 The resulting structure would resemble that found in the UK
B.04 The matrix shown describes the exclusive rights (both economic and
moral) on the X-axis and the protected subject matter on the
Y-axis. The matrix
indicates whether a particular right subsists in a particular subject matter
through describing either ‘Y’
(Yes) or ‘N’ (No).
Table 1 Approach 1
Comm. to Public
Y (if computer program or reproduced in sound
Y (if reproduced in sound recording)
Y (if reproduced in sound recording)
Table 2 Approach 1
Comm. to Public
Performances
‘communicate to the public’ = ‘broadcast right’ +
‘diffusion right’ + ‘new right of making
‘moral rights’ = the right of attribution and the right of
‘copy’ = the right to make a literal copy of the sound recording,
the film or the published edition; to make a film or
sound recording of a
broadcast; or to make a direct or indirect recording of a performance
Key to grey boxes:
a The Government is currently considering whether it will implement a
distribution right.
b The granting of these rights is dependent upon the implementation of the
WPPT. The Government has yet to make a commitment to accede
to the WPPT.
c As a result of the implementation of the distribution right, the right of
publication in relation to material in tangible form would
subsist in this
d The moral rights of attribution and integrity are the rights provided in
art. 6bis(1) of the Berne Convention, implemented along
the general lines
initially proposed by the Government in the
Possible advantages of approach
Retains existing jurisprudence which
should promote certainty during the transitional
Minimal impact on the current
operations of collecting societies and licensing
agreements;
Shortens and therefore
simplifies the Act by removing the duplication currently existing in the
treatment of ‘works’ and
‘subject matter other than
Possible disadvantages of approach
Relies on technology-specific
subject matter that does not reflect current technology, and that is not
flexible enough to encompass
developments;
May not go far enough in
creating technology-neutral rights which will be able to adapt to future
developments;
Maintains distinctions
based upon the tangible and intangible embodiments in which copyright material
Continues the need to be able
to identify a human ‘author’ of a
May be criticised as failing to
clearly reflect the fundamental distinction that is thought to exist between
authored works and other
2 – Conflation approach
General approach
B.05 The options described below involve:
the removal of the Part III and Part
IV distinction, along the lines described in the minimalist
the conflation of categories
of protected subject matter that have similar subsistence requirements and
exclusive rights, resulting
in a smaller number of categories, which are broadly
based and defined exclusively by reference to the current categories of subject
the conflation of related
exclusive economic rights, resulting in a smaller number of rights, which are
broadly based and defined
exclusively by reference to the current categories of
B.06 The approach continues the current
legislation’s differential application of the exclusive rights across the
of subject matter, even where those categories have been
B.07 The options described below are based upon the assumption that the right
of communication to the public and the right of distribution
implemented as described at paragraphs 4.02–4.56.
B.08 Under this approach performances are recognised as a specific category
of subject matter, and are dealt with together with Part
IV subject matter.
B.09 Note that for the purposes of presenting this approach the options
described below are expressed in a summary form and do not
indicate the
subtleties in the application of exclusive rights to subject matter. For
example, in Option (b) a Yes is given for the
application of moral rights to the
conflated category of ‘audiovisual works’. This is meant to indicate
only that moral
rights will apply to that subset of subject matter in the
category to which the Government has already decided to grant moral rights
(namely, cinematograph films). It is not intended to suggest moral rights will
apply to all other subject matter in that category
(i.e. moral rights will not
apply to sound recordings).
B.10 Note also that the analysis contained in the key to Approach 1 also
applies to this approach.
Table 3 Option (a)
Comm. to public
Literary works
Sound recordings
Performances
‘reproduction’ = ‘reproduction right’ +
‘adaptation right’
‘communicate to the public’ = ‘broadcast right’ +
‘diffusion right’ + ‘new right of making
‘moral rights’ = the right of attribution and the right of
‘literary works’ = literary + dramatic + musical works
Table 4 Option (b)
Comm. to public
Literary and artistic works
Audiovisual works
Performances
‘reproduction’ = ‘reproduce right’ +
‘adaptation right’
‘communicate to the public’ = ‘broadcast right’ +
‘diffusion right’ + ‘new right of making
‘moral rights’ = the right of attribution and the right of
‘literary and artistic works’ = literary + dramatic + musical +
artistic works
‘audiovisual works’ = cinematograph films + sound recordings
Table 5 Option (c)
Disseminate
Literary and artistic works
Audiovisual works
Performances
‘reproduce’ = ‘copy’ + ‘reproduce’ (as
defined in options (a) and (b))
‘disseminate’ = ‘publication right’ +
‘performance right’ + ‘communication to the public
right’ (as defined in options (a) and (b)) + ‘rental right’
and ‘distribution right’
moral rights = the rights of attribution and integrity
‘literary and artistic works’ = literary + dramatic + musical +
artistic works
‘audiovisual works’ = cinematograph films + sound recordings
Protected subject matter
B.11 In this approach the conflation of categories of subject matter involves
the combining of two or more categories into the one
category. It is intended
that the new conflated categories of subject matter be defined exhaustively,
through reference to their
component subcategories. It should be noted, however,
that the component subcategories may themselves be open-ended (e.g. as currently
is the case regarding the definition of literary and dramatic works).
Part III works
B.12 The requirements for the subsistence of copyright in literary, dramatic,
musical and artistic works are the same; namely, that
the work falls within a
recognisable category of subject matter described in Part III, and that the work
also satisfies the requirements
of being original, in a material form and
connected with the territory of Australia.
B.13 The owners of literary, dramatic and musical works enjoy the same
categories of exclusive rights. It should be noted, however,
that the rights
that subsist in these categories vary in the extent of their application. For
example, it was noted at the Sydney
consultations that the owners of musical
works enjoy a broader performance right than the owners of literary and dramatic
works (e.g.
under s. 45 the reading or recitation in public of an extract
of reasonable length from a published literary or dramatic work does
constitute an infringement of the copyright in the work if sufficient
acknowledgment of the work is made; a corresponding exception
does not appear to
exist in relation to musical works). Further, the scope of the adaptation right
is defined differently in relation
to a literary, dramatic and musical work.
B.14 The rights that subsist in literary, dramatic and musical works differ
from those that subsist in artistic works. Owners of copyright
in artistic works
do not enjoy an adaptation right or a performance right, both of which are
enjoyed by the owners of other categories
of Part III works.
B.15 Under this second approach the options regarding the conflation of Part
III works include:
conflation of literary, dramatic and musical works into the
one subject matter; and the defining of artistic works as a separate
conflation of all Part III works into the one subject
B.16 As noted above, the conflation approach continues to recognise the
differential application of the exclusive rights across the
categories of
subject matter. Artistic works therefore do not receive an adaptation right or
performance right, even where they have
been conflated into the category of
literary and artistic works described in option (b). This approach must be
contrasted with that
of the preferred ‘technology-neutral’ approach,
where the harmonisation of rights has been implemented where practicable
paragraph 5.67).
Part IV subject matter other than works
B.17 The subsistence requirements for Part IV materials are the same; namely,
that the copyright material must fall within one of
the four categories of Part
IV subject matter, and that there must be a sufficient connection with the
territory of Australia. The
rights that subsist in Part IV materials, however,
vary dramatically.
B.18 Under the approach of conflating subject matter with similar subsistence
requirements and exclusive rights, the only possible
conflation is of the
categories of sound recordings and cinematograph films. In this regard the
options include:
leave sound recordings and cinematograph films as distinct
categories of subject matter; or
conflate sound recordings and cinematograph films into a
broad new category known as ‘audiovisual works’.
B.19 It should be noted that under the US legislation the category of
‘audiovisual works’ includes cinematograph film
as a specific
subcategory referred to as ‘motion pictures’. It should also be
noted that the US Act does not include
sound recordings within the category of
audiovisual works, and that under the US Act sound recordings are treated as a
separate category.
B.20 Further, it should be noted that under the conflation approach the issue
of how to protect multimedia entities remains unresolved,
as the conflated
category of ‘audiovisual works’ is defined exhaustively through
reference to the current categories
of cinematograph films and sound
recordings.
B.21 Under this approach unoriginal databases remain unprotected.
Exclusive rights
B.22 In this approach the conflation of rights involves the combining of two
or more related exclusive rights into the one exclusive
right. It is intended
that the new conflated exclusive rights be defined exhaustively through
reference to their component sub-rights.
Right of reproduction
B.23 A new right of reproduction would be achieved through the conflation of
the current reproduction right and adaptation right.
B.24 It should be noted that this new right would not be granted to Part IV
subject matter or performances. These would continue to
enjoy only a narrow form
of the reproduction right (i.e. the right to make a literal copy of the sound
recording, film or published
edition; to make a film or sound recording of a
broadcast; or to make a direct or indirect recording of a performance).
Broadly based right of communication to the public
B.25 Under the conflation approach the introduction of a broadly based right
of communication to the public would be recommended in
the same form as in the
minimalist approach. At the Sydney consultations there was only minimal support
for the extension of the
communication right to published editions. The majority
of the organisations attending the forum appeared indifferent to this issue.
Further conflations
B.26 Option (c) is produced by the further conflation of rights into two
broadly based rights of reproduction and dissemination. The
broadly based
reproduction right is created through the conflation of the existing right to
make a literal copy and the conflated
right of reproduction. The broadly based
right of dissemination is created through the conflation of the existing
publication, performance
and rental rights, the conflated reproduction right,
and the new communication to the public and distribution right.
B.27 It should be noted that this ‘super conflated’ approach
structurally resembles the French model which primarily has
two broad economic
rights—the right of reproduction and the right of performance
(arts. L.122-1–L.122-3 of the French
Law on the Intellectual
Property Code 1992
). It is important to note, however, that the French
rights are open-ended and interpreted in a very broad manner, whereas the rights
under the conflation approach are defined exhaustively.
Possible advantages of approach
Generally retains the existing
jurisprudence which should promote certainty during the transitional
Shortens and therefore
simplifies the Act by removing the duplication currently existing in the
treatment of works and subject matter
May simplify the Act through the
conflation of subject matter and exclusive
Performances are given
protection as a category of copyright subject matter.
disadvantages of approach
May be considered as failing to
clearly reflect the fundamental distinction that is thought to exist between
authored works and other
Does not implement
technology-neutral subject matter and rights that will be able to adapt to
future developments;
distinctions based upon the tangible and intangible embodiments in which
the need to be able to identify a human ‘author’ of a
Does not resolve the issue of how
to protect multimedia entities or unoriginal
It is unclear whether the
approach of conflating rights actually simplifies the Act or merely adds a
further level of complexity.
The conflated rights suggested in this approach
would have to be further broken down through the definition of the component
sub-rights.
This approach may in fact be more complicated than simply presenting
the component rights;
It does not
harmonise the application of the exclusive rights to the different types of
subject matter within the conflated categories.
It is arguable that this may
lead to a further level of complexity in order to maintain the current
legislation’s differential
application of the exclusive rights across
these categories (e.g. the maintenance of the subtle differences that exist in
the application
of the exclusive rights to literary, dramatic and musical works;
or further, possible differences in the application of future moral
‘audiovisual works’ where such rights may subsist in cinematograph
films but not in sound recordings).
3 – International conventions approach
General approach
B.28 This approach is drawn from Ricketson’s 1997 article entitled
‘The New Copyright Act
The Committee refers to it
here as the ‘international conventions’ approach because, in its
view, this model reflects
the general approach of the international conventions
on copyright and neighbouring rights, and the implementation of them in civil
law systems. Thus, this approach continues the dichotomy between material that
is the product of some ‘original’ contribution
of the author
(subject matter that is within the authors’ rights conventions, such as
the Berne Convention and the WIPO Copyright
Treaty) and derivative productions
resulting from collective enterprise and investment (subject matter that is
within the neighbouring
rights conventions, such as the Rome and Geneva
Conventions and the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty).
B.29 The distinction between the two categories of protected subject matter
turns on the ‘innovation threshold’. The phrase
‘innovation
threshold’ is used to refer to the threshold requirements that must be
satisfied before material comes within
one or other category of subject matter,
and especially the requirement that equates with ‘originality’ under
the current
legislation.
Protected subject matter
B.30 There are only two types of subject matter—an ‘original
literary and artistic work’ (‘OLAW’) and
a ‘derivative
production’ (‘DP’). In essence, the category of OLAW equates
with the current Part III subject
matter, and the category of DP equates with
Part IV subject matter.
B.31 The point of distinction between OLAW and DP is the degree of
originality of the subject matter. An OLAW is a production in the
literary or
artistic sphere that is the result of the application of significant
intellectual effort by its author. The requirement
of a ‘production in the
literary or artistic sphere’ encompasses the range of subject matter
within the Berne Convention.
The requirement of ‘significant intellectual
effort’ equates with the originality requirement provided for in the Berne
Convention (which may be higher than the one under the current legislation). A
DP is a production using or embodying an OLAW (whether
or not combined with
other material), being the result of time, effort or resources by the maker.
Exclusive rights
B.32 The exclusive rights include both moral and economic rights.
Table 6 Approach 3
attribution of authorship
(Y re a perf’nce)
integrity of work
(Y re a perf’nce)
reproduction in material form
dissemination in non-material form
first distribution by sale of material fixations
commercial rental of material fixations
making and distribution of material copies
Consequences of approach
B.33 The main significance of this approach is in relation to the form,
rather than the substance, of the law. The resulting change
of form is achieved
by the major reduction of protected subject matter to the two historical
categories of original creations and
derivative productions, and by the less
major reduction of exclusive rights to six categories of economic rights and two
rights. The distinction between original and non-original subject
matter, and hence between authored and computer-generated subject
B.34 The major change of substance comes from the way in which the categories
of protected subject matter, and to a lesser extent
the categories of exclusive
rights, are defined. The two categories of protected subject matter use a broad
and open definition,
combined with an inclusive listing of particular types of
subject matter. As a consequence, categorisation of subject matter is less
technologically specific than that in the current legislation. A degree of
technological specificity is maintained, however, by virtue
of the need for a
human author.
B.35 The definition of the categories of exclusive rights is of a similar
style to the definition of the categories of protected subject
matter. Thus, the
exclusive rights are also less technologically specific than that in the current
legislation. A degree of technological
specificity is maintained by virtue of
the right of first distribution being distribution by material fixation
Possible advantages of approach
Simplification of the structure of
the legislation is obtained, while retaining most of the current principles of
law including the
key distinction between ‘works’ and ‘other
subject matter’.
categories of protected subject matter are less technologically specific than at
present, due to the use of a broad and inclusive
definition.
The use of an inclusive
listing of protected subject matter under each broadly defined category provides
a degree of certainty.
Performances are
given protection as a species of copyright subject
Possible disadvantages of approach
It is not clear into which category
the current subject matter of cinematograph film
It is not clear the extent to
which other multimedia entities are
The category of DP may be
unduly limited, by virtue of the requirement in the definition that it be a
‘production which uses
or embodies original literary or artistic
works’. This definition would seem to exclude such items as recordings and
of material other than original literary and artistic works, even if
those recordings and broadcasts were the result of the application
effort and resources by the maker (being the innovation threshold for
The categorisation of protected
subject matter is technologically specific, in that protection as an OLAW is
conditional on the identification
of a human author. This means that
computer-generated material can never be protected at the higher
Little in the way of
simplification is achieved in relation to exclusive
The distinction between
tangible and intangible embodiments is maintained in relation to the exclusive
There does not appear be an
exclusive right that encompasses the current performance
C Original submissions
Submission number
Zomba Production Music (Australia) Pty Ltd
Australian Toy Association Ltd
Institute of Faith, Education Archdiocese of Brisbane
Australian Caption Centre
Mr Mark Davison, Faculty of Law, Monash University
IBM Australia Ltd
Australian Association of Broadcast Monitors
The Australian Map Circle
Uniloc Corporation Pty Ltd
Australian Law Reform Commission
Australian Manufacturers’ Patents, Industrial Designs, Copyright and
Trade Mark Association #1
National Library of Australia & National Film and Sound Archive
Open Learning Institute of Research and Development, Charles Sturt
Prices Surveillance Authority
Canadian Copyright Licensing Agency
NSW Technical and Further Education Commission
CSIRO Australia
American Intellectual Property Law Association
The Commonwealth of Learning #1
Hydrographic Service, Royal Australian Navy #1
National Film and Sound Archive #1
Council of Australian University Librarians
Australian Bureau of Statistics
Australian Council of Building Design Professions Ltd
Motion Picture Distributors Association of Australia &
Australasian Film and Video Security Office
Mr Alistair Little, Tress Cocks & Maddox Solicitors and Notaries
Society of Advertising, Commercial and Magazine Photographers Ltd &
Australian Institute of Professional Photography
Telstra Corporation Ltd
Australian Record Industry Association Ltd
Open Training and Education Network
Australian Bankers Association
Australian Council of Libraries and Information Services #1
Mr Jeff Catchlove
John XXIII Catholic Community
Powerhouse Museum
Australian Book Publishers Association Ltd
Australian Archives
Office of the Arts and Cultural Affairs, Northern Territory of
National Library of Australia
Fellowship of Australian Composers
Victoria University of Technology
Australian Council of Archives
International Business Communications Pty Ltd
Combined Newspapers and Magazine Copyright Committee of Australia
Audio-Visual Copyright Society Ltd #1
Royal Australian Institute of Architects
Australian Society of Archivists
New South Wales Parliamentary Library
Law Council of Australia, Intellectual Property Committee, Business Law
Queensland Parliamentary Library
Audio-Visual Copyright Society Ltd #2
Australian Copyright Council
Independent Schools Teacher Librarians Network Group
Arts Law Centre of Australia
Queensland Government (Information Policy Board)
Association of Parliamentary Librarians of Australasia
National Amusement Machine Operators Association Ltd #1
Australian Council for Radio for the Print Handicapped
Oracle Systems Australia Pty Ltd
Mr Malcolm J Barstch
Learning Network Pty Ltd
Business Software Alliance &
Business Software Association of Australia Ltd
Dr Noris Ioannou #1
Australian Institute of Quantity Surveyors
Australian Library and Information Association
Australian Surveying and Land Information Group
Association de Gestion Internationale Collective des Œuvres
Audiovisuelles
Australian Disability Consultative Council
Round Table on Reading Materials for People with Print Disabilities Inc.
Film Australia Ltd
Northern Territory Library
Advertising Federation of Australia Ltd
The Federation of Australian Radio Broadcasters Ltd
University of New South Wales, Division of Information Services
Australia Council for the Arts
Australian Information Industry Association
Australian Vice-Chancellors Committee
Office of Regulation Review, Industry Commission
National Amusement Machine Operators Association Ltd #2
ACT Library Service
Ms Kathleen Crees #1
Mr David H Price
Genealogical Society of Victoria Inc.
Dr Noris Ioannou #2
University of New South Wales
Council of Australian State Libraries
Australian National University (Library)
Hydrographic Service, Royal Australian Navy #2
Federal Libraries Information Network
Ms Jennifer Douglas
Australian Multimedia Enterprise Ltd
National Languages and Literacy Institute of Australia
Australian Broadcasting Corporation, Legal and Copying Department
Department of Lands, Queensland
University of Melbourne
National Federation of Blind Citizens of Australia
The Commonwealth of Learning #2
National Tertiary Education Industry Union
Commonwealth Treasury
Craft Australia
Kathleen Crees #2
Australian Council of Libraries and Information Services #2
National Film and Sound Archive #2
Council of Australian University Librarians #2
Neurosurgical Society of Australasia
Mona Vale Hospital and Community Health Services
Round Table on Reading Materials for People with Print Disabilities Inc.
Pharmaceutical Society of Australia, NSW Branch Ltd
Australian Orthopaedic Association
Dietitians Association of Australia
Sydney Hospital–Sydney Eye Hospital
Australian Manufacturers’ Patents, Industrial Designs, Copyright and
Trade Mark Association #2
Mooditj—Development Unit For Instructional Technology, University of
Western Australia
Australian and New Zealand Society of Nephrology
Medical Women’s Society of New South Wales
School of Health Sciences, Northern Territory University
Merck Sharp & Dohme Australia Pty Ltd
Monash University
Australian Manufacturers’ Patents, Industrial Designs, Copyright and
Trade Mark Association #3
Australasian Faculty of Rehabilitation Medicine
Royal Australasian College of Surgeons
Mrs L Miles
Gregary Chase
Murray Mancha Pty Ltd
Advertising Federation of Australia Ltd #2
Geographe Replacement Parts Pty Ltd
Arts Libraries Society, Australia New Zealand
D Consideration of outstanding CCG and
Computer Software
issues—submissions
Submission number
Productivity Commission
Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd
Australian Broadcasting Corporation
Federation of Australian Commercial Television Stations
Australian Surveying and Land Information Group (email)
Australia New Zealand Land Information Council
Business Software Alliance & Business Software Association of Australia
Australian Hydrographic Office
Australian Publishers Association
Screenrights
Mark Davison, Faculty of Law, Monash University
Telstra Corporation
Australian Council of Libraries and Information Services
Australian Visual Software Distributors Association Ltd
National Archives of Australia
Australian Vice-Chancellors Committee
Australian Copyright Council
The Federation of Australian Radio Broadcasters Ltd
Australian Library and Information Association
The University of Melbourne
Department of Education, Victoria
National Library of Australia
Advertising Federation of Australia
Law Council of Australia
Australasian Film and Video Security Office/ Motion Picture
Association
CSIRO Publishing
National Federation of Blind Citizens of Australia
Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery
Australasian Performing Right Association Ltd
Australian Record Industry Association Limited
Council of Australian University Librarians
National Film and Sound Archive
Submissions on Legal Deposit (received after the CLRC’s public forum
of 28 April 1997)
State Library of New South Wales
Federation of Australian Commercial Broadcasters
Australian Copyright Council
Law Council of Australia
E Organisations represented at the consultations on the reform of exclusive
rights and categories of subject matter
Consultations were held in Sydney, Monday 13 July 1998
Organisation
Australasian Performing Right Association Ltd, also represented
Australasian Mechanical Copyright Owners Society
Christian Copyright Licensing Asia–Pacific
Screenrights
Australian Writers’ Guild Authorship Collecting Society
Visual Arts Copyright Collecting Agency
Phonographic Performance Company of Australia Ltd
Australian Council of Libraries and Information Services
Arts Law Centre of Australia
Australian Broadcasting Corporation
Australian Digital Alliance
Australian Information Industry Association Ltd
Australian Interactive Multimedia Industry Association
Australian Publishers Association
Australian Society of Authors
Federation of Australian Radio Broadcasters
Fellowship of Australian Composers
Law Council of Australia
New South Wales Bar Association
Law Society of New South Wales
Australasian Film and Video Security Office & Motion Picture
Distributors Association of Australia
Australian Film Commission
Screen Producers’ Association of Australia
Federation of Australian Commercial Television Stations
Australian Film Finance Corporation
Special Broadcasting Corporation
Australian Copyright Council
F Follow-up submissions to the consultations on the reform of exclusive rights
and categories of subject matter
Submission number
Australian Surveying and Land Information Group (Auslig)
Australasian Performing Right Association Ltd
Law Council of Australia
Australian Record Industry Association Ltd
Screenrights
Australian Copyright Council
Australian Digital Alliance
Visual Arts and Collecting Agency
Australian Council of Libraries and Information Services
Australian Screen Directors Authorship Collecting Society
Sega Enterprises Ltd v Galaxy
Electronics Pty Ltd
(1996) 35 IPR 161
, affirmed on appeal to the Full Court
of the Federal Court
(1997) 37 IPR 462.
S Ricketson, 1987,
The Berne Convention
for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works: 1886–1986
London (hereinafter referred to as Ricketson: Berne Convention),
ibid., p. 368.
It should be noted, however, that
art. 9 of the yet-to-be-adopted
WIPO Copyright Treaty
states that
contracting parties shall not apply the provisions of art. 7(4) of the
Berne Convention in respect of photographic works.
J Lahore, 1996,
, Law Book Co, Sydney, paragraph 56,215.
Under the Rome Convention, the minimum
level of protection granted to performers is provided under art. 7. Subject
to certain exceptions
the protection includes the possibility of preventing the
broadcasting and communication to the public of their performance, the
of their unfixed performance, and the reproduction of a fixation of their
performance.
Also, under the Rome Convention, the minimum level of protection granted to
producers of sound recordings is provided under art.
10 which provides such
producers with a right of reproduction only.
It should be noted that art. 12 of the Rome Convention provides for the
payment of a single equitable remuneration to performers
and to producers of
phonograms for the broadcasting or for any communication to the public of a
published phonogram.
Further, under the Rome Convention, the minimum level of protection granted
to broadcasting organisations is provided under art.
13. Subject to certain
exceptions, art. 13 provides that such organisations have the right to
authorise or prohibit the rebroadcasting
of their broadcasts, the fixation of
their broadcasts, and the reproduction of unauthorised fixations.
This was in fact acknowledged by the
Attorney-General in the second reading speech on the
, House of Representatives, 18 June 1997, p. 5436).
Note that the
passed on 30 July
1998 did not contain the Schedule originally included to address the moral
rights deficiency. The Committee understands
that, as a result of the report of
the Senate Legal and Constitutional Legislation Committee, the Government is
engaging in further
consultations on the implementation of moral rights.
It should be noted that, with the
exception of the statement made by the Office of Regulation Review at paragraph
3.32, the arguments
described below were stated publicly at the Sydney
consultations. Some of the arguments have been elaborated in the follow-up
submissions
which the Committee received after the consultations.
Original submission from the Office of
Regulation Review (1995), 81.10.
Ricketson: Berne Convention,
ibid., p. 366.
See, for example, ss. 77 and 80
These issues were specifically raised
for public comment in a discussion paper jointly published by the
Attorney-General’s
Department and the Department of Communications and the
Arts entitled
Performers’ Intellectual Property Rights
1997, paragraphs 3.30–3.40.
WCT and WPPT agreed statements
concerning the relevant articles.
The Committee notes that the later two
examples of a limited recognition of the distribution right exist as secondary
or indirect
infringements, as they require the proof of a mental element on
behalf on the infringer. This is to be distinguished from direct
infringements
of copyright (such as publication) where such a mental element is not required.
The Committee believes that the right
of distribution as contained under the new
treaties is an example of a direct infringement of copyright.
Ricketson: Berne Convention,
ibid., p. 400.
WIPO Guide to Berne,
Ricketson: Berne Convention,
ibid., p. 401.
Lahore, op. cit., paragraph
CBS Inc v Scorpio Music
Distributors
(DC ED Pa. 1983); (CA-3
[1984] USCA3 746
1984) 738 F 2d 424.
(1998) 40 IPR 307 (SC
S Stewart, 1989,
International
, Butterworths, London, p. 71.
Public Lending Right Act 1985
Public Lending Right Scheme 1997
, Schedule 7, ss. 6 and 8.
As stated by ACLIS at the Sydney
consultations on the
Reform of Exclusive Rights and Categories of Subject
, 13 July 1998, and also in a follow-up submission to the CLRC
Stewart, op. cit.,
Diplomatic Conference on
Certain Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Questions
, Geneva, 2–20
December 1996.
which received Royal
Assent on 30 July 1998.
[1990] HCA 58
(1990) 18 IPR 443.
[1982] AC 1
[1981] 1 All ER 1057.
Lahore, op. cit., paragraph
[1974] RPC 57.
ibid. at 67–68.
[1914] UKLawRpCh 110
[1914] 2 Ch 728.
[1990] HCA 58
(1990) 18 IPR 443.
In this respect the Committee accepts
the view of a number of authoritative commentators, to the effect that the
art. 3(3) limitation
should be seen as a ‘terminological
error’: see G Koumantos,
The Notion of Publication in the Berne
, (1964) RIDA 4, 6; S Ricketson,
The Berne Convention for the
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works: 1886–1986
pp. 191–192. In light of this view, the preferred approach is to read
down the art. 3(3) limitation, by holding it relevant
only to the matter
dealt with in the article in which it appears.
Chairman of the Committee of Experts
on a possible protocol to the Berne Convention and on a possible instrument for
the protection
of the rights of performers and producers of phonograms, 30
August 1996, CRNR/DC/4.
For examples of such unnecessary
duplication of exceptions and limitations, see
of the Committee’s
report, paragraphs 4.02–4.03.
The Committee uses the phrase
‘multimedia entity’ to mean a collection of copyright and/or
non-copyright materials, that
are textual, aural and/or visual in nature, and
which are accessible in a non-linear way by the use of a computer program. The
accessibility of the content of a multimedia entity is referred to as
its interactivity. It is this feature that distinguishes multimedia
from other collections.
See paragraphs 7.05–7.17.
Pages 214–215.
For example, the possible overlap
between the right of publication and the right of making available, and the
possible overlap between
the rental and publication rights with the diffusion
Intellectual Property
ibid., p. 17.
Whether a sound recording is protected
as a Creation or a Production depends, of course, on which innovation threshold
it satisfies.
As explained in paragraph 5.58, the majority of the Committee
expects most, if not all, sound recordings to be protected only as
Production.
Documents 1948, 94–95 (report of
Ricketson: Berne Convention,
For example, in relation to a literary
work being a compilation, the courts have held that such material is not
protected unless
its creation resulted from a sufficient degree of ‘skill,
judgement or labour’ on the part of the creator:
Ladbroke (Football)
Ltd v William Hill (Football) Ltd
1 All ER 465 (HL).
relation to an artistic work derived from an earlier artistic work, the courts
in Australia have held that the later work will
not be original unless it
exhibits differences that make it ‘visually distinctive’ from the
earlier work:
Interlego AG v Croner Trading Pty Ltd
[1992] FCA 624
(1993) 25 IPR 65
be contrasted with
Interlego AG v Tyco Industries Inc
[1988] UKPC 3
[1989] 1 AC 217
where the Privy Council on appeal from Hong Kong required differences between
the two works that were ‘visually significant’.
For example, this requirement may be
higher than the requirement that a compilation be the result of some skill,
judgment or labour,
and the requirement that a later artistic work be visually
distinctive from an earlier artistic work, as discussed in the immediately
preceding footnote.
‘Qualified person’ is
to mean an Australian citizen, an Australian protected
person or a person resident in Australia.
In relation to a published original
work, copyright will also subsist if the first publication of the work took
place in Australia.
Pursuant to the Copyright (International Protection)
Regulations, these territorial connecting factors are extended, so as to be
satisfied by authors who are nationals, etc of Berne Union and/or WTO countries
and by first publication in Berne Union and/or WTO
In relation to a sound recording or
cinematograph film, the reference is to the ‘maker’ of it:
ss. 89(1) and 90(1).
In relation to a broadcast, the reference is to the
entity responsible for making, or licensed to make, the broadcast: s. 91.
relation to a published edition, the reference is to the
‘publisher’ of it: s. 92(1).
See, for example
Newspapers Plc v Liverpool Daily Post and Echo Plc
[1985] FSR 306
UK court held a series of grids and letter sequences generated by computer was a
literary work authored by the person who
had written the relevant computer
(UK), s. 9(3), which provides that the author of a
computer-generated work is the person by whom the arrangements necessary for the
creation of the work are undertaken’. Section 178 of that legislation
defines a work to be ‘computer-generated’
when ‘the work is
generated by computer in circumstances such that there is no human author of the
Computer Software Protection
, Attorney-General’s Department,
Canberra, chapter 13.
An express provision to this effect is
contained in s. 3(2) of the UK
. This provision is considered as merely codifying the law as it
previously stood, as illustrated by cases such as
Walter v Lane
[1900] UKLawRpAC 52
Section 10(1).
Section 10(1).
Section 92(1).
Section 10(1).
(1997) 37 IPR 462.
In the case of performances, this
protection is under the provisions of Part XIA of the
Article 2(2).
See, for example, art. 10, paragraph 1
of the Spanish Law on Intellectual Property of 11 November 1987.
Computer Software Protection
Discussion paper jointly published by
the Attorney-General’s Department and the Department of Communications and
Performers’ Intellectual Property Rights
December 1997.
As stated by APRA at the Sydney
consultations and in its follow-up submission to the Sydney consultations
The Committee notes that Schedule 1 to
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) further clarifies the broad right to
‘exploit’ through the use of inclusive examples.
Ricketson: Berne Convention, p.
ibid., p. 398.
ibid., p. 291.
Berne Convention, art.
Stewart, op. cit., p. 65.
Ricketson: Berne Convention, p.
Committee Appointed by the
Attorney-General of the Commonwealth to Consider what Alterations are Desirable
to the Copyright Law
of the Commonwealth, 1965, Report, AGPS, Canberra,
paragraph 490.
Lahore, op. cit., paragraph
Avel Pty Ltd v Multicoin Amusement
[1990] HCA 58
(1990) 18 IPR 443.
It does not include any distribution beyond first
putting into public circulation, because that interpretation would be
inconsistent
with the law that operated prior to the Act and would render
superfluous s. 38 of the Act, which provides sale or distribution is
infringement only if a knowledge requirement is satisfied.
Note that the
Act (No. 1) 1998
passed on 30 July 1998 did not contain the Schedule
originally included on moral rights. The Committee understands that, as a result
of the report of the Senate Legal and Constitutional Legislation Committee, the
Government is engaging in further consultations on
the implementation of moral
Section 33(3).
Section 33(2).
Section 33(3).
Sections 33(6), 93, 94 and 96
respectively.
Section 95.
Section 248CA.
See paragraph 4.49.
In this respect the Committee accepts
the view of a number of authoritative commentators, to the effect that the
art. 3(3) limitation
should be seen as a ‘terminological
error’: see G Koumantos,
The Notion of Publication in the Berne
, (1964) RIDA 4, 6; S Ricketson,
The Berne Convention for the
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works: 1886–1986
pp. 191–192. In light of this view, the preferred approach is to read
down the art. 3(3) limitation, by holding it relevant
only to the matter
dealt with in the article in which it appears.
Section 33(2) and (3).
Sections 33(6), 93 and 94
respectively.
Section 95.
Section 96.
See ss. 35(3), 196 and 197.
Section 35(2).
Section 97(2). Under s. 29(3)(b),
the maker of a sound recording is deemed to be the person who owned the first
record at the time
the first record embodying the recording was made.
Section 98(2). Under s. 29(4)(b),
the maker of a cinematograph film is deemed to be the person by whom the
arrangements necessary
for the making of the film were undertaken.
Section 99 specifies the ABC, the SBS
and the holder of a broadcast licence as the owners of copyright in the
broadcasts made by
Section 100.
Section 35(4).
Section 35(6).
Section 35(5).
Section 98(3).
Section 99(3).
This being the person deemed, by
s. 29(3)(b), to be the maker of a sound recording.
Section 29(4)(b).
Section 248J(1).
See paragraph 5.64.
For example, see generally
Ladbroke (Football) Ltd v William Hill (Football) Ltd
[1964] 1 WLR 273
Elanco Products Ltd v Mandops (Agrochemcial Specialists) Ltd
FSR 46 (CA)
Skybas Nominees Pty Ltd v Fortuity Pty Ltd
(1996) 36 IPR 529
C of A—Full Court); and
A-One Accessory Imports Pty Ltd v Off Road
Imports Pty Ltd
(1996) 34 IPR 306.
As stated by CAL at the Sydney
consultations and in its follow-up submission to the Sydney consultations
Paragraph 5.04.
Paragraph 5.06.
Paragraph 5.75.
Paragraph 5.07.
Paragraph 5.08.
The definition reads:
‘“material form”, in relation to a work or an adaptation of a
work, includes any form (whether
visible or not) of storage from which the work
or adaptation, or a substantial part of the work or adaptation, can be
reproduced’.
It is defined in s. 10(1) as
‘the aggregate of the visual images embodied in an
so as to be capable by the use of that article or thing:
(a) of being shown as a moving picture;
(b) of being embodied in another article or thing by the use of which it can
be so shown;
and includes the aggregate of sounds embodied in a sound-track associated
with such visual images’
(emphasis added)
‘Sound-track’ is defined in s. 10(1) as follows:
‘in relation to visual images forming part of a cinematograph film,
(a) the part of any article or thing, being an article or thing in which
those visual images are embodied, in which sounds are embodied;
Paragraph 5.08.
Paragraphs 14.83–14.88 of
that report.
Article 10(2).
Berne Convention,
TRIPS art. 10(2) and WCT
1997 edition—it is an annual
publication.
The majority proposes a fixed term
of years as the duration of protection for ‘productions’, compared
with the term
for ‘creations’ of life of the author plus 50 years,
the present term for works (see paragraphs 5.96–5.107).
Paragraph 5.63.
Paragraph 5.117.
Paragraph 6.22.
Paragraph 6.04.
Terms of reference, paragraph
Copinger and Skone James on
, 1991, Sweet and Maxwell, London, p. 20.
Sega Enterprises Ltd v Galaxy
Electronics Pty Ltd
(1996) 35 IPR 161
, affirmed on appeal to the Full Court
of the Federal Court
(1997) 37 IPR 462.
(1996) 35 IPR 161
ibid. at 167.
(1997) 37 IPR 462
See paragraphs 4.40–4.51 and
Original submission by Information
Policy Board on behalf of Queensland Government (1995), 58.11.
Submission from APRA, 30.04.
Submission from Law Council of
Australia, 24.02.
Diplomatic Conference on Certain
, Geneva, 2–20 December
1996. Basic proposal for the substantive provisions of the treaty on certain
questions concerning the
protection of literary and artistic works to be
considered by the diplomatic conference. Prepared by the Chairman of the
of Experts on a possible protocol to the Berne Convention and on a
possible instrument for the protection of the rights of performers
and producers
of phonograms, 30 August 1996, CRNR/DC/4.
Submission from ACLIS, 13.03.
Submission from FARB, 18.02.
Highways to Change
paragraph 1.3.2.
Submission from LCA, 24.03.
Submission from the Australasian
Film and Video Security Office for the MPA, 23.05.
Submission from ARIA on Exclusive
Rights and Subject Matter Categories, 4.05.
Submission from FACTS, 4.06.
Submission from FARB, 18.02.
Minutes of meeting of Spicer
Committee, 26 May 1958.
Submissions from Accommodation
Owners Association of NSW, Victorian Chamber of Catering Industries representing
the Guest House Association
of Victoria, and the Tourist House Association of
Submission from Accommodation
Owners Association of NSW.
Lahore, op. cit., paragraph
34,440. Cases cited by Professor Lahore include
Australasian Performing Right
Association Ltd v Commonwealth Bank of Australia
[1992] FCA 609
(1992) 25 IPR 157
Australasian Performing Right Association Ltd v Telstra Corporation Ltd
[1997] HCA 41
(1997) 38 IPR 294.
ibid., paragraph 34,450.
ibid., paragraph 34,440.
ibid., paragraph 34,450 citing
Australasian Performing Right Association v Canterbury-Bankstown League Club
65] NSWR 138
Performing Right Society Ltd v Rangers
Football Club Supporters Club
[1974] SLT 151.
Submission from ARIA on
Miscellaneous Exceptions, 42.03.
Submission from APA, 09.01.
Submission from LCA,
Submission from Telstra
Corporation, 12.03.
Submission from CAL on Exclusive
Rights, 7.07.
EMI Music Australia Pty Ltd v
Federation of Australian Commercial Television Stations
(1997) 144 ALR 207
per Wilcox and Sundberg JJ; Lockhart J dissenting.
(1998) 154 ALR 211: judgment
delivered on 20 May 1998; the majority were Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne JJ; McHugh
and Kirby JJ dissented.
See paragraphs 21–27.
(1998) 154 ALR 211.
Submission from FACTS, 04.09.
Submission from LCA, 24.04.
Submission from ANZLIC, 06.01.
‘Related rights’ has
tended to displace ‘neighbouring rights’ in recent years, apparently
as a result of
the EC rental right directive (‘rental right and lending
right and on certain rights related to copyright in the field of intellectual
property’) of November 1992.
Nationwide News v Copyright
Agency Limited
[1996] FCA 1395
(1996) 65 FCR 399.
ibid. at 419.
Paragraphs 15.21–23.
Submission from APA, 9.01.
Submission from ACC, 17.05.
Submission from LCA, 24.05.
Submission from Telstra
Corporation, 12.04.
Submission from ACC, 17.05.
Note that the
Amendment Act (No. 1) 1998
, passed on 30 July 1998, did not contain the
Schedule originally included on moral rights. The Committee understands that, as
of the report of the Senate Legal and Constitutional Legislation
Committee, the Government is to engage in further consultations
implementation of moral rights.
Intellectual Property
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (770 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter