URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ALRCDP/2004/68.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:32:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gene Patenting and Human Health [2004] ALRCDP 68
PDF version
is also available for viewing and download.
Gene Patenting and Human Health
Discussion Paper 68
Making a Submission
Submissions
from the public are an integral part of ALRC inquiries and these are actively
sought by the ALRC from a broad-cross section
of the community, as well as those
with a special interest in the inquiry.
The ALRC welcomes your submission on any matter relevant to this inquiry.
Information on
how to make a submission
available on our website or by
The closing date for submissions in response to DP 68 is 16 April
patents@alrc.gov.au
ALRC homepage:
www.alrc.gov.au
Table of Contents
Terms of Reference
Participants
List of Proposals and Questions
PART A: Introduction
1. Introduction to the Inquiry
Background to the Inquiry
Defining the scope of the Inquiry
Process of reform
The subject matter of gene patents
2. The Patent System and the Nature of Reform
An outline of the patent system
Patents and genetic technologies
Concerns about gene patenting
Approach to reform
3. Economic, Social and Ethical Dimensions
Introduction
Economic dimensions
Social dimensions
Ethical dimensions
PART B: Patent Laws and Practices
4. International Legal Framework
Introduction
International legal instruments
Patent reform and bilateral free trade agreements
5. Domestic Legal Framework
Introduction
Domestic legal framework
Procedure for grant of a patent
Duration of patent protection
6. Patentability of Genetic Materials and Technologies
Introduction
Requirements for patentability
Overview of submissions
Should gene patents be treated differently?
Patentable subject matter
Inventive or innovative step
Disclosure of an invention
7. Exclusions from Patentability
Introduction
Existing exclusions from patentability
Possible new exclusions from patentability
Genetic materials and technologies
Methods of medical treatment
Exclusions from patentability on social or ethical grounds
8. Patent Office Practices
Introduction
Overview of IP Australia's examination practices
General concerns about examination practices
Qualifications and training
Expert assistance
Examination guidelines for biotechnology patents
Prior art searches
Standard of proof
9. Challenging and Enforcing Patent Rights
Introduction
Rights of a patent holder
Challenges to patent rights
Government participation in patent challenges
Enforcement of patent rights
Monitoring compliance with patent rights
Patent litigation insurance
10. Jurisdictional Issues
Introduction
Judicial review and enforcement of patents
Role of assessors in patent cases
PART C: Patents and Genetic Research
11. Funding for Research and Development
Introduction
Value of investing in research and development
Support for research
Public-private research linkages
Support for commercialisation of research
Support for the pharmaceutical industry
Submissions and consultations
12. Publicly Funded Research and Intellectual Property
Introduction
Public funding of research
Intellectual property ownership
Intellectual property and public funding
Issues and concerns
Submissions and consultations
Options for reform
ALRC's views
March-in rights
Government contracted research
13. Patents and Human Genetic Research
Introduction
The research continuum
Impact of gene patents on research
Broad patents
Patents and research tools
ALRC's views
New principles and guidelines on research tools
14. Experimental and Research Use Defences
Introduction
Existing law
Related defences
Research exemption in practice
Is reform needed?
The content of new defences
The TRIPS Agreement and experimental use
ALRC's views
15. Research Culture, Patents and Commercialisation
Introduction
Researchers, patenting and commercialisation
Resistance to commercialisation
Lack of skills and experience
Secrecy and publication
The general grace period
16. Stem Cell Technologies
Introduction
Scientific background
Issues and problems
Stem cell research in Australia
Regulation of stem cell research
Patentability of stem cell technologies
Exploiting patents over stem cell technologies
PART D: Patents and Commercialisation of Biotechnology
17. Overview of the Biotechnology Industry
Introduction
Global context
Australian biotechnology sector
Pharmaceutical industry
Biotechnology patents
Submissions and consultations
18. Technology Transfer from Publicly Funded Research Institutions
Introduction
Technology transfer and research commercialisation
Technology transfer offices
Facilitating transfer for commercialisation
Potential impediments to transfer for commercialisation
Other issues and concerns
Support programs
Submissions and consultations
Options for reform
ALRC's views
Materials transfer agreements
19. Patents and the Biotechnology Industry
Introduction
Upstream and downstream issues
Importance of patents for industry
Barriers to commercialisation
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
PART E: Patents and Human Health
20. Gene Patents and the Healthcare System
Introduction
Overview of the Australian healthcare system
Gene patents and healthcare
Evaluating the economic and financial impact of gene patents
Control through government funding and purchasing
Role of health departments
21. Gene Patents and Healthcare Provision
Introduction
Medical genetic testing
The need for patents on medical genetic testing
Impact of gene patents on medical genetic testing
Impact of gene patents on novel genetic therapies
Reform and healthcare provision
ALRC's views
22. Medical Treatment Defence
Introduction
A defence or an exclusion from patentability?
A medical treatment defence
Reform proposals in other jurisdictions
Framing a new defence
The TRIPS Agreement and medical treatment defences
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
PART F: Licensing and Commercial Arrangements
23. Licensing of Patent Rights
Introduction
Licensing patent rights
Licensing of gene patents in Australia
Impediments to gene patent licensing in Australia
Facilitating gene patent licensing
24. Patents and Competition Law
Introduction
Competition and patent law
Trade Practices Act
Patents Act
Other jurisdictions
Competition law and gene patents
Monitoring and enforcement
25. Prices Surveillance
Introduction
Prices surveillance
Current law and practice
Issues and problems
Submissions and consultations
Options for reform
ALRC's views
PART G: Non - Voluntary Uses
26. Crown Use and Acquisition
Introduction
Crown use in research and healthcare
Other jurisdictions
Acquisition by the Crown
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Transfer of ‘know-how'
27. Compulsory Licensing
Introduction
Compulsory licensing
Relationship to Crown use
Patents Act
The TRIPS Agreement
Application to research and healthcare
The legislative test
Anti-competitive conduct
Dependent patents
Emergency and public non-commercial use
Remuneration
Licensing of ‘know-how'
28. A Statutory Licensing Scheme
Introduction
Current law and practice
Statutory licensing for patents
Submissions and consultations
Possible models
Voluntary or compulsory?
Reasonable remuneration
TRIPS Agreement
ALRC's views
PART H: Other Intellectual Property Issues
29. Copyright, Trade Secrets and Designs
Introduction
Trade secrets
30. Protection of Genetic Databases
Introduction
Genetic research databases
Protection of rights in genetic databases
Other jurisdictions
Issues and problems
Submissions and consultations
Options for reform
Appendix 1. List of Submissions
Appendix 2. Abbreviations
Appendix 3. Glossary
_______________________________________________________________________________________
© Commonwealth of Australia 2004
This work is copyright. For further information about reproducing this
document - in whole or in part - please refer to the ALRC's
ISBN 0-9750600-4-X
Commission Reference: DP 68
Terms of Reference
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS OVER GENETIC MATERIALS AND GENETIC AND RELATED
TECHNOLOGIES
(1) I, DARYL WILLIAMS, Attorney-General
of Australia, following consultation with the Commonwealth Biotechnology Ministerial
and having regard to:
• the objective of the protection of intellectual property rights
to contribute to the promotion of technological innovation,
to the mutual
advantage of producers and users of technological knowledge and in a manner
conducive to social and economic
welfare, and to a balance of rights and obligations;
• the rapid advances in human genome research and genetic and related
technologies which potentially can aid in improving
the quality of life of
all Australians by contributing to Australia’s economic development
and by improving human
health; and
• the economic, legal, technological, ethical, and access and equity
issues relating to the intellectual property protection
of genes and genetic
and related technologies; and
• the need to utilise modern genetic technologies to further Australia’s
national interest, including such areas
as agriculture and industry;
• the trade and investment issues relating to the intellectual property
protection of genes and genetic and related technologies;
• international practices and developments, including any existing
or proposed international obligations;
REFER to the Australian Law Reform Commission for inquiry and report under
Australian Law Reform Commission Act 1996
the following matters,
with a particular focus on human health issues:
(a) the impact of current patenting laws and practices—including licensing—related
to genes and genetic and related
technologies on:
(i) the conduct of research and its subsequent application and commercialisation;
(ii) the Australian biotechnology sector; and
(iii) the cost-effective provision of healthcare in Australia;
(b) what changes, if any, may be required to address any problems identified
in current laws and practices, with the aim of
encouraging the creation and
use of intellectual property to further the health and economic benefits of
genetic research
and genetic and related technologies; and
(c) any other relevant matter.
(2) In performing its functions in relation to this reference the Commission
shall ensure widespread public consultation, and identify
and consult with key
stakeholders, including relevant government agencies, the research community,
the health and medical sector,
the biotechnology sector, and industry bodies.
(3) The Commission is to report to the Attorney-General by 30 June 2004.
Dated 17 December 2002
Daryl Williams
ATTORNEY-GENERAL
Participants
Australian Law Reform Commission
Division of the ALRC constituted under the
Australian Law Reform Commission
(Cth) for the purposes of this Inquiry comprises the
Professor David Weisbrot (President)
Professor Anne Finlay (Commissioner in charge)
Mr Brian Opeskin (Commissioner in charge)
Mr Ian Davis (Commissioner)
Justice Susan Kenny (part-time Commissioner from May 2003)
Justice Susan Kiefel (part-time Commissioner from April 2003)
Senior Legal Officers
Bruce Alston
Miranda Biven
Lynne Thompson (until March 2003)
Legal Officers
Gabrielle Carney
Imogen Goold
George Spiteri (until August 2003)
Project Assistant
Tina O’Brien
Legal Interns
Sandy Cameron
Wendy Chang
Lisa Eckstein
Claire Gaston-Parry
Anthony Hoo
Melanie O’Brien
Christopher Pettigrew
Advisory Committee Members
Associate Professor Ian Anderson, Deputy Director,
Centre for the Study of Health and Society, University of Melbourne
Justice Annabelle Bennett, Federal Court of Australia
Dr Kerry Breen, Chair, Australian Health Ethics Committee of the National Health
& Medical Research Council
Professor Don Chalmers, Head, University of Tasmania Law School
Professor Andrew Christie, Intellectual Property Research Institute of Australia,
University of Melbourne
Dr Trevor Davies, Partner, Allens Arthur Robinson
Dr Carina Dennis, Australasia Correspondent,
Professor Paul Greenfield, Senior Deputy Vice-Chancellor, University of
Dr Eric Haan, Head, South Australian Clinical Genetics Service and Chair of
the Human Genetics Society of Australasia
Dr Jane Hall, Director, Centre for Health Economics Research and Evaluation,
University of Technology, Sydney
Ms Helen Hopkins, Executive Director, Consumers Health Forum
Professor John Mattick, Director, Institute of Molecular Bioscience, University
of Queensland
Dr Dianne Nicol, University of Tasmania Law School
Professor Alan Pettigrew, CEO, National Health & Medical Research Council
Dr Bill Pickering, Partner, Blake Dawson Waldron
Dr Deborah Rathjen, CEO, Bionomics Ltd
Dr Vivien Santer, Principal, Griffith Hack
Professor Vicky Sara, CEO, Australian Research Council
Professor Sue Serjeanston, Executive Secretary, Australian Academy of Science
Professor Brad Sherman, Director, Centre for Intellectual Property Research,
Griffith University
Mr John Stonier, Davies Collison Cave
Professor Ron Trent, Head, Department of Molecular & Clinical Genetics,
Royal Prince Alfred Hospital and University of Sydney
Mr Guy Wilmington, Manager - Scientific & Technical Affairs, Medicines Australia
(until October 2003)
Dr Dianne Nicol, University of Tasmania Law
List of Proposals and Questions
Chapter 5 Domestic Legal Framework
Does the filing of divisional applications present problems in the
context of patents over genetic materials and technologies? If
so, would any of
the following address these concerns:
(a) specifying a time period within
which a divisional application must be filed;
(b) specifying a time period
within which a divisional application must be accepted by IP Australia;
(c) limiting the subject matter that may be claimed in a divisional
application to inventions other than those claimed in the original
application.
Proposal 5 - 1
IP Australia should regularly review the
schedule of patent fees for standard patents and innovation patents
(a) assess the impact of the fees on the actual term of Australian
patents; and
(b) ensure that fees are set at a level appropriate to discourage patent holders
from maintaining patents that lack real commercial
Chapter 6 Patentability of Genetic Materials and Technologies
IP Australia should assess patent applications relating to
genetic materials and technologies according to the same legislative criteria
for patentability that apply to patent applications relating to any other type
of technology.
Proposal 6 - 2
The responsible Minister should request the
Advisory Council on Intellectual Property to review the appropriateness and
adequacy of
the ‘manner of manufacture’ test as the threshold
requirement for patentable subject matter under Australian law.
Proposal 6 - 3
The Commonwealth should amend the
Patents Act
Patents Act
(a) include ‘usefulness’
as a requirement in the assessment of an application for a standard patent and
in the certification
of an innovation patent;
(b) require the Commissioner of
Patents to be satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the criterion of
usefulness is made out
in order to accept an application for a standard patent
or to certify an innovation patent; and
(c) include ‘lack of usefulness’
as a basis upon which an
accepted application for a standard patent may be opposed, in addition to its
current role as a ground for
revocation.
Proposal 6 - 4
IP Australia should develop guidelines,
consistent with the
Patents Act
Patents Regulations 1991
(Cth) and existing case law, to assist patent examiners in applying the
‘usefulness’ requirement. The guidelines should
require that the
claimed ‘usefulness’ must be ‘specific, substantial and
credible’ to a person skilled in
the relevant art.
Question 6 - 1
Do the ‘fair basis’ and
‘sufficiency’ requirements in
Patents Act
adequately limit the scope of claims in gene patents? If not, what are the
deficiencies in the way these requirements are applied,
and what reforms are
needed to address these concerns?
Chapter 7 Exclusions from Patentability
Proposal 7 - 1
Patents Act 1990
) should not be amended specifically
to exclude genetic materials or technologies from patentable subject matter.
Proposal 7 - 2
Patents Act
should not be amended
specifically to exclude methods of diagnostic, therapeutic or surgical treatment
from patentable subject matter.
Proposal 7 - 3
Patents Act
should not be amended to
expand the circumstances in which social and ethical considerations may be taken
into account in decisions
concerns should be addressed primarily through direct regulation of the use or
exploitation of the patented invention.
Chapter 8 Patent Office Practices
Proposal 8 - 1
To ensure the on-going
competence of Australian patent examiners in assessing patent applications,
IP Australia should continue its
efforts to provide examiners with
continuing education in areas of technology relevant to their particular
specialty. IP Australia
should review and update its education programs
regularly so that new developments can be incorporated as required.
Proposal 8 - 2
The Commonwealth should amend the
Patents Act
Patents Act
) to authorise IP Australia to establish
panels of experts to advise patent examiners in assessing patent applications,
as circumstances
Proposal 8 - 3
IP Australia should ensure that appointments
to the panel of experts reflect a balance of independent scientific and legal
and that they be made only after consultation with relevant industry
organisations and other stakeholders. IP Australia should also
procedures for the operation of the panel, including procedures in relation to
confidentiality, conflict of interest, and
decision making by the panel.
Proposal 8 - 4
IP Australia should develop examination
guidelines, consistent with the
Patents Act
Regulations 1991
(Cth) and existing case law, to explain how the criteria
for patentability apply to inventions involving genetic materials and
technologies.
Proposal 8 - 5
The Commonwealth should amend the
Patents Act
to require patent examiners to be satisfied on the balance of probabilities
when assessing all statutory requirements for patentability
that are relevant at
the stage of examination. (See also Proposal 6 - 3.)
Chapter 9 Challenging and Enforcing Patent Rights
Proposal 9 - 1
IP Australia should
develop and regularly update a searchable online database comprising patents and
published patent applications.
The database should be accessible to the public
through IP Australia’s website and should provide user-friendly
for use of the database, it should be kept at a level that does
not unreasonably
limit access.
Chapter 10 Jurisdictional Issues
Proposal 10 - 1
The Commonwealth should
Patents Act
Patents Act
) to provide
that original jurisdiction in matters arising under the Act be conferred
exclusively on federal courts. The original
state and territory courts under the Act should be abolished. The Federal Court
of Australia
should continue to exercise appellate jurisdiction in matters
arising under the Act, exclusive of all courts other than the High
Proposal 10 - 2
Courts exercising jurisdiction under the
Patents Act
should continue to develop procedures and arrangements, in
consultation with relevant stakeholders, to allow judges to benefit from
advice of assessors or scientific advisors in litigation involving patents over
genetic materials and technologies.
Chapter 12 Publicly Funded Research and Intellectual Property
Question 12 - 1
Principles for Intellectual Property Management for Publicly Funded Research
and the National Health and Medical Research Council’s
Guidelines: Intellectual Property Management for Health and Medical Research
be expanded to require research institutions to favour Australian industry when
commercialising patented inventions created through
the use of public funds?
National Principles
Interim Guidelines
‘no Australian disadvantage’ clause in any sale, licence or
partnership arrangement involving patented inventions
created through the use of
public funds? If so, how should such requirements be implemented?
Proposal 12 - 1
The Australian Research Council (ARC) and the
National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) should review their
and guidelines on intellectual property and research to ensure that
publicly funded research, where commercialised, results in appropriate
benefit. (See also Proposal 12 - 2.)
Proposal 12 - 2
As part of the review proposed in
Proposal 12 - 1, the ARC and NHMRC should include guidance on what is
meant by ‘public benefit’
in their principles and guidelines on
intellectual property and research.
Proposal 12 - 3
The principles and guidelines developed in
accordance with Proposal 12 - 1 should enable conditions to be attached
to the grant of
funding for genetic research, to limit the commercialisation of
publicly funded research in appropriate circumstances. Such conditions
include a requirement that research results be placed in the public domain, or
that a patented invention be widely licensed.
Proposal 12 - 4
Universities and other publicly funded research
organisations should ensure that their guidelines on intellectual property
cover research undertaken by visiting researchers and students, as
well as staff—whether undertaken solely within the organisation
with other bodies.
Chapter 13 Patents and Human Genetic Research
Proposal 13 - 1
The Australian Research
Council and the National Health and Medical Research Council, as part of the
review proposed in Proposal
12 - 1, should develop principles and
guidelines for researchers to ensure that the public interest in encouraging
commercial exploitation
of inventions is balanced with the public interest in
the wide dissemination of important research tools.
Chapter 14 Experimental and Research Use Defences
Proposal 14 - 1
The Commonwealth should
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) to establish a new defence to a claim of
patent infringement based on the use of a patented invention to study or
on the subject matter of the invention; for example, to investigate
its properties or improve upon it. The legislation should make
it clear that the
existence of a commercial purpose or intention does not affect the availability
of the defence.
Chapter 15 Research Culture, Patents and Commercialisation
Question 15 - 1
In assessing the
research record of grant applicants, is sufficient weight given to the
applicant’s record in applying for and
obtaining patents? Are there any
other disincentives for researchers to seek patents over genetic research
Question 15 - 2
Are any additional strategies or policies required
by the National Health and Medical Research Council, the Australian Research
universities, or other publicly funded research institutions to
encourage researchers to patent and commercialise the outcomes of
Question 15 - 3
Do researchers in human genetics possess
sufficient expertise to participate in the process of applying for and
exploiting gene patents?
If not, what measures might be taken to address any
lack of expertise?
Proposal 15 - 1
Universities and other publicly-funded research
institutions should continue to take steps to raise the awareness of researchers
in the health sciences and biotechnology about intellectual property issues and
the commercialisation of research, and should provide
relevant advice to
researchers as required.
Proposal 15 - 2
Universities should ensure that students
undertaking degrees in the health sciences or biotechnology are made familiar
with intellectual
property issues and the commercialisation of research
Proposal 15 - 3
The responsible Minister should request the
Advisory Council on Intellectual Property to review the grace period
provisions in the
Patents Regulations 1991
Regulations
) to ascertain whether these provisions are having an adverse
impact on the commercialisation of Australian research in Australia
Proposal 15 - 4
Universities and other publicly funded research
organisations should ensure that their researchers are fully informed about the
of the grace period provisions in the
Patents Regulations
particularly in relation to the effect of publication before filing a
provisional patent application, and the effect of publication
patentability of their inventions in countries that do not have equivalent
provisions.
Chapter 16 Stem Cell Technologies
Proposal 16 - 1
IP Australia
should develop examination guidelines, consistent with the
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations 1991
(Cth) and existing case law, to
explain how the criteria for patentability apply to inventions involving stem
cell technologies. The
examination guidelines should address, among other
things, the patentability of inventions involving:
(a) totipotent,
pluripotent and multipotent cells; and
(b) processes involving stem cell
technologies.
Question 16 - 1
Should specific mechanisms be established to
regulate the exploitation of patented stem cell technologies? If so, would any
following initiatives be desirable:
(a) establishing an Australian
stem cell bank or collaborating with existing stem cell banks in other
(b) conferring responsibility on a new or existing body to
consider the potential exercise of any patent rights that might arise from
research conducted by Australian entities using human stem cell lines; or
(c) developing guidelines and principles by the National Health and Medical
Research Council and the Australian Research Council
to ensure that the public
interest in the commercial exploitation of inventions involving stem cell
technologies is balanced with
the public interest in dissemination of such
technologies?
Chapter 18 Technology Transfer from Publicly Funded Research
Institutions
Proposal 18 - 1
Biotechnology
Australia, in consultation with state and territory governments and other
relevant stakeholders, should:
(a) continue to develop and implement
programs to assist technology transfer offices in universities and
publicly-funded research
institutions in commercialising inventions involving
genetic materials and technologies; and
(b) develop strategies to ensure
widespread participation of technology transfer offices in these programs. (See
also Proposals 19
- 1 and 23 - 1.)
Proposal 18 - 2
The Australian Research Council and the National
Health and Medical Research Council should review their principles and
on intellectual property and research to emphasise the importance of
clear ownership of intellectual property resulting from collaborative
funded research. (See also Proposals 12 - 1 to 12 - 3.)
Proposal 18 - 3
Universities and other publicly funded research
organisations should ensure that their policies and practices address the
of ownership of intellectual property resulting from collaborative or
jointly funded research. (See also Proposals 12 - 4 and
Question 18 - 1
Are there any other measures that could be
implemented to improve technology transfer practice in relation to genetic
Proposal 18 - 4
Biotechnology Australia, in consultation with
state and territory governments and other relevant stakeholders, should develop
materials transfer agreements for use by universities and other publicly
funded research institutions, along the lines of the models
developed by the
United States Association of University Technology Managers.
Chapter 19 Patents and the Biotechnology Industry
Proposal 19 - 1
Biotechnology
Australia, in consultation with State and Territory governments and other
relevant stakeholders, should:
(a) develop further programs to assist
biotechnology companies in commercialising inventions involving genetic
materials and technologies;
(b) develop strategies to ensure widespread
participation of biotechnology companies in these programs. (See also
Proposals 18 - 1
and 23 - 1.)
Chapter 20 Gene Patents and the Healthcare System
Proposal 20 - 1
The Australian Health
Ministers’ Advisory Council (AHMAC) should establish processes for:
(a) an economic evaluation of medical genetic testing and other new genetic
medical technologies; and
(b) an examination of the financial impact of gene
patents on the delivery of healthcare services in Australia.
Proposal 20 - 2
AHMAC should examine options for using government
funding and purchasing power to control the cost of goods and services that are
subject to gene patents and used in the provision of healthcare.
Proposal 20 - 3
Where particular gene patent applications, granted
patents or patent licensing practices are considered to have an adverse impact
on medical research or the cost-effective provision of healthcare, Commonwealth,
state and territory health departments should actively
consider whether to:
request re-examination of a patent; initiate proceedings to oppose a patent;
apply for revocation of a patent;
apply for the grant of a compulsory licence;
or exploit or acquire a patent under the Crown use and acquisition provisions of
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act
Proposal 20 - 4
Commonwealth, state and territory health
departments should establish specialist offices to monitor and manage
intellectual property
issues relating to genetic materials and technologies. The
offices should be staffed by qualified individuals who are capable of
specialist legal and policy advice about intellectual property, biotechnology
and human health. Health departments should
also establish mechanisms to enable
them to draw on expertise in other government departments and agencies to advise
and assist them
in dealing with intellectual property issues arising from gene
Proposal 20 - 5
The proposed Human Genetics Commission of
Australia (HGCA) should monitor the application of intellectual property laws to
materials and technologies, where these may have implications for
medical research or human health, both generally and in specific
conducting such monitoring, the HGCA should have the following
(a) providing information to IP Australia during the
examination of a patent about the proper scope of the patent, in appropriate
(b) liaising with AHMAC, health departments, and other relevant
stakeholders about the advisability of opposition, re-examination
or revocation
of a patent under the
Patents Act
, and about who might take such action
and in what circumstances; and
(c) liaising with AHMAC, health departments, and other relevant stakeholders
be obtained under the
Crown use, Crown acquisition or compulsory licensing provisions of the
Patents Act
Proposal 20 - 6
Pending the establishment of the HGCA, AHMAC
should establish a mechanism for monitoring the application of intellectual
laws to genetic materials and technologies, where these may have
implications for medical research or human health, both generally
specific cases.
Chapter 22 Medical Treatment Defence
Question 22 - 1
In the absence of a
general defence relating to medical treatment, should the
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) be amended to enact a new defence to claims of patent infringement
based on the use of genetic materials and technologies in
diagnostic or
therapeutic treatment?
Chapter 23 Licensing of Patent Rights
Proposal 23 - 1
Biotechnology
Australia, in consultation with state and territory governments and other
relevant stakeholders, should continue to
develop and implement education
programs to assist research institutions and biotechnology companies in
licensing and commercialising
inventions involving genetic materials and
technologies. (See also Proposals 18 - 1 and 19 - 1.)
Proposal 23 - 2
AusBiotech Ltd should develop model agreements and
interpretative guidelines for patent licences involving genetic materials and
technologies.
The model agreements should be developed in consultation with
Biotechnology Australia, state and territory governments, and other
stakeholders as a non-binding model of desirable licensing practices. (See also
Proposals 13 - 1 and 18 - 4.)
Proposal 23 - 3
AusBiotech Ltd should consider ways in which
industry initiatives can facilitate the licensing of patent rights over genetic
and technologies, for example through the establishment of patent
pools or patent clearinghouses.
Chapter 24 Patents and Competition Law
Proposal 24 - 1
The Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) should develop guidelines regarding
the relationship between
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) and intellectual property, with particular regard to patented genetic
materials and technologies. The guidelines should extend
to patent pools and
cross-licensing involving patented genetic materials and technologies.
Proposal 24 - 2
The ACCC should review the conduct of firms
dealing with patented genetic materials and technologies, as the need arises, to
whether their conduct is anti-competitive within the meaning of
Trade Practices Act
The ACCC should liaise, on an
ongoing basis, with Commonwealth, state and territory health departments and
other stakeholders to
identify and assess any emerging competition concerns in
this field.
Chapter 25 Prices Surveillance
Proposal 25 - 1
The Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission should conduct informal price monitoring of
patented medical genetic tests and
other genetic inventions involved in the
provision of healthcare services if evidence emerges that such prices are having
impact healthcare services.
Chapter 26 Crown Use and Acquisition
Proposal 26 - 1
The Australian Health
Ministers’ Advisory Council should develop a policy regarding the
circumstances in which it is appropriate
for the Commonwealth or a State to
exploit a patented invention under the Crown use provisions of the
Patents Act
) for the purposes of promoting human
health. Similarly, the Commonwealth Department of Health and Ageing should
develop a policy
regarding the circumstances in which it is appropriate for the
Commonwealth to acquire a patent for the purposes of promoting human
Proposal 26 - 2
The Commonwealth should amend the
Patents Act
to clarify that, for the purposes of the Crown use provisions, an invention
is exploited ‘for the services of the Commonwealth
or the State’ if
the exploitation of the invention is for the provision of healthcare services or
products to members of the
Proposal 26 - 3
The Commonwealth should amend the
Patents Act
to provide that when a patent is exploited or acquired under the Crown use
or Crown acquisition provisions of the
Patents Act
, the Crown must pay
such remuneration or compensation as is:
(a) agreed between the parties;
(b) determined by a prescribed court to be just and reasonable having
regard to the economic value of the patent.
Question 26 - 1
Should the Commonwealth amend the
to require a patent holder to transfer ‘know-how’ relating
to the patented product or process to the Crown when the Crown
uses or acquires
a patent under the Act.
Chapter 27 Compulsory Licensing
Question 27 - 1
Commonwealth amend the
Patents Act
(Cth) to clarify the test
for the grant of a compulsory licence? If so, should the Commonwealth
(a) clarify the circumstances in which the ‘reasonable requirements of
the public’ will not have been satisfied; or
(b) specify that
s 135 is not an exhaustive list of the circumstances in which a patented
invention would fail to satisfy the ‘reasonable
requirements of the
Proposal 27 - 1
The Commonwealth should amend the
Patents Act
Patents Act
to insert the competition-based test
that was recommended by the Intellectual Property and Competition Review
Committee as an additional
ground for the grant of a compulsory licence. The
amendment should also provide for an independent review of the operation of the
compulsory licensing provisions in addressing competition concerns arising in
relation to patented inventions. This review should
be conducted five years
after the new test commences operation.
Question 27 - 2
Patents Act
be amended to allow
a compulsory licence to be granted to a patent holder who cannot work his or her
patent without using another
patent for which authorised use cannot be obtained?
If so, in what circumstances?
Question 27 - 3
Given the provision in the
Patents Act
Crown use of patented inventions, should the Act
also make provision for
the grant of a compulsory licence over a patented invention in circumstances of
‘a national emergency
or other circumstances of extreme urgency, or in
cases of public non-commercial use’? If so, should a compulsory licence be
available whether or not the applicant has tried for a reasonable period to
obtain a licence from the patent holder?
Question 27 - 4
Should the Commonwealth amend the
to authorise a prescribed court, when granting a compulsory licence, to
require the transfer of ‘know-how’ relating to
the patented product
or process?
Chapter 28 A Statutory Licensing Scheme
Question 28 - 1
Commonwealth amend the
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) to include a statutory
licensing scheme for patented inventions? If so:
(a) should the scheme be
available only to a limited class of patents or a limited class of
(b) should the scheme be voluntary or compulsory in nature; and
(c) how should a reasonable royalty for the scheme be determined and who
should administer the scheme?
Chapter 29 Copyright, Trade Secrets and Designs
Proposal 29 - 1
The Commonwealth
should amend the
(Cth) to clarify the extent to which
‘fair dealing for the purpose of research or study’ applies to
commercial genetic
Chapter 30 Protection of Genetic Databases
Question 30 - 1
Commonwealth amend the
(Cth) to provide that, in
relation to genetic databases protected by copyright, the operation of the
provisions for fair dealing for
the purpose of research or study must not be
excluded or modified by contract or technological protection measures?
Question 30 - 2
Should the Commonwealth amend the
to establish a statutory licensing scheme in relation to genetic databases
protected by copyright?
Question 30 - 3
Does the new Celera subscription agreement cause
any significant concerns for public research institutions or researchers
in publicly funded research? If so, what are these concerns?
Question 30 - 4
Should the National Health and Medical Research
Council, or another Commonwealth body, have responsibility for monitoring the
of agreements between genetic database owners and publicly funded
research institutions within Australia?
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
1. Introduction to the Inquiry
Background to the Inquiry
Defining the scope of the Inquiry
Terms of Reference
Related matters not under investigation
Process of reform
Advisory Committee
Community consultation
Written submissions
Timeframe for the Inquiry
The subject matter of gene patents
Genetic technologies
Natural genetic materials
Isolated genetic materials
Genetic products
PART A: Introduction
1. Introduction to the Inquiry
Background to the Inquiry
4 December 2002 the Australian Government announced that it would ask the
Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) to conduct
an Inquiry into intellectual
property issues raised by genetic
information.
Soon afterwards, the
Government released the Terms of Reference for the
signalling the formal
start of the Inquiry. The Government’s media releases indicated that an
examination of these issues was
important because of the rapid advances in human
genome research and genetic and related technologies.
1.2 The need for such an Inquiry had previously been identified by the ALRC and
the Australian Health Ethics Committee (AHEC) during
the course of their
two-year Inquiry into the protection of human genetic information. That Inquiry,
which was initiated in February
2001, had been asked to examine how best to
protect privacy, prevent unfair discrimination, and maintain high ethical
standards in
relation to human genetic information.
1.3 The earlier Inquiry acknowledged the importance of gene patenting issues but
took the view that it was not possible to examine
those issues in that
investigation. This was because the considerations involved in gene patenting
differed substantially from those
at the core of the Inquiry into ethics,
to do justice to the complex gene patenting
Accordingly, in October
2001 the ALRC and AHEC wrote to the Attorney-General and the Minister for Health
and Aged Care to suggest
that the intellectual property issues raised by
genetics become the subject of a fresh Inquiry with its own Terms of Reference.
present Inquiry is the outcome of that request.
1.4 The current Inquiry is being conducted independently of the earlier Inquiry
into the protection of human genetic information,
but the relationship between
them is nevertheless important. The final Report of the joint Inquiry by the
ALRC and AHEC,
Essentially Yours: The Protection of Human Genetic Information
in Australia
, was tabled in Parliament on 29 May
It contained 144
recommendations, addressed to over 30 bodies, in relation to areas as diverse as
medical research, health services,
employment, insurance, immigration, sport,
parentage and law enforcement. The Report made recommendations about how to
close emerging
gaps in the legal protection of human genetic information so that
Australia may harness the benefits of human genetic science and
technology,
while avoiding the dangers, as we enter a new genetics era. The Report, and the
consultation documents that preceded
it, can be downloaded free of charge from
the ALRC’s website <www.alrc.gov.au>. The Report is referred to
in this Discussion Paper.
Defining the scope of the Inquiry
Terms of Reference
Terms of Reference, which define the scope of this Inquiry, are reproduced at
the beginning of this Discussion Paper. The
‘operative part’ of the
Terms of Reference require the ALRC to examine the impact of patent laws and
practices, as they
relate to ‘genes and genetic and related
technologies’. This is to be done in three contexts:
the conduct of research and its subsequent application and
commercialisation;
the Australian biotechnology sector; and
the cost-effective provision of healthcare.
1.6 The ALRC is
also asked to report on what changes may be required to address any problems
that are identified in current laws
and practices, ‘with the aim of
encouraging the creation and use of intellectual property to further the health
and economic
benefits of genetic research and genetic and related
technologies’. Thus, although the focus of the Inquiry is on patent laws
and practices, other intellectual property issues may be relevant to proposed
reforms. And all this must be done ‘with a particular
focus on human
health issues’.
1.7 In addition to the operative section, the Terms of Reference ask the ALRC to
have regard to a number of considerations in making
its Inquiry. These may be
summarised as follows:
the role of intellectual property rights in promoting technological
innovation;
the potential for human genetics to improve the quality of life of
all Australians;
the ethical, legal and social issues arising from intellectual
property in genes and genetic technologies;
the national interest in using genetic technologies in agriculture
and industry;
trade and investment issues affecting intellectual property;
international obligations and practices, both existing and
1.8 To recount these wide ranging considerations is to
emphasise the complex nature of the Inquiry and the many contexts in which
patenting of genetic materials and technologies may be relevant. One dimension
of the Inquiry is the effect of gene patents on
human health; another is the
effect of gene patents on industry and economic development. Spanning both areas
are the constraints
imposed by ethical and social considerations, and by
Australia’s obligations under international treaties. An analysis of these
issues, and the degree to which the constraints affect practical options for
reform, are canvassed in subsequent chapters.
Related matters not under investigation
are several matters which, although associated with intellectual property and
genetic information, nevertheless fall outside
the scope of the present Inquiry.
In July 2003, the ALRC released an Issues Paper,
Gene Patenting and Human
(IP 27), which discussed these matters in some
In summary, the excluded
areas are as follows:
The Inquiry is confined to examining patent laws and practices as
they relate to genes or genetic technologies in specified contexts,
reporting on what changes may be required to intellectual property laws to
address any problems identified. It is not a general
review of Australian law in
relation to patents or other intellectual property rights. However, some
proposals for reform do have
a wider application because of the difficulty of
confining reform to gene patents.
The Inquiry does not generally consider the impact of gene patents
associated with plants and animals. However, where an animal’s
material is used to develop a therapeutic product or process to be used in human
medical treatment, the patent issues arising
in this context may be relevant to
human health and thus fall within the scope of the Inquiry.
The Inquiry does not extend to genetic research on humans for
purposes unrelated to human health. For example, patents over genetic
to determine biological kinship, or used in DNA profiling for law enforcement
purposes, fall outside the scope of the
Advisory Committee
is standard operating procedure for the ALRC to establish a broad-based, expert
Advisory Committee to assist with the development
of its inquiries. In this
Inquiry, the Advisory Committee includes a number of judges, as well as leaders
in the areas of genetic
and molecular biological research, clinical genetics,
community health, indigenous health, health economics, health education,
intellectual
property law and practice, commercialisation of biotechnology, and
pharmaceuticals.
attention has been paid to achieving a balance of interests and perspectives,
while also giving consideration to matters
of gender and geography.
1.11 The Advisory Committee met on 23 May 2003 and 27 November 2003, and will
probably meet again during the course of the Inquiry
to provide general advice
and assistance to the ALRC. The Committee has particular value in helping the
Inquiry to maintain a clear
focus and arrange its priorities, as well as in
providing quality assurance in the research and consultation effort, and
upon reform proposals. However, ultimate responsibility for the
report and recommendations of the Inquiry remains with the Commissioners
ALRC. The Advisory Committee does not determine the ALRC’s policies on any
issue addressed by the Inquiry.
Community consultation
the terms of its constituting Act, the ALRC ‘may inform itself in any way
it thinks fit’ for the purposes of
reviewing or considering anything that
is the subject of an Inquiry.
of the most important features of ALRC inquiries is the commitment to widespread
community consultation.
1.13 The nature and extent of this engagement is normally determined by the
subject matter of the reference. Areas that are seen
to be narrow and technical
tend to be of interest mainly to experts. Other ALRC references
involved a much greater level of interest and involvement from the general
public and the media. The present Inquiry into gene
patenting falls into the
latter category. In releasing the Terms of Reference for the Inquiry, the
Australian Government specifically
asked the ALRC to ‘undertake widespread
public consultation and consult with key
stakeholders’.
Thus, while it
is essential that the ALRC familiarises itself with the latest developments in
Australia and overseas, it is equally
important that it consults widely and
provides the community with an opportunity to have its say.
1.14 For this purpose, the Inquiry has arranged a large number of targeted
meetings with key stakeholders, to gain expertise, perspectives
and experiences,
which are valuable in informing the Inquiry and helping to develop sound
policies that will meet existing concerns
and work effectively in practice. As
of January 2004, 48 such meetings had taken place around Australia, involving
several hundred
individuals. These included meetings with:
federal, state and territory departments responsible for health,
industry and technology;
advisory bodies to government in the areas of intellectual property,
health, biotechnology and innovation;
the government regulator in the field of competition policy;
organisations concerned with health consumer education and
leading genetic research laboratories and genetic researchers;
companies involved in the commercialisation of genetic research or
in the delivery of medical genetic services;
peak industry bodies in the areas of biotechnology and
pharmaceuticals;
professional and academic associations dealing with intellectual
property; and
academics in intellectual property, competition law and health
Written submissions
1.15 The Inquiry has strongly
encouraged interested persons and organisations to make written submissions to
process. Nearly all submissions received to date
have been in response to IP 27, addressing the issues and questions specifically
raised in that paper.
1.16 As of January 2004, 65 written submissions had been received. The
submissions vary substantially in size and style, ranging
from short notes
written by individuals providing personal views, to large, well-researched
documents prepared by government departments
and agencies, research centres,
industry bodies, professional associations and individual researchers. From the
outset, the Inquiry
was aware that some of the information in submissions might
have commercial sensitivity, and the ALRC left open the possibility of
submissions in confidence. Of the 65 submissions received to date, only two have
been designated as confidential.
1.17 With the release of this Discussion Paper, the ALRC once again invites
individuals and organisations to make submissions to
the Inquiry, prior to the
release of the final Report. There is no specified format for submissions. The
Inquiry will gratefully
accept anything from handwritten notes and emailed
dot-points, to detailed commentary on gene patenting issues. Details about
a submission may be found at the front of this Discussion Paper.
Timeframe for the Inquiry
1.18 Under the Terms of
Reference, the ALRC is required to report to the Attorney-General by 30 June
2004. The ALRC’s usual
operating procedure is to produce two community
consultation papers—an Issues Paper and a Discussion Paper—prior to
the final Report.
1.19 IP 27 was released in July 2003 and sought to identify the main issues
relevant to the Inquiry, provide background information,
and encourage informed
public participation. This Discussion Paper (DP 68) was released in February
2004 and differs from the Issues
Paper in that it contains a more detailed
treatment of the subject matter, as well as specific proposals for reform. The
Paper may be obtained free of charge in hard copy from the ALRC, and
may be downloaded free of charge from the ALRC’s website.
In order to be considered for use in the final Report, submissions
addressing the proposals in this Discussion Paper must reach the
Friday, 16 April 2004
. Details about how to make a submission
are set out at the front of this publication.
1.20 As mentioned above, the Report, containing the final recommendations, is
due to be presented to the Attorney-General by 30 June
2004. Once tabled in
Parliament, the Report becomes a public
The final Report will
not be a self-executing document
the Inquiry provides advice and
recommendations about the best way to proceed, but implementation is a matter
for others.
1.21 In an earlier era, the centrepiece of any significant law reform effort was
the recommendation of a major new piece of legislation.
However, in a more
complex environment in which authority is more diffused, modern law reform
efforts are likely to involve a mix
of strategies, including legislation and
subordinate regulations; official standards and codes of practice; industry and
professional
guidelines; education and training programs; and so on. Although
the final Report will be presented to the Attorney-General, it is
likely that
some of its recommendations will be directed to other government departments,
independent agencies, and non-government
The subject matter of gene patents
1.22 Genetic
science and related technologies are important in medical research and in the
development and provision of healthcare,
and are likely to become increasingly
significant as more becomes known about the biological function of genes and the
proteins they
produce. An introductory ‘primer’ on the relevant
genetic science was included in Chapter 2 of IP 27.
1.23 Human genetic research aims to enhance understanding of how genes and
environmental factors operate and interact to influence
the health of
individuals and populations—and in so doing, to generate knowledge with
the potential to improve individual and
Human genetic research
may translate into the development and provision of new forms of healthcare
involving, among other things,
medical genetic testing, pharmacogenetics, gene
therapy, and the use of therapeutic proteins or stem cells.
1.24 The Terms of Reference for this Inquiry require the ALRC to examine the
impact of current patent laws and practices ‘related
to genes and genetic
and related technologies’. This Discussion Paper uses ‘gene
patent’ as the most convenient
term to describe all patents or potential
patents that fall within the ALRC’s Terms of
Reference—notwithstanding that
some of these patents may not claim rights
with respect to genes or other genetic material per se.
1.25 There are many ways in which the potential subject matter of gene patents
might usefully be categorised, and various opinions
have been expressed to the
Inquiry on this issue. For the purposes of IP 27, the ALRC grouped the potential
subject matter of gene
patents into four broad categories. The categories did
not have a precise scientific or legal meaning, nor were they mutually
However, they were convenient for the purpose of explaining the
issues arising in the Inquiry, and submissions and consultations
revealed broad
acceptance of this nomenclature. The same approach is therefore adopted in this
Discussion Paper. The four categories
are listed below and described in greater
detail in the sections that follow. For the sake of brevity, elsewhere in this
term ‘genetic materials and technologies’ is sometimes
used to encompass all four categories.
Genetic technologies
—the methods and items used in
genetic research and genetics-based healthcare, including those used in
sequencing DNA, medical
genetic testing, other diagnostic uses, and gene
Natural genetic materials
—forms of genetic material in
their natural state, including DNA, RNA, genes and chromosomes.
Isolated genetic materials
—forms of genetic material
isolated from nature, including genetic materials of whole genomes, single genes
and gene fragments.
Genetic products
—items produced by the use of genetic
materials, including proteins, nucleic acid probes, nucleic acid constructs such
and plasmids, and anti-sense DNA.
technologies
term ‘genetic technologies’ is used to cover a broad category of
methods and items used in genetic research and
healthcare services, including
those used in:
Sequencing DNA. Many different methods, products and technologies
are used in amplifying DNA, such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
methodology,
or cloning DNA using a vector or host system, to enable sequencing to be
conducted. In relation to amplification, DNA
primers, Taq or other polymerases
and temperature cycling apparatus are used. DNA sequencing itself uses
instruments that rely on
variations of fluorescence labelling, PCR and gel
electrophoresis.
Medical genetic testing. As research establishes linkages between
genetic variations and diseases, genetic tests are developed in
parallel to
screen individuals who show symptoms or are at risk because of family medical
Genetic testing for
clinical (medical) purposes normally involves mutation analysis—the
identification of variations in DNA
sequences that are associated with disease
or dysfunction.
Many genetic
tests are patented by their developers, with medical testing conducted under
licensing agreements.
Gene therapy. Gene therapy involves the use of methods, products and
technologies for the transfer of DNA or RNA into human cells
to treat disease.
Gene therapy uses various delivery methods to enable genes to be transferred and
expressed, including improving
membrane permeability to DNA, microinjection, and
the use of viral vectors.
Recombinant technology. This involves the use of micro-organisms
that have been transformed by exogenous genetic material to produce
protein. Examples include the production of insulin, growth hormone and
recombinant antibodies.
1.27 Genetic technologies involve the use of
many different combinations of methods, genetic materials and products, some of
may be patented or patentable. The patenting of new and improved genetic
technologies is generally the least controversial area of
gene patenting, since
issues of ‘invention’, ‘novelty’, and
‘usefulness’ may be clearer than
they are in the case of patents
over genetic materials.
1.28 Genetic technologies also include forms of information technology. Genetic
research is increasingly reliant on the use of genetic
compilations of genetic sequences or biochemical pathways. As discussed in
Chapter 30, the potential application
of forms of intellectual property law
other than patents (such as copyright or special database rights) are highly
relevant to genetic
information technology.
Natural genetic materials
term ‘natural genetic materials’ is used in this Discussion Paper to
refer to forms of genetic material in their
natural state, including DNA, RNA,
genes and chromosomes. In general, the Inquiry is concerned with human genetic
materials. However,
genetic material from other organisms, such as viruses, also
may be important to medical research or healthcare provision.
1.30 As discussed in Chapter 6, patent law in Australia and most other
is, in the human body or another organism) and a gene or gene fragment that has
been extracted from the body by a process of
isolation and purification. As the
Human Genome Project’s website states:
In general, raw products of nature are not patentable. DNA products
usually become patentable when they have been isolated, purified,
or modified to
produce a unique form not found in
1.31 Although isolated genetic materials may be patentable, genetic materials in
their natural state usually are not. For example,
the Australian Patent Office
does not allow claims that encompass DNA as it exists in nature. Claims must be
formulated so as to
distinguish clearly what is claimed from the naturally
occurring molecule.
1.32 ‘Natural genetic materials’ include genetic material in living
cells, such as stem cells. As discussed in Chapter
16, naturally occurring stem
cells may be patentable when isolated and propagated to produce a cell line.
Natural genetic materials
also include living cells that have been modified by
genetic manipulation, such as in gene therapy.
Isolated genetic materials
term ‘isolated genetic materials’ is used to refer to genetic
material that has been isolated from nature, for
example, in the form of DNA
copies known as complementary DNA (cDNA), and the genetic sequences in this
Isolated genetic
material may relate to whole genomes, single genes, or gene fragments. When gene
patents extend to isolated genetic
materials, the genetic sequences of that
material form part of the description of the patented
1.34 According to the Human Genome Project, over three million genome-related
patent applications have been filed. While there is
no single patent over the
whole human genome, the whole genetic sequence of some non-human genomes have
been patented. For example,
the genome of the Hepatitis C virus has been
patented by Chiron Corporation and has been used in the development of
diagnostic agents
and methods of blood supply screening for this infectious
The virus has also been
patented in Australia.
1.35 Most practical applications of genetic science and technology depend on the
sequencing of DNA found in genetic material. DNA
sequencing refers to the
identification of individual nucleotide bases along a segment of DNA forming a
genetic sequence.
As a practical
matter, sequencing generally requires natural DNA to be isolated from its
cellular or tissue source and cloned or
amplified. Although other methods are
available, the usual method of DNA amplification is by PCR to produce
PCR technology was
developed in 1985 (and then patented) by Dr Kary Mullis and others at Cetus
Corporation in California.
now used routinely in all biochemical and molecular biology, research, clinical
and forensic laboratories. The capacity and
sophistication of PCR technology has
expanded rapidly with the development of more automated processes, the use of
different or multiple
primers, the use of more powerful information technology,
and the advent of chip technology (microarrays).
1.36 A gene contains all the information required to determine the expression of
one or more proteins or a chain of amino acids.
Isolated genetic material
relating to whole genes (or the coding sequences of whole genes) may be used in
the diagnosis of genetic
conditions, the production of therapeutic proteins,
gene therapy, and other uses. Examples of patented isolated genes include those
associated with breast and ovarian cancer, familial adenomatous polyposis, and
fragile X syndrome.
1.37 Gene fragments include a wide range of different types of isolated genetic
materials, including single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs), expressed sequence
tags (ESTs), and other gene fragments encoding important regions of proteins.
The Human Genome Project
has identified the value of SNPs for research relating
to human health in the following terms:
Variations in DNA sequence can have a major impact on how humans respond
to disease; environmental insults such as bacteria, viruses,
toxins, and
chemicals; and drugs and other therapies. This makes SNPs of great value for
biomedical research and for developing pharmaceutical
products or medical
diagnostics. Scientists believe SNP maps will help them identify the multiple
genes associated with such complex
diseases as cancer, diabetes, vascular
disease, and some forms of mental illness. These associations are difficult to
establish with
conventional gene-hunting methods because a single altered gene
may make only a small contribution to the
1.38 ESTs are DNA sequences of several hundred nucleotides, which form part of a
gene. An EST is cDNA, derived from RNA. The RNA
usually codes for a protein or
protein fragment of unknown function. Among other things, ESTs may be used as a
probe to identify
genes that are active or expressed under certain conditions or
in certain tissues.
1.39 The patenting of gene fragments, in the absence of any disclosure of the
function of the gene to which they relate, may be controversial.
Genome Project has noted that:
Some say that patenting such discoveries is inappropriate because the
effort to find any given EST is small compared with the work
of isolating and
characterizing a gene and gene product, finding out what it does, and developing
a commercial product. They feel
that allowing holders of such
‘gatekeeper’ patents to exercise undue control over the commercial
fruits of genome research
would be unfair. Similarly, allowing multiple patents
on different parts of the same genome sequence—say on a gene fragment,
gene, and the protein—adds undue costs to the researcher who wants to
examine the sequence. Not only does the researcher
have to pay each patent
holder via licensing for the opportunity to study the sequence, he also has to
pay his own staff to research
the different patents and determine which are
applicable to the area of the genome he wants to
1.40 Isolated genetic material may relate to coding or non-coding sequences, or
both. Coding genetic sequences, such as in ESTs,
code for particular proteins.
The role of non-coding DNA is yet to be fully established, but it is thought
that it may produce secondary
signals that integrate and regulate the activity
of genes and proteins.
Australian company, Genetic Technologies Limited, holds several US patents
covering the use of non-coding DNA for genetic
and for gene
Patents have also been
granted in Australia in relation to non-coding
Genetic products
1.41 Genetic
materials may be used to produce a range of items, which are referred to in this
Discussion Paper as ‘genetic products’.
Patentable genetic products
Proteins or important functional regions of proteins. As with
genetic materials, proteins are naturally occurring but may be patentable
isolated or synthesised. Proteins may be used to produce new medicines or
therapies. As the Human Genome Project has noted,
proteins ‘have unique
shapes or structures. Understanding these structures and how potential
pharmaceuticals will bind to them
is a key element in drug
Proteomics is
widely seen as the next phase in the development of genetic science, following
on from the successful sequencing of
the human genome.
Nucleic acid ‘probes’. These are fragments of DNA used
to locate or identify particular parts of genetic sequences.
Oligonucleotides. These are DNA molecules, usually composed of 25 or
fewer nucleotides, which are used as a DNA synthesis
Anti-sense DNA. This is DNA that has been synthesised to have the
opposite sequence to a gene. Anti-sense DNA may be used to regulate
expression, for example to block production of cancer cell proteins.
DNA encoding interfering RNA. Australian biotechnology company
Benitec has been awarded patents in the United States and the United
Kingdom for
its DNA-based technology, ddRNAi, which triggers RNA interference in human and
other cells, and may be used to delay
or repress the expression of a target
Attorney-General and Minister for
Health and Ageing, ‘Who Owns Your Genes?’,
News Release
December 2002.
Attorney-General and
Minister for Health and Ageing, ‘Inquiry into Human Genetic Property
News Release
, 17 December
Australian Law Reform Commission and
Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Protection of Human Genetic
Information
, IP 26 (2001),
Australian Law Reform Commission
and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The Protection of
Human Genetic Information in Australia
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003),
[1.9] - [1.17].
The members of the
Advisory Committee are listed in the front of this Discussion
Australian Law Reform Commission
See B Opeskin,
‘Engaging the Public: Community Participation in the Genetic Information
Attorney-General and Minister for
Health and Ageing, ‘Inquiry into Human Genetic Property Issues’,
News Release
, 17 December
The Attorney-General must table
the Report within 15 sitting days of receiving it:
Australian Law Reform
Commission Act 1996
However, the ALRC has a strong
record of having its advice followed. About 60% of the Commission’s
previous reports have been
fully or substantially implemented, about 20% of
reports have been partially implemented, and the remaining 20% have not been
implemented
or are still under
consideration.
National Health and
Medical Research Council,
National Statement on Ethical Conduct in Research
Involving Humans
(1999), Ch 16.
Molecular Medicine: An Introductory Text
(2nd ed, 1997),
See Australian Law Reform
Commission and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The
Protection of Human Genetic Information in Australia
, ALRC 96 (2003), Ch 2,
Molecular Medicine:
An Introductory Text
(2nd ed, 1997),
Genome Project,
Patenting Genes, Gene Fragments, SNPs, Gene Tests, Proteins,
and Stem Cells
, United States Department of Energy,
<www.ornl.gov/TechResources/Human_Genome/elsi/patents.html#2> at 17 June
The literature often refers to
the patenting of ‘genetic sequences’. Where convenient, this usage
is also adopted in
this Discussion Paper, though it is more accurate to say that
isolated genetic materials are the subject
Human Genome Project,
Patenting Genes, Gene Fragments, SNPs, Gene Tests, Proteins, and Stem
, United States Department of Energy,
<www.ornl.gov/TechResources/Human_Genome/elsi/patents.html#2> at 17 June
Medicine: An Introductory Text
(2nd ed, 1997),
See K Mullis, ‘The Unusual
Origin of the Polymerase Chain Reaction’ (1990) 262
Scientific American
56. Mullis was awarded the Nobel Prize for this work in
Genome Project,
Patenting Genes, Gene Fragments, SNPs, Gene Tests, Proteins,
and Stem Cells
, United States Department of Energy,
<www.ornl.gov/TechResources/Human_Genome/elsi/patents.html#2> at 17 June
C Feldbaum and C Ludlam,
Primer: Genome and Genetic Research, Patent Protection and 21st Century
, Biotechnology Industry Organization,
<www.bio.org/genomics/primer.html> at 8 January
Howlett and A Christie, ‘An Analysis of the Approach of the European,
Japanese and United States Patent Offices to Patenting
Partial DNA Sequences
(ESTs)’ (2003) 34
International Review of Industrial Property and
L Hood and D
Galas, ‘The Digital Code of DNA’ (2003) 421
also G O’Neill, ‘Ghost in the Machine’,
The Bulletin
11 March 2003, 55.
5,192,659; 5,612,179; 5,789,568. See Genetic Technologies Limited,
Presentation May 2003
<www.gtg.com.au/Presentation0503/index.html#btn> at 18 June
US Pat No 5,851,762. See
See, eg, Intron Sequence Analysis
Method for Detection of Adjacent and Remote Locus Alleles as Haplotypes AU67519;
Genomic Mapping
by Direct Haplotyping Using Intron Sequence Analysis AU647806;
Intron Sequence Analysis Method for Detection of Adjacent and Remote
Alleles as Haplotypes AU654111.
Genome Project,
Patenting Genes, Gene Fragments, SNPs, Gene Tests, Proteins,
and Stem Cells
, United States Department of Energy,
<www.ornl.gov/TechResources/Human_Genome/elsi/ patents.html#2> at 17 June
Human Genome Project,
, United States Department of Energy, <www.ornl.gov/
TechResources/Human_Genome/glossary> at 5 June
M Moser Jones,
Benitec Gets
First US Patent for ddRNAi, Plans to Enter US Market
, GenomeWeb Daily News,
6 June 2003, <www.genomeweb.com> at 17 June 2003.
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
2. The Patent System and the Nature of Reform
An outline of the patent system
Historical origins
Functions of patents
Nature of patents
Criteria for patentability
Patents and genetic technologies
Accommodating new technologies
A chronology of genetic technologies and patents
Concerns about gene patenting
Approach to reform
Working with the patents system
Evidence of the impact of gene patents
Need for flexibility
Constraints on reform
Summary of proposals
2. The Patent System and the Nature of Reform
An outline of the patent system
Historical origins
2.1 Patents
are the oldest form of intellectual property, but their historical origins are
In England, in the
fifteenth century, the monarch began to grant monopoly rights as a means of
attracting new industries from continental
Europe, but these were more in the
nature of royal licences to avoid the effects of guild regulations than a true
grant of exclusive
rights to carry on an
It was only in the
following century that patents began to be granted in respect of inventions, and
the patent system was put on
a statutory basis for the first time in the
seventeenth century with the passage of the
Statute of Monopolies 1623
Despite its age, this English statute continues to have relevance in Australian
patent law today.
2.2 As it first developed, the English patent was a slow, costly and cumbersome
procedure for encouraging and protecting inventions.
The procedure was described
in derisory terms by Charles Dickens in a short story published in 1850,
‘A Poor Man’s Tale
Over the years there
were many piecemeal reforms to the system, but it was the
Patents Act
(UK) that provided the basis of modern patent law, though this Act too
has since been amended and re-enacted many times.
2.3 Patent legislation in Australia has always been closely modelled on that of
the United Kingdom. Prior to Federation, each of
the Australian colonies had its
own legislation based on the
Patents Act 1883
(UK). In 1901, the
Constitution
gave the newly established Commonwealth
Parliament power to make laws with respect to ‘copyrights, patents of
invention and
designs, and trade
In 1903, this power
was exercised with passage of the
Patents Act 1903
(Cth). As in the
United Kingdom, there have been many amendments to Australian patent legislation
in response to formal commissions
of inquiry. The 1903 Act was re-enacted with
substantial changes in 1952 and again in 1990. The
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act
) provides the current legislative framework governing the
grant and administration of patents in Australia.
Functions of patents
2.4 Patent law has been
described as a ‘stressful if fertile union’ between certain
contradictory principles: self-interest
and the common good; monopoly rights and
liberty; the ownership of ideas and public disclosure of
This union results from
the dual goals of patent law—to benefit society by encouraging the
provision of new and useful goods,
and to encourage and reward inventiveness.
2.5 These goals are achieved by providing incentives for innovation and
knowledge-sharing by granting monopoly rights, for a limited
period, to exploit
a new product or process.
rights encourage investment by providing an opportunity to recoup the financial
outlays involved in developing an invention.
They also reward the inventor by
allowing a return to be made on the time and resources expended on research and
development.
2.6 The limited duration of the monopoly means, however, that the patented
invention eventually will be available for free and unrestricted
use when the
patent term expires: the compromise is thus ‘a way of securing future
benefits for the common
In addition, patents
promote knowledge-sharing during the term of the patent by requiring the patent
holder to place the details
of the invention in the public domain, in return for
exclusive rights. As one United States judge has stated:
The purpose of the patent system is not only to provide a financial
incentive to create new knowledge and bring it to public benefit
through new
products; it also serves to add to the body of published
scientific/technological knowledge. The requirement of disclosure
of the details
of patented inventions facilitates further knowledge and understanding of what
was done by the patentee, and may lead
to further technologic
Nature of patents
patent is an intellectual property right granted by a government to the inventor
of a new, inventive and useful product or process.
A patent gives the inventor
the right to stop others from exploiting the invention for a limited
However, a patent does
not grant an absolute right to exploit an invention in any way the inventor may
choose. A patent holder may
have to satisfy regulatory requirements in order to
exploit the patented product or process; for example, a patented pharmaceutical
compound may need approval under the
Therapeutic Goods Act 1989
before it can be marketed lawfully and sold as a treatment for a particular
condition. Similarly, the use of a patented invention
is subject to the general
law; for example, the components required to manufacture a car may be the
subject of many patents, but
the car must still be used in accordance with motor
traffic laws.
2.8 A patent holder is not obliged to exploit a patented invention, but the
failure to do so may have implications for the patent
holder’s rights. For
example, the patent could be subjected to compulsory licensing, or it could be
used or acquired by the
Crown under relevant provisions of the
. A patent holder may authorise others to exploit the patent by granting
a licence on agreed terms. This may be on an exclusive, sole
or a non-exclusive
basis, and almost certainly will require the licensee to pay royalties or other
fees to the patent holder.
2.9 It is important to note that while patents are a form of intellectual
property, they do not confer ownership in the physical
material described in the
claims for a patented product or process. Thus, a patent over a genetic sequence
does not amount to ownership
of the sequence itself.
Criteria for patentability
2.10 Although
there is considerable variance in the detail from one jurisdiction to another,
most countries apply similar tests for
patentability: an invention must be novel
(ie, new), must involve an inventive step, and must have a useful application.
In addition,
the description of an invention in a patent application must be
sufficient to allow a skilled person to create the invention independently.
2.11 Chapter 6 of this Discussion Paper provides a detailed discussion of the
criteria for patentability under Australian law. Briefly,
Patents Act
provides that an invention will be patentable if it:
is a ‘manner of manufacture’ within the meaning of
Statute of Monopolies
—that is, the invention is appropriate
subject matter for patent protection;
involves an inventive or innovative step;
is useful; and
has not been used secretly within Australia prior to filing the
application.
2.12 Certain
inventions are expressly excluded from patentability. Australia has relatively
few express exclusions from patentability,
but they include inventions involving
‘human beings, and the biological processes for their generation’,
as well as inventions
the use of which would be contrary to
Other jurisdictions
recognise a broader range of exceptions, including inventions involving
diagnostic, therapeutic and surgical
methods of treatment of humans and animals;
and inventions whose commercial exploitation would be contrary to morality or
Exclusions from
patentability are discussed in Chapter 7.
Patents and genetic technologies
Accommodating new technologies
patent system is over 400 years old. It has accommodated the arrival of many new
technologies including: inventions associated
with mechanics in the industrial
revolution; electricity and electronics; industrial and chemical materials; food
production and
agriculture; scientific instruments and devices; transportation
and energy; warfare; medical devices and pharmaceutical products;
computing and
information technology; and business methods. In the last 20 years, inventions
in the field of biotechnology have become
a new focus of the patent system,
particularly in relation to genetic materials and technologies.
2.14 Each new field of technology has brought with it new challenges for the
patent system, as those responsible for processing patent
applications seek to
assess the novelty, inventiveness and usefulness of each new claimed invention,
in the light of what has gone
before. These challenges have been felt in the
area of gene patents, where the difficulty of the examiners’ task has been
by the newness of the claims, the increasing pace of technological
change, the global nature of scientific inquiry, the highly specialised
of genetic science and technology, and the sheer volume of inventions. No doubt,
once patent examiners have become familiar
with genetics, they will be met with
a new range of challenges from emerging disciplines such as bioinformatics,
pharmacogenomics,
proteomics and nanotechnology.
2.15 Thus the problems identified with gene patents in this Discussion Paper
should be seen in historical perspective. The patent
system has been durable
because it has been highly adaptive. There have been many inquiries into the
patent system, and many legislative
changes to refine and improve the system
inherited from the United Kingdom. Many of these changes have been incremental,
the principal concepts underlying the modern patent system have been in
existence for a long time.
A chronology of genetic technologies and patents
2.16 This section gives a
brief chronology of the patenting of genetic materials and technologies as
background to the issues identified
in this Discussion Paper.
2.17 In 1953, the foundation for modern genetics was laid when the scientific
published Watson and Crick’s hypothesis about the
double helix structure of DNA. Their article suggested a mechanism by which
genetic material could be stored, transferred and copied.
2.18 Twenty years later, Cohen, Boyer and Chang developed a technique that
allowed sections of DNA to be transferred from one life
form into another,
thereby producing the first ‘recombinant organism’. This advance was
significant because, for the
first time, scientists could artificially introduce
genetic traits into other species.
2.19 Commercialisation of genetic technology followed soon after when, in 1976,
Boyer and Swanson established the first known biotechnology
company, Genentech
Inc, in Berkeley, California. In 1977, Genentech reported the production of the
first human protein manufactured
The technology
demonstrated that molecules could be produced in large quantities in bacterial
vectors and then administered to patients,
raising hopes that recombinant
technology could aid the treatment of human disease.
2.20 A second crucial breakthrough in genetic science occurred in 1977, when
Sanger identified a method for reading DNA
Scientists could now
read the genetic code, and so gain an understanding of genetic mutations that
cause human disease as well as
the functional and evolutionary relationships
between genes. The Sanger methodology remains the basis of modern gene
sequencing.
2.21 A third major innovation in genetics was the development of the polymerase
chain reaction (PCR). Developed in the 1980s by Mullis
and others at Cetus
Corporation, PCR provided a quick and easy method for selective amplification of
DNA fragments, removing the
need for cloning in
micro-organisms.
Amplifications
that previously took weeks could now be done in a matter of hours. After
patenting the process, Cetus sold the patent
to Hoffman-La Roche Inc (Roche).
Roche now holds more than 130 patents in the United States related to the PCR
The process has become
the foundation for almost all genetic laboratory work, making access to the
patented technology crucial.
2.22 While genetic technology was progressing apace, legislatures, courts and
regulators were also forced to address issues arising
from the commercialisation
of genetic inventions. The controversial decision in
Chakrabarty
handed down by
the United States Supreme Court in 1980, allowed a patent to be granted for a
recombinant bacterium, thus determining
that life forms are patentable subject
matter under United States law. In the same year, the United States Congress
Bayh-Dole Act
, providing that intellectual property rights
arising from publicly funded research vest in the organisations that carry out
the research.
The underlying
policy of the legislation was to encourage innovation and exploitation by
allowing universities to patent inventions
flowing from their
In 1982, the US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the first recombinant DNA drug for
demonstrating that
government agencies had accepted some genetically manipulated products as safe
for medical use.
2.23 The biotechnology industry expanded rapidly during the 1980s. In 1985, the
FDA gave approval for the first drug to be both manufactured
and marketed by a
biotechnology company.
Sequencing methods improved with the introduction in 1986 of the automated DNA
fluorescence sequencer developed by the Californian
Institute of Technology and
Applied Biosystems Inc. In 1988, the United States Patent and Trademark Office
granted the first US patent
over an entire animal, the ‘Harvard
This move provoked
widespread concern about the ethics of patenting higher life
Genetically altered mice
(and other animals) are valuable research tools for both industry and academic
researchers, principally
because they serve as animal models of human
2.24 The role of patent law in facilitating innovation in the field of genetics
continued to excite controversy in the 1990s. One
issue of contention was the
level of usefulness or utility that needed to be demonstrated to support a claim
over a genetic invention.
In 1991, the US National Institutes of Health (NIH)
filed patent applications on approximately 2,700 partial gene sequences, known
as ‘expressed sequence tags’ (ESTs). The applications included not
only claims over the ESTs, but also over their full-length
gene sequences and
derivative proteins.
claims were controversial because the functions of these sequences were unknown
at the time of filing. The NIH eventually abandoned
the applications.
2.25 Another issue for patent law has been the breadth of claims made in
applications for patents over genetic inventions. An example
is the patent
issued in 1993, to Australian scientist Dr Malcolm Simons, over ‘the use
of non-coding DNA for genetic
and the grant
five years later of a further patent to cover the use of non-coding DNA for the
purposes of gene mapping.
2.26 The commencement of the Human Genome Project in 1990 was an indication of
the thriving state of genetic
The international
consortium led by Dr Francis Collins of the US National Human Genome Research
Institute had the ambitious objective
of determining the complete sequence of
the three billion base pairs comprising the human genome. It is a tribute to the
biotechnological advances of the previous two decades that such a task
could even have been
contemplated.
2.27 A new era of genomics was entered in February 2001, with the publication by
the Human Genome Project and Celera Genomics Group
(Celera) of the working draft
of the human genome sequence.
Final sequencing of the human genome was completed in April
The sequence data produced
by the Human Genome Project have been deposited into public gene banks. In
contrast, Celera sought patent
protection over the sequences that it had
identified. There is little doubt that the vast amount of information released
course of the Project will be a spur to further research and
innovation, and may bring with it a new array of problems for gene
Concerns about gene patenting
2.28 As noted in Chapter 1,
the ALRC has received 65 submissions to date in relation to gene patenting and
has conducted nearly 50
targeted consultations with stakeholders, involving many
hundreds of individuals. The submissions have come from individuals,
organisations
and government departments spanning a wide range of interests.
2.29 A number of submissions expressed the view that the patent system works
reasonably well across all fields of technology, including
human genetics. On
this view, if there are real or perceived problems with gene patents, these are
no more than the expected consequence
of applying an established and generalised
patent system to a new field of human endeavour. From this standpoint, the
problems of
today will be viewed by the next generation in the same way we now
view the problems produced by technologies of the previous generation.
conclusion of these submissions is that the patent system is robust and
adaptable, and should be left alone—or, at
most, adapted at the margins to
address the limited problems that have been shown to exist.
2.30 At the other end of the spectrum were those who considered the patent
system to be fundamentally flawed in its application to
technologies,
with a consequent degradation in the quality and economic value of patents
throughout the industrialised world. The
concerns identified in these
submissions and consultations extended beyond the Terms of Reference of the
current Inquiry. Their principal
criticism was the ‘functional
redundancy’ of patents, which was said to arise because many granted
patents plagiarise
earlier ones, or because the only innovation is the use of
alternative linguistic expressions to describe a previously patented
The problem was said
to stem from the inadequacies of the examination process, combined with the
incentive for patent offices to
be overly generous in their grant of patents
because their revenues depend on receipt of patent fees.
2.31 Between these extremes were the far more numerous submissions and
consultations in which concerns were expressed about the patenting
materials and technologies—ranging from mild dissatisfaction with
particular arrangements, to strenuous objection
to the way in which the patent
system deals with genetic materials and technologies. These concerns are
described and analysed in
detail in later chapters of this Discussion Paper. For
present purposes it is sufficient to distinguish between two classes of
those relating to the law or practice of patenting genetic materials
and technologies; and those relating to the manner in which
gene patents are
exploited in the marketplace.
2.32 Submissions that criticised the patenting of genetic materials and
technologies identified a broad range of concerns, including
the following:
Patent legislation fails to take sufficient account of ethical
considerations, such as whether human genetic sequences are a proper
matter for a statutory monopoly.
Human genetic sequences should not be patentable because they are
discoveries, not inventions. Alternatively, the level of inventiveness
to isolate and purify human genetic material is insufficient to justify the
grant of a patent.
Patents granted over genetic materials and technologies are often
too broad, and are granted without proper evidence that the invention
Patents over genetic materials and technologies are too easily
granted in Australia, in comparison with overseas patent offices;
examiners should be more highly skilled in assessing applications in the field
of biotechnology.
2.33 Many submissions directed their attention not to
the patentability of genetic materials and technologies but to the manner in
which gene patents are exploited in the marketplace by a patent holder or its
licensee. Again, many different views were expressed,
including the
Restrictive licensing practices limit access to medical genetic
testing, and compromise the quality of such testing, to the detriment
Exploitation of the monopoly rights conferred by gene patents drives
up the cost of medical genetic testing beyond a fair and equitable
level, to the
detriment of public health.
Licensing practices restrict access to genetic materials and
technologies for research purposes. Negotiating licences for a large
related or overlapping gene patents is problematic due to the high transaction
costs and the lack of expertise of many
researchers.
The use of gene patents in research
should be exempt from claims of patent infringement, so as to facilitate
research, not hinder
Approach to reform
2.34 In later chapters of
this Discussion Paper, the ALRC canvasses reforms that are designed to address
possible problems with the
patenting of genetic materials and technologies. This
section explains the overall approach taken by the Inquiry in examining these
problems and in proposing reforms.
Working with the patents system
2.35 The Inquiry’s
approach is predicated on acceptance of the fundamental objective of the patent
system in seeking to encourage
innovation by granting limited monopoly rights.
As indicated in Chapter 1, the ALRC has not been asked to undertake a wholesale
of intellectual property laws or the patent system, but to examine ways
in which the patent system can be changed to ‘further
the health and
economic benefits of genetic research and genetic and related
technologies’.
2.36 In this context, there should be realistic expectations of the patent
system and what it can achieve. For example, as discussed
in Chapter 7, the
patent system may be ill-suited to addressing all the social and ethical
concerns that are raised by the use or
exploitation of patented inventions.
Those issues are better addressed by laws and practices that exist outside the
patent system.
Some of the needed reforms were considered by the ALRC and the
Australian Health Ethics Committee in its 2003 report,
Essentially Yours: The
Protection of Human Genetic Information in
recommendations were made, for example, to improve the ethical oversight of
human genetic research.
2.37 An important feature of the patent system is its long-term perspective of
the role of monopoly rights in fostering innovation
and delivering public
benefit. For example, some people may think that exclusive rights to exploit a
particular genetic invention
are not in the public interest because they prevent
open access to a specific medical genetic test for a period of 20 years. Yet
this consideration must be weighed against the role of patent rights in
promoting the innovation and investment that led to the availability
of the test
in the first place. Research and development are not only costly, but
time-consuming. Many therapeutic benefits are still
to be realised from the
genetics revolution that began in the 1970s, whose landmarks have been described
2.38 In developing its proposals, the ALRC has been mindful of the need for
reforms that make the existing system work better, rather
than conceiving an
entirely new system. This approach recalls the much quoted conclusion of
Professor Fritz Malchup in his seminal
study of the economic benefits of the
United States patent system:
If one does not know whether a system ‘as a whole’ (in
contrast to certain features of it) is good or bad, the safest
conclusion’ is to ‘muddle through’—either with it, if
one has long lived with it, or without
it, if one has lived without it. If we
did not have a patent system, it would be irresponsible, on the basis of our
present knowledge
of its economic consequences, to recommend instituting one.
But since we have had a patent system for a long time, it would be
irresponsible,
on the basis of our present knowledge, to recommend abolishing
2.39 As Machlup’s conclusion implies, the patent system can be improved if
particular features can be identified as good or
bad. This Inquiry is directed
to that task.
Evidence of the impact of gene patents
2.40 The previous section
identified some of the concerns that have been raised about the patenting of
genetic materials and technologies.
One difficulty in assessing these concerns
is that there have been very few empirical studies in Australia addressing gene
and their impact on research, biotechnology or
healthcare.
Overseas studies are
also few in number, and their conclusions may not be capable of being
generalised to Australian
conditions.
Where studies have
been conducted, the conclusions are often equivocal.
2.41 The ALRC received a broad range of comments and opinions about the actual
or potential effects of gene patents, including anecdotal
accounts about
research or healthcare being hindered by gene patents, or by the commercial
strategies of patent holders. There are
limits to what may be learned from the
experience of one patent or set of patents, or the exploitation of patent rights
in a specific
social and commercial situation. Just as an old common law saying
is that ‘hard cases make bad law’, hard cases may also
make for poor
law reform proposals. Even if firm evidence can be found that the exploitation
of a specific gene patent has led to
problems for research or healthcare, it
does not follow that this justifies a systemic response by which widespread
change is sought
to the entire patent system.
2.42 The ALRC believes that there is limited evidence to date that gene patents
or licensing practices have had any significant adverse
impact on the conduct of
genetic research or on healthcare provision in Australia. Many of the concerns
that have been expressed
to the Inquiry relate to possible future problems and
are based on assumptions that may or may not be borne out with time—for
example, assumptions about the future development of the market in medical
genetic testing, or the intentions of patent holders with
regard to the
exploitation and enforcement of gene patents.
2.43 In view of the equivocal nature of evidence about adverse impacts on
research and healthcare, the ALRC considers that it should
adopt a cautious
approach towards proposing radical changes in patent law and practice. Major
changes should be proposed only in
response to demonstrated problems. This is
particularly so given that such changes have uncertain flow-on effects; for
example, on
future investment and innovation in genetic technologies, and on the
development of the biotechnology industry. On the other hand,
caution does not
imply inaction, and the patent system must be flexible enough to deal with
problems as they emerge.
Need for flexibility
2.44 While adverse effects
of gene patents may not yet be manifest, the ALRC recognises that this may
change in response to shifts
in the commercial, scientific, medical and
technological environments, or in the interactions among them.
2.45 For example, patent holders may become more active in enforcing certain
patent rights, perhaps in response to the success of
new business models. New
medical, scientific and technological developments in the field of human
genetics may provide new opportunities
to exploit genetic inventions. Medical,
scientific or technological change may also mean that some foreseen problems do
not eventuate
or are manifested in different ways to those anticipated. Thus,
some genes (and hence gene patents) may come to have an importance
unanticipated, while other much-heralded patents may end up as technological
backwaters, rather than being at the forefront
of developments.
2.46 The nature and extent of the potential problems—and whether existing
legal mechanisms provide appropriate and effective
remedies—are difficult
to assess. The appropriate response to this challenge is to ensure that patent
laws and practices are
sufficiently flexible and robust to anticipate and
respond to future problems. This approach has influenced the proposals made in
this Discussion Paper, which are more often directed to influencing patent
practices than to proposing substantive changes to patent
law. The need for
flexible regulation has been described by the ALRC elsewhere as one mechanism
for ensuring that today’s law
reform is relevant to the scientific
developments of tomorrow.
Constraints on reform
Terms of Reference
are other factors that constrain the extent to which it would be appropriate for
the ALRC to propose sweeping changes to
the patent system. One of these is the
Inquiry’s Terms of Reference, which instruct the ALRC to report on the
impact of patenting
laws and practices related to ‘genes and genetic and
related technologies’.
2.48 In general, the ALRC does not believe that concerns about the patenting of
inventions involving genetic materials and technologies
should be addressed by
provisions in the
Patents Act
dedicated only to these types of
inventions. There are cogent reasons for maintaining, so far as possible, the
technology-neutral
nature of the
However, there is scope
for technology-specific regulation through guidelines and principles issued by
the Patent Office (that is,
IP Australia) and other relevant institutions. The
introduction of legislative provisions that are specific to inventions involving
genetic materials and technologies may suggest that specific provisions also
should be implemented for future technologies—an
approach that would
unnecessarily fragments and complicate Australian patent law in the long
2.49 Legislative reform that is specific to genetic materials and technologies
would also represent a departure from attempts to
harmonise the patent laws of
various jurisdictions and lead to divergence between Australian patent law and
that in major industrialised
countries—with implications for investment in
the Australian biotechnology
Further, the adoption of
specific laws for genetic materials and technologies may have implications for
Australia’s obligations
under multilateral agreements dealing with patents
and other intellectual property laws, and under bilateral free trade agreements
with other states.
2.50 Many reforms considered by the Inquiry do not lend themselves to being
formulated in a manner that is specific to genetic materials
and technologies.
Some proposals, therefore, have been framed so as to apply to all patented
inventions. These include, for example,
proposals made in relation to an
experimental use defence,
use and acquisition,
compulsory licensing.
cases, the decision to propose reforms applicable to all patentable inventions,
and not just genetic materials and technologies,
was bolstered by submissions
that identified similar problems with respect to other patentable subject
In other cases, the
uncertain implications of reform on other patentable subject matter constituted
one reason not to propose
2.51 The Terms of Reference direct the ALRC to consider the impact of gene
patents on: (a) research and its subsequent application
and commercialisation;
(b) the biotechnology sector; and (c) the cost-effective provision of
healthcare. However, the interests of
each of these sectors are different and
sometimes conflict—at least on the surface—and must be balanced in
recommending
reform. For example, when making proposals directed primarily to
promoting access to patented inventions for healthcare purposes,
the ALRC has
been mindful of the impact of reforms on the biotechnology sector and on the
potential for commercialisation of research.
Not surprisingly, perhaps, the
views expressed in submissions from health departments often differed markedly
from those expressed
in submissions from departments responsible for industry
and innovation.
International legal framework
2.52 As discussed in Chapter 4, elements of the
international legal framework have an important influence on the reform of
patent law. In particular, reforms proposed by the ALRC may have
implications for Australia’s obligations under multilateral
dealing with patents and other intellectual property laws and under bilateral
free trade agreements with other states.
For example, the
Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 1994
constraints on the extent to which the national laws of Contracting States may
discriminate by ‘field of
technology’.
above, this provides an important reason why it may be appropriate to extend the
application of some proposed reforms beyond
gene patents to all patentable
inventions.
2.53 Although it is possible to amend domestic laws so that they are
inconsistent with Australia’s international treaty obligations,
may be held responsible on the international plane for breaches of such
obligations. The ALRC would need compelling reasons
to recommend any reform of
patent law or practice that would raise doubts about Australia’s
compliance with its existing international
obligations.
Summary of proposals
2.54 To date, the Inquiry
has not identified fundamental flaws in patent law or practice as applied to
genetic materials and technologies
such that we feel the need to propose radical
change. However, there are means by which patent law and practice could be
to address existing problems and provide greater flexibility in
addressing future problems as they arise. This Discussion Paper makes
proposals for reform. These proposals are directed to:
improving patent law and practice concerning the
genetic materials and technologies, including through proposed amendments to the
Patents Act
and changes in the practices and procedures of IP Australia,
patent examiners and the courts;
improving patent law and practice concerning the
exploitation
of gene patents, including in relation to new defences to claims of patent
infringement, Crown use and the compulsory licensing of
gene patents;
ensuring that publicly funded research, where commercialised,
results in appropriate public benefit, including through the adoption
appropriate patent practices;
encouraging universities and other publicly funded research
institutions to raise the awareness of researchers about patenting issues
the commercialisation of research;
ensuring that Australian research institutions and biotechnology
companies are adequately skilled to deal with issues concerning
commercialisation and the licensing of patented inventions;
establishing mechanisms for monitoring the implications of gene
patents for research and healthcare so that governments have the
intervene where gene patents are considered to have an adverse impact, either in
specific cases or systemically; and
applying competition law to business practices involving patented
genetic inventions.
2.55 The mechanisms for implementing these
proposals vary. A number of proposals are directed to legislative change,
generally involving
amendment of the
Patents Act
Regulations 1991
(Cth). A small number of these proposals would make
substantive changes to patent law; for example, through the enactment of a new
requirement that the Patent Office be satisfied during examination that the
criterion of ‘usefulness’ is
a new defence
relating to the use of a patented invention to study or experiment on the
subject matter of the patented
competition-based test as an additional ground for the grant of a compulsory
Other proposals for
legislative reform are of a more minor nature, or are directed to clarifying
existing law. These include proposals
to elucidate the ambit of the Crown use
and the extent to
which the ‘fair dealing’ provisions of the
(Cth) apply to commercial genetic
2.56 However, most proposals do not require legislative change but involve the
development of new or revised guidelines, or other
action by government and
non-government bodies involved with various aspects of the patent system or its
impact on research, biotechnology
or healthcare. These bodies include: IP
Australia; the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC); the
Australian Research
Council (ARC); the National Health and Medical Research
Council (NHMRC); Biotechnology Australia; AusBiotech Ltd; and the Australian
Health Ministers’ Advisory Council (AHMAC).
2.57 Some of these non-legislative proposals are intended to improve the
operation of the patent system and the practices and procedures
of IP Australia,
patent examiners and the courts. For example, the ALRC proposes that IP
Australia develop examination guidelines
to assist patent examiners in applying
the ‘usefulness’ requirement of
patentability,
and to explain
how the criteria for patentability apply to inventions involving genetic
materials and technologies.
ALRC also proposes that courts should continue to develop procedures to allow
judges to benefit from the advice of assessors
or scientific advisors in
litigation involving gene patents. This is a matter of particular importance to
the Federal Court, which
hears and determines most patent litigation in
2.58 Other non-legislative proposals are directed to the relationship between
the patent system and the three sectors to which the
ALRC is required to have
regard—namely, research, biotechnology and healthcare. For example, the
ALRC proposes that the ARC
and the NHMRC review their principles and guidelines
to ensure that publicly funded research, where commercialised, results in
appropriate
public benefit,
that universities continue to take steps to raise the awareness of researchers
It is also proposed
that Biotechnology Australia take steps to assist universities and biotechnology
companies in commercialising
inventions involving genetic materials and
technologies.
Commonwealth,
state and territory health departments are encouraged to consider actively
whether to intervene in patent proceedings
where particular gene patents are
thought to have an adverse impact on healthcare
2.59 Another category of proposals comprises those directed to monitoring the
ongoing impact of gene patents. These reforms are intended
to ensure that
problems are identified at an early stage; for example, through monitoring of
anti-competitive conduct and informal
prices surveillance by the
The ALRC also proposes
processes for examining the economic and financial impact of gene patents on
healthcare services and the monitoring
of gene patents by specialist offices
within Commonwealth, state and territory health
departments.
2.60 It should be apparent that this raft of proposals adopts a nuanced approach
to reform, which seeks to recognise both the generality
and longevity of the
patents system, on the one hand, and the new challenges generated by human
genetic science and technology, on
the other. There are many different points at
which the patent system may be reformed to address the actual and anticipated
posed by the patenting of genetic materials and technologies. This does
not mean that reform should be sought at every point, but
rather that
intervention—where needed—should be directed to those places where
it will be most effective. This Discussion
Paper seeks to describe the
complexities of the Australian patent system and to explain the ALRC’s
views about the desirability
of reform in dealing with the problems generated by
the ‘new genetics’.
See, eg, A Gomme,
Invention: Origin and Growth of the Patent System in Britain
(1946); H Fox,
Monopolies and Patents
The Law of Intellectual Property
Patents Act 1990
requires a patentable invention to be a ‘manner of
manufacture within the meaning of
of the Statute of
Monopolies’.
C Dickens, ‘A
Poor Man’s Tale of a Patent’ (1850) II(70)
Household Words
Constitution
L Kass, ‘Patenting
Journal of the Patent Office Society
Patents Act 1990
, sch 1 defines ‘exploit’ to include make, hire, sell or
otherwise dispose of the product, use or import it, or keep it
for the purpose
of doing any of those things.
Intellectual
Property and Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property
Legislation under the Competition Principles Agreement
P Baird, ‘Patenting and Human
Genes’ (1998) 41
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine
Life Sciences v Merck KgaA
[2002] USCAFED 222
307 F 3d 1351
(2002) (Newman J,
dissenting).
In Australia, a standard
patent has a term of 20 years; an innovation patent has a term of eight
Common terms in patent licences
are described further in Ch
Patents Act 1990
(2)(c), (d). See Ch 7.
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C
of the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into force on 1 January 1995) art
The protein produced was
somatostatin, a human growth hormone-releasing inhibitory
Gilbert and Maxam also created
a sequencing method at this time, based upon the ‘cleavage
The PCR process is
described in Australian Law Reform Commission and Australian Health Ethics
Essentially Yours: The Protection of Human Genetic Information in
, ALRC 96 (2003),
Roche Molecular Diagnostics,
PCR Information for Journalists
<www.roche-diagnostics.com/ba_rmd/pcr_jounalists.html> at 9 December
Diamond v Chakrabarty
[1980] USSC 119
Previously, the US
government retained title to such intellectual property. This meant that
universities and researchers had little
incentive to commercialise their
inventions.
See D Mowery and others,
‘The Growth of Patenting and Licensing by US Universities: An Assessment
of the Effects of the Bayh
- Dole Act of 1980’ (2001) 30
The drug was a
recombinant human insulin, produced by Genentech and licensed to Eli Lilly &
This was Genentech’s
protropin as a treatment for child growth hormone
deficiency.
The ‘Harvard
Mouse’ was genetically engineered to be highly susceptible to breast
See, eg, Greenpeace,
Court of Canada Rejects Patent for Mouse, 5 December 2002
<www.greenpeace.ca/e/campaign/gmo/depth/highlights> at 18 December
Mice and other animals may be
genetically engineered by adding a foreign gene to its cells (a
‘transgenic mouse’), or
deleting or making inactive a specific gene
in its cells (a ‘knockout
M Holman and S Munzer,
‘Intellectual Property Rights in Genes and Gene Fragments: A Registration
Solution for Expressed Sequence
Iowa Law Review
Intron Sequence Analysis
Method for Detection of Adjacent and Remote Locus Alleles as Haplotypes: US Pat
No 5,192,659. See also US
Pat No 5,612,179 and
Genomic Mapping Method by
Direct Haplotyping Using Intron Sequence Analysis: US Pat No
Cracking the
Genome: Inside the Race to Unlock Human DNA
In 1998 geneticist Craig Venter
entered the ‘race’ to sequence the human genome, claiming that
Celera Genomics would
single-handedly sequence the entire human genome in just
three years: C Venter and others, ‘Shotgun Sequencing of the Human
Genome’ (1998) 280
The draft was published in
special issues of
(16 February 2001) and
February 2001).
National Human Genome
Research Institute,
, <www.nhgri.nih.gov> at 9 December
See F Collins and others,
‘A Vision for the Future of Genomics Research: A Blueprint for the Genomic
Era’ (2003) 422
The Problem with
Patents and the Impact on the Investing Public
(2001). The criticisms were
directed principally to the United States Patent and Trademark
See Terms of Reference,
reproduced at the front of this Discussion
Australian Law Reform Commission
and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The Protection of
Human Genetic Information in Australia
An Economic Review of the Patent System
See D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
6; M Howlett and A Christie,
An Analysis of the Approaches of the Trilateral
and Australian Patent Offices to Patenting Partial DNA Sequences (ESTs)
See J Walsh, A Arora and W
Cohen, ‘Effects of Research Tool Patenting and Licensing on Biomedical
Innovation’ in W Cohen
and S Merrill (eds),
Patents in the
Knowledge-Based Economy
(2003), 285; Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual Property Rights and
Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
(2002); M Cho and others,
‘Effects of Patents and Licenses on the Provision of Clinical Genetic
Testing Services’ (2003)
Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
Australian Law Reform Commission
and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The Protection of
Human Genetic Information in Australia
, ALRC 96 (2003), [4.18],
[4.35] - [4.49].
See, eg, Ch 6 in
relation to patentability
requirements.
Chapter 4 discusses the
recently concluded Free Trade Agreement between Australia and the United States,
and the agreement that the
parties work to reduce differences between them in
intellectual property laws and practices, including in relation to
See, eg, Ch 14 in relation to the
proposed new experimental use
See, eg, Ch 22 in relation to
a medical treatment
Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into
force on 1 January 1995).
This is especially important in
light of the legislative requirement that the ALRC, in performing its functions,
regard to all of Australia’s international obligations
that are relevant to the matter’:
Australian Law Reform Commission Act
See Ch 18 - 19,
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
3. Economic, Social and Ethical Dimensions
Introduction
Economic dimensions
Promoting innovation
Investment and economic growth
Resource use and knowledge sharing
Social dimensions
The conduct of research
Access to healthcare
Ethical dimensions
What is ethics?
Ethics and the patenting of human genetic materials
Ethics and the exploitation of gene patents
3. Economic, Social and Ethical Dimensions
Introduction
patents over isolated human genetic materials were initially granted, ethical
concerns centred on the appropriateness of
granting such patents. As gene
patenting became more widespread, concerns about the exploitation of gene
patents came more to the
forefront of the debate. This chapter discusses the
early ethical objections to granting patents on human genetic materials and more
recent concerns about the economic, social and ethical implications of gene
patents. The concerns include those about the effects
of gene patents on
research and innovation; resource use and knowledge sharing; access to
healthcare; benefit sharing; and issues
of consent to, and control of, research
that leads to the development of patentable inventions.
3.2 The economic, social and ethical dimensions of gene patents are relevant to
potential reform of the patent system because the
fundamental rationale for
patents is to promote the social good. It is important, therefore, that any
negative consequences of gene
patents do not outweigh the benefits.
Economic dimensions
3.3 The grant and exploitation
of gene patents have a range of possible economic impacts. The Organisation for
Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) has noted that the ‘genomics
revolution’ has reopened debate about intellectual property rights,
the challenge of balancing:
the need to keep information and access to genetic data open in order to
encourage the diffusion of research results with the commercial
need to protect
inventions in order to create revenue from investments in research and
development.
3.4 This section considers some of the issues that arise from this challenge,
including those relating to:
promotion of innovation;
investment and economic growth implications of patenting; and
resource use and knowledge sharing.
3.5 Innovation benefits the
community by creating new and improved goods and services that meet social
needs. For example, innovations
in medical research may produce new genetic
tests and treatments, which may improve community health.
3.6 As discussed in Chapter 2, patents promote innovation through the grant of
limited monopolies over the exploitation of new products
and processes. These
limited monopolies encourage investment in developing and manufacturing new
inventions by affording the investor
extra opportunity to recoup financial
outlays. For example, in relation to healthcare, the Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical
Research stated:
Not granting patents, coupled with disclosure, would make the IP
unattractive to a company since it would have to invest heavily in
research and especially clinical development with no protection from competitors
using the invention and underselling them
because they do not have to recover
extensive R&D costs. The result could be no further development of the
potential health care
3.7 Without the incentive provided by patents, private investors may be
reluctant to invest, resulting in greater calls on government
funding or a
failure to develop and exploit new technology.
3.8 Patents promote innovation by rewarding inventors for the time, effort and
ingenuity invested in creating new products and
The potential for
financial returns adds an incentive to the traditional rewards of scientific
innovation, such as academic recognition
and promotion within research
institutions.
3.9 The role of patents as an incentive for innovation, investment in research
and as a means to recoup the costs of research was
widely acknowledged in
submissions.
For example, the
Children’s Cancer Institute Australia for Medical Research recognised:
the importance of the patent system as a cornerstone in driving
innovation in medical research by enabling researchers to have protection
their intellectual property and the possibility of capitalizing on their
inventions. The involvement of industry in this process
is also well-established
and important ... Intellectual property protection has been, and will continue
to be, an essential component
of the innovation process that drives medical
3.10 Patents also benefit Australian companies by providing a system for trading
knowledge internationally through licence agreements.
The grant of licences to
international companies to exploit locally developed inventions provides returns
to inventors and access
to foreign markets. The grant of licences to Australian
companies to manufacture inventions developed overseas can improve the skill
know-how available within the Australian community.
3.11 However, patents do not always reward innovation and research investment
equitably. In most jurisdictions, including Australia,
where two researchers
independently create the same invention, only the first to apply for patent
protection will be awarded a patent
This may discourage some
researchers from embarking on a course of research that is already being pursued
elsewhere, despite the
possibility that they may do better or more efficient
Investment and economic growth
3.12 Possessing a patent may
inventions. Small companies may
use patents to attract financial backing and in
negotiations for funding and support from venture capitalists and
manufacturers.
3.13 In addition, patents may stimulate the growth of national industry because
local companies that hold patents can attract overseas
investment and develop
products for export.
generated by patent exploitation can be invested in further research and
development, which may stimulate commercial and
industrial growth.
3.14 However, patents may also have undesirable commercial and economic effects.
The limited monopoly awarded by a patent might enable
the patent holder to
charge a higher price than would apply if others were allowed to produce
competing versions of the patented
invention. Licence fees may drive up
3.15 There are transaction costs associated with seeking the grant of a patent
and enforcing patent rights. Fees must be paid before
a patent application will
be examined or granted, and to maintain patent rights once
Claims of infringement
may need to be pursued through the courts: asserting patent rights or
challenging those of a competitor may
be costly and difficult, particularly for
small and medium-sized
enterprises.
3.16 From a global perspective, patent systems may have adverse consequences for
countries, like Australia, that are net importers
of intellectual property. That
is, expenditure on licence fees or royalties for the use of patents owned by
foreign entities may
exceed the income earned from the use by foreign entities
of inventions patented by local entities. Most Australian biotechnology
are owned by foreign entities and Australian researchers generally pay licence
fees to overseas companies to utilise these
patented inventions in
Chapters 17 and 19
discuss the Australian biotechnology industry and international patent
Resource use and knowledge sharing
3.17 Patents promote
knowledge sharing by requiring the details of the patented invention to be
placed in the public domain in return
for the exclusive right to exploit the
invention. In the absence of this exchange, inventors might protect the details
of new inventions
through secrecy. The disclosure requirements of the patent
system are based on the idea that ‘scientific and technical openness
benefits the progress of society more than do confidentiality and
3.18 By encouraging knowledge sharing, through the requirement of full
disclosure, patents reduce the duplication of research effort
and encourage
researchers to build on existing inventions. Researchers may study a patented
product and find ways to improve upon
it. Access to patented inventions may also
facilitate research that would not otherwise be possible. For example, access to
research tool may enable vital research into the causes of a genetic
disorder and lead to the creation of a genetic test or treatment.
This research
may not have occurred if the tool had remained secret. Due to the cumulative
nature of much genetic research, knowledge
sharing may be particularly important
in this context.
3.19 However, patents may also inhibit research by discouraging knowledge
sharing prior to filing for patent protection. The results
of new research may
be withheld until an inventor is in a position to apply for a patent and the
invention is sufficiently well-developed
to ensure that the patent will be
Chapter 15 considers
issues relating to secrecy, publication and gene patenting.
3.20 The patent system is premised, in part, on the idea that, if a resource is
held in common, it may not be put to its optimal
use. This has been called the
‘tragedy of the commons’. On this view, a resource will be used more
efficiently if it
is privately owned. In the context of patents, this suggests
that the potential of inventions may be wasted if they are publicised
the right to prevent others from exploiting
3.21 In contrast, Professors Michael Heller and Rebecca Eisenberg have suggested
that the grant of numerous patents for biomedical
inventions may produce a
‘tragedy of the anti-commons’—the under-use of a scarce
resource where multiple owners
exclude others and no one has an effective
privilege to use the resource.
In the context of gene patents, this may occur when multiple blocking patents
are granted over pre-market or upstream research products,
such as isolated
genetic materials. The cost and inconvenience involved in obtaining multiple
licences to use upstream products in
marketable or downstream research may
stifle research and innovation.
Chapter 19 discusses this issue further.
3.22 Gene patents also raise issues about access to, and ownership of, research
results. Granting patents to private organisations
or individuals is said to
stimulate research as researchers race to be the first to patent a new
technology. However, private control
of new technology may have unwanted ethical
and social implications for healthcare provisions if private organisations limit
to tests, therapies or drugs, because of pricing or monopoly control.
Access for research purposes may also be
restricted.
3.23 It has been suggested that government agencies should hold patents over
research results that have significant social and ethical
implications.
Alternatively, it may sometimes be appropriate to preclude patenting of research
results by making them available without
charge. This could avoid some of the
drawbacks of private control of research results by allowing researchers to use
and build on
the work of others without having to deal with the cost and
difficulty of obtaining
Chapters 12 and 13
discuss these issues further.
Social dimensions
3.24 The social dimensions of
gene patents include the impact of gene patents on the conduct of research and
the provision of healthcare.
Some aspects of these concerns are discussed
The conduct of research
3.25 Gene patents may promote
genetic research by providing an incentive for investment in research and
development. The exclusive
rights associated with the grant of a patent may
provide sufficient security to attract research and development funding. As
inventions may be commercialised more effectively, this provides an
additional incentive for researchers to obtain patent protection
research outcomes.
3.26 At the same time, it has been argued that gene patents may have a
‘chilling effect’ on research and innovation,
rather than promoting
them. For example, research may be hindered by researchers’ concerns about
infringing patents or if there
are difficulties in obtaining licences to use
patented inventions on appropriate terms. Researchers may be reluctant to put
information
that this might undermine the potential to commercialise their
own research.
3.27 In research areas where commercial incentives are less important, patents
may be seen as creating more problems than benefits.
For example, much medical
research is not conducted solely to reap the commercial rewards of patenting and
marketing new treatments.
Rather, it is undertaken because governments,
researchers and clinicians seek to improve community health. In this context,
may drive up the cost of new products that would have been developed
regardless of patent protection. In such cases, the public benefit
promoted if inventions are not patented, or are widely licensed. This concern
may be relevant, for example, to gene patents
and research into medical genetic
3.28 The economic rewards of patenting may channel investment into more
profitable areas and away from other important goods and
services, such as
medical treatments for rare
Concerns have been
raised that an increasing emphasis on the commercialisation of public sector
research may skew basic research
priorities.
3.29 Chapter 13 discusses the general impact of gene patents on research and
describes the specific subject matter and claims of
gene patents that are most
likely to hinder research.
Access to healthcare
3.30 Gene patents may
encourage the development of new products and processes with important
healthcare applications. The prospect
of obtaining a patent over a new or
improved diagnostic test or therapeutic product provides incentives to invest
the time and resources
necessary to develop the new invention.
3.31 However, it is also possible that gene patenting may have an adverse impact
on the cost and quality of healthcare services.
Because patents award monopoly
rights over the patented product or process, this may enable the patent holder
to set a higher price
than would otherwise apply. Where a patent holder adopts
restrictive licensing practices, this may limit access to a particular test,
therapy or drug.
3.32 Some submissions expressed concerns about the potential for gene patents to
adversely affect access and equity in the delivery
of genetic healthcare
The Royal College of
Pathologists of Australasia (RCPA) emphasised the need to promote equitable
access to affordable genetic testing
and therapies:
The challenge is to balance public access to genetic health services with
appropriate commercial returns for socially beneficial research.
A major concern
regarding gene patents is the potential for commercial patent holders to create
genetic monopolies. The potential
for abuse of monopoly power will increase if a
handful of large biotechnology companies emerges from existing small and medium
biotechnology firms. Commercial monopolies are the anti-thesis of public
health because they serve the commercial interests of shareholders
rather than
the public ... Holders of gene patents and licenses need to recognise that they
have ethical and social responsibilities
and be responsive to government, health
care provider and community concerns as well as their shareholders’
3.33 Chapter 20 discusses the current and potential uses of patented genetic
materials and technologies within the Australian healthcare
system, and the cost
implications of such patented inventions. It contains several proposals for
reform to address these cost concerns.
Chapter 21 discusses the impact of gene
patenting on medical genetic testing and access to healthcare services.
Ethical dimensions
3.34 Ethical concerns about
gene patenting can be divided into two broad categories—ethical objections
to granting patents on
genes and genetic material, and ethical concerns about
the exploitation of gene patents.
3.35 When gene patents were a relatively new phenomenon, ethical concerns
focused mainly on whether it was acceptable to patent human
materials—although the distinction between natural and isolated genetic
materials was seldom appreciated. Concerns
genetic materials are no longer as prominent as they once were. In part, this
may be because
existing gene patents are unlikely to be revoked. Many such
patents have been issued in numerous countries, including Australia,
practice of patenting isolated human genetic materials appears to be more widely
accepted. The New South Wales Cancer Council
noted that, while the ethical
objections to gene patents cannot be discounted, the genetics
‘horse’ has
3.36 Ethical concerns now tend to focus more on the exploitation of gene
patents. Such concerns include those about sharing the benefits
research; consent to the use of genetic material in research that leads to
commercial outcomes; and indigenous
What is ethics?
3.37 Ethical analysis is the
rational and impartial application of principles and values to a given fact
situation to inform and justify
decisions and
In the report
Essentially Yours: The Protection of Human Genetic Information in Australia
Essentially Yours
), the ALRC and the Australian Health Ethics
Committee (AHEC) noted that ‘ethics searches for reasons for acting or
from acting; for approving or not approving conduct; for believing or
denying something about virtuous or vicious conduct or good
It also noted that
‘ethics expresses the fundamental considerations that inform any societal
decisions’.
3.38 Ethics contains normative statements about what ought or ought not to be
done, It also gives justifications for why things ought
or ought not be done.
These justifications can be based on one of the many approaches to ethics. For
example, ‘principlist
ethics’ seeks to establish a set of principles
that must be respected when determining how to act. According to principlist
ethics, the goodness or badness of an action is determined by whether or not it
accords with accepted principles. This approach is
characterised by:
an assumption that scientific progress is essential for the good of
humanity, coupled with a concern to protect individual and group
rights that may
be endangered in the course of scientific
3.39 The principlist school of ethics has dominated health research ethics since
the 1960s. Its principles include: respect for autonomy,
beneficence,
non-maleficence and justice.
statement that ‘gene patenting is wrong because it restricts an
individual’s right to direct what is done with his
or her genes’ is
an example of an ethical objection based on the principle of respect for
3.40 This section outlines a range of ethical concerns that have been expressed
of exploiting these
patents. Objections to gene patenting voiced by the community are rarely
articulated in terms of ethical theory,
but simply reflect the moral values and
beliefs of individuals and groups. However, these objections often rest
implicitly on an
acceptance of some ethical principles and values, and for this
reason these concerns may be characterised as ‘ethical concerns’.
3.41 Some of these values and principles might include:
Respect for persons
: a commitment to treating people as
autonomous agents, and to protecting those with diminished capacity for
autonomy. This principle
encompasses concepts of respect for the inherent
dignity of persons, human rights and the promotion of informed
decision-making.
: a commitment to ensure fair distribution of benefits
and burdens and to avoid oppression of vulnerable
Beneficence
: an obligation to maximise possible benefits and
minimise possible harms
(non-maleficence).
ALRC has not subscribed to a particular approach to ethical inquiry in
considering concerns about gene patenting and responses
to them. However, the
discussion in this section does take account of the principles and values that
may inform ethical concerns
Ethics and the patenting of human genetic materials
3.43 A variety of ethical
objections have been made to granting patents on human genes and genetic
materials. Although the ‘genetics
horse’ may have bolted, there
remain those in the community who are not persuaded that the patent system
adequately takes account
Many submissions to
the Inquiry raised ethical objections to granting gene patents. This section
canvasses a number of these objections
and some of the responses that have been
made to them.
3.44 Critics of gene patents often assert that these patents are morally wrong
because they are incompatible with:
the view that the human genome is the common heritage of
respect for human dignity;
self-determination and self-ownership; or
certain religious beliefs.
Common heritage of
3.45 The human genome is often described as the common
heritage of humanity, a view that has been supported by the Human Genome
Organisation’s
(HUGO) Ethics Committee and by the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
Patents on human
genetic materials are sometimes criticised because they are thought to grant
exclusive rights over this common heritage
to a limited number of
This objection rests
in part on concern for fair distribution of the benefits of genetic research.
3.46 This view of the genome was expressed in a number of
submissions.
For example, the
New South Wales Health Department commented that the human genome:
[is] the common inheritance of all people and that information obtained
freely as fundamental
knowledge for the benefit of humankind. The human genome and the information it
contains should not be regarded
as a commodity to be carved up, granted
exclusive rights, and sold off for profit making purposes, for either the
individual from
whom it came or an
organisation.
Respect for human dignity
3.47 Another objection to patents on genetic materials
is that they may engender a lack of respect for human life and
On this view, to grant
a proprietary right on something suggests that it is a fit subject for such
rights. Consequently, patents
on genetic materials are thought to commodify
parts of human beings by treating them as objects, or as something to be placed
the stream of commerce for financial
Others suggest that
genetic materials have a unique significance, which requires them to be treated
with special respect. For example,
it has been suggested that ‘[b]ody
parts, including genes, are not like other materials to be owned and traded in
place as common
commodities’.
3.48 These objections rest on the principle of respect for persons and promotion
of individual autonomy. Commodification of parts
of human beings is ethically
problematic because it might affect how we value
It is said to be
incompatible with respect for human dignity because it reduces human beings to
things to which no respect is
and is ethically
unacceptable because it precludes respect for individual autonomy.
3.49 Concern about the potential commodification of the human genome was
expressed in many submissions.
For example, Adam Johnston argued that current patent office practice underlined
the commodification of life and called for structures
to be put in place to
address this.
Similarly, Del
Weston stated that:
the patenting of genes is immoral in the ontological sense and against
the broad interests (including health) of humanity. Patenting
of life engenders
many questions of the morality of conceptualizing living organisms, including
humans, and their components as
commodities.
3.50 Dr Warwick Neville emphasised the importance of ensuring that patent law
recognises and protects ‘the human dignity of
the human person’:
It is insufficient that the unspoken but accepted utilitarian
philosophical/ jurisprudential tradition undergirding patent law and
remains unchallenged ... there must be formal recognition and protection of the
inherent and inviolable dignity of the human
person. The commodification of
human life is inimical to the recognition and protection of human
3.51 Others emphasised the special dignity of the human genome and the need for
it to be treated with particular respect. For example,
Dr Graeme Suthers stated
that ‘our genetic code is our heritage. It deserves this degree of
respect. It is not merely a commercial
3.52 Commodification arguments have been criticised on the basis that treating
parts of humans (such as natural genetic materials)
as objects does not
necessarily equate with treating whole persons as objects or commodifying
individuals.
Critics further
suggest that it is not apparent that the widespread grant of patents on human
genetic materials has led to a change
in how human beings are perceived and
Promoting self-determination
3.53 It has also been argued that patents over genetic
materials are incompatible with respect for an individual’s
self-determination
because they grant ownership rights over genetic material
and, consequently over parts of human beings, to someone other than the
from whom the genetic material was
On this view,
self-determination—the right to make one’s own choices about how to
live—is fundamentally linked
to self-ownership—the right to choose
how one’s body is used.
3.54 A number of submissions objected to gene patenting on the ground that it
shifted ownership of genetic material away from the
person from whom it was
obtained, and expressed support for self-ownership of genetic
The RCPA stated
All individuals have natural ownership of their genetic material, which
they share with their genetic relatives and ultimately with
all life. According
to the principles of patent law, because genomic DNA is a naturally occurring
substance, it is not patentable.
Yet, tens of thousands of patents have been
granted on DNA sequences that are identical to their natural form. These patents
effectively
confer ownership rights because they allow these sequences to be
used, sold, traded, licensed and can be used to prevent others from
The effect is that gene patents rob individuals of their natural ownership of
their genetic material.
3.55 Critics suggest that these arguments confuse intangible intellectual
property rights with physical property rights. Stephen
Crespi points out that
‘intellectual property provides a quite different type of ownership and
lack of clarity about this can
easily skew the whole debate’ about gene
Patents grant
intangible property rights over isolated genetic material and inventions for
analysing, sequencing, manipulating or
manufacturing genetic sequences. Patents
do not grant physical property rights in or over parts of a person’s body,
do not enable one person to exert control over how another individual
uses his or her own body. In its submission, AusBiotech Ltd
concurred with this
view, stating that concerns about self-determination and gene patenting arise in
part ‘from a misunderstanding
of the nature of and rights conferred by a
3.56 The ALRC and AHEC canvassed some of the issues surrounding self-ownership
of genetic material and arguments for allowing people
to exercise proprietary
rights over their genes in their previous report,
Essentially Yours
report concluded that granting individuals new property rights in their own
genetic material would not be the most effective
means by which to regulate the
collection and use of such
Religious objections
3.57 Patents on genetic materials are sometimes
criticised on religious grounds.
Some religions maintain that human worth—including the genetic basis for
life—derives from the divine aspect of creation.
Religious critics argue
that patents on genetic materials attribute ownership of the basis of life to
someone other than God, suggesting
that human worth derives from something other
than divine creation.
3.58 The ALRC received few submissions expressing religious concerns about gene
patenting. The Caroline Chisholm Centre for Health
Ethics stated that genes and
gene sequences, as parts of nature, are:
freely given to all, to humanity as a whole, by the Creator - it is
a given of the human condition. We do not believe it would be
ethical to patent
natural sequences of DNA.
3.59 In 1998, Bruce Lehman, then United States Patent Commissioner, responded to
religious objections to patents by stating: ‘[w]e
are not patenting life.
God, I suppose, has a patent on life. We are patenting
technology’.
Ethics and the exploitation of gene patents
3.60 IP 27 noted that an
ethical issue raised by the commercialisation of research, and the granting of
gene patents, is whether people
whose tissue samples are used to develop
patented genetic inventions should have any rights, entitlements or expectations
to exercise
control over, or benefit from, the research
IP 27 also noted that
research involving Indigenous peoples may raise particular ethical issues in
relation to benefit sharing and
Benefit sharing and control
3.61 It has been suggested that individuals or groups
who provide tissue samples for use in genetic research have an ethical right
control the use of those samples, or to control or share in the ownership of any
patented genetic inventions resulting from the
research. It has also been
suggested that tissue donors have an ethical right to share in the benefits of
research and development
using their genetic
This view may to be
based on the ethical principles of respect for the person, justice and
beneficence.
3.62 The HUGO Ethics Committee has recommended that all humanity should share
in, and have access to, the benefits of genetic research.
It also recommended
that, at a minimum, all research participants should receive information about
general research outcomes and
an indication of appreciation; and that
profit-making entities should dedicate a percentage (for example, 1 - 3%) of
their annual
net profit to healthcare infrastructure or to humanitarian
3.63 There are several barriers to a research participant asserting a legal
right to control or share in the benefits of genetic
research in Australia.
These include:
The law is uncertain about the nature of property rights in human
Human Tissue Acts
generally prohibit the sale of human
and it is therefore
arguable that it is unlawful to provide financial benefits in exchange for
tissue donation.
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) provides that a patent may be
granted only to a limited category of
which does not
specifically include research participants.
3.64 It is possible,
however, for research participants to enter into contractual arrangements with
researchers that provide some
form of control or benefit, in exchange for
participation in a research program.
3.65 IP 27 noted that, in the United States, gene patenting has led to
significant concerns about research participants’ rights
to control and
share in the benefits of research results. For example, in
Moore v Regents of
the University of
California,
sued the University after it patented a cell line from tissue obtained from him
in the course of treatment. The Supreme Court
of California held that Moore did
not have a property interest in his tissue, but did have a right to be informed
intent to develop a cell line and the potential commercial
interests of the physicians with whom he
Greenberg v Miami Children’s Hospital Research Institute
the Greenberg family commenced legal proceedings against the hospital and
scientist who identified and patented the gene associated
with Canavan disease.
The Greenberg family had two children afflicted with the disease. They had asked
the scientist to conduct research
into the genetic basis of the disease, and had
assisted him with money and tissue samples from their own children and others.
scientist identified the gene and developed a diagnostic genetic test for
it. The hospital at which he was working patented the gene,
and began charging a
fee for the test. The plaintiffs sought a permanent injunction restraining the
hospital and scientist from enforcing
the patent rights. This case has recently
been settled.
3.67 In contrast, in at least one case, research participants have successfully
asserted control and ownership over the results of
genetic research. In the
United States, the parents of two children afflicted with a rare genetic
disease, PXE,
established a
foundation, found 2,000 people with the disease to donate tissue for research,
set up a repository to store the tissue
samples, and raised money for research.
They required researchers to enter into a contract that provided that the
foundation would
be named in any patent applications arising from the work, any
profits or revenue from the discoveries would be shared with the foundation,
any genetic test must be made readily available to the
foundation.
3.68 IP 27 asked whether there was any need to make special provision for
individuals or groups whose genetic samples are used to
make a patented
invention to benefit from any profits from the
3.69 Several submissions suggested that the patent system is not the appropriate
vehicle to address issues of benefit sharing and
For example, the NHMRC
submitted that there are mechanisms other than the patent system to ensure that
the rights of tissue donors
from which genetic material might be isolated for
use in research are
3.70 The Queensland Government submitted that, while individuals’ claims
to share in the benefits of the patented invention
are understandable, it is
necessary to recognise that the invention resulted from the researchers’
expertise, skill, time and
expense. It noted that:
Universities and ethicists are generally of the view that no special
provisions are required to ensure that individuals or groups,
whose genetic
samples are used to make patented inventions, benefit from any profits derived
from that patent, apart from the requirement
of ensuring that prior informed
consent is obtained. However, where the groups or individuals have been
instrumental in both the
research and funding ... then an arrangement should be
reached between the parties (namely industry and the individuals or groups)
relation to the commercialisation and the use of the patented
material/invention.
3.71 Most submissions supported some form of benefit sharing for research
participants, but considered that such arrangements should
be negotiated between
the researcher and participant
For example, the RCPA
submitted that:
There are ethical, moral, practical and economic concerns with a general
claim that subject should share in the financial rewards
of research: subjects
often stand to benefit indirectly as consumers, it may be unmanageable to
provide individuals with any share
in potential profits, the burden of such
royalties might impede downstream research, and the contribution of individual
may be quite minimal given that they bear little of the risk.
Furthermore, financial reward may establish a legal precedent to permit
of body tissues, eg kidneys for transplantation.
Entities involved in commercial aspects of research should be expected,
as a matter of public policy and research ethics practice,
to openly negotiate
with individuals, foundations, disease associated advocacy groups to resolve
issues of ownership, downstream
control, limits on financial profit sharing and
other acknowledgements of all contributions before the research is done. These
should be incorporated into national guidelines (eg those of the
National Health and Medical Research Council on the ethical practice
3.72 The Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources noted that there are
moves underway at the international level to enable individuals
and communities
providing genetic samples to share in any benefits obtained.
The framework of such benefit sharing arrangements will likely involve
agreeing (signing of a contract) at the time of sample collection
royalties to the source of samples. Such agreements will be subject to
successful research leading to new products or
techniques.
Indigenous peoples
3.73 IP 27 noted that Indigenous peoples have expressed
concerns about the practice that has become known as
‘bioprospecting’—that
is, the collection, screening, and use
for commercial purposes of indigenous knowledge, and of genetic and biological
products taken
from Indigenous peoples and from their
3.74 In Australia, an existing mechanism for ethical review of research
involving Indigenous communities—including genetic
research—involves
the use of Indigenous subcommittees working in conjunction with Human Research
Ethics Committees (HRECs).
subcommittees review proposed research projects and ensure that the subject
group has given informed consent to the proposed
project. At least one
Indigenous subcommittee has a right of veto over HREC approval of research
3.75 In 2003, the NHMRC released a new set of guidelines for ethical conduct in
indigenous health research.
NHMRC has stated that, in addition to the
National Statement on Ethical
Conduct in Research Involving Humans
, these guidelines are the authoritative
statement on health research involving Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people. The
guidelines assist researchers in the conception, design and conduct
of research. The guidelines are based on six values: spirit and
reciprocity; respect; equality; survival and protection; and
responsibility.
3.76 IP 27 asked whether any separate or special considerations apply in
relation to benefit sharing for genetic research involving
Several submissions
commented that whenever Indigenous Australians are involved in genetic research,
their cultural values and wishes
must be taken into
The Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Services (ATSIS) stated:
Indigenous people have a unique attachment to their genetic resources
since they are a vital part of their spiritual and cultural
(cosmology). Misuse of their resources by others can cause Indigenous people to
suffer deep psychological trauma, leading
to sickness and even death ... even
though their genetic material is a unique resource, and the vital ‘raw
without which no patent or intellectual property right can
exist, Indigenous people remain unprotected under the current intellectual
property regime ... ATSIS believes that sui generis (specific or stand alone)
legislation is required to protect Indigenous peoples’
3.77 ATSIS suggested two fundamental principles in relation to Indigenous
participation in genetic research:
Indigenous people whose resources are used must be properly
consulted, and their genetic material may only be used with their informed
Indigenous people should have a legal right to own, control the use
of, and benefit fairly from, their genetic resources (including
DNA extracted
from skeletal remains). Any person seeking to use their resources in any way
must enter into a benefit sharing agreement
to do so. Serious civil and criminal
penalties should
3.78 The South
Australian Government submitted that:
any human research conducted on Indigenous communities be assessed by at
least a Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC) and preferably
Indigenous sub-committee. It is recommended that there be a mandatory
requirement that research conducted on Indigenous
people not proceed without
ethics assessment by either a separate Indigenous Research Ethics Committee or
an Indigenous sub-committee
of the appropriate HREC. South Australia is
apparently the only state currently to have a separate Indigenous Research
Ethics Committee.
3.79 The Queensland Government suggested that one option would be for Australia
to support the efforts being undertaken in the World
Intellectual Property
Organization Working Group on Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and
Folklore to determine whether a
form of intellectual property could be developed
to protect traditional
3.80 The ALRC recognises that individuals and organisations who participate in
genetic research may consider they have an ethical
right to control or own the
results of that research, or share in the benefits of the research in some way.
Approaches to allowing
for such control, ownership and benefit sharing could
take several forms, including legal recognition as joint inventors of the
invention, social recognition of their contribution to research and
development, or some form of financial or other benefit in exchange
participation.
3.81 The ALRC notes that the NHMRC has recently released its new guidelines on
ethical matters in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
research. The ALRC has
formed a preliminary view that issues of control and benefit sharing are better
addressed outside the patent
system, for example through the established system
of ethical review of medical research, and through contractual arrangements
researchers and research participants.
Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual
Property Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
Cancer Council of New South Wales,
Submission P1
, 5 June 2003; D Isaacs,
Submission P6
, 12 September
Cancer Council of New South Wales,
Submission P1
, 5 June 2003; R Edson,
Submission P9
, 23 September
2003; Children’s Cancer Institute Australia for Medical Research,
Submission P13
, 30 September 2003; Royal College of Pathologists of
Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; D Isaacs,
, 12 September 2003; Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
, 3 October 2003; GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
2003; A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003; Australian
Health Ministers’ Advisory Council,
Submission P49
, 23 October
Confidential Submission P54 CON
, 3 November 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November
Cancer Institute Australia for Medical Research,
Submission P13
September 2003.
United States patents are
granted to the first inventor regardless of who is the first to file a patent
application.
P Drahos, ‘Biotechnology
Patents, Markets and Morality’
European Intellectual Property
D Nicol, ‘Gene
Patents and Access to Genetic Tests’
Australian Health Law
, 75. Concern about this issue was also expressed in submissions
eg, D McAndrew,
Submission P14
, 30 September 2003; Australian
Huntington’s Disease Association (NSW) Inc,
Submission P27
October 2003; New South Wales Health Department,
Submission P37
October 2003. The implications for medical genetic testing and other healthcare
services are discussed in more detail in Ch
A patent holder is
required to pay an annual fee to maintain a patent: see Ch
Royal Society,
Keeping Science
Open: The Effects of Intellectual Property Policy on the Conduct of Science
(2003), 13. See also L Andrews, ‘Genes and Patent Policy: Rethinking
Intellectual Property Rights’ (2002) 3
Nature Reviews Genetics
806. Processes for challenging and enforcing patent rights are discussed in Ch
D Nicol and J Nielsen, ‘The
Australian Medical Biotechnology Industry and Access to Intellectual Property:
Issues for Patent
Law Development’
[2001] SydLawRw 16
Sydney Law Review
J Goldstein and E Golod,
‘Human Gene Patents’ (2002) 77
Academic Medicine
Submission P24
30 September 2003; GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
D Dickson, ‘UK Clinical
Geneticists Ask for Ban on the Patenting of Human Genes’ (1993) 366
391, 391. The disclosure of an invention may render patent
protection unavailable: see Ch 5 and
J Goldstein and E Golod,
‘Human Gene Patents’ (2002) 77
Academic Medicine
M Heller and R Eisenberg,
‘Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons in Biomedical
Research’ (1998) 280
See D Nicol and J Nielsen,
‘The Australian Medical Biotechnology Industry and Access to Intellectual
Property: Issues for Patent
Law Development’
[2001] SydLawRw 16
, 358 - 360.
M Heller and R Eisenberg,
‘Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons in Biomedical
Research’ (1998) 280
See also Intellectual Property and
Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation
under the Competition Principles Agreement
Similar concerns have been raised
in relation to patents on genetically modified organisms in the House of
Representatives Standing
Committee on Industry, Science and Technology. The
Committee rejected suggestions that patenting would distort research priorities:
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Industry Science and Technology,
Genetic Manipulation: The Threat or the Glory?
[7.91] - [7.96].
For example,
National Health and Medical Research Council,
Submission P52
, 31 October
2003; Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
October 2003; Caroline Chisholm Centre for Health Ethics Inc,
, 17 October 2003; Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003; Genetic Support Council WA (Inc),
Submission P59
, 7 November 2003; Queensland Government,
, 5 January
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
Cancer Council of New South
Submission P1
, 5 June 2003. Also: South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003. Some submissions disputed community
acceptance of gene patenting: eg, G Suthers,
Submission P30
, 2 October
2003. The Human Genetics Society of Australasia suggested instead that
‘[t]he apparent acceptance of patenting in
this area results not from a
systematic consideration of the potentially new or unique issues presented by
genetic technologies,
but by isolated decisions made in various patent
offices’: Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
October 2003.
The capacity of the
patenting system to deal with ethical considerations is discussed in Ch
Australian Law Reform Commission and
Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Protection of Human Genetic
Information
, DP 66 (2002),
Australian Law Reform
Commission and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The
Protection of Human Genetic Information in Australia
, ALRC 96 (2003),
A principlist approach to
research ethics was formally articulated in the Belmont Report in the late 1970s
and in the principles
set out in the ‘Georgetown mantra’, formulated
by James Childress and Thomas Beauchamp in 1979: Ibid, [6.25]. See also
Beauchamp and J Childress,
Principles of Biomedical Ethics
Other approaches to ethical
considerations include consequentialist ethics; professional ethics; critical
ethics; civic ethics; and
narrative ethics. See further Australian Law Reform
Commission and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The
Protection of Human Genetic Information in Australia
, ALRC 96 (2003), Ch 7.
In relation to duty ethics and gene patenting, see also Danish Council of
Patenting Human Genes
National Health and
Medical Research Council,
National Statement on Ethical Conduct in Research
Involving Humans
(1999), 4. See also Canadian Biotechnology Advisory
Patenting of Higher Life Forms and Related Issues: Report to the
Government of Canada Biotechnology Ministerial Coordinating Committee
National Health and Medical
Research Council,
National Statement on Ethical Conduct in Research Involving
(1999), 4. See also Canadian Biotechnology Advisory Committee,
Patenting of Higher Life Forms and Related Issues: Report to the Government
of Canada Biotechnology Ministerial Coordinating Committee
National Health and Medical Research
National Statement on Ethical Conduct in Research Involving
National Health
and Medical Research Council,
Submission P52
, 31 October
HUGO Ethics Committee,
Statement on the Principled Conduct of Genetics Research
Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights
, 11 November
1997, UNESCO, art 12(a). See also
Recommendation No 1425: Biotechnology and
Intellectual Property
, Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly, (entered
into force on 23 September 1999), rec 10;
Recommendation No 1468:
Biotechnologies
, Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly, (entered into
force on 29 June 2000), rec
Nuffield Council on Bioethics,
The Ethics of Patenting DNA
, 2 October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
October 2003; S Karpeles,
Submission P44
, 20 October; Human Genetics
Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; Australian
Association of Pathology Practices Inc,
Submission P10
, 24 September
2003; New South Wales Health Department,
Submission P37
, 17 October
South Wales Health Department,
Submission P37
, 17 October
See D Resnik, ‘The Morality
of Human Gene Patents’ (1997) 7
Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal
43, 55 - 57.
The House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Industry, Science and Technology noted
similar objections but concluded that allowing
ownership or patenting of animals
would not degrade life: House of Representatives Standing Committee on Industry
Science and Technology,
Genetic Manipulation: The Threat or the Glory?
[7.37] - [7.42].
Commonwealth of
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 27 June 1996, 2332 (Natasha
Stott Despoja), 2333. See also
Howard Florey/Relaxin
[1995] EPOR 541
N Holtug, ‘Creating and
Patenting New Life Forms’ in P Singer and H Kuhse (eds),
A Companion to
(1998), 206, 213.
Claes, ‘Cultural Background of the Ethical and Social Debate about
Biotechnology’ in S Sterckx (ed)
Biotechnology, Patents and
(2nd ed, 2000), 179, 182. See also T Schrecker and others,
Ethical Issues Associated with the Patenting of Higher Life Forms
Submission P30
October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
2003; D McFetridge,
Submission P23
, 30 September 2003; Caroline Chisholm
Centre for Health Ethics Inc,
Submission P38
, 17 October 2003; Breast
Cancer Action Group NSW Inc,
Submission P8
, 19 September
A Johnston,
, 30 September
Submission P62
, 12 November
Submission P50
, 29 October
Submission P30
2 October 2003. Also W Neville,
Submission P50
, 29 October 2003; Caroline
Chisholm Centre for Health Ethics Inc,
Submission P38
, 17 October
D Resnik, ‘DNA Patents and
Human Dignity’
Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics
N Hildyard and S Sexton,
‘No Patents on Life’ (2000) 15
Forum For Applied Research and
Public Policy
Association of Pathology Practices Inc,
Submission P10
, 24 September
2003; Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
October 2003; A Johnston,
Submission P15
, 30 September 2003; D
McFetridge,
Submission P23
, 30 September
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
R Crespi, ‘Patenting and
Ethics: A Dubious Connection’ (2001/2002) 5
Bio-Science Law Review
71. Professor Jill McKeough has stated that ‘ownership of life’
and ‘commodification’ objections about gene
‘misconceive the function and use of the patent system’: J McKeough,
‘Patenting Genetic Material: What
are People Concerned about?’
Intellectual Property Forum
AusBiotech Ltd,
, 7 November 2003.
Law Reform Commission and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially
Yours: The Protection of Human Genetic Information in Australia
(2003), Ch 20.
For example, in 1995 a
group of religious leaders in the United States released a public statement
against human gene patenting.
The statement asserted that ‘humans ... are
creations of God, not humans, and as such should not be patented as human
inventions’:
quoted in S Goldberg, ‘Gene Patents and the Death of
Dualism’ (1996) 5
Southern California Interdisciplinary Law Journal
Danish Council of Ethics,
Patenting Human Genes
Chisholm Centre for Health Ethics Inc,
Submission P38
, 17 October
D Slater, ‘HuMouse’,
Legal Affairs
, Nov-Dec 2002, 21,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), [4.34]. The ALRC and AHEC
examined issues relating to consent and control of genetic samples and
information in the
context of human genetic research in Australian Law Reform
Commission and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The
Protection of Human Genetic Information in Australia
, ALRC 96 (2003), Ch 15,
16, 18, 19.
Benefit sharing could take
many forms, including a financial benefit (such as an upfront payment, or a
share in any profits or royalties
made from the patent), or access to free
medical care, treatment or
HUGO Ethics Committee,
Statement on Benefit Sharing
See Australian Law Reform
Commission and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The
Protection of Human Genetic Information in Australia
Human Tissue Act 1983
, (5) and cognate state and territory
legislation.
Patents may be granted to
a person who is the inventor; would be entitled to have the patent assigned to
him or her; derives title
to the invention from the inventor or an assignee; or
is the legal representative of a deceased person who falls within these
categories:
Patents Act 1990
Moore v Regents of the
University of California
(1990) 51 Cal 3d
Ibid. See also J Merz and others,
‘Protecting Subjects’ Interests in Genetics Research’ (2002)
American Journal of Human Genetics
965; A Nichols Hill, ‘One
Man’s Trash is Another Man’s Treasure, Bioprospecting: Protecting
the Rights and Interests
of Human Donors of Genetic Material’
Journal of Health Care Law and Policy
A Nichols Hill,
‘One Man’s Trash is Another Man’s Treasure, Bioprospecting:
Protecting the Rights and Interests
of Human Donors of Genetic Material’
Journal of Health Care Law and Policy
The plaintiffs
asserted the following causes of action: lack of informed consent, breach of
fiduciary duty, unjust enrichment, fraudulent
concealment, conversion and
misappropriation of trade secrets. In May 2003, the Court granted a motion to
dismiss each of these counts
except unjust enrichment:
Greenberg v Miami
Children’s Hospital Research Institute
(Unreported, District Court for
the Southern District of Florida, Moreno J, 29 May 2003). The plaintiffs filed a
motion for reconsideration
of the order in relation to the count based on the
lack of informed consent. The case was later settled: Canavan Foundation,
Canavan in the News, 29 September 2003
<www.canavanfoundation.org/news.php> at 2 February
PXE—Pseudoxanthoma
elasticum, which causes mineralisation of elastic
G Kolata, ‘Sharing of
Profits Is Debated as the Value of Tissue Rises’,
New York Times
(New York), 15 May 2000.
Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003),
Question 4 - 3.
Walter and Eliza
Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003;
Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October 2003; National
Health and Medical Research Council,
Submission P52
, 31 October
National Health and Medical
Research Council,
Submission P52
, 31 October
Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
For example, Royal College of
Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003;
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; Genetic Technologies
Submission P45
, 20 October 2003; Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
See generally, M Davis,
Indigenous Peoples and Intellectual Property Rights
(1996-7), 4. In the
early 1990s, the Human Genome Diversity Project (HGDP) was established to
collect, preserve and analyse blood,
skin and hair samples from people around
the world, including Indigenous groups, and to establish databases of genetic
information
from this material for use in further research. The HGDP has been
widely criticised by Indigenous peoples: M Dodson, ‘Human
Control of Research and Sharing of Benefits’ (2000) 1
Aboriginal Studies
56, 56. For example, the
Mataatua Declaration on
Cultural and Intellectual Property Rights
(1993) called for the HGDP to be
put on hold until Indigenous peoples have been fully briefed on the
project’s implications:
see T Janke,
Our Culture, Our Future: Report on
Australian Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property Rights
M Dodson, ‘Human Genetics:
Control of Research and Sharing of Benefits’ (2000) 1
Aboriginal Studies
Condon and L Stubbs,
Top End Human Research Ethics Committee: Policy and
Procedures Manual
National Health and Medical Research
Values and Ethics: Guidelines for Ethical Conduct in Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Health Research
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
Royal College of
Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander Services,
Submission P55
, 4 November
and Torres Strait Islander Services,
Submission P55
, 4 November
Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January 2004.
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
4. International Legal Framework
Introduction
International legal instruments
Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property
Patent Cooperation Treaty
Budapest Treaty
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
Other international legal instruments
Patent reform and bilateral free trade agreements
PART B: Patent Laws and Practices
4. International Legal Framework
Introduction
chapter provides an overview of the international legal framework within which
Australian patent law and practice operates,
with reference to a number of
international conventions that seek to harmonise procedural and substantive
aspects of patent law.
The Terms of Reference specifically require the ALRC to
have regard to Australia’s existing or proposed international obligations
in relation to patent law and practice. In addition, the ALRC has a general
legislative obligation to have regard to Australia’s
international
obligations in performing its
4.2 Elements of the international legal framework have an important influence on
the reform of Australian patent law. While domestic
laws can be amended so that
they are inconsistent with Australia’s international treaty obligations,
Australia may be held
responsible on the international plane for breaches of
such obligations. For example, there may be international repercussions such
a requirement to pay compensation or exposure to trade retaliation. The ALRC
would therefore need compelling reasons to recommend
any reform of patent law or
practice which would raise doubts about Australia’s compliance with its
existing international
obligations.
4.3 In particular, reforms proposed by the ALRC may have implications for
Australia’s obligations under multilateral agreements
dealing with patents
and other intellectual property laws and under bilateral free trade agreements
with other states, including
that recently concluded with the United States.
International legal instruments
4.4 Australia is a party to a
number of international legal instruments relating to intellectual property. The
major international
instruments that affect patent laws and practices in
Australia are:
Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property
(Paris Convention);
Patent Cooperation Treaty 1970
The Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of the
Deposit of Microorganisms for the Purposes of Patent Procedure 1977
(Budapest Treaty);
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights 1994
Agreement).
4.5 Significant
provisions of each of these instruments are outlined below and have been given
effect in Australian domestic law.
Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property
4.6 The Paris Convention is
the principal international agreement in the field of ‘industrial
property’, including patents,
trademarks, utility models and industrial
In relation to patents,
the Paris Convention addresses three issues. First, it requires a contracting
State to provide the same rights
to the nationals of other contracting States as
are provided to its own nationals.
Second, it establishes the right of priority, which provides that an applicant
who files for intellectual property protection in
one contracting State and then
in a number of other States within a set period of time—12 months in the
case of patents—may
have all applications treated as if they were filed on
the date of the first application.
Third, the Paris Convention provides that eligibility for patent protection is
independently assessed by each contracting
Patent Cooperation Treaty
4.7 The PCT establishes
administrative procedures to facilitate the simultaneous filing of patent
applications on a single invention
in multiple
Under the PCT, an
inventor may seek patent protection in any number of PCT member countries by
filing a single international application
in one country—called the
‘Receiving Office’—and designating other jurisdictions in
which he or she may wish
to obtain a
4.8 A PCT application may substantially reduce an inventor’s initial costs
in filing for patent protection in multiple jurisdictions.
It also allows an
inventor time to determine whether to pursue patent protection in a particular
priority date given to the original PCT
application.
4.9 The grant or refusal of a patent based on a PCT application is, however,
determined by each of the national or regional patent
offices with which the PCT
application is filed.
Budapest Treaty
4.10 The Budapest Treaty
provides an international system for the deposit of micro-organisms as a means
of satisfying the disclosure
requirement for the grant of a patent by a national
or regional patent office.
Budapest Treaty establishes that the deposit of a micro-organism with a
designated ‘international depositary authority’
will satisfy the
patent procedure requirements of national or regional patent offices that have
recognised the effects of the
Patents Act 1990
) address requirements for the deposit of a micro-organism and implement
the provisions of the Budapest Treaty. IP Australia regards
containing materials such as vectors, cell organelles, plasmids, DNA, RNA, genes
and chromosomes’ as being within
the scope of the term
micro-organism.
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
4.12 The TRIPS Agreement
establishes the minimum standard of patent (and other intellectual property)
protection that each member
of the World Trade Organization, including
Australia, must provide under its national
More extensive patent
protection may be provided under Australian law so long as it would not affect
the operation of other provisions
of the TRIPS Agreement.
4.13 This section discusses significant provisions of the TRIPS Agreement
relating to patents, including the following:
a requirement that member States make patent protection available
for any inventions, whether products or processes, in all fields
technology;
optional exclusions from patentability that may be adopted by
contracting States;
a right for member States to provide limited exceptions to patent
rights (including public policy exceptions) so long as such exceptions
unreasonably conflict with exploitation of a patent, nor unreasonably prejudice
a patent holder’s
limitations on compulsory licensing and government use of patents,
including a requirement that adequate compensation be given for
a minimum patent term of 20
4.14 Amendments
Patents Act
were necessary to bring Australian law into conformity
with the TRIPS Agreement, and were enacted in the
Patents (World Trade
Organization Amendments) Act 1994
(Cth). The amendments included extension
of the standard patent term from 16 to 20 years and changes to compulsory
licensing and Crown
use provisions.
4.15 The implications of the TRIPS Agreement for patent reform are discussed
below in general terms, and are given further consideration
in the context of
specific reform options and proposals considered elsewhere in this Discussion
4.16 Disputes between members of the World Trade Organization (WTO) including
disputes in relation to the TRIPS Agreement, are subject
to a binding dispute
resolution process under the WTO Dispute Settlement Understanding. Like the
TRIPS Agreement, the Dispute Settlement
Understanding is an integral part of the
WTO framework. A Dispute Settlement Body establishes panels to hear disputes,
adopts panel
and Appellate Body reports, supervises the implementation of
recommendations and rulings, and authorises sanctions for failure to
comply. The
Appellate Body reviews rulings made by panels, which are normally composed of
three members.
4.17 Panel and Appellate Body reports of WTO dispute panels provide assistance
in clarifying relevant provisions of the TRIPS Agreement.
Panel Reports and
Appellate Body reports are binding on the parties to a dispute in respect of the
matters at issue in the dispute,
once the Dispute Settlement Body adopts them.
These reports are not legally binding precedents in relation to subsequent cases
they are looked to for guidance, both by WTO members and by subsequent
dispute settlement panels.
4.18 There has been only one WTO case that provides guidance on relevant
provisions of the TRIPS
The WTO panel report
Canada - Patent Protection
involved a complaint by the
European Communities (EC) and their member states against Canada. It provides
significant commentary
on the application of TRIPS provisions relating to
discrimination by field of technology and permissible exceptions to patent
protection.
Discrimination as to field of technology
4.19 The TRIPS Agreement provides that patents shall be
available for any inventions and patent rights shall be enjoyable ‘without
discrimination as to the place of invention, the field of technology and whether
products are imported or locally
It has been
suggested that the main aim of the proponents of the non-discrimination clause
was to ‘restrain the use of compulsory
licences for lack of local
exploitation’.
Canada - Patent Protection
case sets out some of the
parameters for assessing prohibited discrimination by field of technology. The
WTO panel drew a distinction
between ‘differentiation’ and
‘discrimination’ and clarified that the latter, and not the former,
conduct prohibited by art 27.1. The panel stated that the ordinary
meaning of the word ‘discriminate’:
certainly extends beyond the concept of differential treatment. It is a
normative term, pejorative in connotation, referring to results
unjustified imposition of differentially disadvantageous treatment.
Discrimination may arise from explicitly different treatment,
sometimes called
‘de jure discrimination’, but it may also arise from ostensibly
identical treatment which, due to differences
in circumstances, produces
differentially disadvantageous effects, sometimes called ‘de facto
discrimination’. The standards
by which the justification for differential
treatment is measured are a subject of infinite
complexity.
4.21 The non-discrimination provision may place constraints on the extent to
which gene patents may be singled out for special treatment—for
through new exclusions from patentability or defences to claims of infringement,
although the nature of these constraints
is not clear.
Exclusions from patentability
4.22 The TRIPS Agreement provides that member states may
exclude inventions from patentability if prevention of the commercial
exploitation
of an invention is necessary to protect ‘
ordre public
or morality’ including ‘to protect human, animal or plant life or
health or to avoid serious prejudice to the
environment’.
4.23 Non-patentability may be established only if the commercial exploitation of
the invention needs to be prevented to protect the
interests set out in art
27.2. One interpretation of this provision states that:
This excludes the possibility of applying such exceptions when, for
instance, it would be in the interest of public health to promote
the diffusion
of an invention (eg a medicinal product), since a Member cannot refuse a patent
on ordre public or morality grounds
and, at the same time, permit the
commercialisation of the invention.
4.24 The TRIPS Agreement also provides that Members may exclude from
patentability ‘diagnostic, therapeutic and surgical methods
treatment of humans or animals’ and ‘plants and animals other than
micro-organisms, and essentially biological
processes for the production of
plants and animals’.
exclusions from patentability permitted under the TRIPS Agreement are discussed
further in Chapters 7 and 16.
Exceptions to patent rights
4.25 The TRIPS Agreement provides that a patent shall
confer on its owner exclusive rights to make, use, offer for sale, sell or
the patented product or
However, the agreement
allows contracting states to provide exceptions to this level of patent
protection. Article 30 sets out the
criteria that must be met in order for a
exception to patent rights to be permissible. Article 30 states:
Members may provide limited exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred
by a patent provided that such exceptions do not unreasonably
conflict with the
normal exploitation of the patent and do not unreasonably prejudice the
legitimate interests of the patent owner,
taking into account the legitimate
interests of third parties.
4.26 Article 30 establishes three conditions for a permissible exception. The
exception must be ‘limited’, must not ‘unreasonably
with the normal exploitation of the patent’ and must not
‘unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of
the patent owner,
taking into account the legitimate interests of third parties’. These
conditions are cumulative, that is,
failure to comply with any one of the three
may result in the exception being found to be inconsistent with the TRIPS
4.27 At the time of the negotiation and adoption of the TRIPS agreement,
national laws adopted various exceptions to patent rights.
It has been observed
that while these existing exceptions limited the rights of patent holders, the
purpose and scope of the exempted
acts varied
considerably.
[t]he TRIPS Agreement has not attempted to constrain the freedom of
Members to determine the grounds of the possible exceptions, but
has established
the substantive conditions for their
admissibility.
4.28 In relation to the first condition, it has been suggested that an exception
may be regarded as ‘limited’ when it
subject to certain boundaries, for instance, with regard to the acts
involved (e.g., importation, exportation, evaluation), the purpose
(eg for private purposes of education), the outcome of the invention’s use
(eg preparation of individual medicinal
prescriptions), the persons that may
invoke the exception, or its duration. An exception may be limited in relation
to a field of
technology as well (eg food or
pharmaceuticals).
4.29 The relationship between art 30 and art 27.1, which prohibits
‘discrimination’ as to field of technology, has been
the subject of
some debate.
Canada - Patent Protection
case the panel found that art 27 does not
prohibit bona fide exceptions to deal with problems that may exist only in
certain product
4.30 Australia’s third party arguments, submitted in the
Canada-Patent
case, stated that enjoyment of patent rights without
discrimination as to field of technology did not require that identical rules
should apply to patents in all technological fields. The Australian submission
suggested that:
Patent administration could require differential treatment according to
technological subject-matter. The key to non-discrimination
was for the overall
balance of rights and obligations to be maintained. Where legislatures or courts
sought to sustain this balance
by taking account of technology-specific factors
(such as specific regulatory regimes for pharmaceuticals), this was legitimately
characterized as seeking to ameliorate discrimination rather than as creating
Canada-Patent Protection
case confirmed that art 27 of the TRIPS
Agreement does not ‘prohibit bona fide exceptions to deal with problems
that may exist
only in certain product
ALRC’s view it is therefore possible to craft defences to claims of
infringement of patent rights, or other exceptions
to patent rights, that are
specific to a defined subset of gene patents. Such a law would differentiate
between certain product areas
but would not ‘discriminate’ by field
of technology within the meaning of the TRIPS Agreement. Nevertheless, there
need to be strong arguments to justify differentiating gene patents, or a
category of gene patents, from patents in other fields
of technology.
4.32 The extent of permissible exceptions to patent protection under the TRIPS
Agreement, including through new defences to claims
of infringement, are
discussed in more detail in Chapters 14, 22 and Chapters 26 to 28.
Compulsory licensing and Crown use
4.33 The TRIPS Agreement contains detailed provisions
dealing with the use of patented inventions ‘without the authorization
the right holder, including use by the government or third parties authorized by
the government’.
context of Australian patent law and practice, these provisions apply to
compulsory licensing and Crown use of patented inventions.
4.34 Under the TRIPS Agreement, the basic obligation of member states is to
ensure that any use permitted without the authorisation
of the patent holder is
considered on its individual
Use may only be
permitted if the proposed user has made unsuccessful efforts to obtain
authorisation from the patent holder on reasonable
commercial terms, except in
cases of national emergency or other extreme urgency, or for public
non-commercial use.
detailed provisions in relation to the permissible duration and scope of
authorised use, remuneration of the patent holder,
and judicial or other
independent review of compulsory licensing or Crown use
4.35 The compulsory licensing provisions of TRIPS were the subject of the
November 2001 Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public
Health (the Doha
Declaration).
Declaration provided a mandate for negotiations between WTO members on a range
of subjects, including issues concerning
the implementation of the TRIPS
4.36 In the Doha Declaration, the Ministerial Conference of the WTO stressed
that the TRIPS Agreement does not and should not prevent
action being taken to
address public health problems afflicting developing and least-developed
countries, especially those resulting
from HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and
other epidemics. In particular, the Declaration stated that members have the
right to grant
compulsory licences and the freedom to determine the grounds upon
which such licences are granted, and what constitutes a national
emergency or
other circumstances of extreme urgency.
4.37 An outstanding issue from the Ministerial Conference at Doha was the
application of art 31(f) of the TRIPS Agreement, which
requires that production
under compulsory licensing must be primarily for the supply of the domestic
market. In August 2003, the
WTO Council for TRIPS reached a decision to permit
WTO Members with insufficient or no pharmaceutical manufacturing capacity to
compulsorily licensed pharmaceuticals needed to address public health
4.38 The provisions of the TRIPS Agreement dealing with compulsory licensing and
Crown use are discussed further in Chapters 26 and
Patent term
4.39 The TRIPS Agreement provides that the term of
protection shall not end before the expiration of a period of 20
Therefore, any system for
standard patents that does not provide protection to the patent holder for 20
years would not be consistent
with the TRIPS Agreement.
4.40 In relation to possible reform of patent term, the Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade submitted that:
The impact of intellectual property rights on broader social policies has
been at the forefront of negotiations and discussions in
key international fora
over the past few years. There has been no sustained nor substantive suggestions
in these discussions that
amending the period of a patent is a constructive or
practical way to address these broader policy
4.41 As discussed in Chapter 5, Australian patent law recognises a ‘second
tier’ of protection called an innovation patent.
These patents have a term
of eight years, provide protection for inventions that represent a lesser
inventive level over the prior
art, and are subject to less scrutiny by the
Patent Office prior to grant. In Australia, the TRIPS Agreement has been
interpreted
as permitting a shorter term of protection for inventions that do
not qualify for standard patent protection.
Other international legal instruments
4.42 Activity in the
international community to further the global harmonisation of patent laws may
affect Australian patent laws
and practices in the future. For example, the
Patent Law Treaty
—which primarily
addresses administrative issues relating to the patent system—opened for
signature on 1 June 2000 at
a Diplomatic Conference of the World Intellectual
Property Organization (WIPO).
The Treaty, which is not yet in force, enters into force three months after
ratification or accession by ten
4.43 In addition, WIPO member states are currently drafting a Substantive Patent
Law Treaty, which aims to achieve greater convergence
among national patent laws
in relation to the examination and grant of
As of its ninth session
in May 2003, WIPO’s Standing Committee on the Law of Patents had agreed in
principle on a number of
issues, such as the scope of the Substantive Patent Law
Treaty, the right to a patent, novelty, inventive step and the requirement
sufficient disclosure. However, other provisions, such as those relating to
patentable subject matter and exceptions to patentability,
had not been
4.44 In addition, other international legal instruments that are not primarily
concerned with patent law or practice may nevertheless
have an impact on
Australian patent laws and practices, such as the
Convention on Biological
Patent reform and bilateral free trade agreements
4.45 The TRIPS Agreement is
the most comprehensive multilateral agreement on intellectual property. In
addition, Australia may enter
into international obligations with respect to
intellectual property protection as part of bilateral free trade agreements with
countries. Such obligations may also place constraints on reform of
Australian patent law and practice in so far as reforms may be
inconsistent with
4.46 Most importantly, given the dominant position of the United States in
biotechnology, Australia and the United States have recently
negotiations for an Australia - United States Free Trade Agreement (AUSFTA).
On 8 February 2004, the Australian Trade Minister,
the Hon Mark Vaile concluded
an agreed text for the AUSFTA with the United States Trade Representative,
Robert Zoellick.
4.47 The outcome of past free trade agreements involving the United States has
included ‘TRIPS-plus’ patent protection
obligations. For example,
the US - Singapore Free Trade Agreement includes compulsory licensing
provisions that go beyond the patent
protection obligations contained in the
TRIPS Agreement.
understands that the AUSFTA text does not contain any specific agreements on
TRIPS-plus patent protection, but the parties
have agreed to work to reduce
differences between them in intellectual property laws and practices, including
in relation to patents.
4.48 Australia also has comprehensive free trade agreements with Singapore,
Thailand and New Zealand. Australia signed an Australia
- Japan Trade and
Economic Framework in July 2003, committing the two countries to work towards
trade and investment liberalisation
on a comprehensive basis. The Australian
Government is developing a Closer Economic Partnership between the Association
of South-East
Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Australia and New Zealand. Australia and
China have also recently committed to undertake a study into the
feasibility of
concluding a free trade
Australian Law Reform Commission Act
Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property 1883
[1972] ATS 12
(entered into force on 27 September 1975). The Paris Convention has been revised
a number of times, most recently in Stockholm in
1967. Australia has been a
party to the Stockholm revisions since 27 September
Patent Cooperation Treaty
[1980] ATS 6
, (entered into force on 24 January
Budapest Treaty on the
International Recognition of the Deposit of Microorganisms for the Purposes of
Patent Procedure
[1987] ATS 9
, (entered into force on 19 August
Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into
force on 1 January 1995).
Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property 1883
[1972] ATS 12
(entered into force on 27 September 1975) art
Patent Cooperation Treaty
[1980] ATS 6
, (entered into force on 24 January 1978). The PCT was incorporated
into Australian law by the
Patents Amendment (Patent Cooperation Treaty)
Ibid arts 3,
See IP Australia,
International Patent Application Kit
<www.ipaustralia.gov.au/pdfs/patents/internationalpatentapplicationkit.pdf>
at 1 May 2003.
Patent Cooperation
[1980] ATS 6
, (entered into force on 24 January 1978) art
An invention is usually disclosed
by means of a written description. However, in the case of an invention
involving a micro-organism
or the use of a micro-organism, disclosure of the
invention in writing may not be possible. The disclosure requirements for
patentability
are discussed further in Ch
Budapest Treaty on the
International Recognition of the Deposit of Microorganisms for the Purposes of
Patent Procedure
[1987] ATS 9
, (entered into force on 19 August
IP Australia,
Patent Manual
of Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into
force on 1 January 1995).
Ibid art 27(2),
See, eg, Ch 7, 14, 22, 26 to
Department of Foreign Affairs &
Submission P29
, 2 October
Canada: Patent Protection of
Pharmaceutical Products: Complaint by the European Communities and their Member
, 17 March 2000,
WT/DS114/R.
Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh
Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
into force on 1 January 1995) art
United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development and International Centre for Trade and Sustainable
Development,
Resource Book on TRIPS and Development: An Authoritative and
Practical Guide to the TRIPS Agreement
(2003) UNCTAD - ICSTD Capacity
Building Project on IPRs and Sustainable Development,
Patent Protection of Pharmaceutical Products: Complaint by the European
Communities and their Member States
, 17 March 2000, WT/DS114/R,
Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into
force on 1 January 1995) art
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and International Centre for Trade
and Sustainable Development,
Resource Book on TRIPS and Development: An
Authoritative and Practical Guide to the TRIPS Agreement
UNCTAD - ICSTD Capacity Building Project on IPRs and Sustainable
Development, 37.
Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh
Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
into force on 1 January 1995) art
Patent Protection of Pharmaceutical Products: Complaint by the European
Communities and their Member States
, 17 March 2000, WT/DS114/R,
United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development and International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development,
Resource Book on TRIPS and Development: An Authoritative and Practical Guide
to the TRIPS Agreement
(2003) UNCTAD - ICSTD Capacity Building Project
on IPRs and Sustainable Development,
Canada: Patent
Protection of Pharmaceutical Products: Complaint by the European Communities and
their Member States
, 17 March 2000, WT/DS114/R, 170 - 171; compare M
Matsushita, T Schoenbaum and P Mavroidis,
The World Trade Organization: Law,
Practice, and Policy
Patent Protection of Pharmaceutical Products: Complaint by the European
Communities and their Member States
, 17 March 2000, WT/DS114/R,
Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh
Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
into force on 1 January 1995) art
31(c) - (l).
Declaration on the
TRIPS Agreement and Public Health
, 14 November 2001, World Trade
Organization 4th Ministerial Conference, WT/MIN
(01)/DEC/2.
Implementation of
Paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public
, 30 August 2003, World Trade Organization Council for TRIPS,
Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into
force on 1 January 1995) art
of Foreign Affairs & Trade,
Submission P29
, 2 October
Patent Law Treaty
See World Intellectual Property
Organization,
Intellectual Property Protection Treaties
<www.wipo.int/treaties/ip/index.html> at 5 June
World Intellectual Property
Organization,
Draft Substantive Patent Law Treaty
(2003); World
Intellectual Property Organization, ‘Member States Review Provisions on
Patent Law Harmonization’,
Update No194/2003
, 22 May 2003,
<www.wipo.int/pressroom/en/index.jsp>.
Intellectual Property Organization,
Substantive Patent Law Harmonization
<www.wipo.int/patent/law/en/harmonization.htm> at 21 October
Convention on Biological
[1993] ATS 32
, (entered into force on 29 December 1993). The
Convention on Biological Diversity
was implemented by the United Nations
for the purpose of conserving biological diversity, and ensuring sustainable use
of its components,
as well as the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits
from the use of genetic resources: see
Convention on Biological
, (entered into force on 5 June
United States and Singapore,
United States-Singapore Free Trade Agreement
, 6 May 2003 art 16.7. For
example, other than in the case of public non-commercial use, national emergency
or other extreme urgency,
compulsory licensing may only be invoked ‘to
remedy a practice determined after judicial or administrative process to be
anti-competitive
under the competition laws of the party’: art
Department of Foreign Affairs
Australia - United States Free Trade Agreement: Intellectual
<www.dfat.gov.au/trade/negotiations/us_fta/outcomes/08_intellectual_property.html>
at 9 February 2004.
Department of
Foreign Affairs & Trade,
Australia - United States Free Trade
Agreement: Frequently Asked Questions
<www.dfat.gov.au/trade/negotiations/us_fta/faqs.html> at 8 December
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
5. Domestic Legal Framework
Introduction
Domestic legal framework
Legislation
Administration
Standard patents
Innovation patents
Patents of addition
Procedure for grant of a patent
Filing an application
Examination
Acceptance, publication and sealing
Duration of patent protection
International obligations
Maintaining patent rights
Options for reform
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
5. Domestic Legal Framework
Introduction
chapter provides an overview of the domestic legal framework within which the
Australian patent system operates. It outlines
the relevant legislation and
institutions that comprise the Australian patent system and focuses primarily on
procedural aspects
of Australian patent law and practice. The chapter considers
the different types of patent protection available under Australian
process for obtaining a patent, and the duration of patent rights.
5.2 Other chapters in this Discussion Paper address substantive aspects of
Australian patent law and the application of these principles
to inventions
involving genetic materials and technologies. The requirements that must be
satisfied to obtain a patent, and the limitations
on the availability of patent
protection for certain types of inventions, are considered in Chapters 6 and 7.
Chapters 9, 10 and
23 outline the provisions in Australian patent law relating
to challenges to, and the enforcement and licensing of, patent rights,
respectively. Later chapters also examine other Commonwealth legislation that
may affect patent practices in Australia, in particular
Trade Practices
Domestic legal framework
5.3 Australian patent law
operates within an international legal framework, which shapes certain
procedural and substantive aspects
of the patent system. The principal
international conventions relevant to patent law were discussed in Chapter 4.
5.4 Australia has enacted legislation, in accordance with its international
obligations, which regulates patenting practices within
the Australian
‘patent area’
respect to inventions involving any type of technology. The procedures for
obtaining a gene patent in Australia are, broadly
speaking, the same as those
that apply to patents claiming any other type of technology. The majority of the
discussion of Australian
patent law and practice in this chapter is therefore
cast in general terms.
Legislation
5.5 Section 51(xviii) of the
Constitution
grants the Commonwealth Parliament power to make
laws with respect to ‘copyrights, patents of inventions and designs, and
marks’. Pursuant to this power, the Parliament has enacted the
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act
Regulations 1991
Patents Regulations
), which regulate the
patent system in Australia.
5.6 Patent legislation has been in force in Australia since before Federation.
Most Australian colonies had a
Patents Act
based on United Kingdom patent
statutes. These colonial Acts continued in force until the Commonwealth
Parliament enacted the
Patents Act 1903
5.7 The 1903 Act was reviewed in 1935 and again in
Recommendations made in those
reports, and the reforms introduced in the United Kingdom as a result of the
Patents Act 1949
(UK), influenced the provisions of the
Patents Act
The 1952 Act was
subject to a number of important amendments, including the introduction of the
petty patent system in 1979.
5.8 A review of the 1952 Act by the Industrial Property Advisory Committee
(IPAC) in 1984 recommended reform of the Australian patent
Based on the
recommendations in the IPAC report, the government introduced the
Patents Bill
(Cth), and after some amendments, the
Patents Bill 1990
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) came into force on 30 April 1991.
5.9 Patent protection in most countries is available for inventions that are
new, involve an inventive step, and have a useful application.
In Australia, the
Patents Act
provides that an invention is patentable if it:
is a manner of manufacture—that is, the invention is
appropriate subject matter for patent protection;
involves an inventive or innovative step;
is useful; and
has not been used secretly within Australia prior to filing the
application.
application of these requirements to inventions involving genetic materials and
technologies is discussed in Chapters 6 and
Administration
5.11 The Australian patent
system is administered by the Patent Office of IP
IP Australia is a
division of the Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources, but operates
independently and reports directly
5.12 Under the
Patents Act
, the Commissioner of Patents has power to
grant a patent upon an application being filed with and examined by the Patent
IP Australia has developed the
Patent Manual of Practice and
) to assist Australian patent examiners in
applying the
Patents Act
Regulations
Australia’s examination practices are discussed later in this chapter and
in Chapter 8.
5.13 State and federal courts and the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) also
have a role in administering the Australian patent
system. Decisions of the
Commissioner of Patents may be subject to review by the AAT or the Federal
The AAT may undertake merits
review of the Commissioner’s decisions with respect to certain procedural
matters prescribed by
A direct approach may
be made to the Federal Court for judicial review in relation to other decisions
of the Commissioner, essentially
those related to the grant of patents or
matters closely allied to the grant (for example, amendments to patent
specifications and
revocations).
5.14 The Federal Court and state and territory Supreme Courts share original
and enforcement of patent
rights, including challenges to patent rights, infringement proceedings and
compulsory licences.
The AAT has
no jurisdiction in relation to such issues. Jurisdictional matters are
considered further in Chapter 10.
5.15 Australian patent law
recognises two principal types of patents: standard patents and innovation
patents. An applicant for an
Australian patent may elect to obtain protection
for an invention under either the standard patent or innovation patent
5.16 Figure 5 - 1 outlines the key features of standard and innovation
patents and indicates the difference in the scope of protection
conferred by
each type of patent.
Standard patents
5.17 A standard patent is the
basic form of patent protection for inventions under Australian law and is
consistent with the minimum
requirements for patent protection provided under
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS Agreement).
Unless otherwise indicated in this Discussion Paper, references to an Australian
patent and discussions of patent rights relate to
the standard patent system.
Figure 5 - 1 Features of standard patents and innovation patents
Standard patent
Innovation patent
Extension of up to 5 years available for certain pharmaceutical patents under
limited circumstances
Number of claims
No statutory limits
Maximum of 5 claims
(s 40(2)(c))
Inventions excluded from patentability, or excludable at the discretion of
the Commissioner of PatentsII
Human beings and the biological processes for their generation
Inventions the use of which would be contrary to law
(s 50(1)(a))
Inventions capable of application as a food or medicine that are a mere
mixture of known ingredients
(s 50(1)(b))
Same as for a standard patent,III and
Plants and animals and the biological processes for the generation of plants
and animals (other than microbiological processes, or
the products of such
Level of invention requiredIV
‘Inventive step’ over the prior art
‘Innovative step’ over the prior art
Review by Patent Office prior to grantV
Substantive review for compliance with the requirements for patentability
Formalities check only; no substantive review unless requested
I This extension is available upon application to the
Commissioner of Patents for patents relating to ‘pharmaceutical
substances’
for which marketing approval is obtained from the Therapeutic
Goods Administration. Limitations on the rights of a patent holder
extended term of such pharmaceutical patents are discussed in Chapters 9 and
II See Chapters 6 and 7 for discussion of the exceptions to patentable
subject matter under Australian law.
Sections 18(2)
(b)(2)(d) and
Patents Act
are the equivalent provisions specifying inventions
for which protection may not be available under the innovation patent system;
these constitute grounds upon which the Commissioner may revoke an innovation
IV See Chapter 6 for a discussion of the requirements for
patentability under Australian law, including the ‘inventive step’
and ‘innovative step’ requirements. Except as noted in Figure
5 - 1, the statutory requirements for patentability of
an innovation patent
are the same as those which apply to a standard patent.
V See discussion of
the procedures for examination of a patent in the following sections.
Innovation patents
5.18 The innovation patent
system is a ‘second tier’ of protection, which was introduced in
2001 to replace the petty
Innovation patents are
intended to provide protection for ‘lower level’ inventions for
which standard patent protection
is not available and which are not covered by
the designs legislation.
Ryan has commented that:
The sort of things that the innovation patent would be designed to
protect were small innovative steps essentially of a practical
nature necessary
to achieve functional and commercial acceptance of a product or
5.19 The innovation patent system has been criticised on a number of grounds.
These include:
the absence of formal examination of an innovation patent prior to
grant may lead to uncertainty about the validity of such patents,
innovation patents being granted for inventions that should not receive any
patent protection;
the quicker and more affordable nature of an innovation patent may
result in patent protection being granted for too many undeserving
inventions,
which might ‘slow down procedures and confuse the
the definition of ‘innovative step’ in
Patents Act
is unclear;
the exclusion of plants and animals and the biological processes for
their generation from the types of inventions that may be protected
innovation patent is undesirable given the high quality of Australia’s
research in biological and medical
5.20 To date,
the innovation patent system has been considered in only one decision of the
Federal Court.
However, the
innovation patent at issue in the case was not contested, so the Court was not
required to interpret and apply the statutory
requirements for an innovation
Patents of addition
Patents Act
also provides for the grant of a ‘patent of addition’ for an
improvement in, or modification to, an invention claimed
in a standard patent
that has already been granted.
patent of addition may be obtained only by the owner of the earlier patent, or a
person authorised by the owner.
The term of a patent of addition expires at the same time as that of the patent
on the main invention.
Procedure for grant of a patent
5.22 Patent rights do not
arise automatically. A patent can be obtained only by following the procedures
set out in the
Patents Act
Patents Regulations
understanding of the procedure for obtaining a patent is important to
understanding Australian patent law generally.
5.23 The steps in obtaining an Australian patent are described below. A flow
chart describing the stages in the patent application
process is also included
in s 4 of the
Patents Act
and is reprinted below.
Filing an application
5.24 For a patent to be
granted in Australia, an eligible person must file an application in the form
prescribed by the Patent Office.
A patent application must include a specification of the invention, which
contains instructions adequate to enable a skilled person
in the relevant area
of technology to produce or perform the invention. The specification must also
indicate the ‘claims’
that define the invention; that is, the scope
of protection that the applicant is seeking.
5.25 Typically, patent applications are prepared on behalf of an inventor by a
qualified patent attorney. Professional assistance
in drafting a patent
application and communicating with the Patent Office about such application is
not, however, required.
5.26 Australian patent law recognises two types of
patent applications—provisional and
Provisional and
complete applications may be filed to obtain either a standard patent or an
innovation patent. The majority of complete
standard applications are filed by
Patent Cooperation Treaty
5.27 A provisional application need only contain a description of the
Often, an inventor
files a provisional application before all the details of an invention are
known. The applicant then has 12 months
from the date of filing a provisional
application to file a complete application.
5.28 A complete application must contain a full description of the invention,
together with claims, and an abstract summarising the
invention being
application may be based on one or more provisional applications, and only those
claims that are ‘fairly
on the relevant
provisional application will be entitled to the priority date of the provisional
application.
5.29 The ‘priority date’ of a patent claim is important in
determining whether the requirements for patentability of
an invention have been
met. As discussed further in Chapter 6, the requirements of novelty and
inventive (or innovative) step are
assessed against the prior art as it existed
before the priority date.
Australian patent applications, the priority date is typically the date on which
a provisional application is filed, or the date
on which an application is filed
in another participating
5.30 An applicant may also elect to file a PCT application with the Patent
As discussed in Chapter
4, a PCT application designates all the jurisdictions that are parties to the
PCT (including Australia),
and secures an international priority date.
5.31 PCT applications that have entered the national phase (and will be
processed as a complete application) are the main type of
applications received
by IP Australia.
IP Australia
also acts as a Receiving Office under the PCT for the purposes of receiving and
processing PCT applications. Figure
5 - 3 shows the growth in the number of
PCT applications from 1993 - 94 to 2000 - 01. ‘International
applications where Australian
Patent Office is the Receiving Office’
represents the number of PCT applications that IP Australia received during this
‘International applications that have entered the national phase
in Australia’ represents PCT applications filed in any
(including Australia) during this period, which designated Australia as one of
the jurisdictions in which the inventor
wishes to obtain patent protection and
for which the Australian filing fee was paid to IP
Figure 5 - 3 Patent applications under the Patent Cooperation Treaty
Source: IP Australia,
Industrial Property
, various years, Table 3.
Divisional applications
5.32 Each patent application may claim protection only
for a single invention.
following assessment of a patent application, a patent examiner finds that an
applicant has claimed more than one invention in
the application, the applicant
may elect to file a ‘divisional application’—that is, a new
application divided
from the original or parent application. A divisional
application allows an applicant to continue to benefit from the priority date
his or her original application.
5.33 Divisional applications may be filed only in connection with a complete
patent application that has not lapsed, been refused
or withdrawn at the time
the divisional application is
Divisional applications
may claim subject matter not contained in the original application so long as
all the features of at least
one of the claims were disclosed in the original
application. There are no statutory limits on the number of divisional
applications
that may arise from a single complete application.
5.34 The time period within which any divisional application must be filed, and
the subject matter that may be claimed, are limited
Patents Act
as follows:
if a divisional application is filed before the date of grant of the
original patent, the claims of the divisional application may
be directed to
subject matter falling within the scope of the claims of the original
application when accepted;
if, as is more commonly the case, a divisional application is filed
within three months of advertisement of acceptance of an original
application in
Official Journal of Patents
Official Journal
), the claims
of a divisional application may be directed to an invention not falling within
the scope of the claims of the original
standard application when
5.35 Once a
divisional application has been filed, it is subject to the same procedural
requirements, including examination, as any
other complete patent
application.
5.36 Divisional applications might allow for strategic patent filing by an
applicant. For example, Professor James Lahore has commented
that divisional
applications have been used to refile the claims of the original application
when the acceptance period for an application
is about to expire and the
original application has not been
applications have also been filed during an opposition of the original
application so that the opposed original application
5.37 In its submission to the Inquiry, IP Australia indicated that divisional
applications are currently ‘open to abuse’.
Some applicants file a divisional application with the objective of
lengthening the time to a decision, and to increase the chance
of procuring
broader claims for the same invention. This behaviour considerably increases
uncertainty in the market.
5.38 The concern raised by IP Australia does not appear to be limited to gene
patent applications, although minimising uncertainty
and ensuring that the
claims in gene patents are appropriately limited is relevant to the ALRC’s
5.39 No other submissions or consultations addressed this issue. The ALRC is,
however, interested in the extent to which divisional
applications may raise
issues in the context of patents over genetic materials and technologies, and
invites comments and further
information on this matter.
Question 5 - 1
Does the filing of divisional applications
present problems in the context of patents over genetic materials and technologies?
If so, would any of the following address these concerns:
(a) specifying a time period within which a divisional application must be
(b) specifying a time period within which a divisional application must be
accepted by IP Australia; or
(c) limiting the subject matter that may be claimed in a divisional
application to inventions other than those claimed in the original
application.
Time for filing a patent application
5.40 The patent system only protects inventions that
have not been previously disclosed to the public. This is expressed in the
requirement
that an invention must be ‘novel’ when compared to the
Until recently,
public disclosure or use of an invention prior to filing a patent application
was permitted in only very limited
circumstances, including disclosure of the
invention at a recognised exhibition or to a learned
5.41 Recent amendments to the
Patents Regulations
mean that any
publication or use of an invention by or with the consent of a patent applicant
within a period of 12 months prior
to filing a complete patent application no
longer invalidates a patent application filed with the Patent Office within the
period. This is often referred to as a ‘grace
lenient requirements apply only to disclosures made on or after 1 April
While these provisions
may save eligible patent applications filed in Australia, prior disclosure
of an invention may still prevent the grant of a patent
in some other countries
or regions which do not recognise a grace period, or which have different grace
period requirements.
issues are discussed further in Chapter 15.
Examination
5.42 Once an application has
been filed with the Patent Office, a number of additional steps must be followed
before a patent may
be issued. An applicant must file a request that the Patent
Office examine the application.
Examination is not automatic and a request for examination must generally be
filed within five years of the date of filing a complete
specification.
5.43 The Commissioner of Patents may also direct an applicant to file a request
for examination within a shorter
and the applicant must
comply with any such request within six months or the application will
IP Australia’s
standard practice is to direct applicants to file a request for examination if
no request has been received
within approximately 32 months of the priority
An abbreviated examination
may be requested if the Australian patent application is related to a patent
that has already been granted
by the patent office in a prescribed foreign
5.44 The purpose of examination is to determine whether the invention meets the
statutory requirements for patentability set out
The Patent Office
carries out searches of previously published documents—including
scientific and patent literature (the ‘prior
art base’)—to
determine the prior art material relevant to the claimed
In addition, an
applicant must disclose to the Patent Office the results of searches carried out
by or on behalf of foreign patent
offices in respect of the invention claimed in
an Australian application, or in a corresponding patent application filed
An examiner with
expertise in the relevant area of technology then examines the application
taking into account the information contained
in the results of these searches
and any other prior art
information.
5.45 Examination of a patent application typically involves an exchange between
the examiner and the applicant about the appropriate
scope of the specification
and the claims in the patent application in light of the relevant prior art.
This process is known as
‘prosecution’ of a patent application.
5.46 Following receipt of a request for examination, an examiner will make an
initial assessment of an application for a standard
patent and either accept the
application as filed, or issue a ‘first report’ detailing the
procedural and substantive
grounds for objecting to the
application.
An applicant then
has a period of 21 months to address the objections raised by the examiner. The
examiner may issue further reports
for each response by the applicant that does
not address the objections raised. An application for a standard patent will
lapse if it is not in order for acceptance within 21 months after the
date of the first report.
5.47 No substantive examination is required in connection with an application
for an innovation patent. The Patent Office is required
to determine only that
the application is complete and passes a ‘formalities
The formalities
check primarily ensures that an applicant has fulfilled the procedural
requirements for filing an innovation
However, substantive
examination of an innovation patent is required before it can be
Acceptance, publication and sealing
5.48 The Commissioner of
Patents must notify an applicant of the decision to accept or refuse a patent
application, and must publish
notice of the decision in the
Formal refusal of
an application is rare.
Australia indicated that there have been only four or five such refusals since
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) came into
More commonly,
applications for standard patents lapse for failure to obtain acceptance within
the prescribed 21 month period following
a first report, as discussed above. The
Official Journal
also publishes notices of lapsed
applications.
5.49 Publication of a notice of acceptance in the
Official Journal
be distinguished from the publication of a complete specification for a standard
patent. This typically occurs 18 months after
the earliest priority date for the
application in question,
also advertised in the
publication of the complete specification, an application is confidential and
only bibliographic details, such as the applicant’s
name and title of the
invention, are made available by the Patent
5.50 A patent is granted when the Commissioner causes the patent to be sealed
with the seal of the Patent Office. For a standard
patent, this generally occurs
within six months of the date of publication of the notice of acceptance of the
application in the
Official Journal
, unless the application is
An innovation patent
will be sealed provided that there is no order in place preventing publication
of information about the claimed
Duration of patent protection
5.51 As noted in Figure
5 - 1, a standard patent generally has a term of 20 years, commencing on the
date of the patent, and an innovation
patent has a term of 8
A patent holder must pay
the prescribed maintenance fees to keep a patent in
International obligations
5.52 As discussed in Chapter
4, art 33 of the TRIPS Agreement requires Contracting States to provide
protection for a term of not
less than twenty years from the filing date of a
Article 27(1) of the
TRIPS Agreement requires Contracting States to make patent protection available
for all inventions, without
discrimination as to the field of technology to
which an invention relates.
Patents Act
was amended in 1994 to extend the term of protection for a
standard patent from 16 years to 20 years in order to bring Australian
law into conformity with the requirements of the TRIPS
5.53 While the TRIPS Agreement provides some flexibility to Contracting States
in developing their own patent laws—for example,
permitting optional
exclusions from patentability for certain types of
—the minimum
term of patent protection is not subject to any exceptions or
qualifications.
5.54 The TRIPS Agreement does, however, permit Contracting States to require
compliance with reasonable procedures and formalities
as a condition to the
acquisition or maintenance of intellectual property
Such procedures and
formalities include the payment of fees for the filing and processing of a
patent application, and for maintaining
existing patent rights.
Maintaining patent rights
5.55 Under Australian law,
maintenance fees must be paid to keep a standard or innovation patent in
Such fees are due
annually, commencing on the fifth anniversary of the filing of the complete
application for a standard patent,
and from the second anniversary for an
innovation patent.
5.56 For a standard patent, maintenance fees increase incrementally from $180
(payable on the fifth anniversary) to $1,000 (payable
on the nineteenth
anniversary).
Maintenance fees
for an innovation patent increase incrementally from $100 (payable on the second
anniversary) to $235 (payable on
the seventh
anniversary).
A standard patent
or innovation patent will cease if the prescribed fees are not
5.57 The report of the Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee
(the IPCRC Report) suggested that use of more steeply
rising renewal fees might
reduce the effective length of the patent term under Australian law. The IPCRC
Report recommended that
‘the scope for, and impact of, implementing more
steeply rising renewal fees should be considered by IP
Australia’.
IP Australia
acted on this recommendation and increased the amount of annual maintenance fees
5.58 The actual (or effective) term of a patent is the period, after sealing,
during which a patent remains in force. According to
IP Australia, the average
actual term of standard biotechnology patents in Australia is approximately 12
This is higher than the
average actual term for standard patents generally, which is approximately eight
and a half years.
submission to the Inquiry, IP Australia commented that standard biotechnology
patents may have a higher average actual term
biotechnology products take longer to develop and acquire regulatory
approval for use than most other technologies, and so take longer
to repay the
investment.
5.59 Even if Australian patents claiming biotechnological or genetic inventions
persist for a longer average actual term, IP Australia
informed the ALRC
IP Australia is not aware of evidence that the maintenance of gene
patents for above average periods has a detrimental effect. In
their early
stage, other technologies have also experienced rapid advancement, and broad
claims have been maintained for up to twenty
Options for reform
5.60 IP 27 asked whether the
term for protection of gene patents should be limited to a period of less than
20 years and, if so, whether
limiting the term for protection of gene patents
would conflict with Australia’s obligations under the TRIPS Agreement. The
issue was raised as a potential solution to concerns about the existence of
monopoly rights over genetic materials and technologies
and the impact that such
rights might have on the Australian healthcare system, as well as on competition
within the Australian biotechnology
5.61 If the term of protection for gene patents were limited to a period of less
than 20 years, there are a number of possible reform
options. These include:
specifying a different term of protection for gene patents in the
Patents Act
amending the
Patents Act
to provide that inventions involving
genetic materials and technologies may be protected only under the innovation
patent system;
increasing maintenance fees payable in connection with patents to
encourage holders of gene patents to keep only commercially useful
Submissions and consultations
International obligations
submissions indicated that limiting the term of protection for gene patents
would be ‘likely’ to be inconsistent
with Australia’s
obligations under the TRIPS
Some submissions were
more definitive and commented that such a restriction would
‘clearly’ conflict with the TRIPS Agreement.
For example, the
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) submitted that:
any system for standard patents that did not provide protection to the
patentee for 20 years, would not be consistent with the TRIPS
5.63 Two submissions commented on other aspects of Australia’s
international relations in support of the view that limiting
the term of gene
patents to a period less than 20 years would be undesirable. DFAT commented that
there was no general support in
the international arena for ‘amending the
period of a patent’ as a ‘constructive or practical way to address
policy concerns’.
Dr Amanda McBratney and others commented that limiting the term of protection
for gene patents may ‘adversely impact on the
current negotiations for a
Free Trade Agreement between Australia and the United
Suitability of the innovation patent system
5.64 A number of submissions suggested that it would be
preferable for an invention involving genetic materials and technologies to
protected only by an innovation patent. These submissions were critical of the
proposition that genetic sequences are treated
as inventions for the purposes of
patent law and they therefore considered that the shorter term of patent
protection provided by
an innovation patent would be more
appropriate.
Associate Professor
Agnes Bankier, for example, commented:
Discovery of a gene sequence is not an invention. The intellectual effort
would be better regarded as an innovation with a shorter
term of eight years for
the patent.
5.65 The South Australian Government suggested that protection of genetic
inventions under the innovation patent system would be
‘more advantageous
for the healthcare
The Department
of Health Western Australia agreed with this view, but commented that ‘a
tightening of the requirements for
an innovation patent’ might be required
to guard against patent holders exercising their patent rights more
aggressively.
5.66 Other submissions, however, commented that the innovation patent system is
unsuitable to provide patent protection for inventions
involving genetic
materials and technologies.
Some submissions based this claim on the fact that innovation patents are not
subject to substantive examination by IP Australia
5.67 The Australian Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture also
considered that the ability to obtain innovation patents
quickly and easily
would exacerbate problems that biotechnology patents are already said to
The Commonwealth
Department of Health and Ageing supported this view:
If standard gene patents were excluded leaving only innovation patents on
genes, the underlying issues of patent breadth coupled with
the uniqueness of
human genes would not be addressed. This may even exacerbate the proliferation
of overly broad patents, given
the lower level of justification needed by patent
applicants as well as patent office scrutiny of their claims required before
patents would be
5.68 In its submission, IP Australia indicated that, because of the limitations
on the scope of protection available under an innovation
Innovation patents are little used for genetic inventions, except where
immediate protection is desired while the assessment of a
corresponding standard
application is in progress.
Existing mechanisms for limiting patent term
5.69 Some submissions commented that the Australian
patent system already contains mechanisms that may effectively limit the term
patent protection. For example, IP Australia submitted:
The patent maintenance fee structure set out in the Patents legislation
is designed to encourage patent holders in all technologies
to relinquish
patents for which a commercial advantage is no longer
5.70 DFAT expressed a similar view and noted that such mechanisms are consistent
with Australia’s obligations under the TRIPS
5.71 In addition, two submissions commented that the effective term of a gene
patent is much shorter than 20 years because the development
cycle of genetic
products leaves a relatively limited period of time for commercial exploitation.
The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute
of Medical Research submitted:
The average time from gene patent to commercial returns can often be
10 - 15 years as a result of several years of research. Shorter
terms would
only discourage long-term developments of therapeutics and diagnostics and not
be in the interests of translating research
for healthcare
ALRC’s views
5.72 The ALRC’s
preliminary view is that the term of protection for gene patents should not be
more limited than the term of
patent protection available for any other type of
technology. There is no firm evidence that providing patent protection to
inventions for a period of 20 years is particularly problematic. As
noted in some submissions, the development and commercialisation
products may not be complete until many years after patent protection is first
granted, leaving a patent holder only a
limited period in which to benefit from
the monopoly rights conferred by a gene patent.
5.73 Submissions and consultations that supported a shorter term of protection
for gene patents did not suggest an alternative period
for protection of gene
patents, other than the eight-year term available for innovation patents. The
innovation patent system appears
to provide useful and desirable patent
protection for lower level inventions. However, in the ALRC’s view, the
features of
the innovation patent system—in particular, the lack of
substantive pre-grant examination of applications—make it unsuitable
the only form of patent protection available to genetic materials and
technologies under Australian law.
5.74 In addition, a general restriction on the term of patent protection
available to genetic materials and technologies might be
inconsistent with
Australia’s obligations under the TRIPS Agreement.
5.75 The ALRC considers that inventions involving genetic materials and
technologies should be eligible for protection by a standard
patent, or by an
innovation patent, at an applicant’s election, subject to satisfying the
substantive requirements for patentability
set out in the
Patents Act
5.76 However, the ALRC does consider that, to the extent possible, the Register
of Patents should contain only those patents that
are in use by a patent holder.
The IPCRC Report and some submissions to the Inquiry suggested that if patent
fees are set at an appropriate
level, a patent holder will be more inclined to
evaluate whether the investment he or she makes to maintain patent protection
a particular invention is worthwhile. The ALRC agrees with this view but
invites further comment on this matter.
Proposal 5 - 1
IP Australia should regularly review
the schedule of patent fees for standard patents and innovation patents
(a) assess the impact of the fees on the actual term of Australian
patents; and
(b) ensure that fees are set at a level appropriate to discourage patent
holders from maintaining patents that lack real
commercial value.
‘Patent area’ is defined in
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) to include Australia, the Australian
continental shelf, the waters above the Australian continental shelf, and the
above Australia and the Australian continental shelf:
Patents Act
(Cth) sch 1.
The committees
undertaking the reviews were known as the Knowles Committee and the Dean
Committee, respectively: J McKeough, K Bowrey
and P Griffith,
Intellectual
Property: Commentary and Materials
Industrial Property Advisory
Patents, Innovation and Competition in Australia
Patents Act 1990
IP Australia also administers
trademark and design rights in Australia. See
<www.ipaustralia.gov.au>.
What is IP Australia?
<www.ipaustralia.gov.au/about/whatis.html> at 16 December
IP Australia,
Patent Manual
Practice and Procedure Volume 1: International
(2003); IP Australia,
Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume 3: Oppositions,
Courts, Extensions & Disputes
A limited set of decisions by the
Commissioner (primarily those made under the
Patents Regulations
generally subject to review by either the AAT or the Federal Court. See further:
Administrative Review Council,
Administrative Review of Patents Decisions:
Report to the Attorney General, Report 43
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations 1991
(Cth) r 22.26. Decisions of the AAT on
matters of law may be appealed to the Federal Court:
Administrative Appeals
Tribunal Act 1975
Patents Act 1990
The Federal Court also has jurisdiction to review decisions of the
Commissioner under the
Administrative Review (Judicial Decisions) Act
(Cth) and under
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) on the
basis of legal or procedural error. In addition, judicial review is available by
the High Court unders 75(v) of the
Constitution
Ibid s 155. A
‘prescribed court’ is defined to mean the Federal Court, the Supreme
Court of a State and the Supreme Court
of each of the Australian Capital
Territory, the Northern Territory and Norfolk Island:
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) sch 1.
Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh
Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
into force on 1 January 1995). See further Ch
Following a review of the petty
patent system in 1995, the Advisory Council on Industrial Property (ACIP)
recommended the introduction
of innovation patents to replace petty patents as a
‘second tier’ of patent protection in Australia: Advisory Council
Industrial Property,
Review of the Petty Patent System
(1995). A further
report strongly supported ACIP’s recommendation: Intellectual Property and
Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation
under the Competition Principles Agreement
(2000), 157. Other jurisdictions
also provide a ‘second tier’ of patent protection, including
Germany, Japan, Ireland
and Spain: Advisory Council on Industrial Property,
Review of the Petty Patent System
(1995), ch 3; D Ryan, ‘Innovation
Patents: What is their Likely Impact?’ (2002) 48
Intellectual Property
G McGowan, ‘The
New Innovation Patent System: Will It Work?’ (2002) 76
Law Institute
64; Advisory Council on Industrial Property,
Review of the Petty
Patent System
(1995), rec
‘Innovation Patents: What is their Likely Impact?’ (2002) 48
Intellectual Property Forum
For example, a Melbourne patent
attorney applied for an innovation patent on a wheel to highlight the
inadequacies of the innovation
patent system as implemented: G McGowan,
‘The New Innovation Patent System: Will It Work?’ (2002) 76
Institute Journal
D Ryan, ‘Innovation Patents:
What is their Likely Impact?’ (2002) 48
Intellectual Property Forum
30, 33; G McGowan, ‘The New Innovation Patent System: Will It
Work?’ (2002) 76
Law Institute Journal
D Ryan, ‘Innovation Patents:
What is their Likely Impact?’ (2002) 48
Intellectual Property Forum
30, 33 - 34.
Technology Ltd v Alpha Microtech Pty Ltd
[2003] FCA 962.
The case involved
Datadot Technology Ltd’s (Datadot) innovation patent entitled
‘Identifier Label Application System’—a
mechanism that sprays
thousands of identity labels, known as microdots, on to an article for the
purposes of identification. The
Federal Court held that Alpha Microtech Pty Ltd
(Alpha) had infringed Datadot’s patent and restrained Alpha from
distributing
or selling its infringing
Although Alpha filed a
cross-claim for revocation of Datadot’s innovation patent, Alpha failed to
appear at the hearing, or
to adduce evidence in support of its cross-claim. The
cross-claim was, therefore, dismissed without any substantive
consideration.
Patents Act 1990
A patent of addition is not available in relation to an innovation
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act 1990
Eligible persons are the inventor
of the invention claimed in the application, or a person to whom the inventor
has assigned his
or her rights in the invention. If an inventor or his or her
assignee is deceased, that person’s legal representative may file
patent protection: Ibid
contains specific
instructions to examiners as to how to deal with ‘personal’
applicants: IP Australia,
Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume 2:
(2002), [1.12], [12.5.7] - [12.5.8], [12.8.4] - [12.8.7].
Patents Act
does, however, prevent any person other than a qualified
patent attorney from preparing a patent application for gain:
Patents Act
Patents Act 1990
Patent Cooperation Treaty
[1980] ATS 6
, (entered into force on 24 January 1978);
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) s 88.
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations
(Cth) rr 3.1, 3.2A, 3.3.
‘fair basis’ requirement under Australian patent law is discussed in
Patents Act 1990
(standard patent);
s 18(1A)(b)
(innovation
Regulations 1991
3.12 - 3.14.
Patents Act
IP Australia,
Annual Report
Australia may not, however, have undertaken substantive examination of the
applications in this category: IP Australia,
Submission P56
, 4 November
Patents Act 1990
A divisional
application may also be filed in connection with an innovation patent:
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations 1991
Patents Act
does not provide for a divisional application based
on a provisional application:
Patents Act 1990
; IP Australia,
Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
The requirements and timing for
filing divisional applications based on an innovation patent are separately set
Patents Act
Patents Regulations
Patents Act
Patents Regulations 1991
(Cth) r 6A.2; IP
Divisional Applications
<www.ipaustralia.gov.au/pdfs/patents/specific/div.pdf> at 16 December
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations 1991
Patents Act 1990
s 79B(1)(b)
Patents Regulations 1991
(Cth) r 6A.1. Equivalent provisions
exist with respect to the permitted subject matter of any divisional application
based on an
innovation patent and the time for filing such a divisional
application:
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations
(Cth) r 6A.2.
Patents, Trade Marks & Related Rights: Looseleaf Service
[8025]. Acceptance of patent applications is discussed in the following
Ibid, [8025]. Opposition
proceedings are discussed in Ch
Submission P56
, 4 November
Patents Act 1990
18(1)(b)(i)
(standard patent),
s 18(1A)(b)(i)
(innovation patent). See further
Patents Regulations
(Cth) rr 2.2, 2.3.
effects of the amendment, see A Monotti, ‘The Impact of the New Grace
Period under Australian Patent Law on Universities’
Intellectual Property Review
; W Condon and R Hoad, ‘Amazing Grace:
New Grace Period for Patents in Australia’ (2002) 15
Intellectual Property Law Bulletin
73. See also Intellectual Property and
Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation
under the Competition Principles Agreement
Patents Regulations
(Cth) rr 2.2(1A), 2.3(1A).
example, Europe adopts an ‘absolute novelty’ requirement. See
further, A Monotti, ‘The Impact of the New Grace
Period under Australian
Patent Law on Universities’
European Intellectual Property
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations
(Cth) r 3.15.
Patents Act
Patents Regulations 1991
Patents Act 1990
s 142(2)(a)
Patents Regulations 1991
IP Australia,
, 4 November 2003. According to IP Australia, examination of Australian
patents typically occurs about two and a half years after
the date of
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations 1991
(Cth) rr 3.20. The prescribed jurisdictions
Patents Regulations
are: signatory countries to the
Convention on the Grant of European Patents
; Canada; New Zealand; and the
United States:
Patents Regulations 1991
Currently, a patent examiner is
not required to consider all criteria for patentability in
, in particular,
whether the invention is ‘useful’:
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations 1991
(Cth) r 3.18. See Ch
‘Prior art base’ is
defined in the
Patents Act 1990
, sch 1. See further Ch
Patents Regulations
(Cth) r 3.17A. Equivalent disclosure requirements exist with respect to
documentary searches relating to an innovation patent application:
(Cth) s 101D;
Patents Regulations 1991
information’ is defined in the
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) sch 1. The
qualifications of Australian patent examiners and the capacity of IP Australia
to conduct adequate prior art searches
are discussed in Ch
Patents Regulations
(Cth) r 3.18.
Patents Act
s 142(2)(e)
Patents Regulations 1991
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations 1991
Patents Regulations 1991
(Cth) r 3.2B. An applicant for an innovation patent generally has two months in
which to correct any deficiencies in the application
following a formalities
check, or the application will lapse:
Patents Regulations 1991
3.2B(3), (5) - (7).
Patents Act
Procedures relating to the examination of an
innovation patent are set out in
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) Ch 9A,
Patents Act 1990
(7) (standard patents) and
(innovation
Patents, Trade
Marks & Related Rights: Looseleaf Service
IP Australia,
, 4 November 2003.
Regulations 1991
(Cth) r 13.5 (standard patent); r 3.2B(7) (innovation
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations 1991
Patents Act 1990
(standard patents) and
(innovation patents). Certain information
may be prohibited from being disclosed to the public under the
, even after examination and acceptance of an application of a standard
patent or the grant of an innovation patent:
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations 1991
(Cth) r 4.1. See also IP Australia,
Submission P56
, 4 November
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations 1991
(Cth) r 6.2. IP Australia indicated that a
standard patent is typically sealed approximately four months after acceptance
application has been advertised in the
Official Journal
Submission P56
, 4 November 2003. Opposition proceedings and
other challenges to patent rights are discussed in Ch
Patents Act 1990
‘date of the patent’ is the date on which the complete specification
was filed or, if applicable, a different date
determined by the
Regulations
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations
(Cth) r 6.3. As noted in Figure 5 - 1, an extension of the term of
a standard patent relating to ‘pharmaceutical substances’
available in certain circumstances:
Patents Act 1990
. The Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources is currently
reviewing the operation of pharmaceutical patent term extension provisions
Patents Act
. The Department’s final report is not yet publicly
available: Department of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Discussion Paper on
Patent Extensions and Springboarding, and the Effect on Generic Pharmaceuticals
Manufacturers in Australia
Maintenance fees are discussed
later in this chapter.
Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh
Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
into force on 1 January 1995), art
Patents (World Trade
Organisation Amendments) Act 1994
(Cth). The 20-year patent term applies to
all standard patents granted after 1 July 1995, or granted prior to that date
for a 16-year
term that had not expired as of that date:
Patents (World Trade
Organisation Amendments) Act 1994
Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into
force on 1 January 1995), art 27(2),
See further Ch
Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into
force on 1 January 1995), art
Patents Act 1990
. Renewal fees are not payable for patents of addition,
unless such patent becomes an independent patent:
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations
(Cth) sch 7
Fees are subject to amendment by the Commissioner of
Patents from time to time.
Also: IP Australia,
Patent Fees
<www.ipaustralia.gov.au/patents> at 3 December 2003; IP Australia,
Submission P56
, 4 November 2003. Annual maintenance fees for
pharmaceutical patents during any extended term are $1,200 each
Patents Regulations 1991
(Cth) sch 7
Also: IP Australia,
Patent Fees
<www.ipaustralia.gov.au/patents> at 3 December
Patents Act 1990
(standard patent);
(innovation patent). Fees may be paid up to
six months late, subject to a penalty of $100 for each month, or part of a
month, following
the due date during which payment is not made:
Regulations 1991
(Cth) sch 7,
Intellectual Property and
Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation
under the Competition Principles Agreement
(2000), 144,
Under the previous fee structure,
which had been in effect since 1993, maintenance fees for a standard patent
increased from an initial
amount of $165 (payable on the fifth anniversary) to
$790 (payable on the nineteenth anniversary and each anniversary thereafter
the case pharmaceutical patents).
Submission P56
, 4 November
technology. For example, Mexico recently considered
limiting the term of
pharmaceutical patents to ten years, with the right to renew protection for a
further ten years; and under Indian
patent law, patents claiming foods,
medicines and drugs have terms of less than 20 years: L Schmidt, ‘Threat
to Mexican Patent
Legal Media Group News
, 16 March 2003,
<www.legalmediagroup.com>;
Patents Act
(India) s 53.
Compliance with the TRIPS Agreement may, however, be an issue: A McBratney and
Submission P47
, 22 October
Department of Industry Tourism
and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003; Genetic Technologies
Submission P45
, 20 October 2003; A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003; Queensland Government,
, 5 January
of Foreign Affairs & Trade,
Submission P29
, 2 October 2003. See also
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003; IP Australia,
Submission P56
November 2003; Department of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
November 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November
Department of Foreign Affairs
Submission P29
, 2 October
A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003. See Ch 4 for discussion of the Free
Trade Agreement between Australia and the United
, 30 September 2003; Department of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November
Submission P19
, 30 September
South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Department of Health Western
Submission P53
, 3 November
Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January 2004; Department of Industry Tourism and
Submission P36
, 13 October
Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September 2003;
Department of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September
Commonwealth
Department of Health and Ageing,
Submission P65
, 28 January
Submission P56
, 4 November
of Foreign Affairs & Trade,
Submission P29
, 2 October 2003. See also
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C
of the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into force on 1 January 1995), art
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
2003. See also A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
6. Patentability of Genetic Materials and Technologies
Introduction
Requirements for patentability
Overview of submissions
Should gene patents be treated differently?
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Patentable subject matter
'Manner of manufacture' test
Patentable subject matter in other jurisdictions
Application to genetic materials and technologies
Discoveries
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Novelty requirement under Australian law
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Inventive or innovative step
Inventiveness requirement under Australian law
Inventiveness requirement in other jurisdictions
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Usefulness requirement in Australia
Approach to usefulness in other jurisdictions
Reform of the usefulness requirement under Australian
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Disclosure of an invention
Disclosure requirements under Australian law
Disclosure requirements in the United States
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
6. Patentability of Genetic Materials and Technologies
Introduction
Concerns about gene patents may be divided into two broad categories. The first
involves objections to gene patents on the basis
that inventions involving genetic
materials and technologies do not satisfy the requirements for patentability under
law. The second relates to concerns about the way in which gene patents
are exploited, and the way in which inventions covered by
such patents are commercialised.
6.2 This chapter and Chapter 7 address issues in the first category. This
chapter considers the requirements for patentability
under Australian law, and
the application of each requirement to inventions involving genetic materials
and technologies. Chapter
7 considers whether existing exclusions from patentable
subject matter are applicable to any types of inventions involving genetic
and technologies and whether the
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act
should be amended to include additional exclusions from patentability. Later
chapters of this Discussion Paper address concerns
gene patents.
6.3 To provide a context for the discussion in this chapter, it is instructive
to understand the types of inventions claimed in
gene patents. The following
is a selected list of inventions involving genetic materials and technologies
for which IP Australia
has granted patent protection:
synthetic genetic or DNA sequences;
mutant forms and fragments of genetic sequences (including polymorphisms);
isolated or recombinant DNA coding for a sequence of a gene;
proteins expressed by a gene;
vectors containing a gene;
probes for a gene;
methods of transformation using a gene;
host cells, higher plants or animals carrying a gene; and
recombinant DNA methods—such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and
novel expression systems.
Requirements for patentability
For an invention to be protected by an Australian patent, it must satisfy the
requirements for a ‘patentable invention’
provides that a patentable
invention is one which:
is a manner of manufacture within the meaning of
of Monopolies 1623
Statute of Monopolies
is novel when compared to the prior art;
involves an inventive (or innovative) step when compared to the prior art;
is useful; and
has not been secretly used in Australia before the priority date by or
with the authority of the patent holder.
Patents Act
expressly excludes certain categories of subject
matter from patentability, and grants the Commissioner of Patents discretion
to refuse a patent application for other types of inventions.
Chapter 7 discusses these exclusions.
6.6 For reasons outlined later in this chapter, the ALRC does not consider
that inventions involving genetic materials and technologies
raise issues that
warrant major changes to the patentability requirements under Australian law.
Moreover, as a general proposition,
the ALRC does not consider that the patentability
requirements should be applied to genetic inventions differently to the way
in which they are applied to inventions involving any other type of technology.
Inventions involving gene patents do, however,
highlight issues about the way
in which the usefulness of an invention is assessed under Australian law. The
ALRC has, therefore,
proposed specific reforms to the current approach to this
requirement in order to clarify the application of the usefulness requirement
for all types of inventions.
Overview of submissions
6.7 Submissions and consultations
expressed a range of concerns about the patentability of genetic materials and
technologies, including:
general ethical objections;
the identification of a gene or other genetic material (such as a protein)
is a ‘discovery’ not an ‘invention’;
genetic sequences and other genetic materials are not novel and should
not be patentable;
the identification of a genetic sequence or other genetic material does
not involve an inventive step;
gene patents may be granted over inventions even if the use of the invention
is not yet known; and
gene patents contain broad claims and the disclosure in such patents does
not justify the scope of the claims.
6.8 Chapters 3 and 7 discusses the objections to gene patents on the basis
of ethical or social considerations. The other objections
outlined above are
considered in this chapter, in the context of the relevant requirement for patentability.
6.9 Many submissions to the Inquiry criticised the way in which the requirements
for patentability have been applied to inventions
involving genetic materials
and technologies. In some cases, criticisms were directed to the patentability
requirements generally
and it was not evident which particular requirements
were a cause of concern. In other cases, comments in submissions were addressed
to a specific question asked in IP 27, but responses raised issues that were
relevant to other patentability requirements or
to additional issues addressed
by the ALRC in this chapter. In these cases, the ALRC has cited submissions
in the context of
the patentability requirement or issue to which they appear
most related.
6.10 A number of submissions also expressed opinions about the specific types
of inventions involving genetic materials and technologies
that should be patentable,
and those for which patent protection should not be available; for example,
it was said that genetic
sequences and proteins should not be patentable, but
combinations of genes, recombinant proteins and processes for identifying
materials should be. These comments appear to be based on assumptions about
the type of inventions that will
prima facie
fail to satisfy the criteria
for patentability. Such an approach is contrary to the basic notion of patent
law, namely, that
each patent application (and the invention claimed in it)
should be assessed independently to determine whether it satisfies the
requirements
for patentability. However, to the extent possible, the ALRC has considered
these comments in relation to particular
patentability requirements.
Should gene patents be treated differently?
The requirements that must be satisfied in order to obtain a gene patent are the
same as those that apply to patents over inventions
involving any other type of
technology. An initial question arises as to whether the concerns that have been
expressed about gene
patents differ significantly from objections to patents over
other types of technologies and whether those differences, if any,
justify implementing
specific requirements in the
Patents Act
that would apply only to patents
over genetic materials and technologies.
Submissions and consultations
6.12 The weight of submissions
did not favour creating requirements for patentability that would apply only to
the grant of gene
patents. Submissions generally considered that the establishment
of special rules for gene patents was neither necessary nor desirable.
Submissions suggested that implementing specific requirements for gene patents
may add complexity to the Australian patent system,
both in relation to inventions
involving genetic materials and technologies and for other new technologies that
may arise in the
6.13 IP Australia indicated that specific provisions applicable only to genetic
materials and technologies should not be adopted.
IP Australia strongly recommends against introducing technology-specific
laws and procedures. Such measures invariably lead to
uncertainty over the bounds
of the subject matter, involved debate in individual cases, and increased cost
and uncertainty
for users of the system. Such measures may eventually prove
at least partially ineffective, as it may be possible to draft claims
the intent of [any] exclusion. Defining the bounds of a technology is a non-trivial
6.14 Similarly, Dr Graeme Suthers commented:
Either there is a consistent approach to patentability by the patent
office and the courts (and no need to alter the existing patent
regulations),
or there will continue to be a mess of confusion, disputes, and uncertainty
6.15 Dr Amanda McBratney and others suggested that proposals for the special treatment
of a new technology often arise when the
technology has implications for ‘human
health or subsistence’—as is the case for inventions involving genetic
materials and technologies. McBratney and others suggested that the problematic
aspects of such technologies more commonly relate
to the way in which patented
inventions are exploited, rather than the existence of patent rights.
[This] problem is not addressed by adjusting patent legislation to
address each perceived jump in technology, or for inventions
that have ‘special’
features or raise ‘special’ issues. The result would be a complex
and unwieldy
system that would neither serve the patentee nor the public ...
[W]e have established legal principles that have served our society
well. These
can be implemented in a reasoned manner to decide on the patentability of a
new technology that might be perceived
as ‘special’ or of a ‘different
nature’ to the more traditional notion of a patentable invention.
6.16 Other submissions said that imposing particular requirements for gene patents
would lead to inconsistency between the way in
which genetic materials and technologies
are treated under Australian patent law and the patent laws of other jurisdictions.
Submissions
suggested that such a divergence would create unnecessary difficulties
for Australian entities seeking to obtain patent protection
in foreign jurisdictions
and might have adverse implications for the place of the Australian biotechnology
sector in the global economy.
6.17 Some submissions suggested that the introduction of specific requirements
relating to the patentability of genetic materials
and technologies may conflict
with the provisions of the
Agreement on the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights
(TRIPS Agreement).
6.18 However, some submissions commented that there have been difficulties
in applying existing requirements for patentability
to inventions involving
gene patents and that such difficulties did not always reflect inadequacies
in the requirements for
patentability.
Rather, they may result from difficulties encountered by patent offices, including
IP Australia, in applying these requirements
to genetic materials and technologies.
As a result, these submissions supported more stringent application of existing
requirements
for patentability in the future. Chapter 8 considers procedures
to assist Australian patent examiners in assessing gene patent
applications.
6.19 Some submissions identified particular characteristics of genetic materials
and technologies that may justify the application
of specific rules to these
For example, the Department
of Health and Ageing submitted:
It is generally accepted that, in practice, a pure monopoly is unlikely
to arise through the application of patent law. This is
due to the availability
of alternative or substitute products and processes and the scope for imitation.
However, the uniqueness
of human genes provides wide scope for inappropriate
monopoly behaviour. A patent on a particular gene or gene sequence has the
effect of monopolising the knowledge and exploitation of the gene. In effect,
it patents the particular condition
or characteristic. In doing so it prevents
work on alternative ways of dealing with the condition or characteristic and
limit the capacity to invent around the patent.
6.20 IP Australia also acknowledged that such views have been expressed:
It is perhaps arguable the gene patents are different from most other
technologies on the issue of whether they can be ‘invented
It may be that no other genetic material has a function similar to that of a
patented material, and so alternatives
cannot be developed.
6.21 As noted above, however, IP Australia did not consider that this characteristic
warranted the application of special requirements
for patentability.
ALRC’s views
6.22 In the ALRC’s
view, concerns about the patenting of inventions involving genetic materials and
technologies should not
be addressed by the introduction of legislative requirements
that would relate only to these types of inventions.
6.23 The ALRC agrees with those submissions that suggested such an approach
may set an undesirable precedent in relation to how
the patent system should
accommodate new technologies in the future. The current requirements for patentability
set out the
Patents Act
are technology-neutral and are generally able
to adapt to new technologies as they arise. Introducing specific rules for inventions
involving genetic materials and technologies may suggest that special requirements
for patentability should be implemented
for future technologies that raise a
different set of issues. Such an approach would unnecessarily complicate Australian
6.24 To introduce requirements that would apply only to genetic materials
and technologies is also undesirable from an international
perspective. Rules
applicable only to genetic materials and technologies would represent a departure
from attempts to harmonise
the patent laws of various jurisdictions.
Further, it would result in a marked divergence from approaches to inventions
involving genetic materials and technologies
adopted by other major economies,
such as the United States, Europe and Japan. Such an approach is likely to have
significant
implications for the willingness of foreign entities to participate
in the Australian biotechnology sector, and for the ability
of Australian entities
to commercialise genetic inventions in other jurisdictions. As discussed in
Chapter 4, the adoption
of specific requirements for genetic materials and technologies
may be inconsistent with the provisions of the TRIPS Agreement.
Proposal 6 - 1
IP Australia should
assess patent applications relating to genetic materials and technologies
according to the same
legislative criteria for patentability that apply
to patent applications relating to any other type of technology.
Patentable subject matter
‘Manner of manufacture’ test
Currently, genetic materials and technologies are treated as ‘inventions’
for which patent protection is available
under Australian law, provided the requirements
set out in the
Patents Act
are satisfied.
‘Invention’ is defined in the
Patents Act
Any manner of new manufacture the subject of letters patent and grant
of privilege within
of the Statute of Monopolies, and includes an
alleged invention.
Statute of Monopolies
was enacted in the United Kingdom in 1623,
but is not reproduced in the
Patents Act
of the Statute provides
as follows:
Provided also and be it declared and enacted that any declaration
before mentioned shall not extend to any letters patent and grants
of privilege,
for the term of 14 years or under hereafter to be made of the sole working or
making of any manner of new manufacture
within this realm to the true and first
inventor and inventors of such manufactures which others, at the time of making
letters or grant, shall not use, so as also they be not contrary to law
nor mischievous to the state by raising prices of commodities
at home or hurt
trade or generally inconvenient.
6.27 The concept of ‘invention’ under Australian law has not, to date,
been limited to the literal meaning of the term
‘manner of new manufacture’
Statute of Monopolies
leading Australian decision on the concept of ‘invention’,
Research Development Corporation v Commissioner of Patents
the High Court indicated that a policy-oriented approach should be adopted to
the meaning of the term:
The word ‘manufacture’ finds a place in the present Act,
not as a word intended to reduce the question of patentability
to a question
of verbal interpretation, but simply as the general title found in the Statute
of Monopolies for the whole category
under which all grants of patents which
may be made in accordance with the developed principles of patent law are to
be subsumed.
6.28 The High Court held that the following approach should be adopted in determining
whether the invention claimed in a particular
patent application constituted patentable
subject matter under Australian law:
The right question is: ‘Is this a proper subject of the letters
patent according to the principles which have been developed
for the application
of s 6 of the Statute of Monopolies?’
6.29 For an invention to be a ‘manner of manufacture’, as interpreted
, it must belong to the useful arts rather than the fine arts, it
must provide a material advantage and its value to the country
must be in the
field of economic endeavour.
6.30 The categories of inventions that may satisfy the ‘manner of manufacture’
test have gradually expanded over time.
A report of the Intellectual Property
Competition Review Committee (the IPCRC Report) in 2000 outlined the expansion
categories of patentable subject matter from a method for extracting
lead from humans, to agricultural processes, new plant varieties,
micro-organisms,
methods of cosmetic and therapeutic treatment of humans, and mathematical applications
(in computer programs).
This expansion
mirrors developments in other jurisdictions.
6.31 Judicial interpretation of the ‘manner of manufacture’ test
has also recognised a number of categories of subject
matter that will fail
to satisfy the test. These include mere discoveries, ideas, scientific theories
and laws of nature.
6.32 The ‘manner of manufacture’ test is expressed in terms that
appear obscure in a modern context.
reviews of Australian patent law have recommended that the requirement be preserved
as the threshold test for patentability.
A 1984 report of the Industrial Property
Advisory Committee (the IPAC Report) considered that the concept ‘operates
satisfactorily’ and ‘has, in the past, exhibited a capacity
to respond to new developments’.
The IPAC Report recommended:
that the present threshold test for patentability by reference to
section 6 of the Statute of Monopolies and to the expression
new manufacture’ be retained, without specific legislative inclusions
or exclusions.
6.33 The Australian Government accepted this recommendation when drafting the
Patents Bill 1990
(Cth) (Patents Bill). The Explanatory Memorandum stated:
The requirement in s 18(1)(a) that an invention, in order to be patentable,
must be a ‘manner of manufacture’ invokes
a long line of UK and
Australian court decisions ... The Government accepted the Industrial Property
Advisory Committee’s
recommendation that this flexible threshold test
of patentability be retained in preference to adopting a more inflexible codified
definition.
6.34 Similarly, the IPCRC Report considered that the ‘open-textured standard’
represented by the ‘manner of manufacture’
test should be retained.
It concluded that:
Australia has on the whole benefited from the adaptiveness and flexibility
that has characterised the ‘manner of manufacture’
6.35 In reaching the conclusion that the ‘manner of manufacture’ test
should be retained, both the IPAC Report and the
IPCRC Report considered that
codification of a concept of ‘invention’ in the
Patents Act
be likely to result in greater uncertainty (with the attendant costs) than the
‘manner of manufacture’ test.
Patentable subject matter in other jurisdictions
6.36 Other jurisdictions
frame the test for patentable subject matter differently. United States patent
law provides that to be
patentable subject matter ‘the claimed invention
must be a process, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter that has
a practical
Patent legislation in the
United Kingdom defines patentable subject matter by exclusion: an invention is
patentable if it satisfies
the other requirements for patentability and is not,
among other things, a ‘discovery, scientific theory or mathematical method’
or ‘a scheme rule or method for performing a mental act’.
6.37 Associate Professor Ann Monotti and Professor Sam Ricketson have commented
that the choice of (often seemingly outdated)
statutory language relating to
the test for patentable subject matter in patent statutes in Australia, the
United Kingdom and
the United States:
seems to reflect a general understanding, by both courts and legislatures,
that it is impossible to find a form of language that
will adequately cover,
at any one time, the multifarious and diverse forms in which human inventiveness
may manifest itself.
6.38 Monotti and Ricketson also suggested that the issue of what is an ‘invention’
for the purposes of patent law may
only become contentious at the margins, as
new developments in science and technology occur. Historically, courts have been
to address patentable subject matter by ‘a process of progressive interpretation’.
Even where legislatures have expressly stated exceptions to patentable subject
matter, these provisions ‘have generally been
limited in their effect’.
6.39 A 2003 review of New Zealand patent law by the Ministry of Economic Development
(the NZ Report) recommended that the definition
of patentable invention in the
Patents Act 1953
(NZ) be amended to mirror the definition adopted in
Australian law, including that the invention must be a ‘manner of manufacture’
within the meaning of s 6 of the
Statute of Monopolies
The Report commented that such an approach would allow current judicial exclusions
from patentable subject matter to be retained
and continue to allow ‘the
courts the flexibility to develop the definition on a case by case basis’.
Application to genetic materials and technologies
6.40 There has been limited
consideration in Australia of the application of the ‘manner of manufacture’
test to genetic
materials and technologies, except by IP Australia.
The requirement does not appear to have limited the types of inventions involving
genetic materials and technologies that will
be patentable.
Dr Dianne Nicol has suggested that inventions involving genetic materials and
technologies appear to satisfy the
requirements because genetic research
and treatments are commercial in nature and have value in an economic sense, both
through the activities of the Australian biotechnology industry and indirectly
through the ability of such technology to alleviate
Discoveries
6.41 Traditionally, ‘discoveries’
have been regarded as outside the scope of patentable subject matter because no
or ingenuity has been applied to produce a new and useful thing.
However, distinguishing between discoveries and inventions for the purposes of
patent law is difficult. The High Court in
suggested that drawing
such a distinction may be misleading and often only true in a formal sense.
IP Australia’s
Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure
also notes that ‘no general definition can be given as to what constitutes
a discovery as opposed to an invention’.
6.42 Consideration of the distinction between a discovery and an invention
in the context of biotechnology patents first arose
in relation to patent claims
over micro-organisms. In Australia and in other jurisdictions, ‘man-made’
micro-organisms
have been accepted as constituting patentable subject matter;
‘isolated and purified’ cultures of micro-organisms may also be
patentable. However, micro-organisms in their naturally
occurring state are
regarded as discoveries and, as a consequence, patent protection will not be
6.43 The difference between a discovery and an invention has also arisen for
consideration in relation to patent applications
claiming genetic sequences.
The decisions that have addressed this issue in Australia and overseas have
drawn a distinction
between genetic materials in their natural state and those
that have been ‘isolated and purified’.
Kiren-Amgen Inc v Board of Regents of the University
of Washington
involved an opposition to a patent application for the purified
or isolated DNA sequence encoding the human protein erythropoietin
(which plays
a major role in the formation of red blood cells).
The Deputy Commissioner of Patents stated:
In my view, a claim directed to naturally occurring DNA characterised
by specifying the DNA coding for a portion of that molecule
would likely be
claiming no more than a discovery per se and not be a manner of manufacture.
6.45 The Deputy Commissioner found, however, that the principle did not apply
to the patent application at issue because the claims
were directed to ‘purified
and isolated’ DNA sequences that were ‘an artificially created state
of affairs’.
6.46 Applying this principle more generally, IP Australia has indicated that
the following subject matter will not be deemed to
be a discovery under Australian
patent law:
The building blocks of living matter, such as DNA and genes (including
human DNA and genes) which have for the first time been
identified and copied
from their natural source and then manufactured synthetically as unique materials
with a definite industrial
6.47 In addition, IP Australia’s
provides specific guidance
on the difference between a discovery and an invention in the context of gene
[T]he discovery of a micro-organism, protein, enantiomer or antibiotic
in nature can be claimed in its isolated form or as substantially
free of (perhaps,
specified) impurities. Also, a gene can be claimed as the gene per se (as long
as the claim does not include
within its scope the native chromosome of which
the gene forms part) or as the recombinant or isolated or purified gene.
Other jurisdictions
6.48 In 1988, the European Patent Office (EPO), United
States Patent Office (USPTO) and Japanese Patent Office (JPO) issued a joint
explaining the distinction between natural and man-made substances for the purposes
of patent law in those jurisdictions:
Purified natural products are not regarded as products of nature or
discoveries because they do not in fact exist in nature in
an isolated form.
Rather, they are regarded for patent purposes as biologically active substances
or chemical compounds and
eligible for patenting on the same basis as other
chemical compounds.
6.49 Article 52(2) of the European Patent Convention (EPC) provides that, among
other subject matter, ‘discoveries, scientific
theories and mathematical
methods’ shall not be regarded as inventions for the purposes of the European
patent law.
The EPO was required to consider
the application of this provision in the case of
Howard Florey/Relaxin
The case involved an opposition to a patent for a DNA fragment coding for a human
H2-preprorelaxin—a synthetic genetic sequence
that had the same operative
function as natural H2-relaxin, but lacked certain introns found in the naturally
occurring sequence.
The Opposition Division of the EPO held that:
a substance freely occurring in nature is a mere discovery and therefore
unpatentable. However, if a substance found in nature
has first to be isolated
from its surroundings and a process for obtaining it is developed, that process
is patentable. Moreover,
if this substance can properly be characterised by
its structure and it is new in the absolute sense of having no previously recognised
existence, then the substance per se may be patentable.
6.50 Following the implementation of the Directive of the European Parliament
Council on the Legal Protection of Biotechnology Inventions
Biotechnology Directive) in 1998, the patentability of isolated genetic sequences
is now expressly recognised under European
Article 5 of the EU Biotechnology Directive provides that, while the human body
and ‘the simple discovery of one of its elements,
including a sequence or
partial sequence of a gene’ is not patentable,
[a]n element isolated from the human body or otherwise produced by
means of a technical process, including the sequence or partial
sequence of
a gene, may constitute a patentable invention, even if the structure of that
element is identical to that of a
natural element.
6.51 In the United States, biological material was first recognised as patentable
subject matter by the United States Supreme Court
Diamond v Chakrabarty
The issue before the Supreme Court was whether a genetically engineered bacterium
capable of breaking down crude oil constituted
patentable subject matter under
United States law. Upholding the patent at issue, the Supreme Court held:
[T]he patentee has produced a new bacterium with markedly different
characteristics from any found in nature and one having the
potential for significant
utility. His discovery is not nature’s handiwork, but his own; accordingly
it is patentable
subject matter.
6.52 The Supreme Court indicated that the concept of patentable subject matter
under United States law included ‘anything
under the sun that is made by
Dr Dianne Nicol and Jane Nielsen
have commented that this decision ‘laid the foundation for a growing body
of case law and
patent office decisions’ in the United States supporting
the patentability of a range of biological material, including whole
gene, proteins, and cell lines.
Criticisms of the discovery/invention distinction
6.53 Various criticisms have been made of the distinction
between naturally occurring genetic materials and those that have been
and isolated including the following:
Isolated and purified genetic materials are structurally similar or identical
to the form that exists in nature.
Even if genetic material is isolated and purified, the characteristics
of such materials—which are the ‘useful’
properties or information—are
naturally occurring, not created by the person who isolates and purifies the
Isolation and purification of genetic materials may not, in fact, occur
because genetic materials (particularly genetic sequences)
may be identified
by computational techniques.
Submissions and consultations
Manner of manufacture test
IP 27 did not specifically request submissions on the application of the ‘manner
of manufacture’ test to inventions
involving genetic materials and technologies.
A few submissions did, however, comment on this issue.
6.55 The Australian Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture (ACIPA)
considered that:
the scope of patentable subject matter under the definition of ‘manner
of manufacture’ in s 18(1) of the Patents Act
[should] remain broad and
flexible to deal with a range of different technologies.
6.56 Similarly, Davies Collison Cave, proposed that the:
adaptiveness and flexibility recognised in the [‘manner of manufacture’]
test should be retained so as to allow the
concept of patentable subject matter
to develop with future advances in technology.
6.57 However, one submission suggested that there may be scope for making the
test more transparent.
In addition, a small
number of submissions suggested that the ‘manner of manufacture’ test
does not seem to have placed
any limits on patents claiming genetic materials
Discoveries
6.58 Many submissions asserted that genetic materials,
and in particular genetic sequences, are discoveries and should not be patentable.
Most submissions that expressed such concerns came from participants in the research
and healthcare sectors. Some submissions considered
that genetic materials should
not be patentable subject matter because an ‘improved’ version of
naturally occurring
genetic material cannot be developed (except, perhaps, by
natural selection).
For example, Dr Graeme
Suthers submitted:
If a patent is granted on a process ... a better process can conceivably
be patented in the future. A patented process may be the
only means of achieving
some task today, but it need not be the exclusive means in the future. Conversely,
a patent on a naturally
occurring item or concept represents a very different
sort of right. A naturally occurring entity cannot be improved, and there
no prospect of another person patenting a better version in the future.
A law of nature or a physical attribute (such as E=mc2 or the charge
of an electron) cannot be patented because it exists independently
of the inventor
and there is no conceivable way that it could be made redundant by a new patent.
The same rationale must apply
to a naturally occurring chemical such as a human
DNA sequence.
6.59 Similarly, the Australian Association of Pathology Practices Inc commented:
Since an invention is normally taken to be the creation of something,
which previously did not exist, it is difficult to see how
a gene sequence can
truly be considered an invention.
6.60 A few submissions suggested that further consideration needs to be given
to the distinction between a discovery and an invention
in addressing whether
genetic materials and technologies constitute patentable subject matter.
For example, Dr Michela Betta indicated that the distinction between natural and
isolated genetic materials has not been adequately
Luigi Palombi suggested that the concept of ‘isolated and purified’
genetic material (and other naturally occurring
materials such as viruses) is
a ‘legal and scientific fiction’: regardless of the process of isolation
and purification,
the fundamental characteristics of isolated genetic material
remain the same as those found in nature.
Mr Palombi suggested that the comparison between inventions involving genetic
materials and those involving chemical compounds
is ‘not helpful and is
misleading’ in determining whether genetic materials should constitute patentable
subject matter
and that the useful and commercially valuable characteristic of
a genetic sequence is information—namely, instructions that
code for a protein.
He submitted that a chemical molecule that has medicinal properties merely acts
as a catalyst for treatment
in the body, and does not carry a ‘biological
formula’ for the production of a protein, as does a gene.
6.61 Some submissions that objected to the patenting of genetic sequences
on the basis that such material is a discovery nonetheless
considered that the
acceptance of genetic sequences as patentable inventions may not be able to
be revisited at this point
submissions proposed that the practice of patenting human genetic materials
should be acknowledged as ‘regrettable
and probably in error’, but
did not address the consequences of this for existing gene patents.
6.62 Other submissions considered that the fundamental approach to the patenting
of genetic materials required reform, despite
the difficulties that this may
present for already granted gene patents.
These submissions suggested that many of the problematic aspects of gene patents
stemmed from the failure to treat genetic
materials as non-patentable discoveries.
The messy confusing issues in gene patenting have arisen because the
fundamental distinction between a discovery and an invention
has not been addressed
by the patent offices.
6.63 Some submissions considered that, while an isolated genetic sequence should
not be patentable subject matter, patent protection
should be available for a
‘significantly modified’ genetic sequence or other genetic material.
For example, the Human Genetics Society of Australasia (HGSA) suggested that while
gene fragments, spliced gene transcripts and
proteins derived from human genes
should not, in principle, be patentable, a combination of genes—for example,
a human gene
in a viral vector—or a recombinant protein could be.
The National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) proposed different categories
of inventions that should not be patentable,
namely ‘isolated genetic sequences
’ and ‘inferred possible functions for a genetic sequence
without the development of a new use’.
6.64 However, a range of other submissions regarded the patentability of isolated
and purified forms of naturally occurring material,
including genetic material,
as a well-established principle.
College of Pathologists of Australasia (RCPA) commented on the competing assumptions
that affected whether genetic
materials are regarded as discoveries or inventions:
One view maintains that a novel isolated sequence cannot be regarded
as an invention because nothing that did not exist before
has been created ...
The other view, in essence, argues that a novel isolated substance is an invention
because it has been
rendered useful....Overall, this [latter] approach is socially
preferable.
6.65 IP Australia suggested that, if some genetic materials were considered to
be non-patentable discoveries, there may be difficulties
in determining which
genetic inventions should be treated as discoveries.
Treating isolated genetic materials and genetic products as ‘discoveries’,
and therefore excluding them from patentability,
would not be a straightforward
task. Many genetic products and materials are semi-synthetic, and again there
are questions
regarding the scope and meaning of ‘genetic materials’
and ‘genetic products’. For example, it would need
to be determined
whether such terms included:
• proteins and peptides
encoded by polynucleotides;
• microarrays of genetic material;
• processes and test kits using such entities;
• methods of using information derived from genetic materials;
• protein computer modelling and products thereof;
• stem cells;
• genetically modified organisms; and
• gene therapy techniques.
6.66 Davies Collison Cave commented that claims that genetic materials are
non-patentable discoveries may be based on a misunderstanding
of the nature of
It is a common ... misconception that a claim to such an
‘isolated’ material product somehow seeks to claim the material
product that exists in nature; such misconceptions reflect a general
misunderstanding of the nature of patents and particularly
of the role of the
claims of a granted patent in defining the rights of the patent holder under the
6.67 Other submissions suggested that the argument that inventions involving
genetic materials are discoveries does not adequately
take into account the
requirements that are relevant to an assessment of
patentability.
For example, the
procedures required to isolate and purify particular genetic materials are
relevant to an assessment of the inventive
step requirement. Further, mere
isolation and purification of genetic material without the identification of
some corresponding commercial
application is an aspect of the assessment of
‘usefulness’, which in Australia is relevant to the manner of
manufacture
test and the disclosure requirements. These requirements are
considered further in the following sections.
6.68 Other submissions stated that inventions involving genetic materials and
technologies should continue to be patentable to ensure:
the continued
prosperity of the Australian biotechnology industry, the ability to attract
foreign investment to fund biotechnology
research, and the delivery of new
ALRC’s views
6.69 It is clear that the
processes for identifying, isolating and purifying naturally occurring
materials, including biological material
such as genetic sequences, should be
patentable when those processes satisfy the other requirements of patentability,
namely, when
they are novel, inventive, useful and fully disclosed. However,
legitimate concerns have been raised about the patenting of biological
that occur in nature, but have been isolated and purified by ‘man’.
Isolated biological materials may, in some
cases, replicate exactly the
composition and characteristics of the material that occurs in nature. There are
attractive arguments
for the view that such materials should not have been
treated as patentable subject matter. This view does not deny the legitimacy
patenting the processes for isolating and purifying naturally occurring
materials, nor the legitimacy of patenting new chemical
substances that are the
product of human ingenuity.
6.70 However, the time for taking this approach to the patenting of products and
materials has long since passed. Naturally occurring
chemicals have, for
decades, been regarded as patentable subject matter by patent offices in many
This principle has been applied by
analogy to biological materials, including genetic sequences, on the basis that
they are ‘merely’
complex organic compounds. This development was
certainly not foreseen when the modern patent system was established, and a
approach might have been available when the issue first arose for
consideration.
6.71 Nonetheless, the ALRC considers that a new approach to the patentability of
genetic materials is not warranted at this stage
in the development of the
patent system for the following reasons:
It would represent a significant and undesirable departure from
accepted international practice with respect to genetic inventions,
adversely affect investment in the Australian biotechnology industry.
It may fail to deliver the anticipated benefits because many pure
and isolated genetic sequences do not exist in the exact same form
nature—for example, patented sequences may not contain the introns that
are found in the naturally occurring material.
Claims to genetic materials in their natural form (that is, in situ)
do not constitute patentable subject matter in Australia or
Arguments that genetic materials are not patentable inventions do
not always adequately take into account the fact that the issue
‘patentable subject matter’ is only one of a number of requirements
that must be satisfied for patent protection to
be obtained. In particular,
patent protection cannot be conferred over genetic materials unless a use for
such materials has been
identified and adequately disclosed.
It would be difficult to confine a reform to genetic materials and
technologies on any rational basis, yet the extension of the reform
fields—where the patenting of pure and isolated chemicals that occur in
nature is uncontroversial—may have unknown
consequences.
6.72 Nevertheless, the ALRC considers that the test for
patentable subject matter under Australian law is problematic and may warrant
reform. The ‘manner of manufacture’ test was considered in 1984 by
the IPAC Report and in 2000 by the IPCRC Report, and
was endorsed on both
occasions. However, it has become apparent during the course of this Inquiry
that there are problems with the
6.73 The ALRC is a law reform body whose statutory functions are to bring the
law into line with current conditions, remove defects
in the law, simplify the
law, adopt more effective methods for administering the law, and provide
improved access to justice.
this perspective, it is indeed odd that the key concept of ‘manner of
manufacture’ depends on a provision in a 380
year old English statute that
has long since been repealed in the jurisdiction in which it was enacted; and
that the relevant section
of the statute is not reproduced in Australian patent
legislation.
6.74 Moreover, when one looks at the terms of s 6 of the
Monopolies 1623
(reproduced earlier in this Chapter)
it is apparent
that they are beset with ambiguity and obscurity. For example, the grant of
letters patent under s 6 does not extend
to any manner of new manufacture that
is ‘generally inconvenient’. As discussed in Chapter 7, this
requirement has been
largely disregarded by Australian courts and IP Australia,
to date. In addition, the discussion of the ‘usefulness’ requirement
later in this chapter indicates that, while the usefulness of an invention is an
aspect of the ‘manner of manufacture’
test and relevant to the
disclosure requirement, the way in which the requirements interact in practice
is unclear.
6.75 In the light of the ALRC’s Terms of Reference, any general reform of
the way in which Australian patent law should approach
the concept of patentable
subject matter is beyond the scope of the current Inquiry. It would involve
in-depth analysis of the way
in which the manner of manufacture test has been
applied to a broad range of inventions—not merely those involving genetic
materials and technologies—and require consultations with a more diverse
group of stakeholders.
6.76 The ALRC considers that the Advisory Council on Intellectual Property
(ACIP) would be an appropriate body to undertake such
a broad ranging review.
The ALRC envisages, however, that any reform of the ‘manner of
manufacture’ test should take
into account the final recommendations
arising from this Inquiry, including those relating to the
‘usefulness’ of an
invention claimed in a patent application.
Proposal 6 - 2
The responsible Minister should request
the Advisory Council on Intellectual Property to review the appropriateness
and adequacy of the ‘manner of manufacture’ test as the threshold
requirement for patentable subject matter under
Australian law.
Novelty requirement under Australian law
Australian patent will only be granted for an invention that is
‘novel’. In other words, the invention must be
The novelty of each claim
in a patent application is assessed against the ‘prior art base’
that comprises publicly available
‘prior art information’ as it
existed at the ‘priority date’ of the relevant patent
6.78 The ‘prior art base’ includes information that is made publicly
available in a document or a related series of documents,
or through doing an
act or a related series of acts, as well as information contained in a published
patent application that has
an earlier priority date than the application under
examination.
disclosures of an invention in more than one document, or by more than one act,
will only be considered together if the
relationship between the documents or
the acts is such that a person skilled in the relevant art would treat them as a
single source
of information.
Patents Act
provides that a limited range of disclosures will
not preclude an invention satisfying the novelty requirement. As discussed
in Chapter 15, a ‘grace period’ was introduced into
Australian law by recent amendments to the
Patents Regulations 1991
Patent Regulations
). Consequently, any publication or use of an
invention on or after 1 April 2002 made by, or with the consent of, an inventor
is irrelevant
to an assessment of novelty, provided a complete application for
the invention is filed within 12 months of such publication or
For disclosures made prior
to 1 April 2002, a more limited range of publications is excluded from an
assessment of novelty.
6.80 The test applied to determine whether an invention is novel is known as the
‘reverse infringement’
The prior art information
must disclose all of the features of an invention—or all of the essential
features—in clear,
unequivocal and unmistakable terms in order for the
invention at issue to lack novelty.
6.81 Whether or not a disclosure relating to an invention is ‘publicly
available’ has been the subject of much judicial
consideration. Public
availability may exist even if the disclosure was limited to a small number of
was contained in a
foreign language document that could be understood only by an expert in the
or if a limited number
of embodiments of the invention were distributed to members of the public on a
non-confidential basis.
6.82 IP Australia has indicated that the novelty requirement will be satisfied
in relation to inventions covering biological materials—including
genetic sequences and DNA—if the claimed invention is ‘new in the
sense of not being previously publicly
available’.
6.83 Patent laws in other jurisdictions express the novelty requirement in
similar terms to the
The assessment of
the novelty of inventions involving genetic materials and technologies in other
have raised issues that are materially
different from those that arise under Australian patent law.
Submissions and consultations
27 sought comments on the way in which the novelty requirement should apply to
inventions involving genetic materials and
technologies and whether any special
considerations were relevant in assessing the novelty of genetic inventions.
6.85 The ALRC has received a range of submissions from participants in the
research and healthcare sectors suggested that isolated
genetic materials, and
genetic sequences in particular, are not
For example, the RCPA
Natural materials are only novel in the sense that they have not
previously been discovered by humans. Natural DNA sequences are the
over a billion years of evolution and exist independent of
6.86 Some submissions also indicated that the application of the novelty
requirement to gene patents would not be contentious if
genetic sequences were
regarded as naturally occurring material that is not
patentable.
6.87 However, other submissions considered that isolated genetic materials are
capable of satisfying the novelty requirement for
patentability under Australian
law, in the same manner as other naturally occurring products that have been
isolated and purified.
submissions noted that genetic materials do not exist in nature in an isolated
or purified form; and human intervention is
required to achieve this. For
example, GlaxoSmithKline submitted that:
Genetic material, or DNA, is simply a chemical compound. To the extent
that it can be regarded as a natural product, obtained by isolating
nature, there is ample precedent for patenting natural products ... Furthermore,
DNA which is the subject of patent claims
is frequently claimed as cDNA
(complementary DNA) which is a copy of the genomic DNA but lacking the
interspersed intron sequences.
cDNA does not occur naturally (except in rare
cases where a gene is not interrupted by introns) and is novel for that reason
6.88 Genetic Technologies Limited (GTG) commented that:
The substantial body of granted global patents accepts that the isolation
and purification of a newly discovered gene is sufficiently
novel. The fact that
it exists in every human body does not mean that it was identifiable or
separable in any way and in this regard
its identification, isolation and
purification is rightly treated like any other naturally occurring organic
6.89 Similarly, IP Australia submitted that:
newly isolated genetic materials are considered to satisfy the novelty
requirement by all major patent offices, including IP Australia,
because the
isolated material has not existed before. In order to be acceptable, patent
claims must not include within their scope
anything which occurs already, either
artificially or naturally. As a consequence, patents are not granted for genetic
which already exist in the body of any living thing. The same
principle applies to all chemical compounds which have been newly isolated
nature. In fact, it could be argued that most new materials or devices merely
comprise naturally occurring components that have
been arranged into a new state
through human intervention. There appear to be no special considerations
relevant in assessing the
novelty of isolated genetic
6.90 IP Australia also emphasised that the date at which the novelty of an
invention claimed in a patent application is assessed—the
date—may be some time before a patented invention becomes known to the
Concerns are sometimes raised over the validity of a particular patent
because it is seen as merely being for a common, everyday practice
usually several years between the priority date and when a controversial patent
comes to the attention of the general public.
Such a period can be critical in
rapidly developing technologies such as
6.91 Some submissions commented on the application of the novelty requirement to
inventions involving genetic materials and technologies.
Dr Amanda McBratney and
others submitted that, as a result of the amendments, in 2002, to the definition
of ‘prior art information’
Patents Act
Australia’s novelty requirements are ... some of the most strict in
the world; no further upward adjustment to accommodate gene-related
is necessary.
6.92 Further, Dr McBratney and others submitted that changes to IP
Australia’s current approach in assessing the novelty of
genetic materials
and technologies are undesirable because they would represent a ‘departure
from the internationally accepted
6.93 The Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources also considered that the
test for novelty did not require reform:
The particular sequence of nucleic acids that defines a gene lends itself
for comparison with previously described genes that form
the prior art base,
allowing clear judgements on its
6.94 Some other submissions agreed that the application of the novelty
requirement to inventions involving genetic materials and
technologies did not
raise any particular issues that might not be raised by inventions over other
ALRC’s views
6.95 Inventions involving
genetic materials and technologies do not appear to raise any special issues
regarding the application of
the novelty requirement. Many submissions suggested
that genetic materials in a pure and isolated form are not ‘new’
because they are ‘discoveries’ of pre-existing material. For reasons
considered earlier in this chapter, the ALRC is
not persuaded that this approach
should be adopted. The fact that genetic materials exist in nature in
combination with other biological
material does not mean that genetic materials
are ‘previously available’, and therefore not novel, for the
purposes of
patent law.
6.96 However, if an invention involving genetic material has been previously
disclosed or described in prior art information—for
example through one of
the available databases of gene sequence information—then the novelty
requirement might not be satisfied.
The novelty of genetic inventions can only
be determined for each patent application on a case by case basis in light of
art and should not be based on
assumptions relating to
the field of technology.
Inventive or innovative step
6.97 Reports
published in Australia and overseas have suggested that inventions involving
certain types of genetic materials and technologies,
particularly genetic
sequences, may not satisfy the requirement that claims in a gene patent must
involve an inventive step.
6.98 In 1992, a report of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on
Industry, Science and Technology suggested that it was
‘unlikely ... that
[genetic sequence] patents would pass the test of
“non-obviousness”’.
6.99 Similarly, a 2002 report of the United Kingdom’s Nuffield Council on
Bioethics (the Nuffield Council) considered that
the technological advances in
DNA sequencing may mean that isolating a genetic sequence can no longer be
regarded as inventive, as
it is a routine and industrialised
In its view, once a
gene associated with a disease is identified, the use of the genetic sequence in
gene therapy is obvious—particularly
when such use is claimed on a purely
speculative basis—and should seldom be protected by gene
6.100 A 2003 report produced by Professor William Cornish, Dr Margaret Llewelyn
and Dr Michael Adcock for the United Kingdom Department
of Health (the UK
Report) also commented on the significance of the inventive step requirement in
the context of inventions involving
genetic materials and technologies:
Patent Offices now lay emphasis on the standard requirement of inventive
step (non-obviousness) as the requirement which will do most
to retain genetic
patenting within acceptable bounds ... With the growth of bioinformatics
techniques to achieve automated comparison
of gene functions between different
species, it becomes increasingly difficult to characterise the work as anything
other than routine.
6.101 Some academic consideration of the ‘inventive step’
requirement under Australian law has expressed similar views
to those of the
Nuffield Council. Dr Charles Lawson has argued that the cloning and sequencing
of a gene is unlikely to amount to
an inventive step because once information
to a person skilled in the art of molecular biology, armed with the common
general knowledge in the
Similarly, David Keays
has suggested that ‘once a sequence for a specific gene has been isolated
in one species, then to a
person skilled in the art, it is the next obvious step
to develop probes and identify the analogous protein in different
Inventiveness requirement under Australian law
6.102 Patent protection will
only be granted in Australia for novel inventions that involve an
‘inventive step’ (in the
case of an application for a standard
patent) or an ‘innovative step’ (in the case of an application for
an innovation
Inventive step
6.103 Inventive step is defined in s 7 of the
Patents Act
and requires a determination of whether an invention would
have been obvious to a person skilled in the relevant art. This assessment
made in light of the common general knowledge as it existed in Australia before
the priority date of the claim. It may also take
into consideration prior art
information before the priority date, that a person skilled in the art could
reasonably be expected
to have ascertained, understood and regarded as
6.104 The High Court recently considered the inventive step requirement in
Aktiebolaget Hässel v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
Court held that, in assessing whether or not the inventive step requirement has
been satisfied, the issue is whether a notional
research group in the field
‘would have been led directly as a matter of course to pursue one avenue
in the expectation that
it might well produce the [claimed
compound]’.
found that the results of a ‘routine literature search’ that have
not entered into the common general knowledge
are not relevant to an assessment
of inventiveness.
the Court stated that:
The tracing of a course of action which was complex and detailed, as well
as laborious, with a good deal of trial and error, with
dead ends and the
retracing of steps is not the taking of routine steps to which a hypothetical
formulator was taken as a matter
Patents Amendment Act 2001
(Cth) introduced changes to the
assessment of the inventive step requirement by allowing ‘mosaicing’
of prior art information
during patent
examination.
‘Mosaicing’ allows a patent examiner to assess the inventive step in
light of two or more pieces of prior art information
in combination, provided
that a person skilled in the relevant art could reasonably have been expected to
combine such information.
Prior to the amendment, patent examiners were only permitted to assess the
inventive step in light of a single piece of prior art
information, alone or
combined with common general knowledge in the relevant art in Australia.
Innovative step
6.106 As discussed in Chapter 5, the innovation patent
system is a ‘second tier’ of patent protection, which is intended
provide protection for ‘lower level’ inventions for which standard
patent protection is not
To obtain an
innovation patent, an applicant need only show that its invention involves an
‘innovative step’, rather
than the ‘inventive step’
required to obtain a standard patent.
6.107 ‘Innovative step’ is defined in s 7(4) of the
. An invention is taken to have involved an ‘innovative step’
if it makes ‘a substantial contribution to the working
invention’ compared to the prior art, as understood by a person skilled in
the relevant art in light of the common general
knowledge as it existed in
Australia at the priority date of the relevant
6.108 The term ‘innovative step’, and the difference between it and
an ‘inventive step’ applicable to standard
patents, have not yet
been the subject of judicial
consideration.
However, the
Revised Explanatory Memorandum to a recent amendment to the
Patents Act
states that ‘the test for
innovative step
will require an inventive
contribution lower than that required to meet the
inventive step
threshold set for standard
The Revised
Explanatory Memorandum further suggests that to satisfy the ‘innovative
step’ requirement, an invention must
differ from what is already known
‘in a way that it not merely superficial or peripheral to the
invention’.
Application to genetic materials and technologies
6.109 To date, consideration of how the inventive step
requirement will apply to gene patent applications has primarily occurred at
Patent Office level and little guidance on this issue has been provided by the
indicates that patent examiners should adopt a
‘problem-solution’ approach to the requirement of inventive
instructs patent examiners to consider whether a claimed invention would fail to
satisfy the test because ‘the solution would
have been obvious to any
person of ordinary skill in the art who set out to solve the
Andrew Christie and Melanie Howlett have explained the approach of IP Australia
thus: a patent claim will not be regarded
as involving an inventive step if,
although the essential features of a claim have not been previously
disclosed, the claimed features would be obvious to a person skilled
particular art who set out to solve the problem and those features could be
achieved as a matter of routine.
6.111 A study by Christie and Howlett comparing the approaches of the Trilateral
Patent Offices
Australia in assessing patent applications claiming partial DNA sequences, such
as expressed sequence tags (ESTs), concluded
that IP Australia’s approach
to ‘inventive step’ exhibited similarities with the approaches of
the EPO and JPO.
Christie and
Howlett concluded that Australian patent examiners do not, as a general matter,
consider that the ‘application
of standard techniques and practice in the
art to isolate and sequence a gene from the tissue of interest’
constitutes an inventive
step, unless ‘the isolated sequence possesses an
unexpected property that provides an advantageous
Inventiveness requirement in other jurisdictions
6.112 Under European patent
law, the inventiveness requirement will not be satisfied by an invention
involving isolated genetic sequences
that have a structure closely related to
existing sequences with a known
The EPO has
sequences as well as all other chemical compounds should solve a
technical problem in a non-obvious manner to be recognised as
6.113 For example, opposition to a patent granted to Myriad Genetics Inc on the
has been filed
with the EPO on the basis that, among other things, the claim lacks an inventive
step ‘because it was possible
to isolate the gene with the elements
already known at the date of filing of the
6.114 In the United States, the requirement of inventive step (known there as
‘non-obviousness’) has been applied to
inventions involving genetic
sequences in a different manner. Under United States law, a claimed genetic
sequence may not be obvious
even if the prior art discloses the structure of the
protein for which the gene codes and the general methods for isolating a gene
encoding a known protein.
6.115 In adopting this approach, the United States Court of Appeals has stated
that ‘the redundancy of the genetic code permits
one to hypothesize an
enormous number of DNA sequences coding for the
considered that, in the absence of prior art information suggesting a particular
DNA sequence encoded the relevant protein,
a person skilled in the relevant art
could not know the structure of that sequence without conducting appropriate
experiments.
Further, the
Court indicated that the existence of a general method of isolating genetic
sequences is ‘essentially
irrelevant’.
6.116 This approach means that the ‘non-obviousness’ requirement
under United States law may be easier to satisfy for
inventions involving
genetic sequences than in Europe. The Nuffield Council has criticised the United
States approach as setting
the threshold for ‘inventiveness’ too
low. The Nuffield Council has argued that by applying the United States
the outcome of any complex procedure which could not have been predicted
in advance, however familiar the procedure, will be judged
inventive. While
there is a sense in which such a result is ‘non-obvious’, that is
not the sense relevant to questions
as to whether a patent should be
Submissions and consultations
number of submissions from healthcare and research sector organisations argued
that the identification of genetic sequences
or the linking of identified
genetic sequences to a particular disease do not involve an inventive
For example, the
Australian Association of Pathology Practices submitted:
It can be argued that prior and public knowledge of the structure of DNA,
how it codes for proteins, and the technique of sequencing,
will allow someone
expert in the field of genomics or proteomics to arrive at the derivation of
specific gene sequences by diligent
application rather than by ingenious
invention ... Similarly the application of gene sequencing and linkage
disequilibrium analysis
and subsequent mapping to link gene with disease is
neither an invention nor is it novel, but is a discovery combined with the
application
of medical and scientific
6.118 Other submissions suggested that, although identification of genetic
sequences may have had the required ‘inventiveness’
in the past,
this is no longer true. The RCPA submitted:
The invention of methods for sequencing DNA was one of the most
significant and revolutionary advances in biological science. The
sequencing of
genes in the late 1970s and 1980s was a heroic task. Today, all reagents and
equipment required for sequencing known
and unknown DNA sequences are
commercially available and it can be performed on an enormous scale ... The
process of identifying
unknown DNA sequences is now commonplace and can easily
be performed by someone skilled in the art, even if the sequence is novel
non-obvious.
6.119 However, other submissions emphasised that whether a genetic invention
represents an inventive (or innovative) step over the
prior art can only be
determined on a case-by-case basis. These submissions commented that
determinations as to inventiveness should
not be based on assumptions about the
current state of the art in the field of technology to which the invention
relates. For example,
GlaxoSmithKline submitted:
The assessment of inventive/innovative step takes place against the
background of the state of the art at the relevant time. Certainly,
the issue of
whether identification or isolation of genetic material today is
inventive/innovative will be affected by advances in
sequencing technology and
may perhaps mean that it is more difficult to meet the relevant test. However,
each case must be assessed
on its merits and while the way in which an invention
was made is a relevant consideration for the assessment of inventive step,
not the only or the determinative one: what is important is what the patent
contributes over the prior art, not how the invention
6.120 A number of submissions were critical of the way IP Australia appears to
apply the inventive step requirement to inventions
involving genetic materials
and technologies and, in particular, genetic sequences. The RCPA submitted:
The test for inventiveness ... now rests entirely on whether the sequence
of a particular gene was not obvious. The test will apply
in most instances
because the sequence of bases of an unknown gene cannot be known before it was
6.121 However, Dr McBratney and others stated:
[I]n light of High Court authority [in Alphapharm], it is not valid to
judge the obviousness of an invention by the fact that the
avenue of research
was obvious to try. A fortiori, whether those methods were complicated or
required little work will be irrelevant;
it is the invention as claimed that
matters. The ease with which sequences are generated with today’s
technology should therefore
not be seen as ipso facto depriving a new molecule
of patentability.
6.122 IP Australia indicated that few gene patents are associated with processes
for isolating genetic material and identifying genetic
sequences, and that only
a small number of gene patents are now granted on the basis that the means of
identifying and isolating
genetic material was
IP Australia
the inventive or innovative step of most granted patents is now
associated with what can be achieved by using the isolated and identified
genetic material. There continues to be innovation in the purpose for which a
given polynucleotide can be put. The employment of
a standard process of
isolating genetic material does not automatically render unpatentable an
application directed to a use of the
genetic material. Similarly, isolating and
identifying any type of chemical compound through standard techniques does
necessarily
render unpatentable an application directed to the use of the
compound. Hence, patents continue to be granted by IP Australia and
the major IP
offices for genes and parts thereof, on the basis that the applicant has
inventively or innovatively determined a useful
property associated with the
gene or part thereof.
ALRC’s views
6.123 Some submissions to
the Inquiry revealed a concern that the inventive step requirement under
Australian law is not sufficiently
stringent, at least with respect to genetic
materials and technologies.
However, on the basis of information currently available to it, the ALRC is not
inclined to propose any changes to the inventive
step or innovative step
requirement in the
, nor to how those requirements are
applied by IP Australia to inventions involving genetic materials and
technologies.
6.124 The ALRC agrees with those submissions that emphasised the importance of
an ‘inventive step’ analysis being conducted
on a case by case
basis, and of not relying on
assumptions about inventiveness
based on the field of technology to which the claimed invention relates.
6.125 It appears that IP Australia will typically require more than the
identification and isolation of a genetic sequence to grant
a gene patent, in
line with the current state of the art in the genetics field. Recent changes to
the definition of ‘prior
art information’ in the
Patents Act
will also allow patent examiners greater access to prior art material in
assessing the inventiveness of a particular genetic invention
claimed in a
patent application. The evolution of searching and cross-referencing systems in
electronic databases is likely to result
in links between documents being more
readily established and may, therefore, lead to a more expansive interpretation
of the information
that is relevant in assessing the inventiveness of a patent
application.
6.126 In Chapter 8, the ALRC proposes procedures to assist patent examiners in
their assessment of gene patent applications, including
assistance in
understanding the extent to which a particular invention may involve advances
over the current state of the art. These
proposals call for the establishment of
an expert panel to provide advice to examiners on issues that may be raised by a
gene patent application or a class of applications. The development
of examination guidelines relating specifically to biotechnological
is also proposed.
6.127 There has been
considerable debate about whether isolated genetic materials of various types
fulfil the requirement that an
invention be ‘useful’. For example,
the Nuffield Council has noted that:
Since the development of large-scale DNA sequencing techniques over the
past ten years, more DNA sequences have become available without
a concomitant
understanding of their function. As a result, many patent applications have been
filed on genes or parts of genes without
the demonstration of a ‘credible
6.128 In particular, concerns have been expressed that inventions involving ESTs
and single nucleotide polymorphisms
may not display the
requisite usefulness for
patentability.
ESTs and SNPs
may be used to identify previously unknown genetic sequences or as templates for
expressing and characterising proteins
for the purposes of further research.
Questions have been raised about whether such uses should be sufficient to
satisfy the concept
usefulness.
6.129 Gene patents have also been criticised on the basis that they capture for
a patent holder ‘any number of possible applications
even though those
uses may be unattainable and
In relation
to this requirement under United States law, it has been proposed that:
claim scope should be limited to uses that are disclosed in the patent
application and that allowing claims to DNA itself would enable
the inventor to
assert claims to ‘speculative’ uses of the DNA that were not
foreseen at the time the patent application
Usefulness requirement in Australia
6.130 Australian patent law
requires that an invention be ‘useful’, both as an express
requirement in s 18 of the
Patents Act
and as an implicit requirement
that an invention be a ‘manner of manufacture’.
6.131 As interpreted by Australian courts, the express requirement of
‘usefulness’ in s 18 has a limited meaning. It
requires only that
the patent must produce the results that are promised upon a fair reading of the
specification, and that the end
in itself is
Nicol and Nielsen
have commented that the ‘usefulness’ criterion does not require that
an invention be useful in the
sense that it is worthwhile or commercially
practical; only that if a particular result is claimed, it must be
achievable.
6.132 The ‘manner of manufacture’ requirement in s 18 has also been
interpreted to include an assessment of the usefulness
of an invention. In
, the High Court indicated that to constitute a ‘manner of
manufacture’ an invention ‘must be one that offers some
which is material’ and ‘its value to the country is in the field of
economic endeavour’.
6.133 IP Australia’s
indicates that an invention claimed in
a patent application may not satisfy the ‘manner of manufacture’
test if it fails
to indicate a specific use or practical application.
Since an application must be in respect of a manner of manufacture, it is
essential that the specification indicates an area of usefulness
invention claimed, where such use is not self-evident. Where no such use is
described (implicitly or explicitly), the claims
might be directed to a mere
scientific curiosity, discovery or
6.134 In the context of genetic sequences, the
if a claim defines a DNA sequence, it would be insufficient to describe
the sequence as being broadly useful as a ‘probe’.
The specification
must disclose a specific gene which can be probed by the DNA sequence or a
specific use.
6.135 The usefulness of an invention may also be considered indirectly pursuant
to the requirement in s 40 of the
Patents Act
that a complete
specification adequately describe the use of the invention and how it can be
achieved. If the invention cannot be
achieved on the basis of the description in
the specification, it might fail to satisfy this sufficiency
requirement.
6.136 Currently, the usefulness of an invention is not an express requirement
for examination of an Australian patent application.
Usefulness is addressed
only at the examination stage as an aspect of the ‘manner of
manufacture’ and through the disclosure
requirements. The Commissioner of
Patents does not have to be satisfied that an invention is ‘useful’
under s 18(1)(c)
before accepting a patent
application.
utility’ (as the objection is phrased) can be raised as an express
objection only in revocation
proceedings.
It is not a
separate basis upon which a patent may be opposed or
re-examined.
however, be scope to raise the usefulness of an invention claimed in an accepted
application in opposition proceedings
on the basis of failure to satisfy the
‘manner of manufacture’ or disclosure
requirements.
Approach to usefulness in other jurisdictions
6.137 In other
expressed and is relevant in the examination
of a patent application.
United States
6.138 Under United States law, the requirement is known
as ‘utility’.
United States courts have held that in order to satisfy the utility requirement,
a patent application must disclose an invention
that is ‘practically
useful’. The United States Supreme Court has explained the requirement in
the following terms:
Unless and until a process is refined and developed to the point of a
substantial utility—where a specific benefit exists in
currently available
form—there is insufficient justification for permitting an applicant to
engross what may prove to be a
6.139 The Supreme Court also stated that an invention which ‘either has no
known use or is useful only in the sense that it
may be an object of scientific
research’ is not
patentable.
6.140 In 2001, the USPTO issued revised examination guidelines setting out the
way in which the utility requirement should be applied
by United States patent
examiners (the US Revised Utility
Guidelines).
The Guidelines
require a patent applicant to demonstrate a utility for an invention that is
‘specific, substantial and
applicant will demonstrate a ‘specific and substantial’ utility
where ‘any particular practical purpose’
for the claimed invention
is stated in the application, so long as such purpose is not
‘throw-away’, ‘insubstantial’
‘non-specific’.
The Training Materials for Patent Examiners, released by the USPTO in
conjunction with the US Revised Utility Guidelines, further
explain that a
‘substantial’ utility is one that defines a ‘real world’
use; that is, no further research
is required to identify an immediate
The requirement that
the utility claimed for an invention is ‘credible’ will be satisfied
if it is believable to a person
of ordinary skill in the art, based on the
totality of evidence and reasoning
6.141 The USPTO’s comments on the US Revised Utility Guidelines indicate
that a patent application claiming a purified and
isolated genetic sequence may
satisfy the utility requirement if ‘it can be used to produce a useful
protein or it hybridises
near and serves as a marker for a disease
European Union
6.142 Under European law, the criterion of usefulness
takes the form of a requirement that an invention must be ‘capable of
application’.
further provides that an invention shall be considered susceptible of industrial
application if it can be made or used in
any kind of industry, including
agriculture.
6.143 Additional requirements apply with respect to the industrial applicability
of inventions relating to the sequence or partial
sequence of a gene, following
the implementation of the EU Biotechnology
Article 5(3) of
the Directive requires a patent applicant to disclose the industrial application
of a sequence or partial sequence
The UK Report commented
that this provision appears to result in a two-fold disclosure requirement for
inventions involving genetic
the applicant must disclose both the industrial application of the
sequence or partial sequence within which the invention resides
industrial application of the gene from which the sequence
6.144 Revised examination guidelines were issued by the EPO in December 2003.
The guidelines address the ‘industrial applicability’
requirement in
the context of inventions involving genetic sequences. They provide:
A mere nucleic acid sequence without an indication of a function is not a
patentable invention ... In cases where a sequence or partial
sequence of a gene
is used to produce a protein or a part of a protein, it is necessary to specify
which protein or part of a protein
is produced and what function this protein or
part of a protein performs. Alternatively, when a nucleotide sequence is not
produce a protein or part of a protein, the function to be indicated
could eg be that the sequence exhibits a certain transcription
United Kingdom
6.145 Under United Kingdom law, an invention must also
be capable of ‘industrial
application’.
Patents Act 1977
(UK) (the UK Patents Act), which implements the
provisions of the EPC and EU Biotechnology Directive, provides that, subject to
exceptions relating to methods of treatment for humans and animals,
‘an invention shall be taken to be capable of industrial
application if it
can be made or used in any kind of industry, including
agriculture’.
patent applications claiming a genetic sequence must disclose the industrial
application of that
6.146 The United Kingdom Patent Office appears to have adopted a standard
similar to the USPTO in assessing the ‘industrial
application’ of
biotechnological inventions. Referring to the US Revised Utility Guidelines,
recent guidelines issued by the
United Kingdom Patent Office relating
specifically to biotechnological inventions (UK Biotechnology Examination
Guidelines) indicate
a ‘specific, substantial, and credible’ utility, is arguably
the sort of disclosure, relating to industrial application
that we would expect
to appear in a UK application.
6.147 The UK Biotechnology Examination Guidelines note that this approach has
not yet been considered by courts in the United Kingdom,
or by the EPO, and may
not be upheld if challenged by a patent
Nonetheless, the
Guidelines suggest that the approach has been followed in the EPO to
New Zealand
6.148 Changes to the ‘usefulness’
requirement have also been recommended under New Zealand patent law. The NZ
Report endorsed
the approach set out in the US Revised Utility Guidelines and
recommended that the
Patents Act 1953
(NZ) be amended to:
require that usefulness should be a specific criterion that must be
satisfied before a patent is granted, and that the usefulness
must be credible,
specific, and substantial.
6.149 The NZ Report commented that such an amendment would make New Zealand
patent law consistent with international
Further, the Report
suggested that including usefulness as a basis upon which a patent application
may be rejected would reduce the
frequency of revocation
proceedings.
The NZ Report
did not consider how this recommendation would fit with its recommendation that
the ‘manner of manufacture’
test be retained as the test for
patentable subject matter.
Analysis of approaches to utility in other jurisdictions
6.150 As discussed above, several jurisdictions have
endorsed the approach adopted by the US Revised Utility Guidelines and interpret
the requirement of utility (or industrial application) as requiring an applicant
to disclose a ‘specific, substantial, and
credible’ use for a
claimed invention.
6.151 However, some criticisms have been levelled at the standard adopted in the
US Revised Utility Guidelines. The Nuffield Council
considered that the standard
of utility established by the Guidelines is ‘too
and suggested
that a ‘credible’ utility merely required an applicant to claim a
‘theoretically possible’
Given the state of
genetic science and the ability to hypothesise the function of genetic material
on the basis of homology with
other species, the Nuffield Council considered
that a theoretical purpose should not be a sufficient basis on which to award a
6.152 The US Revised Utility Guidelines have also been criticised for not
addressing adequately whether a patent should be awarded
on the basis that only
a single useful function for a particular gene has been disclosed. The
commentary on the Guidelines state
that to obtain a patent, an applicant is
‘only required disclose one utility, that is teach others how to use the
at least one
the applicant is
not required to disclose all possible uses. The result seems to be that other
uses disclosed in the patent claims
are not required to satisfy the standard of
a ‘specific, substantial and credible’ utility. The UK Report stated
the UK Biotechnology Examination Guidelines appear to adopt a similar
Reform of the usefulness requirement under Australian law
6.153 In 2000, the IPCRC
Report stated that the ‘manner of manufacture’ and
‘utility’ criteria ‘have
taken on greater importance in some
new areas of technology, particularly biotechnology, where the dividing line
between mere discovery
and invention has become more difficult to
6.154 The IPCRC Report concluded that references to ‘use’ or
‘utility’ in current Australian law may conflict.
considered that ‘it has not always been clear how this requirement [to
demonstrate a defined use for an invention]
commented that the extent to which s 40 requires a patent application to contain
a ‘clear statement’ of use
or utility is not currently
6.155 Seeking to address these concerns, the IPCRC Report endorsed the approach
adopted by the USPTO in the US Revised Utility Guidelines
and recommended that
IP Australia should ensure that ‘the use described in the specification is
specific, substantial and credible
to a person skilled in the
The IPCRC Report
did not, however, recommend specific changes to the
Patents Act
Patents Regulations
6.156 In response to the IPCRC’s recommendations, the Australian
Government indicated that it would ask IP Australia to ensure
that examinations
of patent applications address all aspects of the use of an invention being
specific, substantial and
However, the
Government noted that the ‘specific, substantial and credible’ test
is already broadly included within current
examination practice under the
‘manner of manufacture’ and ‘fair basis’
requirements.
As noted above,
IP Australia’s
does not explain how the standard of
‘specific, substantial and credible’ use is incorporated into the
requirements for
patentability under Australian law. IP Australia has stated
that it is in the process of amending the
to address this
6.157 Dr Dianne Nicol and Jane Nielsen have suggested that a ‘specific,
substantial and credible requirement marks a radical
change from the previous
interpretations of the usefulness criterion by the Federal
Nielsen stated that amendments to the
Patents Act
Regulations
may be required to implement the recommendation in the IPCRC
Report effectively.
suggested that s 45 of the
Patents Act
may need to be amended to allow
patent examiners to consider the usefulness of an invention in examining an
application.
Alternatively,
they proposed that s 18(1)(a) of the
Patents Act
be amended to add the
words ‘as prescribed’, and that utility requirements be provided in
Regulations
Submissions and consultations
Reform of the usefulness requirement
submissions to the Inquiry supported reform of the ‘usefulness’
requirement, but the weight of opinion was
that any change should apply to
inventions involving all types of technology, not only genetic materials and
technologies.
6.159 A number of submissions expressed concern about the grant of patents over
genetic inventions, where the use of such inventions
is unknown or
speculative.
For example, the
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research (WEHI) submitted that
although inventions involving genetic
materials and technologies are not
‘unique’, gene patent applications render concerns about the utility
requirement more
evident because ‘genetic technologies have almost
Similarly, the
RCPA stated that:
One of the major problems relating to the utility of genes is that we do
not know the varied roles of most genes and claims about
their actual or
potential utility are largely grounded in
6.160 The South Australian Government suggested that changes to the
‘usefulness’ requirement may ‘curb the practice
by inventors
of making theoretical claims of utility without any substantiated
6.161 Luigi Palombi commented on the fact that gene patents often claim uses for
an invention that are ‘speculative and premature’,
but did not believe that
reforming the usefulness requirement would address this concern. Rather, he
considered that the issue should
be addressed by excluding patent claims to
‘isolated or purified polyproteins and nucleotides’ from the
category of patentable
Dr Graeme Suthers and
the HGSA expressed a similar view and considered that only ‘genetic
processes’ not ‘genetic
materials’ should be
patentable.
6.162 Other submissions focused on the desired result of a strengthened
usefulness requirement, rather than offering a view on how
the requirement
should be formulated. The Cancer Council of Australia submitted that there
should be a ‘clear and obvious purpose’
stated in gene patent
applications.
submitted that patent applications claiming genetic materials should
‘disclose an invention that is of a practical
The New South
Wales Department of Health considered that patent applications should be
required to indicate ‘specific, proven
uses’ of the claimed
invention, ‘rather than merely establish that [an invention] had a
commercial value’.
6.163 Some submissions expressed the view that a reformed usefulness requirement
could address concerns about the scope of gene patent
WEHI submitted that
the criteria for patentability should ‘restrict the claims of the patent
demonstrated industrial
Queensland Government suggested that patent applicants should be required to
demonstrate ‘specific use(s)’ and ‘a
monopoly granted only in
relation to the demonstrated
Professor Ross Barnard submitted that ‘applicants should not be allowed to
claim all possible (including unknown)
future uses of a particular nucleic acid
(or derived protein)
ACIPA proposed that:
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) be amended to ensure that the standard of
utility requires demonstrable, rather than theoretical,
6.164 Some submissions opposed such a reform and stated that gene patent claims
should not be limited to the disclosed uses of a
claimed genetic invention.
GlaxoSmithKline submitted:
The contribution of a novel gene sequence comprises both the gene
sequence and the use, and also all the inherent (but unappreciated)
of the sequence, which provide a springboard for further invention.
Use-restricted protection thus provides no reward
at all for the contribution of
the novel gene sequence and its inherent
properties.
6.165 GlaxoSmithKline also suggested that, since the majority of human genetic
sequences are already in the public domain:
unrestricted protection is no longer possible for new inventions. New
uses of known gene sequences can only be protected by use restricted
6.166 Similarly, IP Australia stated that:
It is common for patents to be granted for new chemical compounds,
materials and devices per se, and for which all possible uses are
not yet known.
This does not provide the owner of the patent with the exclusive rights to all
such uses. In all technologies, those
who invent a new use for a patented
product may be able to obtain a patent for this use, however it may be necessary
to obtain a
cross licence from the owner of the patent on the product.
Basis for examination of a patent application
6.167 A number of submissions
supported including usefulness as a separate ground upon which a patent
application should be
However, few
considered in any detail how Australian patent law should be revised to allow
the requirement of usefulness to be addressed
in the examination of patent
applications.
6.168 Some submissions endorsed the proposition that patent applications should
be able to demonstrate a utility for the claimed
invention that is
‘specific, substantial and credible’—relying on the standard
established by the US Revised Utility
Guidelines—but did not address the
changes that may be required to the
Patents Act
to produce this
6.169 The Queensland Government and the NHMRC considered that changes to the way
in which usefulness is treated under Australian
law could be achieved either by
changes to the legislation or by developing ‘operational guidelines and
procedures’ for
use by patent
GTG submitted
The time may have come for there to be some codified requirement for a
demonstration of the function and potential usefulness of ...
a sequence. In
practice most gene patents already include this additional
6.170 Other submissions considered that the ‘usefulness’ of a
claimed invention was already adequately addressed by patent
law. AusBiotech Ltd
considered that the requirement of ‘usefulness’ was encompassed by
the requirements of ‘manner
of manufacture’ and ‘sufficiency
of disclosure’.
Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources commented that:
[the] statutory treatment relating to utility of genetic inventions has
evolved since the early 1990s and that Australia has already
requirement that the utility of an invention claimed in a patent applications
must be ‘specific, substantial and
6.171 IP Australia explained how the usefulness of an invention is currently
assessed in the examination of a patent application:
Manner of manufacture—
... For an application to be in
respect of a manner of manufacture, it is essential that the specification
indicates an economic
use for the invention claimed, where such use is not self
evident. However, the use of the invention does not necessarily have to
explicitly defined in the claims. Patent law in all major jurisdictions allows
patents for products per se.
Sufficiency—
—To be sufficient, an application must
adequately describe the use of the invention and how it can be achieved.
Fair basis—
—To be fairly based, any use defined in the
claims of an application must be reasonably supported by the
description.
6.172 IP Australia also addressed the extent to which a standard of
‘specific, substantial and credible’ use is already
incorporated
into the requirements for patentability, although it indicated that it was in
the process of revising the
to make this more evident.
Specific use: Currently, both Australian and US patent systems require an
invention to have a specific use. The useful purpose of
many inventions is
self-evident, or may be implied in the specification (eg a motor vehicle). In
such circumstances, no formal statement
of use is necessary in Australia.
However, a statement of use that is so broad that it merely indicates that an
invention has been
made, without disclosing what that invention is, is not
sufficient ...
Substantial use: Certain aspects of substantial utility are covered by
current Australian manner of manufacture and sufficiency requirements.
manner of manufacture, an invention must have a practical, real world function.
To be sufficient, the person skilled in the
art performing the invention must
not have to resort to unreasonable experimentation to make it work ...
Credible use: Under Australian law, whether an invention actually works
is assessed to some extent under the criterion of sufficiency.
An invention that
is obviously not believable, such as being contrary to the laws of nature, may
be objected to on the grounds of
insufficiency under
6.173 The Department of Health Western Australia acknowledged that
‘specific, substantial and credible’ usefulness may
incorporated into the assessment of the manner of manufacture and fair basis
requirements. Nonetheless, the Department
considered that amendments to the
Patents Act
were required ‘so that a more stringent review of the
usefulness of an invention becomes a criterion in the application
6.174 Without specifically supporting any reform to the usefulness requirement,
IP Australia suggested ways in which a higher threshold
of use could be achieved
in Australian patent law, if such a reform was considered desirable.
• The new threshold may be incorporated into the manner of manufacture
test, under which use is currently assessed during
examination.
• An entirely new criterion of utility may be introduced, similar
to that in the US and assessed during the examination
process. Such a test
may replace the existing usefulness test under
, with its current
focus on the meeting of promised results.
6.175 As to the merits of such reforms, IP Australia commented that:
the IPCRC report recommended retaining the manner of manufacture test in
its current form, as Australia has on the whole benefited
from its flexibility
... some confusion may result if use were to continue to be assessed under
manner of manufacture according to
a lower threshold [and also under
6.176 IP Australia considered that ‘a more subtle assessment of whether an
invention works is more difficult to do at the examination
stage as it requires
evidence’ and sufficient expertise on the part of those assessing such
evidence. It suggested that the
costs of examination may increase if patent
examiners needed to maintain this type of expertise or contract the analysis out
in the field.
suggested that it would also increase the costs involved in development of an
invention and delay
publication.
6.177 The development of guidelines relating to the application of the
‘usefulness’ requirement was supported in a number
submissions.
Australian Government supported the ‘specific, substantial and credible
utility’ test now adopted under United
States law, but indicated that
guidelines should ‘be developed to clarify what these terms
6.178 Similarly, McBratney and others commented that, although in their view no
amendments to the
Patents Act
were required with respect to the
requirement of usefulness:
given utility is such an important factor in keeping the register clear
of questionable inventions, ... further guidance on the issue
desirable. A set of technology neutral and concisely drafted guidelines would
clarify the lingering uncertainty surrounding
requirement.
Grounds for challenge
6.179 A number of submissions considered that
‘usefulness’ should be a separate basis upon which patent rights may
opposed and re-examined.
GlaxoSmithKline stated that it would
support a proposal to include utility as a ground of opposition or
re-examination in order that all patents which are granted have
been subjected
to an appropriately stringent application of the patentability
6.180 IP Australia considered that ‘usefulness’ should, at most, be
a ground upon which a patent may be opposed:
Assessment of use may be conducted as part of the opposition process
without any obvious difficulty, as the process is designed to
deal with higher
evidentiary burdens. [However,] re-examination is similar to the examination
process, in that it is conducted ex
parte and is not designed to consider
evidence to the extent that would be required for a thorough assessment of
6.181 However, other submissions suggested that adding ‘usefulness’
as a basis upon which a patent may be opposed or
re-examined may have limited
effect. The South Australian Government commented that, as most genetic material
was already protected
by patents, amendments to the grounds for opposition of a
patent may not have a significant
The RCPA noted that
it was unlikely that a challenge would be initiated against a patent that was
not useful.
6.182 AusBiotech Ltd did not support making ‘lack of utility’ a
basis upon which patent rights may be opposed or re-examined.
It stated that
‘lack of utility’ is only an assertion that an invention does not
work for its stated purposes and does
not ‘impose a requirement to
demonstrate a function for the genetic
6.183 Finally, one submission commented that ‘usefulness’ did not
need to be added as a specific ground upon which a
patent may be opposed because
such an objection may already be raised as part of the manner of manufacture
ALRC’s views
6.184 The ALRC considers
that the current way in which the usefulness of an invention is addressed in the
requirements for patentability
requires reform.
6.185 Based on submissions and consultations to date, it is evident that there
is considerable confusion about the application of
the ‘usefulness’
requirement. These misunderstandings relate to: the extent to which an invention
claimed in a patent
application must be ‘useful’; how such a
requirement is imposed; the standard for satisfying this requirement; and the
extent to which ‘usefulness’ can or should limit the scope of patent
6.186 While usefulness is an important consideration in awarding patent
protection for inventions involving all types of technologies,
the ALRC endorses
the opinion expressed in the IPCRC Report that:
The criteria of ‘manner of manufacture’ and
‘utility’ have taken on a greater importance in some new areas
technology, particularly biotechnology, where the dividing line between mere
discovery and invention has become difficult to
6.187 Reform of the usefulness requirement would clarify IP Australia’s
assessment of the function and application (that is,
the use) of genetic
material claimed in a patent application. However, for the reasons discussed
earlier in this chapter, adopting
specific provisions in relation to genetic
materials and technologies is generally undesirable. The present approach of the
Patents Act
is essentially ‘technology-neutral’ and is
capable of accommodating inventions in new technological fields as they arise.
Implementing specific patent requirements for genetic materials and technologies
would diverge from the approach adopted in most
other jurisdictions and may
conflict with Australia’s obligations under the TRIPS Agreement. The
ALRC’s proposals in
relation to the usefulness requirement are not,
therefore, limited to inventions involving genetic materials and
technologies.
6.188 The ALRC considers that Australian patent examiners should assess, and
report on, the usefulness of an invention claimed in
a patent application as a
separate requirement, and not merely as one of a number of considerations in
determining whether an invention
satisfies the ‘manner of
manufacture’ and disclosure requirements in
. The standard of usefulness demonstrated in an application should
satisfy the ‘specific, substantial and credible’ test
endorsed by
the IPCRC Report. Such reforms would make Australian law consistent with
approaches to usefulness adopted in other major
a standard would preclude a patent being granted over a genetic invention when
further research
or investigation is required to understand its practical
application.
6.189 In Chapter 8, the ALRC proposed that a single standard of proof should
apply to all requirements for patentability assessed
As discussed in
that chapter, requiring different standards of proof for the various
requirements for patentability—as currently
provided in
Patents Act
—adds unnecessary complexity to the assessment of patent
applications. The ALRC considers, therefore, that the balance of probabilities
standard should also apply to the requirement of usefulness. This reform may go
some way to addressing concerns that the claimed
‘use’ of a genetic
invention may be speculative.
6.190 The ALRC also proposes that challenges to patent rights on the basis of
lack of usefulness of an invention should not be confined
to post-grant
proceedings by way of revocation. As discussed in Chapter 9, opposition
proceedings may be initiated before a patent
is sealed and may result in the
narrowing or withdrawal of patent claims, or a determination not to allow an
accepted application
to be sealed. The ALRC proposes that the grounds for
opposition set out in the
Patents Act
should be amended to include lack
of ‘usefulness’. This would allow third parties to adduce evidence
that may not have
been available to the examiner during examination. On the
other hand, the ALRC does not believe that usefulness should be included
new basis upon which a patent or patent application may be re-examined.
Re-examination proceedings are conducted
, based largely on
documentary evidence, and are not significantly different in form to the
examination of patent applications.
6.191 The ALRC proposes that IP Australia should also develop guidelines to
assist patent examiners in applying the proposed usefulness
requirement. This
could be done by means of IP Australia’s
, which applies the
requirements of patentability to inventions involving all types of technology.
However, the examination guidelines
relating to biotechnological
inventions—proposed in Chapter 8—should address the application of
the usefulness requirement
specifically to biotechnological
inventions.
In formulating
these examination guidelines, the training materials developed by the USPTO in
conjunction with the US Revised Utility
Guidelines could provide a useful
Proposal 6 - 3
The Commonwealth should
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act
(a) include ‘usefulness’ as a requirement in the assessment of
an application for a standard patent and in the certification
of an innovation
(b) require the Commissioner of Patents to be satisfied on the balance of
probabilities that the criterion of usefulness is made out
in order to accept an
application for a standard patent or to certify an innovation patent; and
(c) include ‘lack of usefulness’
as a basis upon which an
accepted application for a standard patent may be opposed, in addition to its
current role as a ground for
revocation.
Proposal 6 - 4
IP Australia should develop guidelines, consistent
Patents Act
Patents Regulations 1991
existing case law, to assist patent examiners in applying the
‘usefulness’ requirement. The guidelines should
require that the
claimed ‘usefulness’ must be ‘specific, substantial and
credible’ to a person skilled in
the relevant art.
Disclosure of an invention
6.192 Patent law in
Australia and in other jurisdictions requires a patent specification to disclose
an invention in such a manner
as to allow a person skilled in the relevant art
to make or carry out the
This requirement
is intended to ensure that the scope of protection afforded by a patent is
commensurate with the technical contribution
made by the claimed invention.
Disclosure requirements under Australian law
sets out the requirement that a patent specification must
fully disclose an invention.
Section 40(2)(a)
provides that a complete
specification must ‘describe the invention fully, including the best
method known to the applicant
for performing the invention’. This is known
as the ‘sufficiency’ requirement.
Section 40(3)
requires the patent
claims to be ‘clear and succinct and fairly based on the matter described
in the specification’.
This is commonly referred to as the ‘fair
basis’ requirement.
6.194 The Federal Court considered the application of
to biotechnology
inventions in
Genetics Institute v Kirin-Amgen Inc (No
In that case, the
principal claim at issue was for an isolated and purified polypeptide having the
primary structural conformation,
and one or more of the biological
characteristics, of naturally occurring erythropoietin. Heerey J held that the
claim was permissibly
wide because it disclosed the coding sequence for
erythropoietin, which is a ‘principle capable of general
application’.
held that a claim in correspondingly general terms was therefore
acceptable.
6.195 It has been suggested, however, that broad claims of the type accepted by
Heerey J in
Kirin Amgen
may no longer satisfy the disclosure requirement
given the developments that have occurred in the field of genetics since that
was decided.
however, little other specific guidance in Australian case law to assist patent
examiners in determining how the disclosure
requirements should apply to gene
6.196 IP Australia’s
sets out its approach to one particular
issue in the application of the disclosure requirements to inventions in the
biotechnology
field, namely the question of ‘reach through
through’ claim is one that seeks to claim right to a future invention on
the basis of a currently disclosed
In such cases, the
explains that:
The specification generally discloses a new peptide or nucleic acid
sequence, or a newly discovered link between a peptide or a nucleic
specific disease or medical condition, and then claims compounds that interact
with the peptide or nucleic acid and downstream
uses of those
states that ‘reach through’ claims that seek
to cover compounds that interact with a specific peptide or nucleic acid
sequence may fail to satisfy the ‘fair basis’ requirement because
they are not claims to the product of the invention,
but are merely directed to
compounds inherently capable of interaction with the
In addition, such
claims may fail to satisfy the ‘sufficiency’ requirement because
they provide insufficient information
to enable the production of the full range
of compounds that potentially fall within the scope of the
suggests, however, that reach through patent claims to
using candidate compounds may not raise the same
Disclosure requirements in the United States
6.198 In the United States,
the disclosure requirements are expressed in terms of ‘enablement’
and ‘written
description’.
Enablement requires a determination of whether a person skilled in the art can
make and use the claimed invention without undue
experimentation.
‘written description’ requirement is satisfied if a patent
specification describes the claimed invention in detail
sufficient that a person
skilled in the art can reasonably conclude that the inventor ‘had
possession’ of the claimed
Satisfaction of
the enablement and written description requirements are closely linked to the
utility requirement because the application
of an invention claimed in a patent
must be described such that a person skilled in the art could make and use the
invention themselves
on the basis of the patent claims.
6.199 Recent decisions of the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit,
interpreting the ‘written description’ and ‘enablement’
requirements, have begun to elucidate disclosure requirements for particular
addition, in 2001, the USPTO introduced new guidelines for the application of
the written description requirement by United States
Submissions and consultations
6.200 A range of submissions
expressed concern about the scope of gene patent
Concerns about the
breadth of claims in gene patents were primarily directed to the potential
adverse impact such claims may have
on further research and the development of
new procedures and products involving genetic materials and technologies.
6.201 Some submissions commented that broad claims are characteristic of patents
relating to all types of new technologies, not only
gene patents. IP Australia
the scope of patent claims in any emerging technology tend to be of a
broad nature in the early years of development. This had been
the case for areas
such as genetics, electronics, e-commerce and polymer chemistry. This recurring
phenomenon has been likened to
that of a ‘gold rush’, where claims
to new areas are staked out before their full potential have been determined. It
is not clear whether gene patent experience this phenomenon to an unusual or
detrimental degree.
6.202 Similarly, the Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources commented:
The interdependence of inventions and the speed at which they are
occurring, poses challenges for patent authorities to strike the
appropriate
balance between the contribution made by the patent and the reward to which the
patent is entitled. Such challenges are,
however, not unique to biotechnology or
genetic technologies.
6.203 In addition, Davies Collison Cave suggested that:
In many instances, the claims of a patent which is a pioneer in its
field, both claims which involve genetic materials or technologies
and claims in
other fields of technology, are subjected to inappropriate criticism as being
‘too broad’ or the like,
without consideration being given to the
appropriate scope of the claim at the relevant date, that is at the priority
date (and not
at some later date, perhaps years after the priority date, when
the criticism is expressed).
6.204 While a number of submissions commented that the scope of gene patent
claims appears to have narrowed in recent
a few submissions
considered that broad gene patent claims are still an issue. For example, ACIPA
stated that:
The evidence would suggest that patent attorneys are still drafting broad
claims in respect of genes and gene sequences, and such
claims are being
accepted by the Patent Office in large
6.205 The Department of Health and Ageing submitted that:
While there is some evidence that patent offices worldwide have become
alert to the practical anomalies of this area and that patents
are becoming
narrower, we may not be able to rely on this trend to overcome the potential
problems. We would therefore support moves
to impose reasonable limits on the
breadth of gene patents.
6.206 However, GlaxoSmithKline submitted that the debate about broad patent
claims and the adequacy of disclosure:
has centred around the misguided notion that published patent claims
represent the eventual scope of valid and enforceable patent
claims (which of
they of course do not) and isolated anecdotal examples of perceived problem
patents ...
It is our experience that there are relatively few human gene patents
that have been granted and often those that have been granted
(mostly in the US)
have claims that are significantly limited compared with the claims as filed
with the original application.
6.207 Another submission addressed the question of whether product per se claims
are appropriate for inventions involving genetic
sequences. The Department of
Health and Ageing commented:
If it is only subsequent research that reveals a useful function for the
sequence, then it is arguable that the DNA sequence as an
invented product (as
distinct from its application to achieve the new useful function) ... [should]
not be patented.
6.208 There was a divergence of opinion in submissions on whether the ability to
patent novel and inventive applications of a patented
product adequately
addresses the potential adverse consequences of product per se claims in gene
patents. IP Australia submitted:
Claims for products per se are commonly granted in all fields of
technology, such as a newly isolated chemical or a new manufactured
material or
device. Such claims do not actually give the patent holder exclusive rights to
all uses of the product, whether known
or unknown, during the patent term.
Patents may be awarded for new uses of a patented product.
6.209 However, IP Australia also acknowledged that a
patent covering the new use of a previously patented product can only be
if a licence to the original product patent is obtained and that,
except in limited circumstances, a patent holder is not required
licence to such a patent.
6.210 On the other hand, the Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory Council
Human gene patents, as commonly issued in Australia to date, cover all
functions of the gene that are specifically explained in the
patent, as well as
any future developments that are based on use of the genetic information covered
by the patent specifications.
This allows the patent holder to restrict access
to any research and development uses, which may subsequently be discovered in
to their patented gene including, for example, diagnostic, therapeutic
and/or pharmaceutical uses ... Even where the inventor is
able to negotiate a
licence the patent holder could, in effect, be generously rewarded for a later
innovation that may be only obliquely
related to the original inventive step
protected by their patent.
6.211 Some submissions suggested that the fair basis and sufficiency
requirements should be strictly applied ‘to ensure that
the claims in gene
patents are narrowly
Queensland Government considered that these requirements should be applied to
ensure that a gene patent ‘does not extend
to every subsequent use of the
patent that is beyond the scope of the
submissions are discussed above in connection with the ‘usefulness’
requirement.
6.212 ACIPA questioned the way in which the disclosure requirements have been
applied by IP Australia:
It is submitted that genetic materials are presently being patented in a
way that fails to recognise the potential additional inventiveness
granting broad claims which include the additional potential of the sequence and
other biological processes associated with
6.213 AusBiotech Ltd proposed amendments to the examination guidelines to
address a particular issue relating to the application
of the disclosure
requirements to genetic materials. It suggested:
At present some specifications rely on predictions made on the basis of
sequence homologies or motifs for their ‘disclosure’
of function.
Since these predictions are speculative, they do not constitute a true
disclosure of invention ... The patent examination
guidelines should be amended,
for example via a Practice Note, to require that the specification must disclose
an actual experimental
demonstration of at least one biological function of the
nucleic acid or corresponding
6.214 Another submission indicated that difficulties in the application of the
fair basis and sufficiency requirements may have resulted
from a lack of
available guidance—either in the form of guidelines or case law—to
assist patent examiners in applying
6.215 A few submissions suggested that the disclosure requirements under
Australian law were in need of reform. McBratney and others
considered that the
‘fair basis’ requirement under Australian patent law is ‘long
overdue for review and reform’,
but that the difficulties raised by the
requirement are not restricted to inventions involving genetic materials and
technologies:
[T]here is great ambiguity as to what experimentation and disclosure is
necessary to sufficiently enable Australian and US patents,
especially as
relating to ‘gene patents’ and more so with potential drug targets
and ‘method of treating disease’
patents. The same problem may also
be encountered with ‘composition of matter’ patents which claim
broad classes of analogue
compounds for inhibiting certain targets or proteins.
The question is where to draw the
6.216 McBratney and others proposed, however, that this issue may be addressed
by the development of ‘clear and adequate guidelines
“sufficiency” and “fair basis”, similar to the US Patent
and Trademark Office’s Written Description
Guidelines’.
6.217 AusBiotech Ltd considered that patent claims over genetic materials should
be treated similarly to patents claiming chemical
and pharmaceutical
It is very common for a pharmaceutical case to claim a novel compound in
terms of a generic formula which may cover hundreds of millions
of compounds,
whereas the specification provides specific details of structure, synthesis and
activity for only a very small minority
of these compounds ... Once a given
nucleic acid sequence is identified and its function demonstrated, the making
and testing of
variations on this sequence is a matter of mere
6.218 The Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory Council suggested that the
approach under European patent law should be implemented;
‘experimental evidence of biological function [should be] disclosed in the
patent specification’.
In a similar vein, the Department of Health Western Australia considered that a
patent applicant should be required to support the
claims in a patent with
‘at the bare minimum, “proof of concept”
6.219 Subject to the comments considered above, views expressed in submissions
and consultations did not address how the sufficiency
and fair basis
requirements apply to inventions involving genetic materials and technologies,
nor the specific difficulties with
the way in which those requirements are
applied by IP Australia to gene patent applications. Nonetheless, many
submissions commented
that special rules for the fair basis and sufficiency
requirements should not apply to patent applications claiming genetic materials
and technologies.
ALRC’s views
6.220 The ALRC recognises
concerns that granting patent protection that may encompass all subsequent uses
of an isolated and purified
genetic sequence may be disproportionate to the
inventive activity involved in identifying a genetic sequence and determining
least) one of its functions. The value that such inventions contribute to
the state of the art appears to reside primarily in identifying
the purpose or
function of an isolated and purified genetic sequence. On this view, limiting
gene patent claims to the particular
use or uses that the applicant claims and
can demonstrate may be justifiable.
6.221 However, where a gene patent claims an isolated genetic sequence or other
genetic material per se, the patent holder does not
necessarily have the
exclusive rights to all uses of the sequence or material. Later patents might be
granted to another party for
novel and inventive applications of the isolated
genetic sequence or other material. In practice, the later patent holder may
a licence from the holder of the patent on the genetic product in order
to exploit its invention. Conversely, the holder of the patent
on the genetic
product may require a licence in order to exploit the patent on the new
application. A question remains as to whether
these initial (broad) patent
claims prevent access to third parties to develop new applications.
6.222 These concerns are addressed in later chapters of this Discussion Paper.
The ALRC proposes reforms to facilitate access by
others to patented genetic
materials and technologies. These reforms include: changes to the Crown use and
compulsory licensing provisions
Patents Act
; the introduction of
an experimental use defence; and the development of guidelines by the Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission
regarding the relationship between
competition law and intellectual property law.
6.223 In addition, the ALRC considers that some concerns about the effect of
broad gene patent claims may be addressed to some extent
by modifications of the
examination practices of IP Australia and existing procedures for access to
patented technology. In Chapter
8, the ALRC makes proposals to assist Australian
patent examiners in examining gene patent applications and assessing inventions
in new fields of technology.
The ALRC also proposes that each requirement for patentability should be subject
to the same standard of proof—namely, the
balance of probabilities. This
would raise the threshold from a ‘benefit of the doubt’ standard,
which currently applies
to the examination of the fair basis and sufficiency
requirements.
6.224 An issue remains as to whether reform is also required to the way in which
fair basis and sufficiency are applied to patent
applications claiming genetic
materials and technologies. The purpose of such reform would be to ensure that
patent claims over genetic
materials and technologies are commensurate with the
contribution to the art made by a claimed invention. Submissions received by
ALRC to date have not addressed this issue in any detail. The ALRC therefore
seeks further comments and information as to whether
such reform is desirable
and, if so, how it might be achieved.
Question 6 - 1
Do the fair basis and sufficiency requirements in
Patents Act
adequately limit the scope of claims in gene patents?
If not, what are the deficiencies in the way these requirements are applied,
what reforms are needed to address these concerns?
See Ch 12, 14, 15, 18, 20, 21, 24, 26
IP Australia,
Patents for: Microorganisms; Cell Lines; Hybridomas; Related Biological
Materials and their Use; & Genetically Manipulated
<www.ipaustralia.gov.au/pdfs/patents/specific/biotech.pdf> at 31 March
Patents Act 1990
(standard patents);
(innovation patents). ‘Invention’
and ‘patentable invention’ are defined in sch 1 to the
The application of this requirement
(commonly referred to as ‘secret use’) in the context of gene
patents is not materially
different to any other type of technology and thus
will not be considered in any detail in this chapter. For judicial
consideration,
Azuko Pty Ltd v Old Digger Pty Ltd
[2001] FCA 1079
(2001) 52 IPR
Patents Act 1990
(standard patents);
(4) (innovation
For example, Medicines
Submission P21
, 30 September 2003; L Palombi,
, 1 October 2003; GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
2003; Department of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
October 2003; Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
, 17 October 2003; Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
20 October 2003; A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003;
National Health and Medical Research Council,
Submission P52
, 31 October
2003; IP Australia,
Submission P56
, 4 November
Submission P30
October 2003; Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
October 2003; Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
, 17 October
Submission P56
, 4 November
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003. See also Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute
of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October
For example, GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; A McBratney and others,
, 22 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
October 2003; Department of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
November 2003; Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
For example, Royal College of
Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003;
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; New South Wales Health
Department,
Submission P37
, 17 October 2003; Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003;
Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory Council,
Submission P49
October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September
Commonwealth
Department of Health and Ageing,
Submission P65
, 28 January 2004. See
also G Suthers,
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003; Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; E Milward and others,
Submission P46
, 20 October
Submission P56
, 4 November 2003. See also Australian Health
Ministers’ Advisory Council,
Submission P49
, 23 October
See further Ch
IP Australia,
Australian Patents
for: Microorganisms; Cell Lines; Hybridomas; Related Biological Materials and
their Use; & Genetically Manipulated
<www.ipaustralia.gov.au/pdfs/patents/specific/biotech.pdf> at 31 March
(1623) (emphasis added).
‘Inherent Patentability in Anglo-Australian Law: A History’
Australian Intellectual Property Journal
National Research Development
Corp v Commissioner of Patents
[1959] HCA 67
(1959) 102 CLR 252.
The patent at issue
claimed a novel treatment for killing weeds in crops. The question before the
High Court was whether agricultural
and horticultural inventions were patentable
under Australian
Intellectual Property and
Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation
under the Competition Principles Agreement
See, eg, W Cornish, M Llewelyn and
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and Genetics
21 - 25. However, the Supreme Court of Canada has recently held that patent
protection is not available for higher life forms—in
that case a
genetically modified mouse pre-disposed to cancer:
Harvard College v Canada
(Commissioner of Patents)
IP Australia,
Patent Manual of
Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
[8.2.5] - [8.2.6].
See, eg, New
Zealand Ministry of Economic Development,
Review of the Patents Act 1953
Stage 3: Boundaries to Patentability
[22] - [31].
Industrial Property
Advisory Committee,
Patents, Innovation and Competition in Australia
Explanatory
Memorandum,
Patents Bill 1990
Intellectual
Property and Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property
Legislation under the Competition Principles Agreement
Industrial Property Advisory
Patents, Innovation and Competition in Australia
(1984), 41;
Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee,
Intellectual Property Legislation under the Competition Principles Agreement
(2000), 148 - 149.
Patents Act
(UK) s 1(1), (2). Until 1977, United Kingdom patent law also relied on the
‘manner of manufacture’ requirement as the
test for patentable
Monotti and S Ricketson,
Universities and Intellectual Property: Ownership
and Exploitation
Ibid, [3.22]. See also R
Eisenberg, ‘Re-examining the Role of Patents in Appropriating the Value of
DNA Sequences’
Emory Law Journal
A Monotti and S
Universities and Intellectual Property: Ownership and
Exploitation
(2003), [3.22].
Zealand Ministry of Economic Development,
Review of the Patents Act 1953
Stage 3: Boundaries to Patentability
(2003), pt 1, rec 2(i). The current
legislative definition of ‘invention’ includes ‘any new method
or process of
testing applicable to the improvement or control of
manufacture’, in addition to ‘a manner of new manufacture’:
Patents Act
New Zealand Ministry of Economic
Development,
Review of the Patents Act 1953 Stage 3: Boundaries to
Patentability
(2003), pt 1,
See, eg, IP Australia,
Australian Patents for: Microorganisms; Cell Lines; Hybridomas; Related
Biological Materials and their Use; & Genetically Manipulated
<www.ipaustralia.gov.au/pdfs/patents/specific/biotech.pdf> at 31 March
See the list of patented
inventions at the beginning of this
D Nicol, ‘Should Human
Genes be Patentable Inventions under Australian Patent Law?’
Journal of Law and Medicine
, 237. See also K Ludlow,
‘Genetically Modified Organisms and their Products as Patentable Subject
Matter’ (1999) 21
European Intellectual Property Review
Lane Fox v Kensington and
Knightsbridge Electric Lighting Co
(1892) 9 RPC 413
, 416, cited with
approval in
National Research Development Corp v Commissioner of Patents
[1959] HCA 67
(1959) 102 CLR 252
, 263. See also D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical
Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
National Research
Development Corp v Commissioner of Patents
[1959] HCA 67
(1959) 102 CLR 252
IP Australia,
Patent Manual of
Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
Ranks Hovis
McDougall’s Application
[1976] 46 AOJP 3915 (Australia)
Chakrabarty
[1980] USSC 119
(1980) (United
‘Manner of new
manufacture’ was not a ground of opposition in the case but arose in
relation to the Deputy Commissioner’s
consideration of whether the claimed
invention was a mere discovery:
Kiren-Amgen Inc v Board of Regents of
University of Washington
[1995] APO 61
(1995) 33 IPR
(emphasis added).
Ibid, 569. The
decision was appealed to the Federal Court on other grounds:
Institute Inc v Kirin-Amgen Inc
[1999] FCA 742
(1999) 92 FCR
Australian Patents for: Microorganisms; Cell Lines; Hybridomas;
Related Biological Materials and their Use; & Genetically Manipulated
, <www.ipaustralia.gov.au/pdfs/patents/specific/biotech.pdf>
at 31 March
Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
‘Trilateral
Co-operation of the US, European and Japanese Patent Offices’ (1988) 7
Biotechnology Law Review
159, 163 cited in R Crespi, ‘Patenting and
Ethics: A Dubious Connection’ (2001/2002) 5
Bio-Science Law Review
European Patent
, (entered into force on 7 October
Howard Florey/Relaxin
[1995] EPOR 541.
Upheld on appeal:
Relaxin/Howard Florey Institute
(Unreported, Boards of Appeal, European Patent Office, T0272/95, 23 October
Florey/Relaxin
[1995] EPOR 541
Directive 98/44/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the Legal Protection of
Biotechnological Inventions
, (entered into force on 6 July
art 5(2). Certain provisions of the EU Biotechnology Directive were adopted by
the EPO as supplementary interpretation of the
EPC: see Administrative Council,
Implementing Regulations to the Convention of the Grant of European Patents
of 5 October 1973
(2001). Rule 23(e) of the implementing regulations of the
EPC contains a provision equivalent to art 5 of EU Biotechnology
Diamond v Chakrabarty
[1980] USSC 119
Ibid, 308. The Supreme
Court noted that there were limitations on patenting ‘laws of nature,
physical phenomena and abstract
Diamond v Chakrabarty
[1980] USSC 119
(1980), 308.
D Nicol and J
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues
Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional
Paper No 6, 23. See, eg,
Ex parte Allen
(1998) 2 USPQ 2d 1425
[1988] USCAFED 120
846 F 2d 77
(1998) (polypoid oyster);
Moore v Regents of the
University of California
(1990) 51 Cal 3d 120
(human cell line);
Inc v Chugai Pharmaceutical Co Ltd
[1991] USCAFED 309
(1991) 927 F 2d 1200
Nuffield Council on
The Ethics of Patenting DNA
(2002), 27 - 28; D Keays,
‘Patenting DNA and Amino Acid Sequences: An Australian Perspective’
Health Law Journal
Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October
Submission P43
20 October 2003.
Cancer Council
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003; L Palombi,
, 1 October 2003; G Suthers,
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003; Human
Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; Cancer
Council Tasmania,
Submission P40
, 29 September 2003; Cancer Council South
Submission P41
, 9 October
For example, A Morley,
Submission P18
, 30 September 2003; A Bankier,
Submission P19
September 2003; Medicines Australia,
Submission P21
, 30 September 2003; D
McFetridge,
Submission P23
, 30 September 2003; G Suthers,
, 2 October 2003; Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
, 3 October 2003; Caroline Chisholm Centre for Health Ethics Inc,
Submission P38
, 17 October 2003; New South Wales Health Department,
Submission P37
, 17 October
New South Wales Health
Department,
Submission P37
, 17 October 2003; Australian Health
Ministers’ Advisory Council,
Submission P49
, 23 October
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003. See also Human Genetics Society
of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
Association of Pathology Practices Inc,
Submission P10
, 24 September
2003. See also D McAndrew,
Submission P14
, 30 September 2003; A Bankier,
Submission P19
, 30 September
Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September 2003;
Department of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November
Submission P20
30 September 2003.
Submission P28
, 1 October 2003. See also E Milward and others,
Submission P46
, 20 October
Submission P28
1 October 2003.
For example, A Morley,
Submission P18
, 30 September
Cancer Voices NSW Inc,
Submission P7
, 16 September 2003; Breast Cancer Action Group NSW Inc,
Submission P8
, 19 September
Submission P30
2 October 2003; Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003. See also Human Genetics Society
of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
Caroline Chisholm Centre for
Health Ethics Inc,
Submission P38
, 17 October
Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003. See also G Suthers,
Submission P30
, 2 October
National Health and Medical
Research Council,
Submission P52
, 31 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003; Department of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003; Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October 2003; A McBratney and others,
, 22 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
October 2003; IP Australia,
Submission P56
, 4 November
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
IP Australia,
, 4 November
Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003; Department of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003; A McBratney and others,
, 22 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
2003; Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January 2004; AusBiotech
Submission P58
, 7 November
Submission P32
7 October 2003; Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia,
, 1 October 2003; Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
October 2003.
Australian Law Reform
Commission Act 1996
Patents Act 1990
18(1)(b)(i)
(standard patents);
s 18(1A)(b)(i)
(innovation
s 18(1)(b)(i)
s 18(1A)(b)(i)
(innovation patents); sch 1. The significance of the
‘priority date’ is discussed in Ch
, sch 1. As a result of
Patents Amendment Act 2001
(Cth), the definition of ‘prior art
base’ has been extended to include both documentary publications worldwide
disclosures and acts done anywhere in the world. For existing patents,
and patent applications filed prior to 1 April 2002, only
acts occurring within
the patent area (ie Australia) are relevant to an assessment of
Patents Act 1990
Seeking to connect disclosures made in more than one document (or act)
to support a claim that an invention is not novel—often
referred to as
‘making a mosaic’—is not permitted under Australian law: see
Nicaro Holdings Pty Ltd v Martin Engineering Co
[1990] FCA 40
(1989) 91 ALR 513
Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing Co v Beiersdorf (Australia) Ltd
[1980] HCA 9
(1980) 144 CLR 253
Patents Regulations
(Cth) rr 2.2, 2.3.
example, publication of an invention at a ‘recognised exhibition’ or
before a ‘learned society’:
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations 1991
(Cth) rr 2.2,
Meyers Taylor Pty Ltd v Vicarr
Industries Ltd
[1977] HCA 19
(1977) 137 CLR 228
; IP Australia,
Patent Manual of
Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
Sunbeam Corp v
Morphy-Richards (Aust) Pty Ltd
[1961] HCA 39
(1961) 180 CLR
Dennison Manufacturing Co v
Monarch Marking Systems Inc
[1983] FCA 159
(1983) 66 ALR
Fomento Industrial SA v
Mentmore Manufacturing Co Ltd
IP Australia,
Patents for: Microorganisms; Cell Lines; Hybridomas; Related Biological
Materials and their Use; & Genetically Manipulated
<www.ipaustralia.gov.au/pdfs/patents/specific/biotech.pdf> at 31 March
See, eg, 35 USC
Patents Act
For example, Medicines Australia,
Submission P21
, 30 September 2003; G Suthers,
Submission P30
October 2003; Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
October 2003; Caroline Chisholm Centre for Health Ethics Inc,
, 17 October 2003; New South Wales Health Department,
, 17 October
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
, 2 October 2003. See also Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003; Davies
Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003; South Australian
Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003. However, at least one submission took
issue with the distinction patent offices worldwide have drawn between cDNA
genomic DNA: see Australian Association of Pathology Practices Inc,
Submission P10
, 24 September
Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October
Submission P56
, 4 November
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003. See also
Department of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003. See
also A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003; Department of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
, 24 October 2003; IP Australia,
Submission P56
, 4 November 2003;
Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January 2004; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November
Nuffield Council on Bioethics,
The Ethics of Patenting DNA
House of Representatives
Standing Committee on Industry Science and Technology,
Genetic Manipulation:
The Threat or the Glory?
Nuffield Council on
The Ethics of Patenting DNA
Cornish, M Llewelyn and M Adcock,
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and
(2003), 32.
‘Patenting Genetic Materials: Old Rules May be Restricting the
Exploitation of New Technology’
Journal of Law and Medicine
‘Patenting DNA and Amino Acid Sequences: An Australian Perspective’
Health Law Journal
Patents Act 1990
18(1)(b)(ii)
(standard patents);
s 18(1A)(b)(ii)
(innovation
Aktiebolaget Hassel v
Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2002] HCA 59
(2002) 194 ALR
Patents Amendment Act
(Cth). The amendments apply to complete patent applications filed on or
after 1 April 2002 (s
Patents Act 1990
See also IP Australia,
Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume
2: National
(2002), [4.1.4.2].
McGowan, ‘The New Innovation Patent System: Will It Work?’ (2002) 76
Law Institute Journal
64; Advisory Council on Industrial Property,
Review of the Petty Patent System
(1995), rec
Patents Act 1990
- (6); IP Australia,
Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume
2: National
[30.4.5.4].
The Federal Court has
made only one decision in relation to innovation patents, but the case did not
require consideration of the
substantive requirements for an innovation patent:
Datadot Technology Ltd v Alpha Microtech Pty Ltd
Revised Explanatory Memorandum
Patents Amendment (Innovation Patents) Bill 2000
For a discussion of relevant
opposition proceedings, see C Lawson and C Pickering, ‘Patenting Genetic
Material: Failing to
Reflect the Value of Variation in DNA, RNA and Amino
Australian Intellectual Property Journal
IP Australia,
Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
Ibid, [4.1.6.1], citing
HPM Industries Pty Ltd v Gerard Industries Ltd
[1957] HCA 47
(1957) 98 CLR 424
Howlett and A Christie,
An Analysis of the Approaches of the Trilateral and
Australian Patent Offices to Patenting Partial DNA Sequences (ESTs)
The Trilateral Project (also
referred to as the Trilateral Offices) is a cooperative venture of the USPTO,
the EPO and the JPO. It
has been in operation since 1983, primarily to
facilitate the exchange of information regarding patent examination practices:
States Patent and Trademark Office, European Patent Office and Japanese
Patent Office,
http://www.jpo.go.jp/saikine/tws/gen.htm
at 6 February
M Howlett and A Christie,
An Analysis of the Approaches of the Trilateral and Australian Patent Offices
to Patenting Partial DNA Sequences (ESTs)
European Patent Office,
Japan Patent Office and United States Patent and Trademark Office,
Project B3b: Mutual Understanding in Search and Examination: Report on
Comparative Study on Biotechnology Patent Practices
(2001), Annex 2, 43. The
Nuffield Council has agreed with this approach: Nuffield Council on Bioethics,
The Ethics of Patenting DNA
(2002), 30,
Patent Office, Japan Patent Office and United States Patent and Trademark
Trilateral Project B3b: Mutual Understanding in Search and
Examination: Report on Comparative Study on Biotechnology Patent Practices
(2001), Annex 2, 43.
Institut Curie and Assistance
Publique Hopitaux de Paris and Institut Gustav-Roussy,
Against Myriad
Genetics’s Monopoly on Tests for Predisposition to Breast and Ovarian
Cancer Associated with the BRCA1 Gene
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
‘The Australian Medical Biotechnology Industry and Access to Intellectual
Property: Issues for Patent
Law Development’
[2001] SydLawRw 16
, 365. See also D Keays, ‘Patenting DNA and Amino Acid
Sequences: An Australian Perspective’
Health Law Journal
, 83; Nuffield Council on Bioethics,
The Ethics of Patenting DNA
(2002), 30.
[1995] USCAFED 382
51 F 3d 1552
, 1558. Also:
(1993) 991 F 2d 781, 784. See
generally, P Ducor, ‘In re Deuel: Biotechnology Industry v Patent
European Intellectual Property Review
[1995] USCAFED 382
(1995) 51 F
, 1558 - 1559;
(1993) 991 F 2d 781,
[1995] USCAFED 382
(1995) 51 F 3d 1552
, 1559, citing
(1993) 991 F 2d
Council on Bioethics,
The Ethics of Patenting DNA
, 2 October 2003; Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
September 2003; Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
October 2003; Caroline Chisholm Centre for Health Ethics Inc,
, 17 October 2003; Cancer Council Tasmania,
Submission P40
September 2003; Cancer Council South Australia,
Submission P41
, 9 October
2003; National Health and Medical Research Council,
Submission P52
October 2003; Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
Association of Pathology Practices Inc,
Submission P10
, 24 September
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003.
See also South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003. See also Department of Industry Tourism
and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003; R Crespi, ‘Patenting and Ethics: A
Dubious Connection’ (2001/2002) 5
Bio-Science Law Review
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003.
See also Australian Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September 2003; L Palombi,
Submission P28
October 2003; A Hughes,
Submission P42
, 20 October 2003; E Milward and
Submission P46
, 20 October
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
IP Australia,
, 4 November
eg, K O’Connell and J Cooke, ‘Australia: A Patentee’s
European Intellectual Property Review
T Moore, ‘IP
Australia’s Experience with Biotech Inventions’ (Paper presented at
Legal Protection of Australian
Biotechnology, Sydney, 30 May 2002). See also D
Nicol, ‘Gene Patents and Access to Genetic Tests’
Australian Health Law Bulletin
See Proposals 8 - 1
Council on Bioethics,
The Ethics of Patenting DNA
See Ch 13 for a discussion of
ESTs and SNPs.
C Baldock and others,
‘Report Q 150: Patentability Requirements and Scope of Protection of
Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs),
Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) and
Entire Genomes’ (2000) 22
European Intellectual Property Review
M Howlett and A Christie, ‘An Analysis of the Approach of the European,
Japanese and United States Patent Offices to Patenting
Partial DNA Sequences
(ESTs)’ (2003) 34
International Review of Industrial Property and
581; S Chambers, ‘Comments on the Patentability of
Certain Inventions Associated with the Identification of Partial cDNA
American Intellectual Property Law Association
Quarterly Journal
53; R Eisenberg and R Merges, ‘Opinion Letter as to
the Patentability of Certain Inventions Associated with the Identification
Partial cDNA Sequences’ (1995) 23
American Intellectual Property Law
Association Quarterly Journal
1; R Eisenberg and R Merges, ‘Reply to
Comments on the Patentability of Certain Inventions Associated with the
Identification
of Partial cDNA Sequences’ (1995) 23
Intellectual Property Law Association Quarterly Journal
61; Nuffield Council
on Bioethics,
The Ethics of Patenting DNA
For example, the United
States National Institutes of Health (NIH) filed patent applications claiming
ESTs in the early 1990s, which
were rejected by the USPTO for lack of utility.
The applications were later abandoned: see P Ginsburg, ‘Patentability and
Transfer Issues Relating to the NIH Patent Applications’ (1994)
Practising Law Institute Patents, Copyrights, Trademarks and Literary
Property Course Handbook Series
United States Patent and
Trademark Office, ‘Utility Examination Guidelines’ (2001) 66
R Reynolds and N Stoianoff,
Intellectual Property: Text and Essential Cases
(2003), 277. See also
Martin Engineering Co v Trison Holdings Pty Ltd
(1989) 14 IPR
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
6, 32. See also
Rehm Pty Ltd v Websters Security Systems (International) Pty
[1988] FCA 162
(1988) 81 ALR 79
Rescare Ltd v Anaesthetic Supplies Pty
(1992) 111 ALR
National Research
Development Corp v Commissioner of Patents
[1959] HCA 67
(1959) 102 CLR 252
Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
M Howlett and A Christie,
An Analysis of the Approaches of the Trilateral and Australian Patent Offices
to Patenting Partial DNA Sequences (ESTs)
Patents Act 1990
(standard patents);
(innovation
Opposition,
re-examination and revocation proceedings are discussed in Ch
A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003; IP Australia,
Submission P56
November 2003.
[1966] USSC 48
(1966) 383 US 519
United States Patent and
Trademark Office, ‘Utility Examination Guidelines’ (2001) 66
Ibid cl B(2)(a). The
Guidelines state that use of a complex invention as landfill is an example of a
purpose that will not be regarded
as specific and
substantial.
United States Patent
and Trademark Office,
Revised Interim Utility Guidelines Training
, <www.uspto.gov/web/offices/pac/utility/utilityguide.pdf> at
4 February 2004, 6.
United States
Patent and Trademark Office, ‘Utility Examination Guidelines’ (2001)
1092 cl B(2)(a)(2). United States Patent and Trademark Office,
Revised Interim Utility Guidelines Training Materials
<www.uspto.gov/web/offices/pac/utility/utilityguide.pdf> at 4 February
United States Patent and
Trademark Office, ‘Utility Examination Guidelines’ (2001) 66
1092, 1094.
European Patent
, (entered into force on 7 October 1977) art
Directive 98/44/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the Legal Protection of
Biotechnological Inventions
, (entered into force on 6 July
The implementing regulations
of the EPC were amended in 1999 to ensure consistency between the EPC and the EU
Biotechnology Directive:
Administrative Council,
Implementing Regulations to
the Convention of the Grant of European Patents of 5 October 1973
Rule 23e of the implementing regulations of the EPC contains provisions
equivalent to art 5 of the
Cornish, M Llewelyn and M Adcock,
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and
Patent Office,
Guidelines for Examination in the European Patent Office
(2003) pt C, IV.4.5.
Ibid sch A2,
Kingdom Patent Office,
Examination Guidelines for Patent Applications
Relating to Biotechnological Inventions in the UK Patent Office (November
, <www.patent.gov.uk/patent/reference/index>,
Ibid, [36]. The December 2003
version of the EPO’s Examination Guidelines do not, however, refer
expressly to the requirement
of ‘industrial applicability’ being
satisfied if the disclosed use of an invention is ‘specific, substantial
credible’: see European Patent Office,
Guidelines for Examination
in the European Patent Office
(2003) Pt C, ch
Zealand Ministry of Economic Development,
Review of the Patents Act 1953
Stage 3: Boundaries to Patentability
(2003) Pt 2,
Nuffield Council on Bioethics,
The Ethics of Patenting DNA
Similar comments were made in W
Cornish, M Llewelyn and M Adcock,
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and
(2003), 31.
Council on Bioethics,
The Ethics of Patenting DNA
United States Patent and
Trademark Office, ‘Utility Examination Guidelines’ (2001) 66
1092, 1095, 1097.
W Cornish, M
Llewelyn and M Adcock,
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and Genetics
(2003), 31, 62.
Intellectual
Property and Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property
Legislation under the Competition Principles Agreement
IP Australia,
Response to Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee
Recommendations
, <www.ipaustralia.gov.au/pdfs/general/response1.pdf>
Submission P56
, 4 November
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
‘The Australian Medical Biotechnology Industry and Access to Intellectual
Property: Issues for Patent
Law Development’
[2001] SydLawRw 16
Ibid, 367; D
Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis
of Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6,
D Nicol and J
Nielsen, ‘The Australian Medical Biotechnology Industry and Access to
Intellectual Property: Issues for Patent
Law Development’
[2001] SydLawRw 16
Sydney Law Review
Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis
of Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6, 234.
example, Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
October 2003; G Suthers,
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003; Human Genetics
Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; Department of Industry Tourism and
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003; A Hughes,
, 20 October 2003; A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003;
Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January 2004; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November
Cancer Council of New South
Submission P1
, 5 June 2003; Australian Association of Pathology
Practices Inc,
Submission P10
, 24 September 2003; Caroline Chisholm
Centre for Health Ethics Inc,
Submission P38
, 17 October 2003; South
Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003; Department of
Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November 2003; AusBiotech
Submission P58
, 7 November
Other submissions agreed that
gene patents do not raise new issues with respect to the utility requirement: G
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003; Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003.
Also: G Suthers,
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003; Human Genetics Society
of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; South Australian
Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
, 1 October
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003; Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003. See also Cancer Council Tasmania,
Submission P40
, 29 September 2003; Cancer Council South Australia,
Submission P41
, 9 October
National Health and Medical
Research Council,
Submission P52
, 31 October 2003. Also: Queensland
Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
New South Wales Health
Department,
Submission P37
, 17 October
Australian Association of
Pathology Practices Inc,
Submission P10
, 24 September 2003; New South
Wales Health Department,
Submission P37
, 17 October 2003; Caroline
Chisholm Centre for Health Ethics Inc,
Submission P38
, 17 October 2003;
South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003; Queensland
Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January 2004. See also Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003. See also G Suthers,
Submission P30
, 2 October
, 7 October
Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
example, Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003; G
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003; Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003; Cancer
Council Tasmania,
Submission P40
, 29 September 2003; Cancer Council South
Submission P41
, 9 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003; Department of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November 2003; Queensland Government,
, 5 January
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
2003; Department of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November
National Health and Medical
Research Council,
Submission P52
, 31 October 2003; Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October
AusBiotech Ltd,
, 7 November
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
Submission P56
, 4 November
of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November
IP Australia,
, 4 November
Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
October 2003.
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; A McBratney and others,
, 22 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Royal College of Pathologists
of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; A Hughes,
Submission P42
October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
2003; Department of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November
2003; Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Submission P56
, 4 November
South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Royal College of Pathologists
of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
AusBiotech Ltd,
, 7 November 2003.
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Intellectual
Property and Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property
Legislation under the Competition Principles Agreement
See Proposal
See Proposal
M Howlett and A Christie,
An Analysis of the Approaches of the Trilateral and Australian Patent Offices
to Patenting Partial DNA Sequences (ESTs)
Genetics Institute Inc v
Kirin-Amgen Inc (No 3)
(1998) 156 ALR 30 (Heerey
J). This decision was an
appeal from the decision of the Deputy Commissioner of Patents in
Kiren-Amgen
Inc v Board of Regents of University of Washington
[1995] APO 61
(1995) 33 IPR 557
discussed above. An appeal to the Full Federal Court was dismissed:
Institute Inc v Kirin-Amgen Inc
[1999] FCA 742
(1999) 92 FCR
Genetics Institute Inc v
Kirin-Amgen Inc (No 3)
(1998) 156 ALR 30
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
IP Australia,
Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
S Kunnin and others,
‘Reach-through Claims in the Age of Biotechnology’
American University Law Review
Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
(2002), [10.10.1].
Ibid, [10.10.4].
‘Reach through’ compound claims may also fail to satisfy the novelty
requirement: IP Australia,
Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume 2:
(2002), [10.10.2].
Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
(2002), [10.10.5].
[1988] USCAFED 512
(1988) 858 F 2d
United States Patent and
Trademark Office, ‘Guidelines for Examination of Patent Applications under
, “Written Description” Requirement’ (2001) 66
of the University of California v Eli Lilly & Co
[1997] USCAFED 407
(1997) 119 F 3d 1559
Enzo Biochem Inc v Gen-Probe Inc
[2002] USCAFED 65
(2002) 285 F 3d 1013.
See also A Cantor,
‘Using the Written Description and Enablement Requirements to Limit
Biotechnology Patents’
Harvard Journal of Law &
United States
Patent and Trademark Office, ‘Guidelines for Examination of Patent
Applications under the
, “Written Description”
Requirement’ (2001) 66
For example, Cancer
Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003; Caroline Chisholm
Centre for Health Ethics Inc,
Submission P38
, 17 October 2003; Australian
Health Ministers’ Advisory Council,
Submission P49
, 23 October
2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003;
National Health and Medical Research Council,
Submission P52
, 31 October
2003; Commonwealth Department of Health and Ageing,
Submission P65
Submission P56
, 4 November
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October
National Health and Medical
Research Council,
Submission P52
, 31 October 2003; Commonwealth
Department of Health and Ageing,
Submission P65
, 28 January
Commonwealth Department of
Health and Ageing,
Submission P65
, 28 January
Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
September 2003. See also R Barnard,
Submission P32
, 7 October
Commonwealth
Department of Health and Ageing,
Submission P65
, 28 January 2004. See
also South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003. On the failure of some patent holders to
take out gene patents in Australia, see D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and
Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
Commonwealth
Department of Health and Ageing,
Submission P65
, 28 January
Health Ministers’ Advisory Council,
Submission P49
, 23 October
2003. See also L Palombi,
Submission P28
, 1 October 2003; Commonwealth
Department of Health and Ageing,
Submission P65
, 28 January
Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September 2003.
See also R Barnard,
Submission P32
, 7 October 2003; Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003.
GlaxoSmithKline also supported application of the disclosure requirements so
that the scope of the patent ‘matches,
as best it can, the contribution of
the invention to the art’: GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
October 2003.
Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
Submission P58
, 7 November
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Submission P58
, 7 November
Australian Health
Ministers’ Advisory Council,
Submission P49
, 23 October
Department of Health Western
Submission P53
, 3 November
Royal College of Pathologists
of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; G Suthers,
, 2 October 2003; Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
, 3 October 2003; GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
2003; Department of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
October 2003; A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003;
Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003; IP Australia,
Submission P56
, 4 November 2003; Queensland Government,
, 5 January 2004; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November
See Proposal 8 - 5.
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
7. Exclusions from Patentability
Introduction
Existing exclusions from patentability
Human beings and the biological processes for their generation
Contrary to law
Food or medicine produced by mixture
Plants and animals
Possible new exclusions from patentability
Genetic materials and technologies
Reform proposals in other jurisdictions
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Methods of medical treatment
Australian law
Other jurisdictions
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Exclusions from patentability on social or ethical grounds
Australian law
Other jurisdictions
Ethics and the patent system
A role for patent examiners?
An ethics advisory body?
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
7. Exclusions from Patentability
Introduction
‘patentable invention’ under Australian law is one that satisfies
the requirements set out in
Patents Act 1990
namely that
the invention is novel and inventive (or innovative) when compared to the prior
art, is useful, and has not been secretly
used in Australia before the priority
7.2 As discussed in Chapter 6, the
Patents Act
also requires that the
invention fall within the concept of patentable subject matter under Australian
law. Subject to certain exclusions
expressly provided in the
Patents Act
this requirement is primarily expressed in terms of the ‘manner of
manufacture’ test.
7.3 Chapter 6 examined arguments that certain types of inventions involving
genetic materials and technologies are not, or should
not be, patentable on the
grounds that such inventions do not satisfy patentability
requirements—including on the basis that
the subject matter constitutes a
‘discovery’ rather than an invention.
7.4 It has also been suggested that certain types of inventions involving
genetic materials and technologies should not be patentable—even
that the inventions meet the requirements of patentability—on the ground
that the inventions are not, or should not
be, patentable subject matter. This
amounts to a claim that certain genetic materials and technologies should fall
within an exclusion
from patentability.
7.5 This chapter begins by examining the existing exclusions from patentability
contained in the
Patents Act
and their possible application to genetic
materials and technologies. The chapter then outlines grounds on which some
genetic materials
or technologies might be excluded from patentability. These
would involve new exclusions from patentability:
for genes and genetic sequences specifically;
for methods of medical treatment; or
on social or ethical grounds.
Existing exclusions from
patentability
Patents Act
excludes certain categories of subject matter from patentability and grants the
Commissioner of Patents the discretion to refuse
a patent application for other
7.7 As discussed below, ‘human beings, and the biological processes for
their generation’ are excluded from patentability,
as are ‘plants
and animals and the biological processes for the generation of plants and
animals’, although in the latter
case only with respect to innovation
7.8 The Commissioner of Patents also has discretion to refuse a patent
application where the use of the invention would be ‘contrary
law’ or where the invention is a food or medicine produced by
As these exclusions are
discretionary, it is possible, in theory, for the Commissioner to accept
applications for such patents notwithstanding
that the patent falls within a
class of excludable subject matter.
7.9 The existing grounds of excluded and excludable subject matter are limited
and have been interpreted narrowly by IP Australia.
Human beings and the biological processes for their generation
7.10 ‘Human beings, and
the biological processes for their generation’ are excluded from
patentability under
Patents Act
. To date, the scope of
this provision has not been considered judicially, and its precise scope remains
unclear. IP Australia’s
Manual of Practice and Procedure
states that inventions that are ‘clearly
encompassed’ by the provision include:
human beings, foetuses, embryos or fertilised ova;
fertilisation or cloning methods that
generate human beings; and
processes—beginning with fertilisation and ending with
birth—that are wholly biological and result in a human
7.11 It seems
unlikely that
excludes many inventions involving genetic materials and
technologies from patentability. In particular, the
states that
‘human genes, tissues and cell lines’ are outside the scope of
and will be patentable, if the other requirements set out in the
Patents Act
7.12 The application of
Patents Act
to inventions
involving human stem cells and stem cell technologies has been a matter of some
This issue is discussed in
Chapter 16.
Contrary to law
Section 50(1)(a)
Patents Act
provides that the Commissioner of Patents has the discretion
to refuse an application for a standard patent on the grounds that its
be ‘contrary to
states that the discretionary power conferred on the
Commissioner of Patents under
should only be invoked ‘in the
clearest of circumstances’.
also states that the provision should only be relied on to
exclude an invention if an unlawful use, and no alternative or additional
use, has been described in the
application.
Section 50(1)(a)
will have limited application to inventions involving
genetic materials and technologies because, in general, a patent applicant
be able to identify a lawful use for such an invention.
Food or medicine produced by mixture
7.16 The Commissioner of
Patents may also refuse to accept an application for a standard patent that
claims an invention capable of
being used as a food or medicine for humans or
animals and that is merely a mixture of known ingredients, or is a process to
such substance by mere
It is unlikely that
this exclusion would apply to genetic materials and technologies or other
biotechnology inventions.
Plants and animals
7.17 Finally, with respect to
innovation patents only, plants and animals and the biological processes for the
generation of plants
and animals are not patentable
inventions.
This provision is
currently under review by the Advisory Council on Intellectual Property (ACIP).
ACIP released an Issues Paper in
2002 and is conducting further
consultations.
Possible new exclusions from patentability
7.18 The existing exclusions
from patentability do not place any significant constraints on the patenting of
genetic materials or
technologies. It has been suggested that some types of
inventions involving genetic materials and technologies should not be patentable
subject matter. The following section discusses possible new exclusions from
patentability relevant to genetic materials and technologies.
Genetic materials and technologies
7.19 One way to exclude
genetic materials and technologies, or some subset of them, from patentability
would be through an exclusion
directed specifically to genetic inventions.
7.20 An exclusion from patentability applicable to inventions involving genetic
materials was proposed in 1990 by Senator John Coulter
(Australian Democrats)
during consideration of the
Patents Bill 1990
(Cth). The amendments, which were
rejected by the Senate Standing Committee on Industry, Science and Technology
(Senate Standing
Committee), would have presumptively excluded genes, genetic
material and genetically modified organisms from
patentability.
The proposed
amendment stated:
(2) A patentable invention shall not include the following:
(a) a gene or genes, whether derived from cells
or chemically synthesised;
(b) a genome either complete or one which has had genetic material added
or deleted;
(c) the altered organism (human, plant, animal or micro-organism) produced
by having its genome manipulated; and
(d) the progeny of the genetically engineered organism which also carry
the altered genome.
(3) Sub-section (2) does not limit the patenting of technologies, techniques
and processes involved in the carrying out of genetic
engineering.
7.21 In 1996, Senator Natasha Stott Despoja proposed a similar amendment to
Patents Act
The proposal provided
that naturally occurring genes, gene sequences, or descriptions of the base
sequence of a naturally occurring
gene or gene sequence would not be regarded
as either novel or inventive for the purposes of
Patents Act
Senator Stott Despoja put forward the proposal again in 2001
and the proposed amendments were re-tabled in 2002. There has been no further
parliamentary consideration of them.
Reform proposals in other jurisdictions
7.22 There have been suggestions
in other countries that some genetic materials should not be patentable. In 2001,
the Canadian
House of Commons Standing Committee on Health (the Canadian Standing
Committee) expressed concern that the
Patent Act 1985
(Can) did not specifically
disallow patenting with respect to human genes, DNA sequences and cell lines.
The Canadian Standing
Committee recommended that the patenting of ‘human
materials’ should be prohibited.
7.23 However, in general, such a sweeping approach to reform has been rejected.
For example, the Ontario government report,
Genetics, Testing & Gene
Patenting: Charting New Territory in Healthcare
(the Ontario Report) rejected
the Canadian Standing Committee’s call for a complete ban on gene patents
and instead suggested
a range of proposals to achieve an ‘appropriate
balance between the public interest in accessing the health benefits offered
by genetic technologies and maintaining the economic and commercial incentives
that fuel this research’.
7.24 There have also been a number of international statements suggesting
that genes and genetic sequences should be excluded
from patentability. The
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO)
Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights
states that ‘the
human genome in its natural state shall not give rise to financial gains’.
Similarly, the International Bioethics Committee of UNESCO has stated ‘there
are strong ethical grounds for excluding
the human genome from patentability’.
7.25 In March 2000, the European Parliament called on the European Patent
Office (EPO) to ensure that patent applications in Europe
do not violate the
principle of non-patentability of human genes or cells ‘in their natural
environment’.
This resolution,
originally made in the context of concerns about human cloning, was subsequently
reiterated in connection
with the patenting of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes associated
with pre-disposition to breast and ovarian cancer.
However, as discussed in Chapter 6, genetic materials are generally considered
to be patentable if they have been isolated
from nature.
Submissions and consultations
7.26 Some submissions supported
a specific amendment to the
Patents Act
to exclude genetic materials from
the scope of patentable subject matter.
In general, however, submissions focused more on the application of the existing
patentability requirements to genetic materials
and technologies—and on
whether the subject matter of some gene patents constitutes a ‘discovery’
or an invention—rather
than on whether gene materials or technologies should
be excluded altogether from patentable subject matter.
7.27 Some submissions considered that the introduction of an exclusion from
patentability was not necessary to address ethical
and social concerns raised
by patents on genetic materials,
or were concerned about the negative impact of such an exclusion. For example,
the Cancer Council of Victoria noted that, while
gene patents could have a negative
impact on access to genetic testing ‘there are risks in unilateral modification
existing laws, particularly retrospective changes’.
7.28 Other submissions commented that, as a general matter, technology-specific
provisions might not be effective. IP Australia
Where it can be avoided, IP Australia strongly recommends against introducing
technology-specific laws and procedures. Such measures
invariably lead to uncertainty
over the bounds of the subject matter, involved debate over individual cases,
and increased
cost and uncertainty for users of the system. Such measures may
eventually prove at least partially ineffective, as it may be
possible to draft
claims to avoid the intent of the exclusion. Defining the bounds of a technology
is a non-trivial issue.
7.29 Similarly,
it was suggested that the introduction of specific exclusions from patentability
might increase the complexity
of and costs involved in obtaining patent protection.
Dr Amanda McBratney and others suggested that to adjust patent legislation each
time a new technology was perceived to raise
special issues would produce an
unwieldy patent system.
7.30 Submissions generally supported amendments to, and interpretation of,
patent laws in a technology-neutral manner. It was
said that this would maintain
the ability of patent law to adapt flexibly to new technologies as they arise.
For example, Davies Collison Cave submitted:
In our view, it is not appropriate to propose amendments to the patent
legislation which are specific to an area of technology.
Even if such changes
appear sensible and reasonable at their time of instigation, this type of approach
has the potential to
reduce the flexibility of the system and create difficulties
in responding to demands of future technological development.
7.31 The Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia (RCPA) noted that genes
could be excluded from patent protection under
Australian law on the basis that
such patents represent a ‘hazard to society’. However, the RCPA
commented that
such an exclusion would amount to ‘a major deviation from
the spirit and the letter of current patent law in Australia and
the TRIPS Agreement’.
Other submissions referred to the potential for detrimental effects on the biotechnology
industry and the development of new
genetic products and technologies, if genetic
materials were not patentable.
ALRC’s views
7.32 In the ALRC’s view,
there are significant impediments to amending the
Patents Act
genetic materials from patentability. In Canada, it has been observed in respect
to such an exclusion that:
The momentum of the biotech industry, the long history of patentability
of gene sequences and the impact and complexity of existing
international trade
agreements make this, at present, an impractical and unrealistic option.
7.33 Similar considerations apply in the Australian context. Importantly, excluding
genetic materials from patentability could
have detrimental effects on the Australian
biotechnology industry. Dr Dianne Nicol has commented that jurisdictions that
substantial biotechnology research and commercialisation programs appear
to agree that patents on inventions involving gene sequences
should generally
be permitted.
While the fact
that other jurisdictions generally accept patents on genetic sequences is not
conclusive of the approach that
should be adopted in Australia, it is reason
to question whether amending the
Patents Act
to implement such an exclusion
from patentability is desirable.
7.34 Submissions encouraged the ALRC to consider the global nature of the
biotechnology industry and patent rights.
The Australian biotechnology industry relies on foreign investment and partnerships
with overseas entities to commercialise
the results of research involving genetic
materials and technologies. Australia’s adoption of a position that diverges
from the general international consensus would likely have adverse implications
for Australia’s participation in the global
biotechnology market and the
extent to which foreign entities participate in, and provide capital investment
for, research
and commercialisation of genetic materials and technologies in
7.35 Further, excluding genetic materials from patentability may conflict
with Australia’s international obligations under
Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 1994
(TRIPS Agreement).
As discussed in Chapter 4, the TRIPS Agreement provides that patents shall be
available for any inventions, and that patent
rights shall be enjoyable without
discrimination as to ‘the field of technology’.
Excluding genetic materials from patentability may be inconsistent with this
7.36 Even assuming that the express exclusion of genetic materials from patentability
is consistent with Australia’s obligations
under the TRIPS Agreement,
it may be argued that such an exclusion would not provide a complete, or even
a satisfactory, solution
to the problems said to be associated with the recognition
of some gene patents.
would be considerable difficulty involved in defining the scope of any exclusion
relating to genetic materials—for
example, would proteins produced by
genetic materials be covered? Dr Dianne Nicol and Jane Nielsen have suggested
that excluding
inventions involving gene sequences from patentability is likely
only to ‘invite patent attorneys to engage in creative
This is precisely what has happened with the ordre public/morality
exclusion, the methods of medical treatment exclusion and the
plant and animal
variety exclusions in Europe, none of which impose any significant limitations
on the types of patents being
granted in Europe.
7.37 Similar observations with respect to the interpretation of exclusions from
patentability in the patent laws of other jurisdictions
were made by IP Australia
in its submission.
7.38 The ALRC does not consider that the
Patents Act
should be amended
to exclude genetic materials or technologies from patentability. Such a reform
would pose a significant risk
to the biotechnology industry, raise problems
in terms of Australia’s compliance with its obligations under the TRIPS
Agreement and be difficult to implement effectively.
Proposal 7 - 1
Patents Act 1990
) should not be amended specifically to exclude genetic materials
or technologies from patentable subject matter.
Methods of medical treatment
Australian law
Patents Act
does not expressly exclude methods of medical treatment
from patentability. However, before 1972, Australian law recognised non-medical
procedures (including cosmetic treatment), as well as surgical or medical treatment
of the human body as an exclusion from patentability.
The reason for the exception was that such treatment was thought of as being ‘essentially
non-economic’ and ‘generally
inconvenient’ within terms of
Statute of Monopolies
7.40 Based on case law,
Australia considers that it is now ‘firmly established that methods of
medical treatment are patentable subject matter’.
IP Australia’s practice is that no objection to a patent application may
be made to ‘methods or processes for the
treatment, medical or otherwise,
of the human body or part of it, only on the basis that the human body is involved’.
Anaesthetic Supplies Pty Ltd v Rescare Ltd
a Full Court of the Federal Court considered whether methods of medical treatment
could constitute a ‘manner of manufacture’
and, if so, whether such
methods should nevertheless be excluded as ‘generally inconvenient’
in terms of
Statute of Monopolies
. Lockhart J stated that
there was no reason in principle why a method of medical treatment should not
be considered to be a
manner of manufacture and thus patentable.
On both humanitarian and economic grounds the search for medical advance
is to be encouraged. The award of limited monopolies is
a standard way of helping
to compensate for the expense of research. Ultimately the resolution of this
question is a balancing
exercise. There is on the one hand a need to encourage
research in connection with methods of medical treatment and on the other
the need not unduly to restrict the activities of those who engage in the therapy
7.42 Wilcox J agreed
that methods of medical treatment should be patentable, noting that the Parliament
had an opportunity
to include an exception in the
Patents Act
was re-enacted in 1990, and had chosen not to. Courts should, therefore, be
hesitant to introduce the exclusion by
reference to ‘the very general
principles’ contained in
Statute of Monopolies
7.43 The approach to the patentability of methods of medical treatment taken
by Lockhart and Wilcox JJ in
was affirmed by a Full Court of
the Federal Court in
Bristol-Myers Squibb Company v FH Faulding & Co
Black CJ and Lehane
J commented on:
the insurmountable problem, from a public policy viewpoint, of drawing
a logical distinction which would justify allowing patentability
for a product
for treating the human body, but deny patentability for a method of treatment.
Other jurisdictions
7.44 In the United Kingdom,
methods of medical treatment of the human body are expressly excluded from patentability.
Section 4(2) of the
Patents Act 1977
(UK) provides that:
An invention of a method of treatment of the human or animal body by
surgery or therapy or of diagnosis practised on the human
or animal body shall
not be taken to be capable of industrial application.
In other jurisdictions, including Canada and New Zealand, methods of medical
treatment are excluded by reference to more
general provisions of their respective
patents legislation.
7.46 The Canadian Patent Office states that subject matter ‘related
to a process of surgery or therapy on living humans’
is not considered
to be within the scope of ‘invention’ as defined by s 2 of the
of medical treatment are not patentable inventions because they are generally
considered not to meet the Canadian utility
Patents Act 1953
(NZ) does not currently contain an express
exclusion from patentability for methods of medical treatment, but case law
held that methods of medical treatment are not patentable on the basis that
they do not constitute a ‘manner of manufacture’.
Recently, however, the New Zealand Court of Appeal appears to have departed
from this view in concluding that ‘it can
no longer be said that a method
of treating humans cannot be an invention’.
To address potential uncertainty as to the patentability of methods of medical
treatment under New Zealand law, the New Zealand
Ministry of Economic Development
has recommended that the
Patents Act 1953
(NZ) be amended to provide
a specific exclusion from patentability for ‘inventions concerning diagnostic,
therapeutic
and surgical methods of treatment of humans’.
7.48 The medical treatment exclusion from patentability, as applied in the
United Kingdom and other overseas jurisdictions, relates
only to treatment or
diagnosis on
the human body—and not to procedures carried out
, or exclusively outside the body.
In particular, methods of diagnosis performed on tissues or fluids that have
been permanently removed from the body are not
7.49 Article 27(3)(a) of the TRIPS Agreement permits members to exclude ‘diagnostic,
therapeutic and surgical methods for
the treatment of humans or animals’
from patentability. This exclusion has not been definitively interpreted but
scope may not be as broad as may appear at first glance.
7.50 It is not clear whether the TRIPS Agreement permits exceptions for
procedures. While the language may be broad enough on its face to
procedures (for example, as a ‘diagnostic method’)
these words may need to be interpreted in the light of the national
laws existing
at the time the treaty was negotiated.
The medical treatment exclusion from patentability, as applied in the United
Kingdom and other overseas jurisdictions, relates
only to treatment or diagnosis
the human body.
7.51 This limitation is significant when considering the possible application
of a new exclusion for methods of medical treatment
in the context of gene patents.
Gene patents most often relate to products and processes for use outside the
human body, notably
in connection with genetic sequencing and diagnostic genetic
testing. Even in the case of gene therapy, patents are likely to
relate to processes
carried out
—such as inserting genes into a gene carrier
(or ‘vector’) and using the vector to carry the genes into somatic
cells. Procedures for introducing vectors, modified cells or stem cells into
the human body (for example, by injection) could
be excluded as methods of medical
treatment. However, such an exclusion may have limited practical benefit if
processes remained patentable.
Submissions and consultations
7.52 A number of submissions
supported the introduction of an exclusion from patentability for methods of medical
treatment. The
Department of Health Western Australia suggested that:
Australia consider making provision for Article 27(3)(a) of the TRIPS
Agreement, where ‘diagnostic, therapeutic and surgical
methods for the
treatment of human or animals’ may be excluded from patentability. This
may preclude the patentability
of materials required for diagnostic and predictive
genetic testing.
7.53 The Breast
Cancer Network of Australia suggested that the ALRC should consider exclusions
from patentability ‘for
specific public health purposes’.
7.54 However, some submissions indicated that excluding inventions involving
methods of diagnostic, therapeutic or surgical treatment
from patentability
might not be as effective as it first appears. Submissions cited patent practice
in Europe with respect
to methods of treatment as evidence that such an exclusion
might have limited application.
IP Australia commented:
The European Patent Office applies a narrow, technical interpretation
of the exclusion for methods of treatment of the human body.
‘Diagnosis’
outside the body is considered to be patentable. The medical use of novel substances
can be protected,
as long as the patent claim is to the substance per se, rather
than a method. New medical uses for known substances may in effect
be patented
using the ‘Swiss’ form of claim.
Submissions also suggested that precluding methods of medical treatment from
patentability might have an adverse effect
on innovation in the healthcare field.
Genetic Technologies Limited and GlaxoSmithKline proposed that methods of treatment
and diagnosis should continue to be patentable
to provide incentives to invest
in research and development in such methods.
The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute for Medical Research (WEHI) commented that
removing patent protection for such inventions
would ‘simply prevent development
or else encourage commercial secrecy’.
7.56 Some submissions supported patent protection for methods of diagnostic,
therapeutic, or surgical treatment involving genetic
materials and technologies
only on a conditional basis. For example, certain submissions indicated that
patents on methods
of medical treatment should be acceptable provided that patent
protection was not available for genetic materials
7.57 The Human Genetics Society of Australasia (HGSA) proposed that naturally-occurring
chemicals (including genes and gene sequences)
should not be patentable, but
medical methods and processes should continue to have patent protection. The
HGSA considered
Provided there is the potential for competition, for new and better
processes to be invented and patented, then there is no justification
for restricting
7.58 If diagnostic,
therapeutic and surgical methods of treatment were to be excluded from patentability,
some submissions
suggested that the exclusion should not be limited to methods
involving genetic materials and technologies but should be technology
7.59 Other submissions considered that, if protection continued to be available
for these types of inventions, an appropriately
crafted defence should be enacted
to address the potential adverse consequences of patents on methods of medical
For example, the
Australian Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture (ACIPA) submitted
If methods of human treatment remain patentable, Australia should follow
the lead of the United States, and introduce a limited
liability defence for
surgeons and medical practitioners in respect of patent infringement.
ALRC’s views
7.60 For the reasons set out
in Chapter 22, the ALRC has concluded that if reform in relation to gene patents
and medical treatment
is justified, the introduction of a new defence—as
opposed to an exclusion from patentability—would be the preferable
because such a defence could apply to both
procedures and be more targeted in its application.
7.61 Accordingly, the ALRC does not propose that a new exclusion from patentability
for methods of medical treatment be introduced
in Australia. In particular,
the ALRC is concerned that such an exclusion would have adverse effects on investment
in biotechnology,
medical research and innovation in healthcare and may not
be consistent with Australia’s obligations under the TRIPS Agreement.
Proposal 7 - 2
Patents Act
should not be amended specifically
to exclude methods of diagnostic, therapeutic or surgical treatment from patentable
Exclusions from patentability on social or ethical grounds
7.62 Chapter 3 discussed the
social and ethical dimensions of gene patents. These include concerns about ensuring
equitable access
to healthcare; recognising the human genome as the common heritage
of humanity; respecting human dignity, self-determination and
self-ownership;
conflict between the premises of gene patenting and certain religious beliefs;
and ensuring fair benefit-sharing
of, and control over, research outcomes.
7.63 It has been suggested that the patent system should provide avenues for
addressing these concerns, such as by making social
and ethical considerations
relevant in the assessment of gene patent applications.
7.64 The following material examines the extent to which social and ethical
considerations may be taken into account under existing
Australian patent law
and the law of other countries, and then discusses whether the patent system
is an appropriate mechanism
through which to address these concerns and, if
Australian law
Patents Act
not contain an explicit mechanism to allow social and ethical considerations to
be taken into account by patent examiners in
assessing the patentability of a
particular invention. The Act may, however, include an indirect means for this
7.66 As discussed in Chapter 6, s 18 of the
Patents Act
states that
a patent may be granted for a ‘manner of manufacture’ within the
meaning of s 6 of the
Statute of Monopolies 1623
Section 6 provides that an invention should ‘be not contrary to the law,
nor mischievous to the state, by raising prices
of commodities, or hurt of trade,
or generally inconvenient’.
7.67 It is arguable that the term ‘generally inconvenient’ includes
social and ethical considerations within its scope.
Decisions of the High Court and the Federal Court contain
obiter dicta
suggesting that the ‘generally inconvenient’ exception incorporates
public policy considerations and may provide
a basis upon which the grant of
a patent could be refused.
7.68 To date, however, Australian courts have declined to rely solely upon
matters of public policy or ethics under the ‘generally
inconvenient’
exception in considering whether an invention is inappropriate subject matter
for the grant of a patent.
The courts have suggested that such issues are for
Parliament to determine, not judges.
7.69 Further, as a matter of practice, it appears unlikely that ethical considerations
are considered by Australian patent examiners
in their assessment of whether
an invention constitutes a ‘manner of manufacture’. The
of Practice and Procedure
specifically notes that ethical and policy considerations
are not grounds upon which a patent examiner may reject a patent application.
Arguments based solely on matters of ethics or social policy are not
relevant in deciding whether particular subject matter is
patentable. ... it
is for Parliament, not the courts or the Patent Office, to decide whether matters
of ethics or social policy
are to have any impact on what is patentable.
Other jurisdictions
7.70 In contrast to the Australian
position, a number of overseas jurisdictions expressly permit an invention to
be excluded from
patentability on social or ethical grounds. Article 27(2) of
the TRIPS Agreement provides that member States may exclude inventions
from patentability
if prevention of the commercial exploitation of an invention is necessary to protect
ordre public
or morality’ including ‘to protect human,
animal or plant life or health or to avoid serious prejudice to the environment’.
European Union
7.71 The European Patent Convention (EPC) includes an
exception from patentability in similar terms to the TRIPS Agreement.
Article 53(a) of the EPC provides:
European patents shall not be granted in respect of:
inventions the publication or exploitation of which would be contrary to ‘ordre
public’ or morality, provided
that the exploitation shall not be deemed
to be so contrary merely because it is prohibited by law or regulation in some
all of the Contracting States.
Article 53(a) of the EPC is replicated in the European Parliament’s Directive
on the Legal Protection of Biological
Inventions (EU Biotechnology Directive).
In addition, the EU Biotechnology Directive sets out certain inventions that
presumptively fall within the ambit of the exclusion
from patentability on the
ordre public
or morality.
Those inventions are: processes for cloning human beings or for modifying the
germ line identity of human beings; uses of embryos
for industrial or commercial
purposes; and processes for modifying the germ line identity of animals which
are likely to cause
them suffering without substantial medical benefit to humans
or animals, as well as any animals resulting from such processes.
This list of inventions is not, however, intended to be exhaustive.
7.73 The terms ‘
ordre public
’ and ‘morality’
are not defined in either the EPC or the EU Biotechnology Directive. In drafting
of the EPC, the EPC Working Party concluded that European institutions
from time to time should determine the interpretation of
these concepts.
7.74 The EPO has interpreted both terms. In
Plant Genetic Systems NV
the Boards of Appeal of the European Patent Office (EPO Boards of Appeal) upheld
the validity of a patent claiming certain
herbicide-resistant plants, which
was challenged on the basis that it was contrary to
ordre public
or morality,
among other grounds. In reaching this decision, the EPO Boards of Appeal stated
that the concept of
ordre public
the protection of public security and the physical integrity of individuals
as part of society. This concept encompasses also the
protection of the environment.
7.75 The EPO Boards of Appeal also explained that the concept of ‘morality’
is related to the belief that some behaviour is right and acceptable
whereas other behaviour is wrong, this belief being founded
on the totality
of accepted norms which are deeply rooted in a particular culture. For the purposes
of the EPC, the culture
in question is the culture inherent in European society
and civilisation.
7.76 Despite
the seemingly broad scope given to the concepts of
ordre public
and morality
under European patent law, the exception has been narrowly applied.
The Examination Guidelines for the EPO (EPO Examination Guidelines) indicate
that the application of art 53(a) is extremely
The purpose of this [provision] is to exclude from protection inventions
likely to induce riot or public disorder, or to lead to
criminal or other generally
offensive behaviour ... obvious examples of subject-matter which should be excluded
provision are letter-bombs and anti-personnel mines. In general,
this provision is likely to be invoked only in rare and extreme
cases. A fair
test to apply is to consider whether it is probable that the public in general
would regard the invention as
so abhorrent that the grant of patent rights would
be inconceivable.
Florey/Relaxin
the Opposition
Division of the EPO specifically rejected the relevance of the exception to
a patent claiming a genetic sequence
encoding human H2-preprorelaxin.
The decision was affirmed on appeal to the EPO Boards of Appeal. The EPO Boards
of Appeal held that materials isolated from
the human body were outside the
scope of the
ordre public
/morality provision as a matter of statutory
interpretation because r 23(e)(2) of the EPC—which provides that ‘an
element isolated from the human body’ may be a patentable invention—qualifies
ordre public
/morality exclusion in art 53(a) of the EPC.
Harvard/Oncomouse
, a patent claiming a method for producing
a mouse genetically predisposed to cancer was opposed, relevantly, on the basis
it was contrary to
ordre public
morality pursuant to art
53(a) of the EPC.
The EPO Boards
of Appeal held that to determine whether art 53(a) constituted a bar to patentability
would require
a careful weighing up of the suffering of animals and possible risks
to the environment on the one hand, and the invention’s
usefulness to
mankind on the other.
7.79 It appears
that such a balancing of competing interests will rarely result in a patent
challenged on
ordre public
or morality grounds being rejected. A recent
report on the impact and management of intellectual property rights in the United
Kingdom healthcare sector noted that:
Patent practice to date is to apply a utilitarian (benefit/detriment)
approach to determining whether the commercial exploitation
of an invention
would be contrary to morality or not. Provided some benefit can be shown to
result, or be likely to result,
from the exploitation of the invention, then
the exclusion is unlikely to be invoked.
7.80 Indeed, the
ordre public
/morality exception has been raised successfully
in only two known cases—one involving a hairless mouse used to test hair
growth products and the other an invention involving the cloning of a fused
human and pig cell.
7.81 Patent statutes in jurisdictions outside Europe also contain provisions
permitting the exclusion of inventions from patent
protection on ethical or
social policy grounds.
date, these ethical exceptions have rarely been invoked with any degree of success.
However, recent reviews of patents legislation
in other jurisdictions have suggested
that adopting an exclusion from patentability on ethical grounds or expanding
of an existing provision might be desirable.
New Zealand
7.82 Amendments to New Zealand patent law have been proposed
to expand the scope of the exclusion from patentability on moral grounds.
s 17 of the
Patent Act 1953
(NZ) grants the New Zealand Commissioner of
Patents discretion to refuse an application if the use of the claimed invention
be ‘contrary to morality’. The provision has rarely, if ever,
been invoked to date.
7.83 A recent review on the
Patents Act 1953
(NZ) by the Ministry for
Economic Development (the NZ Report) recommended that the Act be amended to
include a provision in
similar terms to the European
The NZ Report
indicated, however, that a patent is likely to be refused or revoked pursuant
to this provision only if ‘exploitation
of the invention would be offensive
to a substantial section of society’.
7.84 The Ontario Report recommended that the Canadian
Government consider amending the
Patent Act 1985
(Can) to include an
/morality clause.
The Ontario Report contemplated that the bases upon which a patent might be challenged
for contravention of the clause would be
set out in the legislation.
The Ontario Report suggested that:
Such a mechanism appropriately modified from the European experience
would grant the Commissioner of Patents the ability to reject
patents on processes,
products and techniques which are deemed to violate Canadian morals and ethics.
United States
7.85 As in Australia, United States patent law does not
contain an express provision permitting patent applications to be refused
or challenged
on ethical grounds. United States courts have, however, interpreted the ‘utility’
requirement as preventing
the patenting of inventions that are ‘injurious
to the well-being, good policy, or sound morals of society’.
Ethics and the patent system
7.86 There are widely differing
views about the relevance of social and ethical considerations in the assessment
of patents. One
view is that patents form part of an economic system for encouraging
investment in research and that the patent system should be
concerned primarily
with assessing the inventiveness and utility of new inventions.
Social and ethical concerns are separate issues to be dealt with by other means.
7.87 Further, it is said that the patent system is an ineffective mechanism
for dealing with the social and ethical considerations
because it was not designed
to address such issues.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Working Party on Biotechnology
Report (OECD Report) stated:
Workshop participants generally agreed that in cases where fundamental
ethical decisions are at stake, the debate needs to take
place in society at
large rather than in the patent offices, which have no special authority in
moral matters ... the patent
law itself is most probably not a suitable medium
for the raising of philosophical objections to the patenting of living organisms
and genetic inventions. In such cases, legislative or regulatory action should
be envisioned. Although some observers would
encourage legislators to adopt
a broader vision of patent law as an ethico-legal instrument of public policy,
it was generally
agreed that IP law is fashioned primarily to promote inventiveness
and the disclosure of advances in technology and cannot be
easily reformed to
include such a vision.
These views have been challenged on the basis that any system that affects the
interests of individuals or groups—as
the patent system does—cannot
be socially or ethically neutral.
A number of general arguments have been made for dealing with social and ethical
concerns through patent laws, which may be
applicable in the context of gene
patents. These include the following:
Decisions made by patent examiners are affected by the values and social
interests of the community of which they are a part.
Therefore, social and
ethical considerations are implicitly and unavoidably part of the patent granting
The patent system exists to serve the public interest: considerations of
public purpose should be fundamental to the patent
granting process.
Patents create incentives for research and investment, and the availability
of a patent may affect the types of products and
processes that are developed.
Patent systems should bear some responsibility for ensuring that the research
they encourage
is consistent with the public interest.
The incentives that patents create may provide a useful mechanism for dealing
with any social and ethical problems raised by
the use of patented inventions.
Thus, it may be effective to regulate the adverse consequences of patents
through the laws
that create these incentives, rather than by creating a separate
set of rules.
7.89 If the patent system is to address social and ethical considerations,
there is a variety of ways in which this might be achieved.
Some mechanisms
may be more suitable than others, depending upon the nature of the social or
ethical concerns at issue and,
in particular, whether they relate to the grant
of a patent covering a genetic invention or to the way in which such patents
are exploited.
Patents Act
contains mechanisms that might be used indirectly
to address social or ethical concerns about the manner in which patent rights
are exploited. For example, the compulsory licensing provisions may be invoked
where the reasonable requirements of the public
with respect to a patented invention
are not being satisfied.
This might include circumstances in which access to a patented medical genetic
technology is not being provided equitably.
7.91 However, the material below focuses on reforms intended to allow social
and ethical considerations to be assessed as part
of the process for
patents—that is, to allow certain subject matter to be excluded from patentability
on social or ethical grounds. Suggestions
that the patent system should deal
with social or ethical concerns raises questions about how such decisions should
and by whom.
A role for patent examiners?
7.92 One option would be for
patent examiners to consider whether a patent application should be rejected on
social or ethical grounds,
as part of the examination process.
7.93 However, it has been suggested that patent examiners lack the training
and expertise to make decisions of this kind.
For example, one European patent attorney has stated that patent examiners are
‘wholly incapable’ of carrying out
‘sophisticated balancing
of subjective moral values as part of the examination procedure’ and asked:
Are EPO examiners to have courses in moral philosophy or theology?
And if so, of what variety?
7.94 The Ontario Report also commented that one of the difficulties with the
European morality clause is that:
the clause is applied, in the first instance, by patenting examiners
who do not necessarily have expertise in ethical matters,
and are therefore
uncomfortable in applying the clause.
7.95 The OECD Report concluded:
In the absence of commonly agreed criteria for making moral judgments
as to the application of new technology, therefore, it is
difficult to apply
morality provisions ... In addition, the patent system is meant primarily to
regulate competition, and patent
examiners are not in a position to define or
even interpret the basic values of society.
7.96 Patent examiners could be assisted in assessing the social and ethical
considerations involved in patent applications
by guidelines drawn up by some
authoritative body. An analogous set of ethics guidelines is the
Statement on Ethical Conduct in Research Involving Humans
(National Statement),
developed by the Australian Health Ethics Committee
of the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC). Research proposals
involving human participants must be reviewed and approved by a Human Research
Ethics Committee (HREC). The National Statement
provides ethical guidance to
members of HRECs in conducting this ethics review. The National Statement reflects
international
development of standards about the ethical conduct of human research,
culminating in the Declaration of Helsinki,
which has become an international benchmark in this area.
7.97 There are no similar international precedents for the development of
guidelines by which to assess the social and ethical
implications of gene patents,
or patents generally. Overseas jurisdictions that expressly permit an invention
to be excluded
from patentability on social or ethical grounds have not developed
comprehensive guidelines. This may indicate that, given the
breadth of potential
social and ethical considerations of relevance to inventions in different technological
fields, drafting
guidelines in this area may be impracticable.
An ethics advisory body?
7.98 Another option would
be to refer patent applications that raise social or ethical considerations to
a specialised body that
could provide guidelines or advice on these issues, or
make determinations itself.
The establishment of such a body has been considered previously in Australia and
7.99 Review of certain types of patent applications by
a committee, prior to any decision by the Commissioner of Patents, was proposed
by Senator Coulter as part of the amendments to the
Patents Bill 1990
proposal included provision for a committee (to be established by the regulations)
to review patent applications that
may have fallen within the scope of the proposed
exclusion for genes, genetic material and genetically modified organisms, upon
reference from the Commissioner of Patents.
The proposal for an additional layer of review of patent applications was criticised
by some Senators on the basis that it would
increase uncertainty
and further complicate the operation of the patent system.
7.100 There are some Australian precedents for the establishment of ethics
advisory bodies. For example, as mentioned above, the
regulatory framework for
the ethical conduct of research is centred on the review of research proposals
Another precedent
is the Gene Technology Ethics Committee (GTEC) established under the
Technology Act
(Cth), which introduced a national scheme for
the regulation of genetically modified organisms in Australia. The Act established
the position of the Gene Technology Regulator (the Regulator)
and three advisory bodies, including GTEC.
7.101 GTEC provides advice to the Regulator and the Gene Technology Ministerial
on ethical issues
associated with gene technology.
At present, GTEC comprises 12 members with expertise in matters such as ethics
and the environment, health ethics, applied
ethics, law, religious practices,
and animal health and welfare; and two expert advisors with expertise in bioethics.
GTEC does not provide advice in respect of specific decisions of the Regulator.
Other jurisdictions
7.102 The introduction of an advisory body to assist
patent examiners in assessing ethical issues has been considered in other jurisdictions.
The NZ Report recommended that the Commissioner of Patents must ‘seek advice
from appropriate authorities outside the Intellectual
Property Office’ when
determining whether to refuse to grant a patent on ‘morality/
ordre public
The NZ Report indicated
that such authorities might include the Maori Consultative Group and the Bioethics
The NZ Report did
not, however, consider the mechanisms by which appropriate authorities might provide
advice to the Intellectual
Property Office of New Zealand.
7.103 Similarly, the Ontario Report, which recommended that the Canadian Government
consider the introduction of a morality clause
Patent Act 1985
also recommended that a specialised body separate from the Canadian Patent Office
might undertake review of patents for
compliance with particular moral standards.
The Ontario Report considered that a specialised review body, comprising experts
in science, ethics and competition law, would
‘overcome the reluctance
faced by European patent examiners to make pronouncements based on ethical or
moral criteria’.
Ontario Report also contemplated that such an ethics review body would have
the power to suspend the operation of a patent
deemed to be in contravention
of the morality clause and to lift the suspension if and when the ‘offending
of the patent were remedied.
7.104 As discussed above, in Europe, determinations about whether particular
patent applications claim inventions that are contrary
ordre public
morality are made by patent examiners and are also open to challenge by third
parties on such grounds. However, the European
Group on Ethics in Science and
Technologies (European Group on Ethics) is responsible for evaluating all ethical
biotechnology
and may be consulted where biotechnology is to be evaluated at the ‘level
of basic ethical principles’.
In its 2002 report on the ethical aspects of patenting inventions involving
human stem cells, the European Group on Ethics
also proposed that ethics review
of patent applications by an independent advisory body should be incorporated
into the patent
examination process.
Submissions and consultations
Social and ethical considerations and the patent system
Many submissions suggested that social and ethical considerations should be taken
into account in assessing gene patent applications.
For example, the Cancer Council of Australia recommended amendments to the
to introduce ‘public interest and social impact criteria into the
assessment criteria for patent applications’.
ACIPA referred to the ‘insular attitude of patent administrations to matters
of public policy’
recommended that ‘ethical and social concerns about patents on genetic materials
and technologies should be addressed
in part through the patent system’.
The South Australian Government suggested that the patent system cannot be ethically
or socially neutral and that it would benefit
from explicit direction on ethical
7.106 Other submissions opposed any use of the patent system as a mechanism
for assessing social or ethical considerations. Davies
Collison Cave considered
The patent system is not the appropriate forum for making assessments
regarding ethical and moral issues. In this context it is
pointed out that the
grant of a patent does not provide the patentee with an endorsement or authority
to exploit the invention
concerned ... In our view, consideration of moral or
ethical issues is incompatible with the commercial priorities and realities
of the patent system.
WEHI noted that the grant of gene patent rights and the use of genetic inventions
were distinct issues and should be
separately regulated. WEHI stated that:
one should not confuse the granting of patent rights with practising
the invention. Practice of the invention may fall under several
different laws
and codes of practice within each jurisdiction.
7.108 Some submissions noted that if there are concerns about the type of research
activities that lead to the development
of genetic inventions, these concerns
should be addressed directly, through regulating genetic research. The Department
Industry, Tourism and Resources submitted:
The patent system is not the appropriate instrument to deal with perceived
ethical concerns about research activity in the area
of human genetics including
‘gene manipulation’ and commercialisation of technologies resulting
from such research.
Patentable inventions generally result from intensive R&D
activity. Controls on patenting will not be effective as a means
of regulating
genetic research or technologies since such activities can still be carried
out and results exploited. In addition,
the community would lose some of the
economic benefits arising from the new technology ... ethical concerns regarding
research should be addressed at a much earlier stage of the research
process, before the activity proceeds to the patenting stage.
7.109 In a similar vein, GlaxoSmithKline commented:
much of the debate about the ethics of patenting is actually about
the ethics of particular areas of research ... If a particular
is considered to be ethically objectionable, then the denial of patent protection
for inventions arising from
such work will not result in its cessation ... Direct
legislative controls (such as prohibition or strict regulation) on the conduct
of certain types of research and/or on the sale of certain types of products
are the appropriate means to ensure that any public
policy objectives based
on ethical concerns are achieved.
Reform options
7.110 Submissions recognised that if social and ethical
considerations are to be taken into account in assessing patent applications,
Australian patent law and practice will need to be amended to facilitate this.
The Cancer Council of Australia submitted:
Public interest objectives should be included within patent law with
an emphasis on defining a benefit to society before a patent
is granted. A key
consideration is whether such objectives should be made more explicit in the
Patents Act.
7.111 ACIPA stated
Ethical considerations are and should be relevant in assessing applications
for gene patents. The current manner of manufacture
test is not sufficient to
accommodate such considerations.
7.112 The possibility of amending the Patents Act to include an
ordre public
or morality exception to patentability—similar to exceptions under European
laws—was raised in some submissions.
The difficulties involved in incorporating social or ethical considerations
into an exclusion from patentability were recognised.
For example, IP Australia
commented that:
ethical exceptions to patentability in European patent law has increased
uncertainty over patent rights, and is considered by many
to be generally ineffectual.
7.113 Several submissions advocated the development of statutory guidelines
to assist in the assessment of social and ethical
although they were not explicit about how these guidelines should be developed,
applied or given legal effect as part of the
patent examination process.
7.114 The appropriateness of the Patent Office making social or ethical determinations
was questioned. Genetic Technologies Limited
asserted that such matters were
not properly within the province of the Patent Office.
It is not the place of the patent office to consider ethical concerns—there
are many other vehicles for this, many of which
perform extremely well ... Ethical
control of the use of new technology sits appropriately with our legislators.
It has never
been and there is no reason in the future for it to be the role
of the patent office to be making ethical judgments.
7.115 Submissions noted the practical difficulties inherent in requiring patent
examiners—who are specialists in scientific
and technical fields—to
assess social or ethical considerations. GlaxoSmithKline submitted that patent
examiners are
not equipped to determine such issues.
The Queensland Government considered that IP Australia may not be equipped to
address ethical and moral issues if the patent
system were amended to include
these matters as relevant considerations.
7.116 A number of submissions considered that a body other than IP Australia—for
example, the proposed Human Genetics Commission
of Australia (HGCA)
play a role in developing and implementing appropriate mechanisms to help ensure
that the exploitation of gene
patent rights does not conflict with other public
policy goals.
7.117 ACIPA proposed that an independent body comprising specialists in ethics,
research and economics be established to assess
the ethical implications of
patent applications.
submissions supported the establishment of a such a body.
The Department of Health Western Australia recommended that:
an ethical review panel, apart from the Patent Office, be involved
in assessing applications for gene patents, with the power to
suspend the exercise
of patent rights. It is recommended that such an ethical review panel operate
under the auspices of the
proposed HGCA. Ethical considerations should be taken
into account in assessing patent applications over genetic materials. Such
ethics body could also be employed to oversee and recommend the kinds of genetic
tests that are available to the public.
7.118 Some submissions suggested that it may be preferable to focus on addressing
any social and ethical concerns that arise
after gene patents have been granted,
rather than in the examination process. IP Australia submitted:
It may be more suitable for any such assessment [of ethical issues
by IP Australia] to be conducted post-grant, and only for those
patents which
are identified to be of concern. In any case, close collaboration with other
agencies may be required for any
such assessment to be sufficiently robust,
as the patent system has relatively shallow experience in this area.
7.119 The RCPA submitted:
It is probably wiser to protect society from the occasional misuse
or abuse of monopoly power by imposing conditions or restrictions
of gene patents and by enhancement of defences, exemptions and ‘downstream’
regulations rather than
alter the patent system itself.
ALRC’s views
7.120 It is arguable that
the ‘generally inconvenient’ proviso included in the ‘manner
of manufacture’ requirement
in s 18 of the
Patents Act
already provides
some limited basis upon which social and ethical considerations may be relevant
to the patentability of a genetic
invention under Australian law.
However, the ALRC does not believe that the
Patents Act
should be amended
to expand the circumstances in which such considerations are taken into account
in decisions about granting patents.
7.121 In the ALRC’s view, there is no compelling case for amending the
Patents Act
to allow expressly for the exclusion of particular subject
matter from patentability on social or ethical grounds. If such a provision
were to be included in the Act, an obvious model would be an exclusion from
patentability on the grounds of
ordre public
or morality, as found in
European law and as permitted by the TRIPS Agreement. Yet, adopting such a provision
in Australia
would not address the particular concerns expressed to the Inquiry
In Europe, the
difficulties in applying the exclusion have led to a very narrow interpretation
of the provision, and it has
had no discernible impact on the granting of gene
patents in those jurisdictions.
7.122 Patent offices and examiners have no special authority in philosophical
or moral matters. Examiners are chosen for their
expertise in particular scientific
and technical fields. For example, examiners who assess patent applications
for genetic
materials and technologies must have qualifications in the field
of biochemistry.
possible to provide examiners with training in social and ethical matters but
they will not necessarily be the individuals
best suited to making assessments
on such grounds. Further, given the breadth of potential social and ethical
considerations
of relevance to inventions in different technological fields,
it may not be possible to provide them with the training or guidelines
to assess the social and ethical implications of all new inventions.
7.123 Where the use or exploitation of new inventions gives rise to social
or ethical concerns, it may be argued that debate and
decisions about new regulation
should be taken by society as a whole—through community action and the
political system—rather
than by individuals whose training and experience
is primarily scientific and technical in nature.
7.124 The establishment of a new ethics advisory body would be a more appropriate
mechanism for assessing social and ethical considerations
than leaving such
an assessment to individual patent examiners. The membership of an ethics advisory
body could be based on
expertise in social and ethical issues and permit various
ethical perspectives and standpoints to be represented. However, such
a mechanism
would inevitably add to the cost and complexity of the patent system. Any determination
and ethical implications of a particular invention
is likely to be contested and new review or appeal mechanisms may be needed.
Given that IP Australia examines more than 16,000 patent applications each year,
and that only a small proportion of these applications can be expected to have
contentious social or ethical implications,
ethics assessment of all patent
applications seems unlikely to be the most efficient or effective form of regulation.
to permit inventions to be excluded from patentability based on the advice
or determinations of patent examiners or some new ethics
advisory body would
thus have uncertain consequences for the efficiency of the patent system.
7.125 The ALRC’s present view is that social and ethical concerns can
be addressed most effectively through direct regulation
of the use and exploitation
of patented inventions (or through regulation of research activities that lead
to the development
of inventions), rather than through excluding particular
subject matter from patentability. In this context, arguments about the
of social and ethical considerations tend to be directed towards two quite different
outcomes: either that particular
subject matter should not be patentable because
the invention is objectionable and its use should be curtailed or prohibited;
or that particular subject matter should not be patentable because the invention
is beneficial and its use should be promoted.
7.126 In the ALRC’s view, it is better in the former case to regulate
use of the invention directly than to address the
ethical or social concerns
by excluding the subject matter from patentability. To exclude such an invention
from patentability
does not prevent the inventor from using the ‘objectionable’
technology, although it might have the incidental effect
of encouraging secret
use and limiting the dissemination of the technology. Thus, intervening at the
point of patentability
does not address the mischief that is said to arise from
the invention. An example is human embryonic stem cells—these can
be patented but their derivation and use in research is carefully controlled
by federal, state and territory legislation,
as well as guidelines and standards
issued by the NHMRC.
7.127 In the latter case—where an invention is seen as beneficial and
access is to be encouraged—somewhat different
considerations apply, but
the ALRC here too has come to the view it is generally better to regulate use
of the patented invention
than to exclude the subject matter from patentability.
Those who argue for an exclusion from patentability in order to promote
access to the invention generally do so because the granting of a patent over
the invention, with its concomitant monopoly
rights, enables the patent holder
to limit use of the invention through restrictive licensing practices or charging
prices. But this is to take a short term view. In the longer term,
the inability to patent a particular type of technology (for
example, diagnostic
genetic tests) may have negative implications for research and development in
that field. The net outcome
might be to reduce access to that technology in
the longer term.
7.128 Social and ethical considerations relating to access can be better addressed
by specific measures to facilitate the use
of particular patented inventions,
both through the patent system and by other means. For example, research on
a patented invention
can be promoted by a new defence to claims of patent infringement
(see Chapter 14); and exploitation of a patent can be promoted
by better utilisation
of the Crown use (Chapter 26) and compulsory licensing provisions (Chapter 27)
Patents Act
. Beyond the
Patents Act
, access on reasonable
terms can also be facilitated by the vigilant application of competition law
principles to the licensing
of patent rights (Chapter 24). Solutions such as
these allow for a targeted response to existing and emerging problems in the
field of genetic materials and technologies, and this is unlikely to be achieved
by the categorical exclusion of such inventions
from patentability.
Proposal 7 - 3
Patents Act
should not be amended to expand
the circumstances in which social and ethical considerations may be taken into
account in decisions
should be addressed primarily through direct regulation of the use
or exploitation
of the patented invention.
Patents Act 1990
(innovation patents). ‘Invention’ and ‘patentable
invention’ are defined in the
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) sch 1.
Patents Act 1990
, (3) (innovation patents).
(standard patents);
s 101B(2)(d)
(4) (innovation patents).
IP Australia,
Patent Manual of Practice
and Procedure Volume 2: National
(2002), [8.5.1] - [8.5.2].
Ibid, [8.5.1]. See also D Nicol, ‘Should
Human Genes be Patentable Inventions under Australian Patent Law?’
Journal of Law and Medicine
See Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional
Human Cloning: Scientific, Ethical and Regulatory Aspects of Human
Cloning and Stem Cell Research
(2001), [8.70] - [8.75]; M Rimmer, ‘The
Attack of the Clones: Patent Law and Stem Cell Research’ (2003) 10
of Law and Medicine
The Commissioner may revoke an innovation
patent on equivalent grounds:
Patents Act 1990
s 101B(2)(d).
IP Australia,
Patent Manual of Practice
and Procedure Volume 2: National
(2002), [8.6.1].
Ibid, [8.6.3] - [8.6.4].
Patents Act 1990
s 50(1)(b).
The Commissioner may revoke an innovation patent on equivalent grounds:
See also IP Australia,
Patent Manual of Practice
and Procedure Volume 2: National
(2002), [8.7].
Biotechnology Australia,
Biotechnology
Intellectual Property Manual
(2001), 39.
Patents Act 1990
This exclusion does not apply if the invention is a microbiological process
or a product of such a process:
Patents Act 1990
Advisory Council on Intellectual Property,
Innovation Patent: Exclusion of Plant and Animal Subject Matter
Senate Standing Committee on Industry
Science and Technology,
Report on the Consideration of the
Patents Bill 1990
(1990), 2; Commonwealth of Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
20 September 1990, 2653 (J Coulter). The Senate Standing Committee adopted an
alternate provision proposed by Senator
Brian Harradine which is now embodied
Patents Act
. See further Ch 16.
Senate Standing
Committee on Industry Science and Technology,
Report on the Consideration
Patents Bill 1990
(1990), 2 - 3.
Patents Amendment Bill 1996
(Cth); Commonwealth
of Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 27 June 1996, 2332 (Natasha
Stott Despoja).
The terms ‘genes’, ‘gene
sequences’ and ‘descriptions of the base sequence of naturally occurring
gene or a naturally occurring gene sequence’ were not defined, but it
appears that the amendment was intended to apply
to both human and non-human
genetic material.
As a proposed amendment to the
Amendment Bill 2001
(Cth): Commonwealth of Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
Senate, 27 September 2001, 28195 (N Stott Despoja).
Parliament of Australia,
Senate Daily
Bills Update
, <www.aph.gov.au/parlinfo/billsnet/billsupd.pdf> at 19
January 2004.
House of Commons Standing Committee on
Assisted Human Reproduction: Building Families
(2001), rec 34.
Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting: Charting New Territory in Healthcare:
Report to the Provinces and Territories
(2002), iii, 31 - 32.
Universal Declaration on the Human
Genome and Human Rights
, 11 November 1997, UNESCO, art 4.
International Bioethics Committee of
Advice of the IBC on the Patentability of the Human Genome
European Parliament,
Bulletin EU 3-2000
Human Rights (5/11): Parliament Resolution on the Decision by the European Patent
Office (EPO) with Regard
to Patent No EP 695 351 Granted on 8 December 1999
http://europa.eu.int/abc/doc/off/bull/en/200003/p102005.htm
at 19 January
European Parliament,
Bulletin EU 10-2001
Human Rights (3/9): Parliament Resolution on the Patenting of BRCA1 and BRCA2
http://europa.eu.int/abc/doc/off/bull/en/200110/p102003.htm
at 19 January 2004.
D McAndrew,
Submission P14
September 2003; G De Ruyter,
Submission P3
, 14 August 2003; J Graham,
Submission P5
, 26 August 2003; L Palombi,
Submission P28
, 1 October
2003. Luigi Palombi submitted that isolated genetic material should be excluded
as patentable subject matter under
Patents Act
, and that a new
intellectual property right should be created (to be known as a
‘genetic sequence right’).
These submissions are discussed in Ch
For example, National Health and Medical
Research Council,
Submission P52
, 31 October 2003.
Cancer Council Victoria,
, 30 September 2003. See also G Suthers,
Submission P30
, 2 October
IP Australia,
Submission P56
, 4 November 2003. See also Australian Centre for Intellectual
Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September 2003.
Submission P30
, 2 October
2003; Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
A McBratney and others,
, 22 October 2003.
Ibid; Davies Collison Cave,
, 24 October 2003.
Davies Collison
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003.
Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003.
Submission P32
, 7 October
2003; GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003.
T Caulfield and
others, ‘Genetic Technologies, Health Care Policy and the Patent Bargain’
Clinical Genetics
D Nicol, ‘Gene Patents: The Ultimate
Snatch’ (Paper presented at Hatching, Matching, Snatching and Dispatching,
AIHLE 7th Annual Conference, Newcastle, 27 - 30 June 2002), 9; D Nicol and J
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues
Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional
Paper No 6, 232.
Submission P30
, 2 October
2003; Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
2003; GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; S Karpeles,
, 20 October; A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003; Queensland
Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January 2004; AusBiotech Ltd,
, 7 November 2003; D Weston,
Submission P62
, 12 November 2003.
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects
of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing
Trade Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into force on 1 January
Ibid, art 27.1.
D Nicol, ‘Gene Patents: The Ultimate
Snatch’ (Paper presented at Hatching, Matching, Snatching and Dispatching,
AIHLE 7th Annual Conference, Newcastle, 27 - 30 June 2002), 9; D Nicol and J
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues
Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional
Paper No 6, 161.
D Nicol and
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues
Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional
Paper No 6, 232.
IP Australia,
Submission P56
4 November 2003. For example, while the European Patent Convention provides
that methods of treating humans are not patentable
subject matter, new medical
uses for known substances may be patented using the ‘Swiss’ form
Joos v Commissioner of Patents
[1972] HCA 38
(1972) 126 CLR 611
, 619 where Barwick CJ decided that a process for the cosmetic
treatment of hair and nails could be patentable, but distinguished
medical treatment of disease, malfunction or incapacity.
IP Australia,
Patent Manual of Practice
and Procedure Volume 2: National
(2002), [8.2.13.1].
Anaesthetic Supplies Pty Ltd v Rescare
[1994] FCA 1065
(1994) 50 FCR 1
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co v FH Faulding & Co Ltd
[2000] FCA 316
(2000) 170 ALR 439.
IP Australia,
Patent Manual of Practice
and Procedure Volume 2: National
(2002), [8.2.13.3].
Ibid, [8.2.13.1].
Anaesthetic Supplies Pty Ltd v Rescare
[1994] FCA 1065
(1994) 50 FCR 1.
The case concerned the patentability of a method and
device for the prevention of sleep apnoea.
Ibid, 42 - 43.
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co v FH Faulding
[2000] FCA 316
(2000) 170 ALR 439.
The case concerned the validity of a patent
for the method of administering a drug used to treat cancer.
Patents Act
Canadian Patent Office,
Patent Office Practice
(1998), [16.04(b)].
Canadian Biotechnology Advisory Committee,
Patenting of Higher Life Forms and Related Issues: Report to the Government
of Canada Biotechnology Ministerial Coordinating Committee
(2002), 31.
Wellcome Foundation Ltd v Commissioner
[1983] 2 NZLR 385.
Pharmaceutical Management Agency Limited
v Commissioner of Patents
[1999] NZCA 330
[2000] 2 NZLR 529
, [29]. The Intellectual Property
Office of New Zealand has continued to refuse patent claims to methods of medical
on the basis that a change in policy relating to the patenting of
methods of medical treatment of humans is a matter for the legislature.
New Zealand Ministry of Economic Development,
Review of the Patents Act 1953 Stage 3: Boundaries to Patentability
Pt 1, rec 2(ii).
Canada: Ontario Ministry of Health and
Long-Term Care,
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting: Charting New Territory
in Healthcare: Report to the Provinces and Territories
(2002), 51. United
Kingdom: United Kingdom Patent Office,
Manual of Patent Practice
United Kingdom Patent Office,
of Patent Practice
(5th ed, 2003).
The general rules of treaty interpretation
set out in the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
permit recourse
to supplementary means of interpretation, including the preparatory work of
the treaty (travaux préparatoires)
and the circumstances of its conclusion:
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
[1974] ATS 2
, (entered into
force on 27 January 1980) art 31 - 32.
Department of
Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November 2003.
Breast Cancer Network Australia,
, 30 September 2003.
A McBratney and others,
, 22 October 2003.
Genetic Technologies Limited,
, 20 October 2003; IP Australia,
Submission P56
, 4 November 2003.
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
10 October 2003; Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003.
South Australian Government,
, 30 October 2003.
Human Genetics
Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003. See also G Suthers,
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003.
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
10 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003;
AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November 2003.
Australian Centre for Intellectual Property
in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September 2003; Royal College of Pathologists
of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003. Medical treatment defences
are discussed in Ch 22.
Australian Centre
for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September
Such a defence is examined, and rejected,
by the ALRC: see Ch 22.
Patents Act 1990
(standard patents);
s 18(1A)(a)
(innovation patents).
P Drahos, ‘Biotechnology Patents,
Markets and Morality’
European Intellectual Property Review
, 441. See also D Nicol, ‘Should Human Genes be Patentable Inventions
under Australian Patent Law?’
Journal of Law and Medicine
, 241 - 242; M Forsyth, ‘Biotechnology, Patents and Public Policy:
A Proposal for Reform in Australia’
Australian Intellectual
Property Journal
, 215 - 218.
Joos v Commissioner of Patents
[1972] HCA 38
(1972) 126 CLR 611
, 623 (Barwick CJ);
Advanced Building Systems Pty Ltd v
Ramset Fastners (Aust) Pty Ltd
[1998] HCA 19
(1998) 194 CLR 171
Anaesthetic Supplies
Pty Ltd v Rescare Ltd
[1994] FCA 1065
(1994) 50 FCR 1
, 41 (Sheppard J);
Bristol-Myers
Squibb Company v FH Faulding & Co Ltd
(1998) 41 IRP 467, 479 - 481 (Heerey
J), on appeal to the Full Federal Court;
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co v FH Faulding
[2000] FCA 316
(2000) 170 ALR 439
, 444 - 445 (Black CJ and Lehane J).
Anaesthetic Supplies Pty
Ltd v Rescare Ltd
[1994] FCA 1065
(1994) 50 FCR 1
, 45 (Wilcox J).
IP Australia,
Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
(2002), [8.1.2]
European Patent Convention
into force on 7 October 1977) art 53(a);
Directive 98/44/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the Legal Protection of Biotechnological Inventions
(entered into force on 6 July 1998) art 6(1).
Directive 98/44/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the Legal Protection of Biotechnological Inventions
(entered into force on 6 July 1998) art 6(1).
In 1999, the implementing regulations
of the EPC were amended following introduction of the EU Biotechnology Directive
consistency between the EPC and the Directive in relation to these
provisions: see Administrative Council,
Implementing Regulations to the Convention
of the Grant of European Patents of 5 October 1973
(2001) r 23(b) - 23(e).
Directive 98/44/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the Legal Protection of Biotechnological Inventions
(entered into force on 6 July 1998) art 6(2).
Relaxin/Howard Florey Institute
(Unreported, Boards of Appeal, European Patent Office, T0272/95, 23 October
2002), [7].
Plant Genetic Systems/Glutamine Synthetase
(Unreported, Boards of Appeal, European Patent Office, T0356/93,
21 February 1995), [4].
Lubrizol/Hybrid Plants
Harvard/Oncomouse
[1990] EPOR 501
Howard Florey/Relaxin
[1995] EPOR 541
Plant Genetic Systems/Glutamine Synthetase Inhibitors
(Unreported, Boards of Appeal, European Patent Office, T0356/93, 21 February
European Patent
Guidelines for Examination in the European Patent Office
Pt C - IV, [3.1]
Howard Florey/Relaxin
[1995] EPOR
The patent at issue was opposed on the grounds that the invention involved
the patenting of human life, an abuse of women, a return
to slavery and the
piecemeal sale of women to industry. The Opposition Division rejected these
arguments as being unfounded
in principle and in the circumstances of the case.
The opponents also asserted that patent on human genes in general were immoral.
The Opposition Division concluded that, in 1994, there was no general consensus
that patenting human genes was immoral and
that art 53(a) of the EPC did not,
therefore, apply.
The genetic sequence coded for human
relaxin, a hormone of reproduction that appears to affect parturition, uterine
accommodation,
and sperm motility.
Relaxin/Howard Florey Institute
(Unreported, Boards of Appeal, European Patent Office, T0272/95, 23 October
2002), [4], [6] - [7].
Harvard/Oncomouse
[1990] EPOR
W Cornish, M
Llewelyn and M Adcock,
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and Genetics
(2003), 82.
See Canadian Biotechnology Advisory Committee,
Patenting of Higher Life Forms and Related Issues: Report to the Government
of Canada Biotechnology Ministerial Coordinating Committee
(2002), 39 fn
Patents Act
(Law No 121 of 1959) (Japan) s 32.
New Zealand Ministry of Economic Development,
Review of the Patents Act 1953: Boundaries to Patentability: A Discussion
(2002), 17.
New Zealand Ministry of Economic Development,
Review of the Patents Act 1953 Stage 3: Boundaries to Patentability
Pt 2, rec 2(i).
Ibid, Pt 2, [28].
Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting: Charting New Territory in Healthcare:
Report to the Provinces and Territories
(2002), rec 13(f).
The modifications to the European model proposed by the Ontario report are discussed
further below.
Lowell v Lewis
, (1817) 15 Fed
Cas 1018 (Story J) quoted in
Tol-O-Matic Inc v Promo Produkt-und Marketing
Gesellschaft MbH
[1991] USCAFED 574
(1991) 945 F 2d 1546
, 1553. See also United States Patent
and Trademark Office, ‘Facts on Patenting Life Forms Having a Relationship
to Humans’,
Media Advisory
, 1 April 1998, <www.uspto.gov/web/offices/com/speeches>.
R Crespi, ‘Patenting and Ethics:
A Dubious Connection’ (2001/2002) 5
Bio-Science Law Review
C Ho, ‘Building a Better Mousetrap:
Patenting Biotechnology in the European Community’ (1992) 3
Duke Journal
of Comparative and International Law
173, 195 cited in B Looney, ‘Should
Genes be Patented? The Gene Patenting Controversy: Legal, Ethical, and Policy
Foundations
of an International Agreement’
Law and Policy
in International Business
C Baldock and others, ‘Report
Q 150: Patentability Requirements and Scope of Protection of Expressed Sequence
Tags (ESTs),
Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) and Entire Genomes’
European Intellectual Property Review
Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual
Property Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
(2002), 75.
P Drahos, ‘Biotechnology Patents,
Markets and Morality’
European Intellectual Property Review
, 441. See also Canadian Biotechnology Advisory Committee,
of Higher Life Forms and Related Issues: Report to the Government of Canada
Biotechnology Ministerial Coordinating
(2002), 36.
B Looney, ‘Should Genes be Patented?
The Gene Patenting Controversy: Legal, Ethical, and Policy Foundations of an
International
Law and Policy in International
M Forsyth, ‘Biotechnology, Patents
and Public Policy: A Proposal for Reform in Australia’
Intellectual Property Journal
Patents Act 1990
See, eg, Canadian Biotechnology Advisory
Patenting of Higher Life Forms and Related Issues: Report to the
Government of Canada Biotechnology Ministerial Coordinating Committee
40; R Ford, ‘The Morality of Biotech Patents: Differing Legal Obligations
in Europe?’ (1997) 19
European Intellectual Property Review
317; D Slater, ‘HuMouse’,
Legal Affairs
, Nov-Dec 2002, 21,
24; P Grubb,
Patents for Chemicals, Pharmaceuticals and Biotechnology: Fundamentals
of Global Law, Practice and Strategy
(3rd ed, 1999), 258.
Patents for Chemicals, Pharmaceuticals and Biotechnology: Fundamentals of
Global Law, Practice and Strategy
(3rd ed, 1999), 258.
Ontario Ministry
of Health and Long-Term Care,
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting: Charting
New Territory in Healthcare: Report to the Provinces and Territories
Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual
Property Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
(2002), 45.
National Health and Medical Research
National Statement on Ethical Conduct in Research Involving Humans
World Medical Association,
Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects
, June 1964.
European Group on Ethics in Science
and New Technologies,
Ethical Aspects of Patenting Inventions Involving Human
Stem Cells: Opinion to the European Commission
(2002), [2.10]; Canadian
Biotechnology Advisory Committee,
Patenting of Higher Life Forms and Related
Issues: Report to the Government of Canada Biotechnology Ministerial Coordinating
(2002), 40.
Commonwealth of Australia,
Parliamentary
, Senate, 17 September 1990, 2478 (J Coulter).
See, eg, Commonwealth of Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 17 September 1990, 2481 (R Collins).
See, eg, Commonwealth of Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 17 September 1990, 2482 (B Archer).
The membership and role of HRECs is
discussed in Australian Law Reform Commission and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The Protection of Human Genetic Information in Australia
ALRC 96 (2003), Ch 17.
Gene Technology Act 2000
The other subsidiary advisory
bodies established under the Act are Gene Technology Technical Advisory Committee
and the Gene
Technology Community Consultative Committee:
Gene Technology
The Gene Technology Ministerial Council
comprises one representative from the Commonwealth and each of the States and
Territories
and was established by the intergovernmental
Gene Technology
Gene Technology Act 2000
Office of the Gene Technology Regulator,
The Gene Technology Ethics Committee
, <www.ogtr.gov.au/committee/gtec.htm>
at 27 January 2004.
New Zealand Ministry of Economic Development,
Review of the Patents Act 1953 Stage 3: Boundaries to Patentability
Pt 2, rec 2(ii).
Ibid, Pt 2, [29].
Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting: Charting New Territory in Healthcare:
Report to the Provinces and Territories
(2002), 50. See also R Gold and
T Caulfield, ‘The Moral Tollbooth: A Method that Makes Use of the Patent
System to Address
Ethical Concerns in Biotechnology’ (2002) 359
Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting: Charting New Territory in Healthcare:
Report to the Provinces and Territories
(2002), 50.
Directive 98/44/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the Legal Protection of Biotechnological Inventions
(entered into force on 6 July 1998) art 7.
Ibid recital 44.
European Group on Ethics in Science
and New Technologies,
Ethical Aspects of Patenting Inventions Involving Human
Stem Cells: Opinion to the European Commission
(2002), [2.10].
See, eg, Australian Centre for Intellectual
Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September 2003; Breast Cancer
Network Australia,
Submission P22
, 30 September 2003; D McFetridge,
, 30 September 2003; Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
30 September 2003; Cancer Foundation of Western Australia Inc,
, 10 October 2003; Caroline Chisholm Centre for Health Ethics Inc,
, 17 October 2003; Cancer Council Tasmania,
Submission P40
September 2003; Cancer Council South Australia,
Submission P41
, 9 October
2003; D Jackson,
Submission P43
, 20 October 2003.
Cancer Council Australia,
, 30 September 2003.
Australian Centre for Intellectual
Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September 2003.
South Australian Government,
, 30 October 2003.
Davies Collison
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003.
Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003.
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003.
Cancer Council
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003.
Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September
Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; D McFetridge,
Submission P23
30 September 2003; Caroline Chisholm Centre for Health Ethics Inc,
, 17 October 2003; National Health and Medical Research Council,
, 31 October 2003.
IP Australia,
Submission P56
, 4 November 2003.
Submission P30
2 October 2003, 9; Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
3 October 2003, 25; Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September
2003, 5; Cancer Council Tasmania,
Submission P40
, 29 September 2003,
5; Cancer Council South Australia,
Submission P41
, 9 October 2003, 5;
Submission P43
, 20 October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003, 25.
Genetic Technologies
Submission P45
, 20 October 2003.
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
10 October 2003.
Queensland Government,
, 5 January 2004.
See Australian Law Reform Commission
and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The Protection
of Human Genetic Information in Australia
, ALRC 96 (2003), rec 5 - 1.
Submission P30
2 October 2003; Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia,
, 1 October 2003; Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
, 3 October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
30 October 2003; Department of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
3 November 2003.
Australian Centre for Intellectual
Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September 2003, 68 - 69.
S Karpeles,
Submission P44
20 October, 6 - 7; D Jackson,
Submission P43
, 20 October 2003.
of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November 2003.
IP Australia,
Submission P56
, 4 November 2003.
Royal College
of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003.
Patents Act 1990
See also Proposal 6 - 1, which recommends review of the ‘manner of manufacture’
test in the
Patents Act
by the Advisory Council on Intellectual Property.
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
8. Patent Office Practices
Introduction
Overview of IP Australia's examination practices
General concerns about examination practices
Issues and problems
ALRC's views
Funding for IP Australia
Australian patent examiners
United States Patent and Trademark Office
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Qualifications and training
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Expert assistance
Submissions and consultations
Expert advisory committees in other regulatory schemes
ALRC's views
Examination guidelines for biotechnology patents
Other jurisdictions
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Prior art searches
IP Australia
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Standard of proof
Other jurisdictions
Options for reform
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
8. Patent Office Practices
Introduction
Australian patent system is administered by the Patent Office of IP
This chapter provides an
overview of certain aspects of IP Australia’s practices and addresses
concerns raised in some submissions
and consultations about the manner in which
IP Australia assesses applications for gene patents. It considers the resources
to IP Australia; the expertise of, and training provided to,
Australian patent examiners; and the assistance available to patent
examiners in
applying Australian patent law to gene patent applications.
8.2 The issues raised in submissions and consultations about IP
Australia’s practices are not unique. Internationally, questions
raised about the capacity of patent offices to assess applications for gene
patents effectively and to process such applications
efficiently.
It has been suggested
that patent offices may lack the resources or expertise to deal with the volume
and nature of patent applications
being filed in this area. The reforms proposed
in this chapter are intended to assist IP Australia in adapting its current
to the challenges posed by applications claiming genetic materials and
technologies, and to enhance mechanisms already adopted by
IP Australia to
address these issues.
Overview of IP Australia’s examination practices
8.3 IP Australia receives
patent applications from applicants within Australia and overseas. Patent
applications may be filed in person
at one of IP Australia’s state
offices, by mail, or electronically. The Patent Office is divided into various
groups, which
have responsibility for different aspects of processing a patent
application, including groups responsible for patent administration
examination.
8.4 The patent administration branch initially processes patent applications.
Applications are categorised and assigned to a particular
examination section
according to the International Patent Classification (IPC) system at the
sub-class level.
The IPC system is
a hierarchical classification system created by international convention and
administered by the World Intellectual
Property Organization
It comprises sections,
classes, subclasses and groups (main groups and subgroups). All technological
fields are categorised into
one of the eight sections and then further
classified. Relevantly, in the seventh edition of the IPC, there are 628
subclasses. No
single category of the IPC encompasses all inventions involving
genetic materials and technologies.
8.5 The patent examination branch handles examination of patent applications and
challenges to patent rights determined by the Commissioner
Currently, the examination
branch includes two Deputy Commissioners of Patents and eleven examination
sections. Each examination
section comprises one supervising examiner, three to
four senior examiners and approximately 16 patent examiners. A third Deputy
Commissioner is responsible for dealing with challenges to patent rights. This
section comprises one supervising examiner, one senior
examiner and two clerical
8.6 Examination of a patent application is generally undertaken by a single
patent examiner, although a team of three examiners may
be needed when prior art
patent examiner, is prioritised
to ensure that statutory time limits are met and
IP Australia’s targets and standards are also fulfilled to the extent
8.7 Each examination section includes a supervising examiner and senior
examiners who perform a variety of functions, including training
and evaluation
of newly recruited examiners, managing any issues referred by examiners assigned
to a particular application, and
review of examiners’ work for quality
control purposes.
General concerns about examination practices
Issues and problems
submissions and consultations articulated a general concern about IP
Australia’s capacity to scrutinise gene patent
applications,
but did not always
identify areas in which IP Australia’s practices were regarded as
problematic. Some submissions and consultations
encouraged the ALRC to examine
the resources available to IP Australia, and its expertise in relation to
genetic materials and
technologies.
8.9 A number of submissions commented that IP Australia should ensure that the
requirements for patentability under current Australian
law are stringently
applied to gene patent
applications.
Others suggested that
more rigorous examination of gene patent applications was
It was also suggested
that Australian patent examiners might not have correctly applied particular
requirements for patentability
to gene patent applications—for example,
the ‘utility’
8.10 A small number of comments were directed to IP Australia’s
examination of particular gene patents, and cited the grant
of certain patents
as evidence of a more general failure on the part of the Patent Office to
examine gene patent applications
adequately.
8.11 However, other submissions and consultations did not perceive current
problems with IP Australia’s practices or its capacity
to assess gene
patent applications. The Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources (DITR),
of which IP Australia is a division,
and the Queensland Government commented
that IP Australia currently scrutinises gene patent applications
effectively.
Similarly, views
expressed in some consultations suggested that, while IP Australia may have
experienced difficulties in examining
gene patent applications in the past, its
practices had now improved.
8.12 Some submissions and consultations suggested that patent examiners in
Australia are more lenient than patent examiners in other
or accept gene
patent applications with overly broad
The ALRC was informed
that patent examiners in the United States seemed to subject gene patent
applications to more rigorous
assessment.
In addition, a few
submissions and consultations expressed concern that Australian patent examiners
may not rigorously assess Australian
patent applications related to a patent
that has already been granted in another
8.13 Similar views were expressed to Dr Dianne Nicol and Jane Nielsen as part of
an empirical study that they conducted regarding
medical biotechnology patenting
and technology transfer in
Nicol and Nielsen
found that one of the problems consistently identified by respondents was the
breadth of biotechnology patents
granted by Australian patent
8.14 However, in its submission to the Inquiry, IP Australia suggested that
these concerns are misplaced.
Australia commented that patent applicants sometimes assume that the more
objections raised by a patent office the higher the
quality of the examination,
but this assumption is
In addition, IP
Australia noted that even where patent claims granted by different patent
offices appear to be of different scope,
they may be similarly interpreted under
the laws of the relevant
IP Australia
indicated that comparison with the United Kingdom Patent Office has suggested
that similar patentability outcomes were
reached by the two patent offices when
examining the same patent
applications.
8.15 IP Australia’s submission on this issue is supported by the results
of a recent study comparing the approaches adopted
by the United States Patent
and Trademark Office (USPTO), the European Patent Office (EPO), the Japanese
Patent Office (JPO) and
IP Australia to certain gene
Professor Andrew
Christie and Melanie Howlett compared the approach of each of these patent
offices in examining a series of hypothetical
claims for partial DNA sequences
(or expressed sequence tags).
Christie and Howlett found that while each patent office adopted its own
approach to interpreting and applying the requirements for
patentability, the
end result of the examination of such claims was the same for all the
8.16 DITR submitted that IP Australia’s procedures are comparable with
international best practice.
DITR supported IP Australia’s comments that it has implemented procedures
to monitor international patent activity and ‘to
adopt appropriate legally
based examination
procedures’.
In addition,
DITR indicated in consultations that IP Australia was highly regarded and
distributed results of prior art searches
to patent offices in other
IP Australia, in
conjunction with the JPO, has been nominated to coordinate a project sponsored
by WIPO to modernise patent offices
in the Asia-Pacific
ALRC’s views
8.17 The ALRC acknowledges
the general concerns expressed in submissions and consultations about the
capacity of IP Australia to assess
gene patent applications. However, these
concerns do not warrant fundamental changes to the functions or structure of IP
Rather, the ALRC considers that concerns about IP Australia’s
practices may be addressed by specific proposals set out in this
chapter with
respect to the training of patent examiners, access to the advice of legal and
scientific experts, and provision of
additional guidance to patent examiners in
applying general principles of patent law to inventions involving genetic
materials and
technologies.
8.18 The capacity of IP
Australia to examine gene patent applications efficiently and effectively
depends, in part, on the financial
and human resources available to the
organisation.
Funding for IP Australia
8.19 IP Australia operates on
a full cost-recovery basis and funds its activities from revenue raised through
charges for its intellectual
Unlike some other
government agencies, therefore, IP Australia is not dependent on appropriations
from the Parliament to carry out
activities.
According to IP
Australia’s audited financial statements for the fiscal year ending 30
June 2003, IP Australia’s annual
revenue from its ordinary activities
amounted to approximately $85.5 million. Of that amount, $50.6 million
represented amounts collected
Australian patent examiners
8.20 IP Australia currently
has approximately 200 patent
This is a relatively
small number compared with the USPTO, which has approximately 3,500
As Figure 8 - 1
indicates, the number of patent examiners employed by IP Australia has increased
in the last three years after a
period of steady decline from 1996 - 97 to
1999 - 2000. Figure 8 - 1 also shows that, following a steady increase
in the number of
patents examined annually per examiner in the 1990s, that
number has declined in the last two years. The total number of patent
applications
filed each year with IP Australia has risen steadily since
If this trend
continues, the number of applications that Australian patent examiners will have
to assess each year will also continue
to increase, unless there is a
corresponding increase in the number of examiners.
Figure 8 - 1 Patent examiners and their workload
Sources: IP Australia,
Industrial Property Statistics
, Table 2, various
years; Department of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Annual Report
United States Patent and Trademark Office
8.21 Concerns have also been
expressed about the examination of patent applications by the
It has been estimated
that the USPTO currently has a backlog of 300,000 patent
applications,
including 40,000
applications relating to
biotechnology.
In response to
concerns about the capacity of the USPTO to process pending patent applications
efficiently and accurately, the USPTO
introduced its
21st Century
Strategic Plan
the USPTO proposed in the Plan included: hiring new examiners; increasing patent
examination fees; reducing the level
of ‘fee diversion’ to other
government programs (that is, allowing the USPTO to retain and use more of the
it raises in patent fees for its own
and implementing an
electronic filing and processing system for patent applications.
Submissions and consultations
the Inquiry has received comments on the need to ensure that IP Australia has
sufficient resources, only the Australian
Centre for Intellectual Property in
Agriculture (ACIPA) made a specific submission on this matter. ACIPA was
critical of the current
funding arrangements for IP Australia, which are based
on a ‘cost-recovery
ACIPA considered
that IP Australia should receive independent public funding, rather than being
reliant upon application and maintenance
fees to fund its activities. In its
view, the fact that IP Australia’s funding (like the USPTO’s) is
dependent upon patent
fees may lead it to adopt a more service-oriented approach
to the patent application process and provide incentives to IP Australia
issue patents in order to maintain funding levels.
Patent examiners
8.23 Concerns were expressed about whether IP Australia
has access to a sufficient number of experienced examiners to assess
applications
for gene patents in an adequate and timely manner. For example, the
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research suggested
rapidly increasing volume of gene patents raises questions of access to
sufficiently experienced
examiners’.
8.24 GlaxoSmithKline and ACIPA supported additional examiners being made
available to IP Australia in all areas of
technology.
GlaxoSmithKline
suggested that ‘the efficiency and quality of examination by IP Australia
has noticeably improved’ since
the employment of significant numbers of
new examiners in recent years.
GlaxoSmithKline contrasted current practices of IP Australia with the general
decrease in the number of Australian patent examiners
in the late 1990s which,
combined with an increase in patent filing activity, adversely affected the
timeliness and quality of examinations.
ACIPA also submitted that:
there is a need for the organisation to retain its cadre of patent examiners—so
that its expertise is not lost to the patent
attorneys and private law firms.
Accordingly, the terms and conditions for patent examiners should be markedly
ALRC’s views
8.25 The ALRC acknowledges
the concerns expressed in submissions and consultations relating to the number
of Australian patent examiners
and the resources available to IP Australia. The
services provided by IP Australia, like any other governmental body, could no
be improved with additional funding. However, no evidence was presented to
the Inquiry demonstrating that lack of funding is currently
hampering IP
Australia’s examination of gene patent applications, or applications
claiming any other type of technology. On
the contrary, some submissions
suggested that there have been significant improvements in IP Australia’s
examination practices
in recent years. Furthermore, concerns about Australian
patent examiners did not focus on the number of patent examiners per se but
the experience of examiners. This issue is addressed below.
Qualifications and training
8.26 A report on the
Australian biotechnology industry published in 2001 noted that biotechnology
inventions are assessed by examiners
with particular expertise and training in
the biotechnology field, in accordance with the practices of patent offices in
other jurisdictions.
Australia has provided the ALRC with further information about qualification
requirements and training programs for Australian
8.27 To be eligible for a position as a patent examiner, an applicant must hold
a university degree in science or engineering. Examiners
who assess applications
for genetic materials and technologies must have qualifications in the field of
biochemistry. Experience
in a relevant industrial field is preferable, but not
mandatory. IP Australia informed the ALRC that the level of industrial
of newly recruited examiners varies from year to
8.28 IP Australia trains new recruits to allow them to perform the various
functions required of a patent examiner. Supervising and
senior examiners
conduct this training, which covers Australian patent law and patent practice.
It includes a formal assessment regime,
as well as practical training and
supervision. The purpose of this training is to enable new examiners to reach
the required competency
standard to exercise the ‘acceptance
delegation’.
‘Acceptance delegation’ refers to the Commissioner of Patents’
ability under the
Patents Act
to delegate his or her power to examine
and, if appropriate, accept patent applications to examiners who meet IP
Australia’s
standards for such a
Examiners must
demonstrate an ‘appropriate level and quality of work output and have the
experience, knowledge and judgement
to be able to reliably exercise the
delegation’.
examiners reach this level of competence after approximately 30 months of
service with IP Australia.
8.29 IP Australia also has a continuing professional development program for
patent examiners. The program aims to develop examiners’
skills in patent
law, examination and searching practices, and examiners’ knowledge in
relevant technological fields. It includes
both internal and external training
programs, attendance at conferences, visits to relevant industries and
placements in patent attorney
8.30 IP Australia has a number of examination sections, each of which
specialises in different areas of
technology.
IP Australia
commented that:
While there is a degree of specialisation within each field, IP Australia
examiners are expected to assess a greater range of
technologies than may
be the case in the larger offices such as the USPTO and EPO.
Submissions and consultations
8.31 Concerns were raised in
a number of submissions and consultations about patent examiners’
expertise and the need for continuing
training to allow patent examiners to keep
abreast of technological developments in their relevant fields. Some of the
submissions
that addressed this issue indicated that the expertise of patent
examiners is not currently a concern, but is a matter that warrants
8.32 Other submissions considered that the expertise of patent examiners in any
rapidly developing area of science may be an issue,
because the quality of
patent examination is limited by the level of technical skill of a patent
The South Australian
Government commented that this may be a particular issue in relation to genetic
materials and technologies because
the assessment of patent applications
claiming such inventions might require a greater understanding of science than
BresaGen commented that
the issue might also arise for patent applications relating to stem cell
technologies, where patent examiners
may not have an adequate understanding of
the relevant scientific
background.
8.33 In consultations, the National Stem Cell Centre commented that patent
applications were typically allocated to a patent examiner
with a background
that is related to the technology involved in the
Variations in the
level of skills of Australian patent examiners were, however,
The Department of Health
Western Australia commented that, while Australian patent examiners may have a
general science degree, the
level of specialisation of patent examiners was not
as great as within the USPTO.
BresaGen suggested that this might be the result of both a lack of resources
within IP Australia and a lack of training of Australian
8.34 Dr Amanda McBratney and others suggested that concerns about the expertise
of patent examiners could be addressed by imposing
‘a requirement for
auditing and updating of examiner
Examiners should be involved in a process of ongoing education so that they
are as up to date in the relevant technological areas
as possible. Continuing
education should be mandatory—not only course work, but attendance at
conferences (as this
is where the most up to date information is discussed).
ALRC’s views
8.35 In view of the number
of examiners employed by IP Australia and the variety of patent applications,
Australian patent examiners
may be required to assess patent applications
involving a diverse range of technologies. It is important that patent examiners
access to training and professional education to allow them to continue to
develop knowledge and skills in the areas of technology
in which they may be
required to assess applications. IP Australia currently operates such programs,
and submissions and consultations
did not identify particular inadequacies in
the training that Australian patent examiners currently receive. The ALRC
considers that
IP Australia should, however, ensure that it reviews the subject
matter and structure of its education programs regularly to ensure
examiners remain up to date with new developments. The ALRC does not regard this
issue as unique to inventions involving genetic
materials and
technologies.
It will also be an
important issue in connection with new technologies that arise in the future.
Proposal 8 - 1
To ensure the on-going competence
of Australian patent examiners in assessing patent applications, IP Australia
continue its efforts to provide examiners with continuing education
in areas of technology relevant to their particular specialty.
IP Australia
should review and update its education programs regularly so that new developments
can be incorporated
as required.
Expert assistance
8.36 A recent report of the
Royal Society expressed concern that patent examiners in the United Kingdom may
lack sufficient skills
and experience in newer areas of
The Royal Society
recommended that examiners should consult experts to ensure that their
understanding of relevant areas of science
is extremely
so that examiners are able
to apply the same demanding standards in both developing and established areas
of science.
In the Royal
Society’s view, scientific experts might provide a valuable resource
[m]any scientists, especially in academia, have detailed and up-to-date
knowledge (often including access to prior art not otherwise
easily traceable)
and experience in assessing experimental data and the significance of new
scientific developments.
8.37 To date, there is limited precedent in other jurisdictions for providing
patent examiners with the type of access to scientific
or technical expertise
proposed by the Royal Society.
The USPTO has announced that it will expand its practice of
‘second-pair-of-eyes’ review to cover fields such as biotechnology,
semiconductors and software.
recent report by the United States Federal Trade Commission endorsed these
initiatives:
In emerging areas such as biotechnology, second-pair-of-eyes review can
significantly help improve the quality of patent application
review, since in
emerging areas, examiners necessarily lack experience in reviewing the new
industry’s patent applications,
and the body of prior art is
8.38 Currently, Australian patent examiners may refer any issues to senior or
supervising examiners within their section. IP Australia’s
Manual of Practice and Procedure
) indicates that an
examiner should raise any concerns he or she may have about mastering the
technical and legal aspects of an application
with a senior
In addition, IP
Australia has adopted policies that require patent applications for certain
to a supervising examiner automatically,
for example patent applications that may claim human beings or the biological
generation.
Submissions and consultations
8.39 A number of submissions
proposed that expert advice should be available to patent examiners in assessing
patent applications,
whether involving genetic materials and technologies or new
technologies generally. Dr Amanda McBratney and others submitted that:
Engagement of experts within a particular field should be sought where broad
patents are to be granted for a new area.
8.40 Some submissions considered that a panel of expert advisers should be
established to assist patent examiners. The Commonwealth
Department of Health
and Ageing suggested that there was a need for ‘appropriate advice to
assist patent examiners’
in their assessment of patenting human genes
and related technologies for health purposes.
The Department proposed that an expert committee should be set up to advise
patent examiners on ‘policy and scientific
issues’ surrounding gene
8.41 Other submissions and consultations suggested that such an expert panel
should have more of an oversight role. The Department
of Health Western
Australia suggested that IP Australia should consider ‘the development of
a secondary body of experts to
oversee the granting of ... highly specialised,
significant and controversial
consultations, the Consumers’ Health Forum of Australia also indicated
that expert oversight of decisions made by the Patent
8.42 One submission that supported the establishment of a panel of expert
advisers considered that membership of the panel should
include legal and
scientific experts.
suggested that experts in social policy or ethics should also be included to
assess the manner in which specific patents might
impact on the healthcare
The Consumers’
Health Forum of Australia proposed that the involvement of consumer
representatives might also be
8.43 In consultations, IP Australia indicated that use of expert panels in
examining patent applications could be considered if this
would improve the
assessment of patent
applications.
However, the
organisation also noted that appointing a panel of experts to advise on
applications on a case-by-case basis might raise
conflict of interest issues,
and potentially delay the examination and grant of a patent. In addition, the
South Australian Government
submitted that increasing the level of scrutiny to
which gene patent applications are subjected might delay the grant of such
Expert advisory committees in other regulatory schemes
8.44 In examining the
potential for advisory experts in patent examination, it is instructive to
consider their use in other regulatory
regimes in Australia. Expert advisory
committees form part of the regulatory regime for genetically modified organisms
in Australia.
Gene Technology Act
(Cth) created the
position of the Gene Technology Regulator (the
Regulator),
as well as certain
subsidiary advisory committees to assist the Regulator in performing his or her
functions set out in the Act.
8.45 One of the advisory committees created by the
Gene Technology Act
the Gene Technology Technical Advisory Committee
The GTTAC comprises
mainly experts in relevant scientific
disciplines
who provide
scientific and technical advice to the Regulator and the Gene Technology
Ministerial Council (the Ministerial
Members of the GTTAC
are appointed by the Minister of Health, following consultations with the States
and Territories, the Regulator,
stakeholder groups and such other Ministers as
may be appropriate.
8.46 The GTTAC provides advice upon request by the Regulator or the Ministerial
Such advice may relate
to specific applications for licences to conduct
genetically modified organisms under the
The GTTAC may also provide
general advice relating to genetically modified organisms and products, as well
as the biosafety aspects
of gene technology. In addition, the GTTAC may provide
advice on the need for, and the content of, policies, codes of practices and
guidelines in relation to genetically modified organisms and
8.47 Members of the GTTAC are appointed on a part-time
and are subject to
disclosure of interest requirements prescribed by
regulation.
Prior to their
appointment as a member of the GTTAC, nominated members must disclose to the
Minister any direct or indirect interests
(including pecuniary interests) in
matters likely to be considered at a meeting of the
In addition, each member
must disclose to the GTTAC any conflicts of interest (including pecuniary
interests) that arise from time
to time during the term of their
appointment.
Any member who
discloses a conflict of interest is not permitted to participate in
deliberations relating to, or decisions on, the
matter in connection with which
a conflict exists.
ALRC’s views
8.48 As discussed in Chapter
6, novel and complex scientific and legal issues may be raised by patent
applications claiming genetic
materials and technologies. IP Australia already
has some mechanisms in place to resolve difficult issues that may arise during
assessment of a particular patent application—for example, referral of
particular matters to supervising or senior examiners.
However, IP Australia
employs a comparatively small number of Australian patent examiners, and these
examiners assess patent applications
in a broad range of technological fields.
8.49 New developments in human genetics require an increasingly detailed grasp
of the scientific context and background to distinguish
potentially novel
developments from what has come before. In the ALRC’s view, the
establishment of a panel of experts within
IP Australia would assist Australian
patent examiners in addressing issues raised during the examination of
particular gene patent
applications. The panel could also provide general advice
class of genetic inventions. Similar panels of experts might also be established
by IP Australia in relation to other novel
areas of technology in the future.
8.50 Few submissions commented on the composition of such a panel of experts.
However, the ALRC considers that a balance of independent
legal and scientific
experts (drawn from within Australia or internationally, as the circumstances
require) should be appointed to
the panel by the Commissioner of Patents,
following appropriate consultation with industry groups and other relevant
stakeholders.
The ALRC is currently of the view that experts in bioethics,
public health or social policy should not specifically be included on
The panel of experts is not intended to be a broad policy-making body but to
provide advice on specific patent applications
or on particular legal or
scientific issues raised by a class of inventions. The ALRC has made proposals
elsewhere in this Discussion
Paper to address the wider public policy and
healthcare concerns raised by gene patents, and to establish mechanisms to
ensure on-going
review of these
8.51 The expert advisory committees established within the Office of the Gene
Technology Regulator provide a model for developing
procedures for the proposed
panel of experts, particularly in relation to conflict of interest issues. In
addition, IP Australia
should establish appropriate procedures to maintain the
confidentiality of any patent applications considered by the panel prior
publication of the application.
8.52 The establishment of a panel of experts has the potential to increase the
level of scrutiny of patent applications, and thereby
delay the grant of certain
patents. However, assistance from the panel will be appropriate only in a
relatively limited number of
cases, and should be given only upon a request from
the Commissioner of Patents. IP Australia should develop procedures to ensure
that consideration by the panel of experts takes place as expeditiously as the
circumstances allow; for example, by enabling the
entire panel, or individuals
members of it, to be called upon as the need arises. In the ALRC’s view,
an appropriate choice
of procedures should enable panels of experts to be
established and utilised with minimal additional cost.
8.53 Responsibility for determinations about a particular gene patent
application should remain with the individual examiner to whom
application is assigned. In the ALRC’s view, the Commissioner of Patents
should not delegate any examination powers
to the panel of experts, as the
Commissioner does in the case of patent examiners. A patent examiner who seeks
the opinion of the
panel of experts on a particular matter should, however,
indicate that advice was sought from the panel in any resulting examination
Proposal 8 - 2
The Commonwealth should amend the
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act
) to authorise IP Australia to establish panels of
experts to advise patent examiners in assessing patent applications, as
circumstances
Proposal 8 - 3
IP Australia should ensure that appointments to the
panel of experts reflect a balance of independent scientific and legal
and that they be made only after consultation with relevant industry
organisations and other stakeholders. IP Australia should also
procedures for the operation of the panel, including procedures in relation to
confidentiality, conflict of interest, and
decision making by the panel.
Examination guidelines for biotechnology patents
discussed in Chapter 17, the Australian biotechnology industry is still in the
early stages of development. One consequence
of this is that there has been
limited judicial consideration of how patent law principles apply to
biotechnological inventions.
Little specific guidance is, therefore, available to patent examiners in
assessing whether a particular biotechnological or genetic
invention satisfies
the requirements for patentability. Dr Dianne Nicol and Jane Nielsen have
suggested that ‘the absence of
judicial guidance in this area is
problematic’.
8.55 IP Australia has developed the
to assist Australian patent
examiners in applying the
Patents Act
Patents Regulations
Regulation)
is intended as a reference guide for examiners on all aspects of
patent practice including, for example, search and examination procedures,
interpretation and application of the requirements of patentability under
Australia law and relevant procedural provisions of the
Patents Act
practice and procedures in connection with patent applications filed under the
Patent Cooperation Treaty
does not, however, contain a section that specifically considers issues that
may arise in applying each of the requirements of patentability
to inventions
involving genetic materials and
technologies.
8.56 IP Australia has developed a number of user guides relating to specific
issues, including
Australian Patents for: Microoganisms; Cell Lines;
Hybridomas; Related Biological Materials and their Use; and Genetically
Manipulated
discussed in Chapter 6, this user guide sets out the types of biological
inventions for which IP Australia will currently grant
patent protection if the
statutory criteria for patentability are met. The user guide also briefly
explains relevant considerations
in relation to each of the requirements for
patentability and provides more detailed information as to the way in which the
requirements under Australia law might be satisfied in relation to
biological inventions.
Other jurisdictions
8.57 Other jurisdictions,
particularly the United States and Europe, have more highly-developed case law
on patents over biotechnological
inventions generally, and inventions involving
genetic materials and technologies specifically. In addition, patent offices in
patent law might apply to biotechnological or genetic
inventions.
United Kingdom
8.58 In September 2002, the United Kingdom Patent
Office released its
Examination Guidelines for Patent Applications Relating
to Biotechnology Inventions in the UK Patent Office
(UK Biotech Examination
Guidelines).
These set out
relevant considerations in applying each requirement for patentability under
United Kingdom patent law to biotechnological
inventions, and supplement the
Manual of Patent Practice
developed by the United Kingdom Patent Office
for general use by patent examiners.
8.59 The introduction to the UK Biotech Examination Guidelines comments that
applying the basic patentability requirements to biotechnological
inventions can
‘place considerable demands on the judgment of the
United Kingdom patent examiners in assessing such applications, the Guidelines
set out relevant case law in this area,
and also indicate how patentability
requirements ‘should be applied’ to biotechnological inventions,
subject to further
guidance from the courts and the Boards of Appeal of the
European Patent Office.
UK Biotech Examination Guidelines also provide guidance to patent examiners
for biotechnology
inventions.
8.60 A recent report on the impact and management of intellectual property
rights in the United Kingdom healthcare sector,
Intellectual Property Rights
(IPRs) and Genetics
outlined, and commented favourably on, the approach of the United Kingdom Patent
Office in the UK Biotech Examination Guidelines.
The report stated that:
It is relevant to note that as these Guidelines are intended simply to outline
the practice of the Patent Office they are not
intended to act as a forum
for discussion over the appropriateness of the principles being applied. However,
the Guidelines
do make a number of key statements on policy and these are
to be applauded as they indicate a clear desire to ensure that patent
is applied in an appropriate and effective manner which is consistent with
the public interest objectives that underpin
the system.
8.61 The JPO has also issued specific examination
guidelines relating to biotechnological inventions. In 1997, the JPO published
implementing
guidelines for inventions in specific fields, including genetic
engineering.
Subsequently,
the JPO published model assessments of gene patent applications, which set out
it’s analysis of a range of hypothetical
genetic inventions, including
applications claiming DNA fragments (or expressed sequence tags) and single
nucleotide polymorphisms.
United States
8.62 The United States has not issued specific
guidelines for examiners about the application of United States patent law to
biotechnological
or genetic inventions. United States case law in this area is,
however, considerably more developed than in other
In addition,
the USPTO has provided guidance about its approach to gene patent applications
in connection with its implementation
of new guidelines for examination of
patent applications under the utility and written description requirements for
patentability
in United States
8.63 Before final guidelines on the written description and utility requirements
were adopted, the USPTO published interim guidelines
The introduction to
the interim guidelines indicated that, while the guidelines reflected the
current understanding of the USPTO
of the ‘written description’
requirement and applied to all relevant technologies, revisions to the
guidelines were particularly
intended for use by examiners in review of
‘biological patent
applications’.
the comments received by the USPTO during the process of public comment thus
addressed the application of the proposed guidelines
to inventions involving
genetic materials and technologies. The USPTO published responses to the
comments it received, and in doing
so set out the USPTO’s understanding of
the current United States law, as well as its practices, in relation to the
8.64 Recent reports in Canada have also proposed that
the Canadian Intellectual Property Office (CIPO) provide more assistance to
patent examiners in assessing gene patent
applications.
The report of
the Ontario Government,
Genetics, Testing and Gene Patenting: Chartering New
Territory in Healthcare
(the Ontario Report), recommended that new patent
office guidelines, procedures and training manuals relating to gene patents
be developed. The Ontario Report indicated that:
clear guidelines must be spelled out providing direction regarding novelty,
non-obviousness and utility as they pertain to the
issuing of genetic patents.
8.65 A similar recommendation was made by the Canadian Biotechnology Advisory
Committee (CBAC) in its 2002 report.
CBAC suggested that interpretive guidelines concerning biological inventions
could be developed with the assistance of an expert
advisory panel.
CBAC encouraged the CIPO to indicate its position on particular issues—such
as the patentability of higher life forms.
CBAC considered that guidelines on how the requirements for patentability are
applied by the CIPO to particular types of inventions
would also be useful for
smaller biotechnology companies who are inexperienced in the patent process.
8.66 The CIPO is currently reviewing its
Manual of Patent Office
expects to complete a full update of the Manual by September
It is unclear whether
CIPO will adopt the recommendations made by the Ontario Government and CBAC as
part of this process.
Submissions and consultations
8.67 A number of submissions
proposed that IP Australia develop guidelines and procedures in relation to
inventions involving genetic
materials and
technologies.
ACIPA commented
The expansion of the patent system has involved drawing analogies between
mechanical inventions and new technologies—such
as chemical substances,
pharmaceutical drugs, and biotechnological inventions. This process of adaptation
has produced
mixed results—sometimes there is a need for special administrative
guidelines and legislative rules to accommodate new
technologies.
8.68 Other submissions commented that patent examination practices and procedures
develop over time in new technological areas,
and this gives the system a degree
of flexibility.
Davies Collison Cave
and GlaxoSmithKline considered that biotechnology patents do not present issues
that are fundamentally
different from other new technologies—such as organic
chemistry, information technology, software or business methods.
8.69 Dr Amanda McBratney and others submitted that IP Australia should publish
an information kit about its practices in processing
and examining genetic
inventions to improve public awareness and confidence on these issues.
In order to address the public’s concerns about gene patenting, it
is submitted that a comprehensive information brochure or
kit could be produced
by IP Australia, giving the public accurate information about the Australian
Patent Office’s practices
and some level of certainty or reassurance on
the issue. It is not anticipated that such a brochure would be legally binding
may prove a useful educational
8.70 In its submission, IP Australia indicated that it seeks to provide
applicants with ‘as much information and assistance
as possible’ and
referred to the
and its various user guides as evidence of this
IP Australia did,
however, comment that:
Although it can be difficult to provide definitive information in such a
complex and case-specific matter, IP Australia recognises
that further improvements
to the clarity and user-friendliness of such information can always be made.
8.71 Not all submissions favoured the implementation of new examination guidelines
for biotechnological inventions. DITR noted
that IP Australia already has a
procedures manual, which provides detailed guidelines on the examination of
gene patent applications.
Australian Government considered that IP Australia’s resources would be
better directed to increasing the number
and skill level of patent examiners
than developing specific patent guidelines.
The South Australian Government considered the creation of guidelines for the
assessment of patent applications claiming human
genes. It suggested, however,
that the proposed Human Genetics Commission of Australia
might be an appropriate agency for coordinating the development of such guidelines,
with input from researchers, clinicians,
community representatives, as well
as IP Australia, and subject to approval by the Australian Health Ministers’
and the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General.
ALRC’s views
8.72 While IP Australia has
published both general guidelines to assist patent examiners in applying
Australian patent law to particular
applications and a user guide on patent
applications for biological material, the ALRC considers that additional
guidelines to assist
patent examiners in assessing patent applications claiming
genetic materials and technologies are desirable. Currently, Australian
examiners have little relevant case law to assist them in determining how the
general requirements for patentability in
Patents Act
to a specific genetic invention.
8.73 The ALRC considers that guidelines relating specifically to the examination
of biotechnological inventions would assist patent
examiners in applying patent
law principles to biotechnological
inventions.
The guidelines
should outline IP Australia’s general approach to such inventions, and the
considerations it regards as relevant
in applying each of the requirements for
patentability to gene patent applications, particularly where analogies must be
other technologies on the basis of established case law. The
guidelines should be in a form that is comprehensible to both patent
and patent applicants. The UK Biotech Examination Guidelines are a worthwhile
model in this regard.
8.74 Examination guidelines relating to patent applications claiming
biotechnological inventions will make IP Australia’s assessment
applications more transparent. It will also assist applicants and their legal
advisers in assessing the likely availability
of patent protection for a
particular genetic invention, and in drafting patent claims appropriately.
8.75 Any such guidelines must be consistent with the
Patents Act
Patents Regulations
and existing case law. While it is recognised that
the final interpretation of the Act and the Regulations lies with the
courts—which
may ultimately reject an interpretation of patent law that
has been adopted by IP Australia—the ALRC considers that a clear
explanation of IP Australia’s approach in assessing gene patent
applications would be useful.
8.76 IP Australia is clearly the most appropriate body to formulate specific
guidelines relating to the assessment of patent applications
biotechnological inventions. IP Australia should, however, engage relevant
stakeholders and other interested parties in consultations
before adopting any
guidelines in final form. IP Australia should also obtain assistance and advice
from the panel of experts described
in Proposal 8 - 2.
Proposal 8 - 4
IP Australia should develop examination guidelines,
consistent with the
Patents Act
Patents Regulations
(Cth) and existing case law, to explain how the criteria for
patentability apply to inventions involving genetic materials and
technologies.
Prior art searches
8.77 A recent report of the
Royal Society expressed concern that, at least in the United Kingdom, patent
examiners may not have complete
access to the relevant prior art to enable
patent applications to be examined
effectively.
Society recommended that searches of the prior art by patent examiners should be
as broad as possible, including journals
and trade literature, patents and
patent applications.
addition, as discussed above, the Royal Society considered that patent examiners
should be allowed to consult experts who ‘have
detailed and up-to-date
knowledge (often including prior art not otherwise easily
traceable)’.
IP Australia
8.78 A report on the
Australian biotechnology industry in 2001 indicated that IP Australia has
adapted its processes to accommodate
particular features of biotechnology
inventions.
The report cited
specific procedures that IP Australia has adopted to facilitate the processing
of applications for gene patents,
including acceptance of genetic and protein
sequences on computer disks or CD for searching
sets out general considerations that Australian patent
examiners should take into account in determining the correct strategy for
art searches and in assessing patent applications in light of prior art search
notes that examiners should rely on previous search results to the extent
possible, including search results conducted by or on behalf
of foreign patent
offices in respect of an invention claimed in an Australia patent application or
in a corresponding patent application
filed overseas and disclosed by an
applicant under
states that:
Examiners should not conduct further searches unless, in the light of their
knowledge of the art, it is likely that better art
would be found that would
invalidate the claimed subject matter not anticipated by the search results
report of the Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee (the
IPCRC Report) commented on IP Australia’s
practice of relying on overseas
expertise, judgement and skill on the part
of patent examiners. In a small
office such as IP Australia ... resources can be stretched in some areas of
technology.
8.81 The IPCRC Report also noted that on-line journals and other information
technology can reduce the disadvantages that smaller
patent offices, like IP
Australia, may face. The report, therefore, recommended:
IP Australia devote additional resources to improving the quality of examination,
particularly to prior art processes including
through enhanced use of technology.
8.82 IP Australia provided information to the ALRC about the resources available
to Australian patent examiners in conducting prior
art searches. IP Australia
indicated that it has access to internationally recognised on-line databases
for searches of complete
and partial gene sequences, as well as corresponding
polypeptide sequences.
IP Australia
accesses a number of these databases via facilities at the Australian National
Genomic Information Service. IP
Australia also has access to Dgene—the
international patent gene sequence database—and the World Patents Index.
8.83 IP Australia assigns teams of three people to develop search strategies for
all original prior art
In addition, IP
Australia has a Search Technical Team consisting of 12 patent examiners who
conduct reviews of available search tools,
examine new on-line search facilities
and manage search training for all Australian patent
8.84 IP Australia also conducts prior art searches for patent offices in other
Authorities under the
PCT, IP Australia prepares an International Search Report for each PCT
application it receives in its capacity
as an International Searching
An International
invention claimed in a PCT application
and is available to the patent offices in
each jurisdiction in which a PCT application enters the national
IP Australia also
conducts prior art searches upon request for patent offices in certain countries
in the Asia-Pacific region as
part of IP Australia’s bilateral
arrangements with such
Submissions and consultations
8.85 A few submissions
questioned the capacity of IP Australia to conduct adequate prior art searches
and to identify all relevant
prior art against which the novelty and
inventiveness (or innovation) of a claimed invention is
8.86 In consultations, some patent attorneys suggested that prior art searches
performed by IP Australia were sometimes inadequate.
In particular, it was
suggested that IP Australia rarely raised any new prior art in considering
applications filed under the PCT.
Such comments appear to relate to PCT
applications that enter the national phase in Australia, rather than those
applications received
by IP Australia in its capacity as an International
8.87 A small number of submissions suggested that IP Australia might have failed
to identify relevant prior art in assessing particular
Suggestions were
made that IP Australia should consider outsourcing some of its prior art
the approach adopted by the
8.88 IP Australia noted that it had cooperated with the USPTO to compare search
results on the same patent applications (including
some gene patent
applications), and with the United Kingdom Patent Office to compare searching
and examination strategies. IP Australia
submitted that:
The exercise showed that, despite some variation in the tools used, IP Australia’s
to those obtained in the US and
ALRC’s views
8.89 Conflicting views were
expressed in submissions and consultations about IP Australia’s capacity
to conduct adequate prior
art searches. Some submissions and consultations
expressed concerns about their adequacy while others noted that IP
Australia’s
offices and subject to on-going internal review.
8.90 To the extent that concerns about IP Australia’s searching practices
focused on patent examiners’ decisions to rely
on the results of prior art
this practice can be
appropriate to reduce duplication of effort and to allow
Australian patent applications to be processed expeditiously. Further, although
separate searches conducted by IP Australia might identify additional prior art
not included in a search conducted by another patent
office, such information
will not always be relevant. The cooperative activities conducted by IP
Australia with the USPTO and United
Kingdom Patent Office suggest the searching
practices of all three offices are comparable.
8.91 As discussed above and in Chapter 5, the disclosure obligations imposed on
patent applicants and the definition of ‘prior
art’ in the
Patents Act
have recently been
The impact of these
changes is yet to be seen,
but such provisions may well result in a wider range of prior art information
being made available to IP Australia. In the absence
of further specific
information about IP Australia’s capacity to conduct prior art searches,
the ALRC does not propose any
reforms to the practices of IP Australia in
conducting prior art searches at this stage.
Standard of proof
Patents Act
requires the Commissioner of Patents to accept an
application for a standard patent if the Commissioner is ‘satisfied’
that the requirements of novelty and inventive step have been met and the
Commissioner ‘considers’ that there is no lawful
ground of objection
to the patent.
8.93 The satisfaction test was introduced into the
Patents Act
Patents Amendment Act 2001
(Cth) following recommendations in the
1999 report of the Advisory Council on Industrial Property (the ACIP Report) and
in the IPCRC
8.94 Prior to the 2001 amendment, it was sufficient if the Commissioner
‘considered’ that there was no lawful ground
of objection to a
The IPCRC Report
noted that, as interpreted by the courts, the earlier position gave the benefit
of the doubt to a patent applicant
the Commissioner [could] only refuse to grant a patent where it [was] clear
that a valid patent [could not] be granted.
8.95 Both the ACIP Report and the IPCRC Report recommended increasing the threshold
for acceptance of patent applications ‘so
that granted patents would be
more likely to be valid’. The ACIP Report specifically recommended that
giving the benefit of the doubt to the applicant should be abrogated
in so far as it relates to novelty and obviousness’.
The IPCRC endorsed the views expressed in the ACIP Report, but cast its recommendation
in more general terms:
The Committee recommends changing the
Patents Act
to require a ‘balance
of probabilities’ approach to be used during examination, rather than
conferring the
‘benefit of the doubt’ to the applicant as at present.
8.96 As now amended,
Patents Act
requires a patent examiner
to apply two different standards of proof in assessing the requirements for
patentability relevant
to examination of a patent application.
The requirement that the Commissioner be ‘satisfied’ that an invention
is novel and involves an inventive (or innovative)
step is a ‘balance
of probabilities’ standard. With respect to other requirements for patentability
relevant at
the examination stage, the Commissioner need only ‘consider’
that such grounds are met. As noted above, this has been
interpreted as imposing
a ‘benefit of the doubt’ standard.
explains the considerations relevant in assessing whether
each of the standards of proof has been met:
[The ‘balance of probabilities’] test requires an examiner to
weigh up all the material before them and decide, on
balance, whether a claimed
invention is ‘more likely than not’ to be novel and inventive
(or innovative).
In the case of objections other than novelty, inventive step, and innovative
step, the benefit of the doubt is given to the applicant,
and objections are
maintained if there is little uncertainty as to whether the objection still
applies (having regard to
the response from the applicant).
Other jurisdictions
8.98 Other jurisdictions
formulate the standard of proof for acceptance of a patent application in a
number of different ways. In
general, however, the standard of proof is a
‘balance of probabilities’ standard, or equivalent. A ‘balance
probabilities’ standard is applied, for example, by the United Kingdom
Patent Office.
applies a ‘preponderance of the evidence’ test, which is the civil
standard of proof under United States law
and, broadly speaking, equates with
the ‘balance of probabilities’ standard applied in other
In addition,
unlike Australia, patent offices in other jurisdictions appear to apply a single
standard of proof to all the elements
for patentability relevant on
examination.
New Zealand
8.99 A recent report of the New Zealand Ministry for
Economic Development (the NZ Report) has recommended changes to the standard
proof applicable to the acceptance of New Zealand patent
applications.
8.100 Currently, a New Zealand patent examiner may reject a patent application
only if he or she is ‘practically certain’
that any patent granted
would be invalid. The NZ Report cited the amendments to the standard of proof
for acceptance of Australian
patent applications with approval. The report
recommended that the
Patents Act 1953
(NZ) be amended to ‘provide
that patents can only be granted if, on the balance of probabilities, the
requirements for patentability
As a result of
other recommendations in the NZ Report, it appears that the New Zealand Ministry
for Economic Development intended
the ‘balance of probabilities’
standard to be met for each of the requirements for patentability, namely that
an invention
must be a manner of manufacture within the meaning of s 6 of the
Statute of Monopolies 1623
, and must be novel, involve an inventive step,
and be useful.
Options for reform
8.101 IP 27 asked whether
the standard of proof for acceptance of a gene patent should be raised and if so
what the appropriate standard
of proof should be. If the standard of proof were
to be amended, there are two different standards of proof that could plausibly
be applied during examination of an
application.
These would
giving the ‘benefit of the doubt’ to the applicant;
requiring the criteria for patentability be demonstrated by the
applicant on the ‘balance of probabilities’.
criminal standard of proof—‘beyond a reasonable
doubt’—is clearly inappropriate to a civil or administrative
proceeding such as a patent application.
8.103 In determining the appropriate standard of proof for acceptance of a
patent application, a number of considerations are relevant.
prosecution process is analogous to an
procedure in that patent
examiners do not generally have the benefit of arguments and supporting evidence
on both sides of any issue.
Second, the goal of maximising the certainty and
validity of patents granted by a patent office must be balanced against the
available to a patent office, and against other mechanisms in the
patent system that allow the validity of patents to be tested.
If most or many
patents granted are never licensed or enforced, focusing extensive resources at
the patent granting stage may not
Submissions and consultations
8.104 Some submissions
considered that there was no reason to raise the standard of proof for
acceptance of a gene patent application,
or of applications claiming any other
GlaxoSmithKline suggested that raising the standard of proof for acceptance of
gene patent applications alone, and not other types
of patent application, would
conflict with art 27(1) of the TRIPS Agreement, which requires that patent
rights shall be available
without discrimination as to the field of
technology.
Other submissions
also rejected the suggestion that a different standard of proof should apply to
the acceptance of gene patent applications,
but did not refer specifically to
the TRIPS Agreement.
8.105 Genetic Technologies Limited and AusBiotech Ltd cautioned that raising the
standard of proof for acceptance of gene patents
may have adverse consequences
for perceptions of Australian patent law and for Australian companies in the
global biotechnology market
and that these factors should be carefully
considered before any amendments were
8.106 IP Australia commented on the fact that there are two different standards
of proof for acceptance of a patent application,
depending upon the particular
issue under examination. IP Australia indicated that this approach may be
unprecedented and submitted:
IP Australia is not aware of any particular difficulty in extending the ‘balance
of probabilities’ standard to all
criteria of patentability, other than
recommending that any such changes apply to all fields of technology.
8.107 IP Australia rejected the proposition that an even higher standard of
proof ought to be satisfied before a patent application
was accepted, for example,
increasing the standard of proof to ‘beyond all reasonable doubt’.
IP Australia suggested that such a standard did not ‘appear to be appropriate
for any criteria of patentability, as this
is the standard for criminal law’.
IP Australia also commented:
The IPCRC report noted that although the aim of the examination process is
to issue patents with a high presumption of validity,
in some respects it
is a coarse sieve. It is questionable how much onus should be placed on the
applicant at this stage.
8.108 In contrast, the Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia
considered that the current standards of proof for acceptance
of a patent application
appear to be ‘too lenient’. The College stated:
More stringent criteria, based on objective evidence, clearly need to be
developed and implemented. If a patent application is
judged to be novel or
inventive, then the examiner must be certain, not satisfied, that this is
indeed not the case.
8.109 In addition, views expressed in a number of submissions and consultations
suggested that a greater burden should be placed
on patent applicants to prove
that a patent should be granted, and supported reforms that would increase the
presumption that
a granted patent is valid.
In general, comments did not address precisely how this might be achieved, but
seemed to indicate that the standard of proof
for acceptance of patent applications
should be more stringent than it is under current Australian patent law.
8.110 A number of submissions and consultations suggested that the standard of
proof for deciding whether an invention is useful
and whether the claims in an
application are of an appropriate scope might need to be more
These views raise
broader questions about the substantive requirements for patentability and the
grounds upon which gene patent applications
are currently examined. These
matters are addressed in Chapter 6.
ALRC’s views
8.111 Submissions to the
Inquiry did not support the adoption of a standard of proof that would apply
only to gene patent applications.
The ALRC agrees with this view and considers
that gene patent applications should be subject to the same standard of proof as
applications
for patents over any other type of technology. Determining which
patents should be subject to genetic-specific provisions is likely
somewhat arbitrary and difficult to apply. Any such provision is likely to
increase uncertainty in the application of patent
law to inventions involving
genetic materials and technologies. In addition, requirements that would apply
only to gene patents may
be inconsistent with Australia’s obligations
under the TRIPS Agreement to provide patent protection to all inventions without
discrimination as to field of technology.
8.112 However, the ALRC considers that
Patents Act
should be amended to
provide a single standard of proof for all patent applications examined by IP
Australia and that the applicable
standard of proof should be ‘on the
balance of probabilities’.
8.113 The rationale for maintaining two different standards of proof is unclear,
given that each of the elements of patentability
is a prerequisite for the grant
of a patent. Applying different standards of proof to the various requirements
for patentability
adds unnecessary complexity to the examination of patent
applications and might generate confusion on the part of patent applicants
patent examiners. Further, there are practical difficulties for examiners in
applying different levels of proof to different
criteria for patentability, and
the practical effect of this might be that examiners apply a single standard of
8.114 The ALRC agrees with the views expressed by ACIP and the IPCRC that
requiring a ‘balance of probabilities’ standard
to be met before a
patent application is accepted will increase the chance that a granted patent is
likely to be held to be valid.
This is particularly important in relation to
patents over genetic materials and technologies. The ALRC considers that this
should be applied to all of the issues that an Australian patent
examiner is required to assess in examining a patent application.
This should
include examination as to whether an invention claimed in a patent application
is ‘useful’ (see Chapter 6).
It would not, however, change the
standard of proof applicable to the requirements of novelty and inventive (or
innovative) step
because a ‘balance of probabilities’ standard
already applies to these requirements under the current law.
Proposal 8 - 5
The Commonwealth should amend the
Patents Act
to require patent examiners to be satisfied on the balance of probabilities
when assessing all statutory requirements for patentability
that are relevant at
the stage of examination. (See also Proposal 6 - 3.)
IP Australia is the Commonwealth
organisation that also administers trade mark and design rights. See website at
<www.ipaustralia.gov.au>.
Making the World Safe for Biotech Patents
(2002) International
Intellectual Property Institute Discussion Paper, 26 June 2002; M Cooney,
Patent Reform Plans Win Approval: But Lawyers Call for Better Resourcing of
Patent Office
, Computerworld, <www.computerworld.co.nz> at 1 September
IP Australia,
Submission P56
4 November 2003.
World Intellectual
Property Organization,
General Information on the Seventh Edition of the
International Patent Classification System (IPC)
<www.wipo.org/classifications> at 16 December
Challenges to patent rights are
discussed further in Ch 9.
Australian Department of Human Services,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 15
September 2003; Australian Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September
Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003; Cancer Council South Australia,
Submission P41
, 9 October 2003; Cancer Council Tasmania,
, 29 September 2003; National Health and Medical Research Council,
Consultation
, Canberra, 24 September
Royal College of Pathologists of
Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003.
Submission P32
, 7 October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Submission P32
7 October 2003; Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003; South Australian Clinical Genetics
Consultation
, Adelaide, 16 September 2003; G Suthers,
Submission P30
, 2 October
Submission P28
1 October 2003; Department of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
November 2003; South Australian Clinical Genetics Service,
Consultation
Adelaide, 16 September 2003.
Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January 2004; Department of Industry
Tourism and Resources,
Consultation
, Canberra, 22 September
Western Australian Department of
Health and others (healthcare issues),
Consultation
, Perth, 17 September
2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 September 2003. See also
BresaGen Limited,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 15 September
BresaGen Limited,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 15 September 2003; Consumers’ Health Forum
of Australia,
Consultation
, Canberra, 23 September
Benitec Ltd,
Consultation
Brisbane, 3 October 2003.
Consultation
, Adelaide, 15 September 2003; Western Australian
Department of Health and others (legal issues),
Consultation
, Perth, 17
September 2003.
See, eg, South
Australian Department of Human Services,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 15
September 2003.
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
IP Australia,
Consultation
Canberra, 24 September 2003.
also Gene CRC,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 3 September
IP Australia,
, 4 November
Howlett and A Christie,
An Analysis of the Approaches of the Trilateral and
Australian Patent Offices to Patenting Partial DNA Sequences (ESTs)
The hypothetical claims were
taken from a similar comparative study conducted by the Trilateral
Offices—that is, the USPTO,
M Howlett and A Christie,
Analysis of the Approaches of the Trilateral and Australian Patent Offices to
Patenting Partial DNA Sequences (ESTs)
Department of Industry
Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Consultation
, Canberra, 22 September
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Annual Report
balance of IP Australia’s annual revenue from its ordinary activities
comprises trademark and design fees, revenue gained
from sale of assets and from
services provided by the Australian Government free of charge, as well as
accrued interest: Ibid.
This figure
includes supervising examiners and senior
IP Australia,
, 4 November 2003.
IP Australia,
Industrial Property Statistics
, Tables 1 and 2, various
The number of patents examined
is based on data for the ‘first reports issued’ on patent
applications filed with IP
United States Patent and
Trademark Office,
Performance and Accountability Report for Fiscal Year
(2002), 22.
J Kurlantzick,
Losing the Race: Is the Patent Office’s Slowness Putting US Innovation
, Entrepreneur, May 2003, <www.entrepreneur.com> at 13 May
T Zwillich,
Biotech Firms Want
to Sway Patent Office Revamp
, Reuters Health, <www.reuters.com> at 2
See United States Patent and
Trademark Office,
21st Century Strategic Plan
<www.uspto.gov/web/offices/com/strat21/index.htm> at 2 June 2003. See also
Making the World Safe for Biotech Patents
(2002) International
Intellectual Property Institute Discussion Paper, 26 June 2002,
The United States Federal
Trade Commission has also recommended that the USPTO should receive greater
funding from the United States
Congress to ensure quality patent review: United
States Federal Trade Commission,
To Promote Innovation: The Proper Balance of
Competition and Patent Law and Policy
(2003), rec
Australian Centre for Intellectual
Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute
of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003. See also Australian
Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
September 2003; UniQuest,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 3 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003.
also BresaGen Limited,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 15 September
Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
September 2003.
Biotechnology
Australia, Freehills and Ernst & Young,
Australian Biotechnology
IP Australia,
Submission P56
, 4 November
to certain formalities, the Commissioner may delegate any or all powers and
functions conferred upon him or her under the
Patents Act
or any other
Patents Act 1990
Other powers of the Commissioner of
Patents may also be delegated to more senior examiners, for example, the power
to hear and determine
opposition and re-examination
proceedings.
IP Australia,
Submission P56
, 4 November
Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003; Cancer Council
Submission P40
, 29 September 2003; Cancer Council South
Submission P41
, 9 October 2003. See also New South Wales
Genetics Service,
Consultation
, Sydney, 9 September
Royal College of Pathologists of
Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November 2003; A McBratney and others,
, 22 October 2003; Western Australian Department of Health and others
(healthcare issues),
Consultation
, Perth, 17 September
South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
BresaGen Limited,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 15 September
National Stem Cell Centre,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 4 September
Institute of Patent and Trade
Mark Attorneys of Australia,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 September 2003;
National Stem Cell Centre,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 4 September
Western Australian Department of
Health and others (healthcare issues),
Consultation
, Perth, 17 September
2003; Western Australian Department of Health and others (legal issues),
Consultation
, Perth, 17 September
BresaGen Limited,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 15 September
A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
concerns have been raised in connection with applications for patents relating
to other technologies: see, eg, Institute
of Patent and Trade Mark Attorneys of
Submission to Advisory Council on Intellectual Property’s
Inquiry into the Patenting of Business Systems
, Advisory Council on
Intellectual Property,
<www.acip.gov.au/bus_submissions/bus_submissions.htm> at 4 June
Royal Society,
Keeping Science
Open: The Effects of Intellectual Property Policy on the Conduct of Science
(2003), [3.27].
For example, in Singapore
Patents Act 1995
(Singapore), legislation
grants the Registrar
of Patents the discretion to appoint a scientific adviser from a panel of
advisers established under the Act
to assist the court and the Registrar of
Patents Act
Chapter 221 (Singapore) s 90.
European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies has recommended that
patent applications claiming human stem cells should
be subject to ethical
review by an independent advisory body as part of the examination process:
European Group on Ethics in Science
and New Technologies,
Ethical Aspects of
Patenting Inventions Involving Human Stem Cells: Opinion to the European
(2002), [2.10]. Creation of an independent ethical advisory body
as part of the Australian patent system is considered further in
United States Patent and Trademark
21st Century Strategic Plan
<www.uspto.gov/web/offices/com/strat21/index.htm> at 2 June 2003; United
States Patent and Trademark Office,
Patent Quality Improvement: Expansion of
the Second-Pair-of-Eyes Review
<www.uspto.gov/web/offices/com/strat21/action/q3p17a.htm> at 1 December
United States Federal Trade
Commission,
To Promote Innovation: The Proper Balance of Competition and
Patent Law and Policy
(2003), rec
IP Australia,
Patent Manual
of Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
Ibid, [8.5]. The exclusion
from patentability of inventions claiming human beings or the biological
processes for their generation
is discussed in Ch 7 and
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Commonwealth Department of Health
and Ageing,
Submission P65
, 28 January
Department of Health Western
Submission P53
, 3 November
Consumers’ Health Forum of
Consultation
, Canberra, 23 September
Commonwealth Department of Health
and Ageing,
Submission P65
, 28 January
Ibid; Department of Health
Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November 2003. Submissions and
consultations that proposed the establishment of a separate advisory panel of
expert ethicists
to review patent applications claiming genetic materials and
technologies are considered in Ch
Consumers’ Health Forum of
Consultation
, Canberra, 23 September
IP Australia,
Consultation
, Canberra, 24 September
South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Gene Technology Act 2000
The functions of the Regulator are prescribed in
Technology Act
and include: administration of the Act and related
legislation; assessment of any risks posed by genetically modified organisms;
providing information and advice to other regulatory agencies about genetically
modified organisms and products; and promoting harmonised
risk assessment for
such organisms and products by all regulatory
Ibid s 100(1). The other
subsidiary advisory bodies established under the
Gene Technology Act
the Gene Technology Ethics Committee and the Gene Technology Community
Consultative Committee:
Gene Technology Act 2000
GTTAC comprises 18 members with
expertise in matters such as biology, ecology, genetics, public health, botany,
toxicology and risk
assessment, as well as one layperson:
Gene Technology Act
(6). An expert adviser who provides further
expertise in weed and pesticide resistance management also participates in
determinations
made by the GTTAC:
Gene Technology Act 2000
Department of Health and Ageing,
Gene Technology Committees: The Gene
Technology Advisory Committee
, <www.ogtr.gov.au/committee/gttac.htm>
at 25 November 2003.
Technology Ministerial Council comprises one representative from the
Commonwealth and each of the States and Territories
and was established by the
intergovernmental Gene Technology Agreement 2001: Commonwealth of Australia and
Gene Technology Agreement
Gene Technology Act 2000
Consultation by the Minister does not appear to be required
prior to the appointment of any expert advisers:
Gene Technology Act 2000
Gene Technology Act
‘Dealings’ is defined
Gene Technology Act
to include any of the following activities in
relation to a ‘genetically modified organism’: conducting
experiments; making,
developing, producing or manufacturing; breeding;
propagating; growing or culturing; and importing: Ibid
The GTTAC also
provides comments on the Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plan prepared in
connection with each such license
application.
Gene Technology
Regulations 2001
Gene Technology Act 2000
Gene Technology Regulations 2001
(Cth) rr 20,
Gene Technology Regulations
(Cth) rr 20(1), 23(1).
20(2), 23(2).
Ibid r 20(4). The same
restriction does not appear to apply to expert advisers appointed by the
Gene Technology Regulations 2001
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
IP Australia,
Patent Manual
Practice and Procedure Volume 1: International
(2003); IP Australia,
Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume 3: Oppositions,
Courts, Extensions & Disputes
(2002). The
is available on
IP Australia’s website and in hard copy from IP Australia’s state
Patent Cooperation
[1980] ATS 6
, (entered into force on 24 January
There are isolated references
to genetic materials in the
as well as a chapter setting out the
principles and procedures relevant to the deposit of micro-organisms and other
life forms: IP
Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume 2:
(2002), [8.4.2], ch
IP Australia,
Patents for: Microorganisms; Cell Lines; Hybridomas; Related Biological
Materials and their Use; & Genetically Manipulated
<www.ipaustralia.gov.au/pdfs/patents/specific/biotech.pdf> at 31 March
The fair basis and sufficiency
requirements for patentability under Australian law are discussed in Ch 6. The
Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of the Deposit of
Microorganisms for the Purposes of Patent Procedure 1977
is discussed in Ch
United Kingdom Patent Office,
Examination Guidelines for Patent Applications Relating to Biotechnological
Inventions in the UK Patent Office (November 2003)
<www.patent.gov.uk/patent/reference/index>.
Ibid, [7], Annex
W Cornish, M Llewelyn and M
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and Genetics
Japan Patent Office,
Implementing Guidelines for Inventions in Specific Fields: Biological
, <www.jpo.go.jp/tetuzuki_e/t_tokkyo_e/txt/bio-e-m.txt> at
18 November 2003.
Japan Patent
Examples of Examinations on the Inventions Related to Genes (DNA
Fragments, Full-length cDNAs, and Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms)
Translation)
, <www.jpo.go.jp/tetuzuki_e/t_tokkyo_e/dnas.htm> at 18
November 2003.
Enzo Biochem
Inc v Gen-Probe Inc
[2002] USCAFED 65
(2002) 285 F 3d 1013
Regents of the University of
California v Eli Lilly & Co
[1997] USCAFED 407
(1997) 119 F 3d 1559
[1995] USCAFED 382
51 F 3d 1552
(1993) 991 F 2d
United States Patent and
Trademark Office, ‘Guidelines for Examination of Patent Applications under
, “Written Description” Requirement’ (2001) 66
1099; United States Patent and Trademark Office, ‘Utility
Examination Guidelines’ (2001) 66
United States Patent and
Trademark Office, ‘Request for Comments on Interim Examination Guidelines
for Examination of Patent
Applications under the
“Written Description” Requirement’ (1998) 63
United States Patent and Trademark Office, ‘Revised Interim Guidelines for
Examination of Patent Applications under the
para 1 “Written
Description” Requirement: Request for Comments’ (1999) 64
71427; United States Patent and Trademark Office, ‘Revised Utility
Examination Guidelines: Request for Comments’ (1999)
Public comment on the USPTO’s examination guidelines is not required under
United States law: 5 USC
§553(b)(A).
United States
Patent and Trademark Office, ‘Request for Comments on Interim Examination
Guidelines for Examination of Patent
Applications under the
“Written Description” Requirement’ (1998) 63
As a result of certain comments that the USPTO received on the interim written
description guidelines, the agency determined
that review of the utility
examination guidelines was also required: United States Patent and Trademark
Office, ‘Revised Utility
Examination Guidelines: Request for
Comments’ (1999) 64
Ontario Ministry of
Health and Long-Term Care,
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting: Charting
New Territory in Healthcare: Report to the Provinces and Territories
Canadian Biotechnology
Advisory Committee,
Patenting of Higher Life Forms and Related Issues: Report
to the Government of Canada Biotechnology Ministerial Coordinating Committee
(2002), rec 10.
Ibid, 21. Note that the issue of
the patentability of higher life forms has now been considered by the Canadian
Supreme Court and
Harvard College v Canada (Commissioner of
Harvard College v Canada
(Commissioner of Patents)
[2002] SCC 76
Canadian Patent Office,
Manual of Patent Office Practice
Canadian Intellectual
Property Office,
Information about the Manual of Patent Office Practice
http://strategis.ic.gc.ca/sc_mrksv/cipo/patents/mopop/mopop-e.html
November 2003.
Department of Health
Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November 2003; Western Australian
Department of Health and others (healthcare issues),
Consultation
17 September
Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
September 2003, 39.
Davies Collison
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003; GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
IP Australia,
, 4 November
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
See Australian Law Reform
Commission and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The
Protection of Human Genetic Information in Australia
, ALRC 96 (2003), rec
5 - 1 to 5 - 9.
Nielsen have also proposed biotechnology-specific guidelines for assessing the
‘description criteria’ (this
is, the sufficiency and fair basis
requirements for patentability): D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical
Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
Royal Society,
Science Open: The Effects of Intellectual Property Policy on the Conduct of
(2003), [3.27].
Biotechnology Australia,
Freehills and Ernst & Young,
Australian Biotechnology Report
Patents Regulations
(Cth) sch 3, cl 12.
Patent Manual Practice and Procedure Volume 1: International
(2003), ch 1.2; IP Australia,
Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume
2: National
(2002), [0.2.7] - [0.2.8], [1.4], ch
IP Australia,
Patent Manual of
Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
(2002), [12.5.9]. Equivalent
disclosure requirements exist with respect to documentary searches relating to
an innovation patent:
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) s 101D. See also Ch
Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
Intellectual
Property and Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property
Legislation under the Competition Principles Agreement
IP Australia,
, 4 November 2003. The on-line databases IP Australia may access include
Genebank, EMBL, Swiss-prot and PIR which cover gene data
published in
literature, including some patent
literature.
Ch 4 and 5 for further discussion of the
and IP Australia’s
responsibility in processing applications filed under
See further Ch 4; IP Australia,
International Patent Application Kit
<www.ipaustralia.gov.au/pdfs/patents/internationalpatentapplicationkit.pdf>
at 1 May 2003.
IP Australia,
Annual Report
(2003); Intellectual Property and Competition Review
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation under the Competition
Principles Agreement
, 7 October 2003; Benitec Ltd,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 3 October
2003; Institute of Patent and Trade Mark Attorneys of Australia,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 September
Department of Health Western
Submission P53
, 3 November 2003; South Australian Clinical
Genetics Service,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 16 September
Benitec Ltd,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 3 October
Submission P56
, 4 November 2003. See also IP Australia,
Consultation
, Canberra, 24 September
See [8.79] and Ch
See D Nicol, ‘Gene Patents
and Access to Genetic Tests’
Australian Health Law Bulletin
Patents Act 1990
(standard patents). Equivalent provisions exist in relation to the
examination of innovation patents:
Patents Act 1990
grounds for objection to an application for a standard patent or to an
innovation patent are discussed in Ch
Advisory Council on Industrial
Review of Enforcement of Industrial Property Rights
(1999), 15;
Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee,
Intellectual Property Legislation under the Competition Principles Agreement
(2000), 167. See Explanatory Memorandum,
Patents Amendment Bill 2001
Patents Act 1990
(as in force at 30 September
Intellectual
Property and Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property
Legislation under the Competition Principles Agreement
(2000), 167. See, eg,
Commissioner of Patents v Microcell Ltd
[1959] HCA 71
(1959) 102 CLR
Advisory Council on Industrial
Review of Enforcement of Industrial Property Rights
(1999), rec
Intellectual
Property and Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property
Legislation under the Competition Principles Agreement
The situation is the same for
the equivalent provisions relating to examination of an innovation patent:
Patents Act 1990
IP Australia,
Patent Manual
of Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
(2002), [0.2.4], [12.5.2.1]
(standard patent); [30.4.3.3] (innovation patent). See also Explanatory
Memorandum,
Patents Amendment Bill 2001
(Cth), [18],
Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
[12.5.2.2].
[12.5.2.3].
United Kingdom Patent
Examination Guidelines for Patent Applications Relating to
Biotechnological Inventions in the UK Patent Office (November 2003)
<www.patent.gov.uk/patent/reference/index>. See also New Zealand Ministry
of Economic Development,
Review of the Patents Act 1953 Stage 3: Boundaries
to Patentability
(2003), Pt 1,
United States Patent and
Trademark Office,
Manual of Patent Examining Procedure
(2003), [706].
‘Preponderance of evidence’ requires that the greater weight of
evidence, or evidence which is more credible
and convincing, is in favour of a
particular conclusion: H Black,
Black’s Law Dictionary
1968); B Garner,
A Dictionary of Modern Legal Usage
New Zealand Ministry of
Economic Development,
Review of the Patents Act 1953 Stage 3: Boundaries to
Patentability
Ibid, Pt 1, rec
Ibid, Pt 1, rec
See Intellectual Property and
Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation
under the Competition Principles Agreement
See further, M Lemley,
‘Rational Ignorance at the Patent Office’
Northwestern
University Law Review
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October 2003; Queensland Government,
, 5 January
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003.
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003;
Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November
Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
Submission P56
, 4 November
See also Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee,
Intellectual Property Legislation under the Competition Principles Agreement
(2000), 143 - 144,
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
Confidential
Submission P54 CON
, 3 November 2003; Department of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November 2003; BresaGen Limited,
Consultation
Adelaide, 15 September 2003.
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November 2003; Commonwealth
Department of Health and Ageing,
Submission P65
, 28 January 2004.
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
9. Challenging and Enforcing Patent Rights
Introduction
Rights of a patent holder
Challenges to patent rights
Intervention in the examination process
Re-examination
Other jurisdictions
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Government participation in patent challenges
United Kingdom
United States
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Enforcement of patent rights
Factors affecting the decision to enforce a patent
Commercial responses to infringement
Legal responses to patent infringement
Defences to patent infringement
Enforcement of gene patents in Australia
Monitoring compliance with patent rights
By Australian patent holders
By users of Australian gene patents
Patent information available from IP Australia
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Patent litigation insurance
Prevalence of patent litigation insurance
Advantages of patent litigation insurance
Criticisms of patent litigation insurance
Effect of litigation insurance on the patent system
Government consideration of patent insurance schemes
Submissions and Consultations
ALRC's views
9. Challenging and Enforcing Patent Rights
Introduction
chapter addresses issues relating to the law and practice of challenging and
enforcing gene patents in Australia. Procedures
for challenging Australian gene
patents are available both prior to the grant of a patent and after a patent has
been sealed. These
procedures are outlined and the potential for greater
government participation in challenging gene patents is considered. The chapter
then addresses the variety of ways in which gene patents may be enforced, from
commercial negotiations to license a patent, to litigation
proceedings. The
chapter also discusses the factors that affect patent holders’ decisions
as to which enforcement strategy
they will pursue. One important issue is the
ability of Australian patent holders to detect infringing activities. The
chapter therefore
addresses mechanisms for monitoring compliance with patent
rights, including through information made available by IP Australia.
chapter concludes with a discussion of insurance policies that provide coverage
for the costs of patent litigation.
Rights of a patent holder
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act
) provides that the grant of a patent confers upon a
patent holder the exclusive right to exploit an invention, or to authorise another
person to exploit an invention, during the patent term.
‘Exploit’ is defined in the Act to include:
(a) where the invention is a product—make, hire, sell or otherwise
dispose of the product, offer to make, sell, hire, or
otherwise dispose of
it, use or import it, or keep it for the purpose of doing any of those things;
(b) where the invention is a method or process—use the method or process
or do any act mentioned in (a) in respect of a
product resulting from such
9.3 A patent holder may assign or license his or her patent rights to a third
party. An assignment of a patent results in the transfer
of all of the rights
owned by the patent holder to a third party (the assignee).
A licence of a patent does not transfer ownership of any patent rights; rather
it establishes terms upon which a third party
(the licensee) may exercise certain
patent rights without such use constituting infringement.
Licensing practices in Australia with respect to genetic and biotechnological
inventions are discussed in Chapter 23.
9.4 If a patent is owned by more than one person, each is entitled to exercise
the exclusive rights granted by the patent for his
or her own benefit, without
accounting to the other patent
However, any licence or
assignment of a co-owned patent requires the consent of all of the patent
9.5 Subject to a number of safeguards, including the compulsory licensing
provisions in the
a patent holder is not
obliged to exploit an invention claimed in a patent at any time during the
patent term, or to license or assign
the patent rights. Patent protection may be
obtained purely for blocking purposes, that is, to prevent another person or
from using a patented invention in the development of other
9.6 However, patents rights remain subject to challenge even after a patent
application has been accepted by the Commissioner of
Patents and after the
patent is sealed.
Patents Act
expressly states that
nothing in the Act or in the
Patent Cooperation Treaty
guarantees that a patent is
Challenges to patent rights
9.7 Opportunities
to object to the grant of patent rights exist at each stage of the patenting
process—prior to acceptance of
a standard patent application, after the
Commissioner of Patents has accepted an application, and after a patent has been
The mechanisms for challenging patent rights at each stage are discussed
in turn below.
Intervention in the examination process
Patents Act
there is an opportunity for any person to intervene in the
examination of a standard patent
application.
The section permits
any person to file a notice (commonly referred to as a ‘
notice’) with the Patent Office asserting that the invention claimed in
the patent application is not novel or does not involve
an inventive
The notice may be filed
any time after publication, but before acceptance, of a complete
application.
It must contain
reasons for the assertion that the claimed invention is not patentable and
attach any documentary evidence on which
the assertion is
9.9 Upon receipt of any such notice, the Commissioner of Patents must notify the
applicant and provide copies of documents provided
in support of the
In practice, documents
provided to the Patent Office pursuant to a
notice are included in the
prior art information relied on by the examiner assessing the application, and
they are also open to public
inspection.
9.10 A patent examiner is not, however, required to raise an objection to an
application based on information provided pursuant to
notice. Once the
notice has been filed, the notifier does not take any further part in the
prosecution of the patent application and cannot be aware
of the impact of the
notice until after acceptance of the patent application at
Professor James Lahore
has commented that a
has the advantage of cheapness and potential anonymity, and best suits
circumstances of clear prior publication. There is the disadvantage
telegraphed intentions without an opportunity to stay
three primary mechanisms for challenging patents after acceptance of the patent
application are opposition, re-examination
and revocation.
9.12 Any person may initiate proceedings to oppose the grant of a standard
patent within three months of publication of a notice
of its acceptance by the
Commissioner of Patents.
Opposition to a standard patent therefore occurs before the patent is
9.13 Currently, the grounds upon which an application for a standard patent may
be opposed are limited to the following:
the applicant is not entitled to the grant of a patent, or is only
entitled in conjunction with some other person;
the invention is not a manner of manufacture, is not novel or does
not involve an inventive step when compared to the prior art;
the patent specification does not comply with the requirements of
the invention relates to human beings or to biological processes for
generation.
objection raised by an opponent and the prior art cited in support of such
objections may be similar or in addition to that
already overcome by an
applicant during examination of the patent application by the Patent
Opposition hearings are
the responsibility of the Commissioner of Patents and are typically heard and
determined by senior examination
staff within the Patent
9.15 There are several possible outcomes of opposition proceedings. The
Commissioner may dismiss an opposition on procedural grounds,
either in whole or
the proceedings may
result in the amendment of one or more of the patent claims in order to rectify
deficiencies in the opposed application;
or the opposition may be successful, in
which case the Commissioner may refuse to grant a
The most common outcome
of opposition proceedings is that the scope of the opposed patent claims is
restricted. Decisions of the
Commissioner may be appealed to the Federal Court
by either the patent holder or the
9.16 In practice, only a very small proportion of accepted
applications—approximately 1.5%—are
Statistics on the
number of oppositions filed in relation to gene patents are not readily
but data for the
broader category of biotechnology patents suggest that the number of oppositions
is also very small. According to
data provided to the ALRC by IP Australia, in
the five years from 1997 - 98 to 2001 - 02, there were only 14
substantive decisions
made on biotechnology oppositions (an average of less than
three per year), although 86% of these were
successful.
Review of the opposition process in Australia
9.17 Two reports have recently reviewed the system for
opposing patents under Australian law—a 1999 report of the Advisory
on Industrial Property (now the Advisory Council on Intellectual
Property—ACIP)
report of the Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee (the IPCRC
The reports addressed
two principal concerns about the current opposition process: whether oppositions
should be available prior
to the grant of a patent (as is currently the case) or
only post-grant; and who should have responsibility for hearing opposition
proceedings.
9.18 ACIP considered perceived deficiencies in the current system of pre-grant
opposition,
and commented on the
fact that opposition proceedings may be used by third parties to delay the grant
of a patent. However, consultations
conducted by ACIP indicated that industry
did not generally support replacing pre-grant opposition with post-grant
opposition.
Further, the IPCRC
Report indicated that there may be concerns in adopting a post-grant opposition
procedure because such a review
might be regarded as an unconstitutional
exercise of judicial power by a non-judicial body (that is, by IP
Australia).
9.19 However, both reports suggested that there was scope to improve the
procedures for pre-grant opposition. The ACIP Report did
not make a specific
recommendation on this issue but encouraged IP Australia and the Institute of
Patent and Trade Mark Attorneys
of Australia to review the current
procedures.
The IPCRC Report
indicated that hearings officers in opposition matters should continue to
comprise senior examination officers at
the Patent Office. While a specialist
hearing section (comparable to those in the United States Patent & Trademark
Office (USPTO)
and the Europe Patent Office (EPO)) did not need to be
established,
the IPCRC Report
recommended that:
IP Australia take further measures to improve perceptions of the hearings
process [for oppositions] being independent of, and more
generally fair and
equitable to, all parties.
9.20 In its response to the IPCRC Report, the Australian Government indicated
that it would ask IP Australia to appoint a senior
officer who is to be directly
responsible to the Commissioner of Patents for opposition hearings, and to take
further steps to improve
the transparency of the hearings process for
oppositions.
IP Australia has
now formed the Opposition Hearings and Legislation section to address the issues
raised in the IPCRC Report.
Re-examination
9.21 Re-examination
provides another mechanism by which the validity of a patent (or, in limited
circumstances, an accepted application
for a standard patent) may be
challenged.
9.22 The only issues relevant in re-examination proceedings are whether the
invention claimed in the patent or patent application
is novel or involves an
inventive (or innovative) step.
Re-examination may be conducted at the discretion of the Commissioner, upon the
request of a patent holder or any other person, or
at the direction of a
prescribed court in connection with proceedings disputing the validity of a
9.23 Re-examination proceedings are conducted
—that is, in
the presence of one party, but not the other—and are typically undertaken
by senior examination staff within
the Patent Office, who also have
responsibility for opposition
9.24 As a result of re-examination, one or more claims in a patent may be
amended as directed by the
Commissioner.
The Commissioner
also has the power to refuse to grant a patent application, or to revoke an
issued patent (either in whole or in
part), that has been the subject of an
adverse re-examination report.
9.25 A patent holder may appeal decisions of the Commissioner on re-examination
to the Federal Court.
parties, however, have no right of appeal against decisions of the Commissioner
on re-examination. If, following re-examination,
the Commissioner finds that a
patent (or an application for a standard patent) is valid and a third party
still wishes to challenge
the enforceability of the patent, the only course of
action available is an application for revocation under
9.26 To date, the re-examination provisions of the
Patents Act
invoked only on a limited number of
Mr Philip Spann, a
supervising examiner of patents at IP Australia, has suggested that the
relatively small number of re-examinations
may indicate that other mechanisms
for challenging patents are more
attractive.
a patent has been granted, it remains subject to a claim for revocation.
Typically, an application for revocation of a
patent is filed as a counter-claim
to a claim of infringement.
However, revocation of a patent may be sought by any person independently of
infringement proceedings.
9.28 The grounds upon which an application for revocation may be made are
broader than the grounds upon which opposition or re-examination
are available.
An application for revocation of a patent may be made on the basis that:
the patent holder is not entitled to the patent;
the invention is not a ‘patentable invention’ as defined
Patents Act
the patent holder has contravened a condition in the patent;
the patent (or an amendment to the patent request or complete
specification) was obtained by fraud, false suggestion or misrepresentation;
the patent specification does not comply with
Patents Act
provides other circumstances in which a patent may be
revoked. These include: pursuant to an order of a prescribed court following
expiration of a compulsory licence on the basis that a patent is no longer being
worked and the reasonable requirements of the
public have not been
by the Commissioner in
response to a patent holder’s offer to surrender his or her patent
and, in the case of
innovation patents, following an adverse report upon
re-examination.
Other jurisdictions
9.30 Other jurisdictions
have recently considered improvements to the mechanisms for challenging patent
rights with a view to promoting
mechanisms that are cheaper and less complicated
than court proceedings.
9.31 In Canada, both a report of the Canadian Biotechnology Advisory Committee
(the CBAC Report)
and a report
of the Ontario Government (the Ontario
recommended the
introduction of an opposition procedure to allow challenges within a limited
period following the grant of a
If implemented, the
opposition process would provide an additional mechanism for challenging gene
patents under Canadian law. Currently,
other than in litigation, a Canadian
patent may be challenged only by ‘re-examination’ proceedings, which
are similar
to the re-examination procedures under Australian law outlined
9.32 In the United States, a November 2003 report of the Federal Trade
Commission (FTC) on the intersection between patent and competition
policy (the FTC Innovation Report) recommended the creation of a ‘new
administrative procedure to allow post-grant
review of and opposition to
Currently, the
principal ways in which a United States patent may be challenged outside
infringement litigation is by
inter partes
re-examination.
Both types of
proceedings permit any person to file a request for re-examination at any time
following the grant of a patent. Re-examination
will be commenced by the USPTO
if the request raises a substantial new question of patentability. In the case
inter partes
re-examination only, the third party requestor has access
to relevant documents filed in the proceedings and may provide written
to any response by the patent holder to an action on the
Between its introduction
in 1999 and July 2003,
inter partes
re-examination had been used only
four times.
9.33 The FTC recommended a new procedure for post-grant review, which would
allow challenges to the patentability of an invention,
at least with respect to
novelty, non-obviousness, written description, enablement and
Proceedings would
include the ability to cross-examine witnesses and appropriate (but
circumscribed) discovery.
FTC made further recommendations to ensure that such review proceedings would be
conducted expeditiously by an independent administrative
Submissions and consultations
9.34 IP 27 asked whether
existing mechanisms for challenging gene patents were adequate, or whether
additional or alternative mechanisms
might be required. Submissions and
consultations did not support the implementation of mechanisms to permit
challenges specifically
to gene patent applications or granted gene
However, a number of
submissions suggested that current avenues for challenging patent rights are
inadequate.
Submissions
indicated that, while the mechanisms for challenging patent rights might be
effective if invoked, the financial cost
of a patent challenge is often
prohibitive.
The Royal College
of Pathologists of Australasia (RCPA), for example, submitted:
The process can be expensive and time consuming. Smaller organisations
and companies are much more likely to make a pragmatic commercial
decision to
cease the alleged infringement activity or pay the requested licences and
royalties even though they may believe the
patent to be invalid or illegitimate
... The public sector has additional difficulties with these provisions
[because] ... they have
neither the resources to mount a challenge nor the
support of government.
9.35 In consultations, the Institute of Patent and Trade Mark Attorneys of
Australia indicated that the decision to oppose or initiate
another type of
challenge to a patent may be based on strategic considerations, as well as
financial ones.
Members of the
Institute suggested that, in resolving opposition proceedings, IP Australia
often seeks to modify the claims of an
opposed application, rather than
dismissing the application in its entirety. Consequently, a potential opposer
must take into account
the possibility that opposition proceedings might help an
applicant get a better patent (even if one of more limited scope), rather
result in the application being rejected.
9.36 Two submissions proposed specific reforms to the current mechanisms for
challenging patent rights under Australian law. The
Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture (ACIPA) suggested that third party
participation in patent challenges
should be facilitated:
There needs to be greater participation of third parties in the initial
interviews about a patent application, greater scope for opposition
proceedings,
greater scope to ask for re-examination, and the chance for third parties to
appeal patent office re-examination
9.37 The Department of Health Western Australia agreed that improvements to the
re-examination process are
The Department did
not make a specific proposals in this regard, but did consider that the time
during which opposition proceedings
may be initiated should be extended from the
current three-month period to nine months, to allow interested parties
sufficient time
to respond to accepted patent
applications.
9.38 On the other hand, a number of submissions considered that the current
mechanisms for challenging patents are
satisfactory.
McBratney and others considered that current mechanisms strike the right balance
between giving third parties an opportunity
to test the validity of a patent or
patent application and not unduly delaying the grant of patent
The Australian
biotechnology industry organisation, AusBiotech Ltd, indicated that although
opinions varied, its members generally
considered that the procedures for
challenging patents under Australian law were better than in other
or the United
ALRC’s views
9.39 The ALRC’s
preliminary view is that no changes are currently required to the specific
procedures for challenging gene patent
applications and granted gene patents.
The ALRC agrees with submissions that suggested that genetic materials and
technologies do
not give rise to any special needs in this regard.
9.40 No evidence was provided to the Inquiry that the opposition, re-examination
or revocation procedures set out in the
Patents Act
are not adequate
avenues for challenging patent rights. Third parties may intervene in each stage
of the patent process and, in the
ALRC’s view, no additional avenues for
intervention are required at this stage. However, in Chapter 6 the ALRC has
that ‘usefulness’ should be considered by Australian patent
examiners in assessing patent applications and, consequently,
should be a ground
upon which an accepted patent application may be opposed (see Proposal
9.41 Many submissions and consultations expressed concern about the cost
involved in challenging patent rights. The large investment
of time and
resources required to challenge a gene patent might result in patents of
questionable validity not being challenged.
In the ALRC’s view, this is
not a failure of the mechanisms currently available to challenge patents, but it
does raise questions
as to who might initiate such challenges and for what
purposes. This matter is discussed below.
Government participation in patent challenges
9.42 One issue raised by the
Inquiry is whether increased participation by relevant government departments or
other organisations
would assist in addressing some of the practical impediments
that Australian companies and research organisation face in challenging
patents. Reports about the patent system in Australia and in other jurisdictions
are instructive on this issue.
9.43 As part of its review
of Australian patent and competition law, the IPCRC Report recommended that IP
Australia should assume
responsibility for initiating test cases ‘where
substantial areas of uncertainty exist in application of the patent
The IPCRC Report
considered that problems raised by gene patents may continue for a number of
years ‘if it is left entirely
to private litigation to correct areas of
uncertainty’.
9.44 The Australian Government accepted this
recommendation.
However, Dr
Dianne Nicol and Jane Nielsen have commented that ‘it seems incongruous
for the same body that grants patents to
take responsibility for challenging
their validity’.
view, IP Australia’s expertise makes it particularly well qualified to
identify areas of patent law that require clarification.
9.45 On the other hand, public confidence in the patent system might be
undermined if IP Australia is required to initiate challenges
decisions to grant a patent. Further, IP Australia is not well-placed to know
which patents may, in the future, present
significant issues for competitors of
a patent holder, or for the general public, such as to warrant a challenge being
mounted. Nicol
and Nielsen thus proposed that ‘a public interest body with
financial support from the Federal Government’ might initiate
to patent validity, if
United Kingdom
9.46 In 2003, the United
Kingdom Department of Health commissioned a report by Professor William Cornish,
Dr Margaret Llewelyn and
Dr Michael Adcock (the UK
on the impact and
management of intellectual property rights in the healthcare sector, and in
particular in genetic materials and
technologies. The report recommended that
the Department of Health should ‘take an active role in monitoring
developments in
relevant areas of intellectual property law (most notably patent
9.47 The UK Report also recommended that the Department of Health establish
mechanisms for intervening in the patent process, where
appropriate. The UK
Report considered that such intervention might include: providing information to
the United Kingdom or European
patent offices in connection with the examination
of a gene patent application; challenging the validity of a gene patent either
in United Kingdom Patent Office, in court, or (for a European patent) in the
EPO; or challenging abuses of patent rights under the
competition laws of the
United Kingdom or the European
The recommendations of
the UK Report are discussed further in Chapter 20.
United States
9.48 The FTC Innovation
Report canvassed whether the FTC should assume a more active role in the patent
law area. The report made
a series of recommendations designed to improve the
quality of patents granted by the
The report also indicated
that the FTC intended to implement measures to address patent law issues that
may have a significant impact
on competition, including:
To increase its competition advocacy role by filing
briefs in appropriate
circumstances;
To ask the Director of the USPTO to re-examine questionable patents
that raise competitive
9.49 Public
organisations in the United States have also begun to promote greater
participation in the patent system. A non-profit
organisation called the Public
Patent Foundation
was recently
established in New York to combat the effects of so-called ‘illegitimate
patents that have the potential, for example, to restrict the availability of
medicines to the public, or that provide
barriers to market entry for small
businesses. The Foundation intends to rely on legal action and proceedings in
the USPTO, advocacy
and public awareness programs to challenge such patents, and
to encourage others to do so.
Submissions and consultations
9.50 IP 27 did not ask
specific questions about the participation of government departments or other
organisations in challenging
gene patents. However, a number of submissions
supported greater government involvement in patent challenges, given the
and practical impediments faced by Australian companies and
individuals in this regard.
9.51 The Cancer Council Australia commented that responsibility for challenging
patent rights lies with the Australian Government.
Given that patent law operates in the Federal jurisdiction and is subject
to International Agreements, such responsibility [to initiate
legal challenges
to patents] should fall to the Australian
Government.
9.52 The RCPA suggested that, although governments might be reluctant to
challenge patent rights, they are the only entities with
the resources to do
Governments are understandably wary of opposing patents as it suggests
that their patent laws and processes are flawed, yet they alone
resources to mount a public challenge that takes years and millions of dollars
to resolve.
9.53 The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research (WEHI) indicated
gene patent were not being challenged because of the
costs involved and proposed
It might be desirable in some instance for potential infringers to pool
together to challenge a questionable patent or, where it is
in the public
interest, for the Government to mount a challenge against broad, questionable
9.54 Submissions that addressed this issue canvassed a range of options by which
government entities might coordinate participation
in the patent system. The
Cancer Council Australia considered that the Australian Health Ministers’
Advisory Council might
be an appropriate
ACIPA proposed ‘the
creation of a public advocate or ombudsman’, or alternatively that the
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission (ACCC) be given power to
participate in the patent examination
9.55 A number of submissions also considered a role for the proposed Human
Genetics Commission of Australia
in monitoring and evaluating the impact of gene
Chapter 20 discusses
these submissions in more detail.
ALRC’s views
9.56 As discussed in other
chapters of this Discussion Paper, questionable gene patents may adversely
affect research and development
in the Australian biotechnology industry by
deterring innovation in that field or by increasing the cost of innovation and
development if the patent is
In turn, questionable
gene patents may affect the provision and cost of healthcare in
A significant
aspect of this Inquiry is to examine whether adequate procedures exist to ensure
that applications for gene patents
are properly examined and that gene patents,
if granted, may be effectively challenged.
9.57 Chapter 8 contains proposals to assist IP Australia in examining gene
patents to improve the quality of the patents being issued.
However, as noted in
that chapter, there are limitations to the examination process. Patent examiners
depend primarily on information
provided by only one party (the applicant) in
making determinations about the patentability of a particular invention.
Further, such
determinations are necessarily made before the full impact of
granting a patent can be known. Nicol and Nielsen have commented that
patent to be challenged by third parties at later stages in the patent process
balances inherent deficiencies of patent
examination
It is important
that such procedures are invoked when appropriate to ensure that the exclusive
rights conferred on the holder of
a gene patent are exercised only when
9.58 The ALRC considers that challenges to patents might be facilitated if
Commonwealth, state and territory governments were to
play a greater role in the
patent system. Government resources are generally more extensive than those
available to private companies
and publicly-funded research organisations,
although the ALRC recognises that such resources may already be committed to a
of projects.
9.59 The motivations of governments and private entities in challenging patent
rights may differ significantly. Private entities
will typically initiate
challenges only for strategic business purposes, or in response to an allegation
of infringement. At times,
the cost involved in such a challenge may render such
action prohibitively expensive. Governments, however, have greater incentives
challenge a patent if it is in the public interest to do so; for example, if a
patent has detrimental effects for the healthcare
system or for competition
generally, or if it highlights a particularly controversial patent law issue.
Government action might also
benefit a larger number of organisations than a
challenge initiated by a private entity.
9.60 The ALRC does not regard IP Australia as being well-suited to coordinate
patent challenges on behalf of the government, but
on the other hand, nor is the
creation of a new government office (such an ombudsman of patents) required to
represent the public
interest in patent matters. Rather, the ALRC considers that
a more active role should be taken by government departments or agencies
connection with specific patents, as well as general patent law issues, within
their portfolios.
9.61 In light of this, Chapter 20 contains proposals for health departments to
take a more active role in monitoring patent laws
and practices, and intervening
in patent processes in appropriate circumstances. Chapter 24 discusses further
proposals relating
to an increased role for the ACCC in connection with
competition law issues raised by gene patents.
Enforcement of patent rights
9.62 Patent protection is
generally sought in order to secure and preserve the competitive and commercial
advantage that may result
from an invention, as well as to recoup the cost
incurred in development of an invention. However, patent rights are of limited
unless they are enforced to deter potential infringers and to provide a
remedy for a person or entity whose rights have been infringed.
Nonetheless, a
patent holder is typically required to make strategic decisions about the best
use of resources in enforcing his or
her rights.
Factors affecting the decision to enforce a patent
9.63 There is a range of
factors that might affect Australian patent holders’ decisions as to
whether to enforce their patent
rights. Enforcement of a patent is dependent on
a patent holder identifying individuals or entities that are infringing his or
patent rights. In the case of gene patents, infringement may be difficult to
A 2002 report of the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (the OECD Report) noted
that the use of ‘research
tools’ occurs behind laboratory doors,
making infringement particularly difficult to
A recent empirical
study of medical biotechnology patenting and technology transfer in Australia
conducted by Nicol and Nielsen (Nicol-Nielsen
Study) reached a similar
conclusion.
Further, many
biotechnology companies may not yet have commercial products that could lead a
patent holder to suspect that such products
have been developed using patented
research tools.
procedures for monitoring use of Australian patents, and the difficulties
Australian gene patent holders may face in discovering
infringement, are
discussed later in this chapter.
9.64 Apart from the difficulties of detection, actions for infringement of gene
patents, although warranted, may not be being instigated.
Patent protection for
an invention is frequently obtained in more than one jurisdiction and an
Australian patent holder may choose
to enforce his or her rights in the
the market for
a patented product is significant, a patent holder may decide
that pursuing certain infringers is not financially viable, or could
attract too
much adverse publicity.
9.65 Alternatively, a patent holder may select certain defendants for tactical
For example, a
patent holder might pursue alleged infringers with limited financial resources,
who are therefore unlikely to challenge
the patent holder’s rights, before
seeking to enforce the patent against better-resourced entities.
9.66 Infringement proceedings also expose the validity of a patent to attack. As
discussed earlier in the chapter, a defendant may
file a counter-claim for
so that a patent
holder seeking to enforce his or her rights may be required to prove both that
the rights are valid and that they
have been infringed. There has been
relatively limited consideration of the application of Australian patent law to
genetic materials
and technologies to date. In the absence of judicial decisions
delineating the scope of rights conferred by a gene patent, infringement
proceedings may be thought to entail too great a
9.67 Finally, patent litigation is generally a complex, time-consuming and
costly process. In Australia, it has been estimated that
the cost to a patent
holder of litigating a patent infringement action at first instance may be
$750,000 or more.
This figure
may be conservative. In light of the fact that the Australian biotechnology
sector is dominated by small and medium sized
enterprises (SMEs) and
publicly-funded
organisations,
such amounts
are significant.
Commercial responses to infringement
9.68 If a patent holder
decides to enforce its patent, it may employ a variety of means to do so,
including commercial actions and
legal proceedings. A patent holder may notify a
potential infringer of the existence of a patent and indicate that its
involving the use of the invention claimed in the patent should be
terminated—often referred to as a ‘cease and desist
Alternatively, a patent holder may notify a potential infringer of the existence
of a patent and that activities covered
by the patent claims should be conducted
only pursuant to a licence—commonly termed an ‘offer to
license’. If such
approaches are not successful, a patent holder may need
to consider initiating civil proceedings to enforce the patent.
Legal responses to patent infringement
9.69 A patent holder (or his
or her exclusive licensee) may take legal action to prevent the infringement of
the exclusive rights
granted pursuant to a
Patent infringement
may be either direct or contributory. The infringement is direct if a person,
without authorisation, exercises
any of the exclusive rights conferred on the
patent holder.
Contributory
infringement exists if a person who is not the patent holder or a licensee
supplies a product the use of which would
constitute an infringement of the
9.70 A patent will be infringed if all of the essential features (or
‘integers’) of the patent holder’s claim have
been taken by a
That is, a court
must determine whether or not the substantial idea of an invention disclosed in
a patent specification (and subject
to a definite claim) has been taken and
embodied in an item alleged to infringe the patent. Australian courts have found
that omitting
an inessential part of a patent claim or replacing it with an
equivalent will not necessarily prevent a finding of
infringement.
constitutes an ‘essential integer’ of a patent is a matter of
construction of the patent specification. In general,
it is said that such
construction must be purposive rather than purely
9.71 Infringement may occur any time after the date of publication of the
complete specification, although proceedings may not be
commenced until the
patent has been granted—or, in the case of an innovation patent,
9.72 If a patent holder
successfully proves that its patent has been infringed, remedies are available
to prevent continuation of
the activities constituting the infringement and to
compensate the patent holder for any loss incurred. These remedies include an
injunction and compensation in the form of damages, or an account of profits, at
the patent holder’s
A court may also make
orders for the inspection
delivery up of infringing
9.73 Provisional relief is available to a patent holder to prevent an alleged
infringement from occurring and to prevent infringing
goods from entering the
channels of trade pending the resolution of litigation. Provisional relief may
also be available to preserve
relevant evidence relating to an alleged
infringement.
Defences to patent infringement
Defences available under the Patents Act
Patents Act
establishes a limited number of defences, which may be
asserted against a claim of patent infringement. General defences to a claim
patent infringement include:
use of a patented invention on board a foreign vessel, aircraft or
vehicle that only comes within the patent area of Australia temporarily
accidentally;
prior use of an invention, so long as the alleged infringer had not
obtained the subject matter of the invention from the patent
holder (or their
predecessor in title);
use of a patented invention that is subject to a contractual
condition prohibited under
Patents Act
arrangement);
use of a patented invention pursuant to, and within the scope of the
grant of a ‘declaration of non-infringement’ granted
by a prescribed
Patents Act
also provides a defence to the infringement of a patent
covering a pharmaceutical substance for therapeutic purposes if the term
patent has been extended under the
This defence is limited
to circumstances in which the pharmaceutical substance claimed in the patent was
used: (a) after the extension
of the patent term has been granted, for the
purpose of registering a product on the Australian Register of Therapeutic Goods
any foreign equivalent thereof); or (b) during the extended portion of the
patent term, for a non-therapeutic purpose.
9.76 Even if a person is held to have infringed a patent, a court may decline to
award damages or an account of profits if the infringement
‘innocent’; that is, if the infringer was not aware, and had no
reason to believe, that a patent for the invention
existed. ‘Innocent
infringement’ does not, however, prevent the grant of an injunction to
restrain future
infringement.
9.77 In addition to these defences, later chapters of this Discussion Paper
examine whether the
Patents Act
should be amended to enact new defences
based on experimental use of gene patents, or use of gene patents for the
purposes of medical
Defences available under general law
9.78 In addition to the defences specifically provided
Patents Act
, it has been suggested that general equitable
defences may be available against a claim of patent
infringement.
circumstances in which such defences may be able to be invoked are outlined
below, but there is little case law on this issue
and the extent and effect of
pleading such a defence is consequently unclear.
9.79 First, an alleged infringer may claim that the patent holder is estopped
from enforcing its rights if, by its acts or words,
the patent holder has led
the infringer to believe that the patent rights would not be enforced and the
alleged infringer has relied
on that understanding to his or her
9.80 Second, an alleged infringer may assert delay or acquiescence on the part
of the patent holder in the enforcement of his or
Such a defence is
unlikely to avoid an injunction restraining future infringement, but may
substantially reduce the damages awarded
if the patent holder successfully
demonstrates that the patent has been
Enforcement of gene patents in Australia
Submissions and consultations
IP 27, the ALRC sought information about the level of enforcement of Australian
gene patents, the factors affecting Australian
entities’ decisions to
enforce gene patents, and the type of action such entities initiate in this
9.82 Submissions that addressed this issue adopted different views as to what
amounted to ‘enforcement’ of a gene patent.
A number of submissions
used the term to refer only to infringement proceedings. Others adopted a
broader view and regarded ‘offers
to license’ a patent as also
amounting to enforcement action. A few submissions considered that the term
encompassed an even
wider range of actions. For example, a multi-national
pharmaceutical company, GlaxoSmithKline, commented that patents may be effective
on a number of levels, including:
(a) providing a deterrent against infringement, (b) giving rise to
licensing or cross-licensing arrangements, (c) being the subject
of letters of
demand, and (d) being the subject of full scale patent infringement
litigation.
9.83 A number of submissions commented on the apparently low level of
enforcement activity that is occurring in Australia with respect
patents. Two submissions indicated that they were not aware of any threats to
enforce gene patents in the genetic testing
AusBiotech Ltd
commented that ‘so far there has been very little actual
litigation’.
however, that the low level of patent litigation does not take into account
disputes that have settled, or that occur prior
to a gene patent being granted
(for example, opposition
proceedings).
submissions agreed that the level of enforcement of gene patents is difficult to
particularly given
that communications about such matters are generally confidential unless
infringement proceedings are
9.84 A few submissions identified specific examples of recent enforcement
actions relating to gene patents, and expressed concern
becoming more common.
submissions suggested that even if specific evidence about the enforcement of
gene patents in Australia was not currently available,
the ALRC should
‘take a pro-active stance in looking for problems that have yet to
9.85 The factors that may influence a patent holder’s decision as to how
to enforce a gene patent were addressed in a number
of submissions. The
Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources (DITR) suggested that the cost of
gene patent litigation is ‘a
major factor influencing the capacity to
enforce gene patents’.
Other submissions indicated that the costs of infringement litigation may act as
a disincentive to pursue individuals or entities
who are infringing Australian
gene patents,
particularly in
the case of academic institutions and research
organisations.
submissions commented that the cost of infringement litigation is an issue in
enforcing patents over any type of technology,
not only gene
Submissions also
suggested that the cost of gene patent litigation encouraged patent holders and
potential infringers to license
gene patent rights or reach some other
commercial solution to potential infringement issues rather than face the cost
of being involved
litigation.
9.86 Other factors influencing a patent holder’s decision to enforce its
rights were also suggested in submissions. GlaxoSmithKline
and Davies Collison
Cave referred to the provisions in the
Patents Act
that provide for
action to be taken against a patent holder who makes ‘unjustified threats
of infringement’.
submissions indicated that such provisions meant that an Australian patent
holder ‘will generally not make threats of
initiating legal proceedings
unless they are prepared to actually proceed in this manner’. Other
submissions commented that
the potential for adverse publicity might also affect
the decision to enforce patents against particular types of entities, for
institutions.
Nicol-Nielsen Study
9.87 The Nicol-Nielsen Study received responses largely
consistent with the views expressed in submissions in relation to IP 27. Nicol
and Nielsen concluded that there has been little enforcement of gene patents in
Australia to date.
entities surveyed indicated that potential patent infringement issues are most
often resolved by negotiating a licence to
use the patented invention. Nicol and
Nielsen noted, however, that there is a body of evidence in other jurisdictions
that this situation may be changing and they indicated that
enforcement actions may become more likely in
In particular,
Nicol and Nielsen noted that Genetic Technologies Limited’s (GTG)
announcements of the steps being taken to
license and enforce the
company’s non-coding DNA patents occurred after responses to the study had
been received.
Monitoring compliance with patent rights
By Australian patent holders
patent holder’s ability to enforce its rights depends on its ability to
obtain information about third parties’
activities that may infringe the
claims of a patent. Such information may be obtained from a variety of sources,
including in-house
procedures established by a patent holder, patent offices, or
private information services that monitor patent compliance. The mechanisms
which Australian patent holders may monitor and investigate potentially
infringing activities are considered below.
9.89 Information and resources within a patent holder’s organisation are
two means by which potential patent infringers may
be detected. Employees of a
patent holder may be in the best position to identify potential infringement by
third parties because
of their familiarity with the relevant area of technology,
the identity of competitors, and such entities’ business activities.
9.90 ‘Patent watch’ services may also be used. These services are
frequently provided by law firms or patent attorneys.
Patent watch services
review notices in the Official Journals published by patent offices, as well as
other computer databases covering
patent and technical data, for information
rights. Searches
may be restricted by subject matter (for example, to a
particular genetic sequence or technology), or by organisation name (for
a key competitor or a researcher who is known to be active in the
field). The available material is, however, limited because these
information do not reveal patent applications that have not yet been
9.91 It is somewhat easier for patent holders to monitor the activities of third
parties who have been authorised by them to use
a patented genetic invention
pursuant to a licence agreement. Mechanisms for monitoring a licensee’s
compliance with the terms
of a licence are typically stipulated in the
agreement. A patent licence may include a requirement that a licensee submit
reports detailing product sales or—if research and development is
still required in connection with licensed gene patents—describing
progress during the reporting period. In addition, a patent holder may have the
right to audit a licensee’s records relevant
to activities covered by an
agreement including, in some cases, laboratory workbooks. These mechanisms allow
a patent holder to assess
whether a licensee is using the patent rights in
accordance with the licence, or for other purposes that may amount to an
infringement.
By users of Australian gene patents
9.92 Individuals, academic
institutions, research organisations and biotechnology companies may also
conduct prior art searches before
embarking on a particular line of research, or
commercialising any genetic material or technology, to ensure that their
will not infringe existing patent rights.
9.93 Respondents to the Nicol-Nielsen Study indicated that conducting prior art
is becoming increasingly more
difficult as the gene patent landscape becomes more
The study found that
prior art searches are commonly conducted by Australian biotechnology companies
to ensure that research does
not infringe third party patent
However, Australian
research organisations and diagnostic facilities that were surveyed in the
Nicol-Nielsen Study demonstrated less
inclination to perform such
To the extent prior
art searches are conducted by such entities, it may only occur when a commercial
application for the relevant
research becomes
Nicol and Nielsen
concluded that:
There is some desirability for finding ways of reducing the onerous
demands of patent searching and tracking
infringement.
Patent information available from IP Australia
9.94 IP Australia makes
information about granted patents and published patent applications available in
three forms:
Official Journal of Patents
by way of searchable on-line databases on IP Australia’s
website; and
on a subscription basis, by way of CD-ROM, containing copies of
patent applications and specifications.
9.95 The information available
Official Journal
and via IP Australia’s on-line databases
are described further below.
Section 222
Patents Act
provides for publication of the
Official Journal
by the Commissioner on a periodic basis. The
contains notices and other matters prescribed in the
Patent Regulations
. The Journal reports all significant
events and actions that occur in relation to each Australian patent, as well as
general information
and notices about amendments to Australian patent law or the
PCT, or to IP Australia’s practices. Currently, a supplement to
Official Journal
is made available by IP Australia on its
but IP Australia
intends to make the entire journal available electronically in the future.
9.97 IP Australia also provides on-line access to a number of databases that
contain information about Australian patents and patent
applications,
Patents mainframe bibliographic databases—Patent
Administration System (PatAdmin) and Patent Indexing System (PatIndex);
AU Published Patent Data Searching (APPS);
Patent specifications database; and
New Patent Solution system (NPS).
9.98 PatAdmin and
PatIndex provide bibliographic information about patent applications that have
been filed up to 4 July 2002. The
available information includes: patent and
application numbers; patent title; inventor and applicant; the status of a
patent or application;
dates that are significant in processing the application
and to maintain the patent in force; and whether any licences have been
against the patent.
9.99 APPS contains Australian patent abstracts, that is, the first page of a
patent application at the time of its publication. Searches
may be conducted by
patent or application number, as well as by title or International Patent
Classification mark.
copies of patent specifications, the user is transferred to the patents
specification database.
9.100 The patent specifications database contains complete copies of published
Australian patent applications. The database includes
copies of applications
prior to acceptance and after acceptance, as well as applications that have been
republished following amendment
after acceptance. Searches may be conducted by
patent number or application number. The database does not contain information
the status of an Australian patent or application. A user may only obtain
this information on-line from PatAdmin or the NPS system.
In addition, a user is
transferred to the EPO’s on-line database ‘esp@cenet’ for
copies of Australian patent applications
filed under the PCT, which are
published prior to
acceptance.
9.101 NPS is a new patent database developed by IP Australia. It contains
bibliographic information on patent applications having
a number format, which
was recently implemented as a new patent numbering system by IP Australia. NPS
contains bibliographic data
for standard complete and provisional applications
filed from July 2002, as well as all innovation patent data. Currently, the type
of bibliographic data included in the NPS system is similar to that contained in
PatAdmin and PatIndex. The NPS system is, however,
still under development and
both the search function and the content of the database are being upgraded.
Full copies of the published
Australian patent applications or granted patents
are not included in this database, but will be incorporated into the patent
specifications
subscription basis through IP Australia’s CD - ROM products.
9.102 The databases on IP Australia’s website contain overlapping
information and each database has limitations in the information
it contains. To
conduct a patent search on IP Australia’s website, at least two databases
(and frequently more) must be used
and the results of each search
cross-referenced in order to cover all necessary information. The nature of a
user’s needs will
determine which of IP Australia’s databases must
be accessed to obtain the relevant information. For example, if a user requires
bibliographic information about a patent application, a search of both PatAdmin
and the NPS system would be required to complete
a search. However, if a user
requires information on an invention claimed in a patent application, a search
of APPS and certain of
IP Australia’s CD - ROM products would be
appropriate.
time-consuming task and may potentially produce misleading results, particularly
for inexperienced users, or those with
a limited understanding of the Australian
patent system.
9.103 Online databases provided by patent offices in other jurisdictions, such
as the USPTO and EPO, are more user-friendly. Search
functionality is
concentrated in one area of the websites of the USPTO and the EPO, and searches
may be conducted using a wide range
include both bibliographic information about the patent and a copy of the
complete patent specification, or a patent
application (if
published).
Submissions and consultations
availability of information about gene patents and pending gene patent
applications was identified as an issue in a number
of submissions and
consultations.
Australian Government submitted:
The current methods of disseminating information about pending or granted
patents are considered inadequate in relation to patents
that may have a
significant impact on healthcare. Clearly, information about the IP Australia
to parties and stakeholders in the
community so that they are alert to and vigilant about patents that impact or
are likely to impact
9.105 GTG commented that the ability to search patent literature is generally
poor and particularly so in Australia, making it difficult
for patent holders to
identify potential licensees.
GTG suggested that IP Australia might develop databases to facilitate searches
of patent literature:
There is an opportunity for leadership by IP Australia here to establish,
for example, a database of all gene patents (indexed by
gene) in force or under
application in Australia. Also helpful would be a database of all genetic
sequences that have been patented
9.106 The Department of Health Western Australia also supported increasing
public awareness about gene patent
applications.
The Department
suggested that the
Official Journal of Patents
could be supplemented by
Official Journal of Patents for Genetic Technologies
for Technologies Relating to Healthcare
to allow for more transparent
review of gene patent
applications’.
Alternatively, the Department considered that:
The proposed HGCA could distribute information about human genetic
patents, in the same manner that the Office of the Gene Technology
distributes for comment all applications for release of GM
9.107 However, other submissions indicated that information is available to
Australian patent holders, and the public generally,
lead a patent holder to believe that its patent is being
Some submissions
commented that appropriate professional advice is required to obtain patent
protection and that, within Australia,
there are many intellectual property
lawyers and patent attorneys from whom such advice can be
Two submissions
commented that patent holders are responsible for monitoring the use of their
patent rights and detecting infringement,
perhaps with the assistance of
9.108 In contrast, WEHI commented that, while sufficient information about gene
patents may be available in Australia, such information
is not always
‘easily accessible or
affordable’.
ALRC’s views
9.109 Notwithstanding
the patents information already made available by IP Australia on its website,
the ALRC considers that a comprehensive
patents should be developed by IP Australia.
9.110 Submissions and consultations, as well as respondents to the Nicol-Nielsen
Study, indicated that information about Australian
gene patents is not readily
available or accessible and that this creates impediments to the licensing and
enforcement of gene patents.
The ALRC considers that a comprehensive database of
patent information developed by IP Australia could assist inventors,
biotechnology
companies, research organisations and academic institutions in
conducting preliminary searches of existing Australian patent and
patent applications, which are an important part of any prior art search. For
individuals and entities with limited resources,
such a database could assist in
initial identification of whether a particular activity or area of research is
problematic in relation
to intellectual property issues, or to refine the scope
of a comprehensive prior art search.
9.111 Currently, patent information is provided by IP Australia in a number of
overlapping databases. The ALRC considers that, contrary
to the suggestion in
some submissions, developing a separate database containing information only
would compound the difficulties that a user
presently faces in obtaining information about Australian gene patents.
Developing a
comprehensive database relating to all Australian patents and
published patent applications is preferable and would allow searches
for patents
and published patent applications claiming genetic materials and technologies,
as well as all other types of inventions.
9.112 Much of the information that should be contained in any new patent
need to be compiled and
centralised. This process is likely to involve considerable resources on the
part of IP Australia, which
the organisation might seek to recoup by charging an
access fee for the use of the database. However, the ALRC is of the view that
IP Australia decides to charge a fee to some or all users seeking access to the
does not impede access
unreasonably.
9.113 In identifying the criteria by which such a database may be searched,
USPTO and EPO websites are a worthwhile model. In the ALRC’s view, the
ability to conduct searches
of the patents database based on any of the
following information would be useful: patent number and application serial
number; inventor
name, applicant name and assignee name; patent title; issue
date; application date; specification details; patent classification;
registered encumbrances (for example, security interests and exclusive
9.114 Some of the difficulties a user currently encounters in searching for
patent information using IP Australia’s on-line
when improvements to the NPS system are complete. For example, the NPS system
currently allows searches
to be conducted using the categories of information
identified in the previous paragraph. However, in its current form, the NPS
does not appear to provide all of the information a user might require
when conducting a patent search. For example, access to full
copies of patent
specifications (for the purpose of obtaining information about claimed
inventions) is available only from a separate
capability.
9.115 The ALRC recognises that the role of IP Australia is not, and should not
be, to provide legal advice to prospective patent
applicants about their ability
to obtain patent protection, or to users of patent rights about freedom to
operate in a particular
field. The ALRC agrees with submissions that identified
the importance, in appropriate cases, of obtaining legal advice in connection
with filing for patent protection, enforcing patent rights or defending against
allegations of infringement. Patent watch services
and commercial databases
containing patent and other prior art information are also available to assist
patent holders and others
in monitoring compliance with patent rights.
9.116 The following proposal is not intended to implement suggestions made in
some submissions that IP Australia could assist government
health departments in
identifying gene patents that may have implications for healthcare by providing
such departments with information
patent applications. The proposed database may well facilitate the assessment of
issues by government health departments by making information about
Australian patents and published applications more accessible,
but at this stage
the ALRC does not envisage that IP Australia would have any specific
responsibility in this regard. Use of patent
information by federal and state
health departments is addressed in later chapters of this Discussion
Proposal 9 - 1
IP Australia should develop and regularly update a
The database should be accessible to the public through IP Australia’s
website and should provide user-friendly access and
wide variety of bases. If a fee is charged for use of the database, it should be
kept at a level that does
not unreasonably limit access.
Patent litigation insurance
9.117 Patent litigation
typically entails substantial costs and involves a degree of risk both to the
patent holder, whose patent
rights may be revoked, and to a defendant, who made
be prevented from pursuing an aspect of his or her business if liability is
In light of this, companies may consider investing in patent litigation
9.118 There are several
The principal types of insurance
and the characteristic elements of each policy
are outlined below.
Patent enforcement litigation insurance
allows a patent holder
to initiate legal proceedings to protect and enforce its patent rights.
This type of policy typically covers the legal costs involved in enforcing patent
rights against an alleged infringer on a
‘claims-made’ basis.
Patent infringement liability insurance
provides coverage against
allegations of patent infringement.
Such policies are often obtained by manufacturers, vendors and users of patent
rights to cover the legal costs involved in
defending a patent infringement
claim and, in some cases, they may also cover damages awards if liability is
Intellectual property litigation insurance
is a broad form of
enforcement litigation insurance, which covers the enforcement of all intellectual
property rights—for
example, trademarks, copyrights and rights in computer
software, as well as patents. Such policies may also cover legal costs
in defending a challenge to the ownership, validity or title to covered intellectual
property rights, or in enforcing
the terms of intellectual property licences
and non-disclosure agreements.
Commercial general liability insurance
held by a company may
also cover the cost of defending an intellectual property infringement claim.
However, the existence of such coverage depends on the scope and wording of
the policy and many commercial general liability
policies now contain express
exclusions for intellectual property actions.
Prevalence of patent litigation insurance
9.123 Patent litigation
insurance is a relatively new development. The ALRC understands that currently
no Australian insurers offer
although Australian
companies may be able to obtain patent litigation insurance from overseas
underwriters that cover patent infringement
proceedings in foreign jurisdictions
as well as Australia.
9.124 Patent litigation insurance is more widely available in the United States
and Europe. However, even in these jurisdictions
the number of insurers offering
patent litigation policies is relatively
effectiveness of such policies is yet to be fully tested. A report on patent
litigation insurance prepared for the European
Commission in 2003 (the EC
Insurance Report) concluded that, to date, litigation insurance had not been
particularly successful in
While precise
statistics were not available, the report estimated that approximately 750
patent litigation insurance policies had
been issued in the European Union in
the last 25 years—an extremely small number compared with the aggregate
number of patents
granted during the same
Advantages of patent litigation insurance
9.125 Patent litigation
insurance may provide a number of advantages, particularly for SMEs. Patent
litigation insurance allows SMEs
to enforce their patent portfolios against, or
defend allegations of patent infringement by, larger companies without having to
or license to avoid escalating costs. Further, it may strengthen a
party’s bargaining power in any negotiations to settle an
infringement
claim. In addition, it has been suggested that, for patent holders,
‘publication of the existence of insurance
in company literature and on
websites acts as an effective deterrent to potential
infringers’.
9.126 In Australia, patent litigation insurance has recently received public
attention in connection with the Melbourne-based biotechnology
company, Genetic
Technologies Limited,
has patents in many
The company
has indicated that patent litigation insurance is an important part of its
licensing and enforcement strategy, and has
allowed the company to initiate
proceedings against major biotechnology companies in the United
publicly-listed Australian broadband technology company, has expressed a similar
view and is reportedly relying on a patent
litigation insurance policy
underwritten by Lloyd’s of London to help finance patent infringement
litigation in Germany against
Siemens AG and Deutsche
9.127 In licensing negotiations, litigation insurance may strengthen a patent
holder’s ability to license its patents to corporate
entities that want to
commercialise aspects of the company’s patented
technology.
licensees may indeed require a patent holder to obtain patent litigation
insurance to ensure that the patent holder will
be able to indemnify the
licensee in the event that a patent infringement claim is made by a third
9.128 Patent litigation insurance may also provide indirect benefits to a
A substantial
portion of the value of many biotechnology companies is based on their
intellectual property portfolio, making protection
of such intellectual property
rights paramount. Patent litigation insurance facilitates a company’s
protection of its intellectual
property. This, in turn, may attract investors.
An insurance company’s assessment of the validity of a company’s
portfolio, which is a prerequisite to any patent litigation policy being
issued, may add credibility to claims that the company’s
patents are both
valid and valuable.
patent litigation obviates the need to ‘self-insure’, which involves
a large capital commitment that may be
beyond the capabilities of many SMEs.
Criticisms of patent litigation insurance
9.129 Patent litigation
insurance does, however, have a number of limitations. The costs involved in
obtaining and maintaining patent
insurance are significant and, in some cases,
prohibitive. For patent enforcement litigation insurance, annual premiums are
approximately
US$4,000 for US$500,000 in coverage—that is, less than 1% of
the insured amount.
addition, potential insureds are generally required to obtain patent validity
or ‘freedom to
operate’ opinions,
applicable, at their own cost, before an insurance company will consider issuing
a policy. Annual premiums for patent infringement
liability insurance are
generally between 1.5% to 4% of the insured
Co-payment provisions
of between 15% and 25% are also common in both types of
9.130 The EC Insurance Report concluded that, in the United States, Europe and
Japan, ‘high costs have meant that insurance
has only been of interest to
Further, the
EC Insurance Report commented that ‘no insurance scheme [in Europe or the
United States] has shown any capacity
to provide adequate cover at premiums
affordable to patentees in
9.131 The amount of coverage provided by a patent litigation insurance policy
may be limited in a number of
In addition to
co-payment provisions, the quantum of legal costs that an insurer will cover is
generally limited to a predetermined
indemnity level. In the case of patent
infringement liability litigation, predetermined indemnity levels also apply to
damages awards—if
such liability is covered by the policy at all—and
certain types of damages may be excluded, such as punitive or exemplary
9.132 Territorial limitations may also apply, leaving the insured to pay all
costs involved in patent litigation outside the designated
countries covered by
its policy.
9.133 For patent enforcement litigation insurance, coverage may be limited to
specific patents or may only cover a company’s
patent portfolio at the
date the policy was issued, with payments required to update the policy to cover
any additional patents.
In addition, certain types of claims may not be
covered—for example, speculative claims—and coverage for appeals
adverse decisions may be at the insurance company’s discretion.
9.134 Other conditions contained in patent litigation insurance policies may
limit the insured’s discretion in formulating
a litigation strategy.
Policies typically make coverage conditional on the insurer’s approval of
the patent holder’s
legal counsel and litigation
In some cases, an
insurer may also require control of the litigation.
Effect of litigation insurance on the patent system
9.135 Conflicting opinions
have been expressed about the impact of patent litigation insurance on patent
filing activity and enforcement
of patent rights. Participants in workshops
conducted in connection with the EC Insurance Report considered that wider use
litigation insurance in Europe could have a positive impact on the
level of patent filing activity, enforcement and licensing of
Participants in the
workshop also suggested that an increase in the amount of patent litigation as a
result of insurance would lead
to greater effectiveness of the patent
9.136 It has also been suggested that patent litigation could be disadvantageous
to the operation of the patent system generally.
The cushion of a patent
insurance policy might encourage litigation in circumstances where negotiation
and settlement may be more
appropriate.
For this reason,
the EC Insurance Report considered that a patent litigation insurance scheme in
Europe should encourage out-of-court
settlements.
In addition, it
has been suggested that ‘weak’ patent rights might be successfully
enforced simply because patent litigation
insurance provides a patent holder
with the resources necessary to take such action. However, in assessing this
claim, it should
be remembered that insurance companies generally obtain
opinions about the strength of a patent prior to issuing a policy and that
insurers may control, or advise on, the conduct of patent litigation covered by
Government consideration of patent insurance schemes
9.137 Currently, patent
litigation insurance is available only from private sector insurers. However,
reports in Australia and Europe
have addressed the possibility of a patent
insurance scheme being administered by the government as part of the patent
9.138 In 1999, ACIP considered whether a levy should be imposed on all patent
grants to fund insurance coverage for infringement
litigation and validity
challenges.
ACIP concluded,
however, that such insurance should be left to the private sector and that
involvement by government would be inconsistent
with the government’s
policy that ‘its primary role in the IP area is to ensure Australia has
effective IP and legal
Nonetheless,
ACIP suggested that industry associations, education institutions and IP
Australia might wish to include intellectual
property litigation insurance as a
topic in future awareness
9.139 In Europe, the EC Insurance Report was commissioned to examine the
feasibility of implementing a patent litigation insurance
scheme for widespread
use in the European Union. The report is based on a preliminary empirical and
analytical study of the patent
litigation insurance market in Europe, the United
States and Japan. It concludes that the European Commission should continue its
efforts to develop a patent litigation insurance
The EC Insurance
Report also makes recommendations about the broad structure of any such scheme,
including that it should be compulsory
and that premiums should be collected
annually through the patent system and might be varied according to the size of
European Commission does not appear to have taken any action on the report to
Submissions and Consultations
9.140 While IP 27 did not
ask specific questions about patent litigation insurance, some submissions
commented on this issue. The
Australian Health Minsters’ Advisory Council
(AHMAC) encouraged the ALRC to examine the extent of use and impact of patent
litigation insurance. AHMAC and a number of other submissions suggested that the
existence of patent litigation insurance may reduce
the number of challenges to
patent rights.
Patent insurance may possibly further discourage potential challengers to
a patent, as they will be aware that those companies who
hold patent insurance
may not suffer any financial burden as a result of the
litigation.
9.141 Submissions also expressed concern that patent litigation insurance may
make the cost of challenging and litigating patent
rights prohibitively
expensive. This view seems to assume that if a party to a patent suit is insured
it will refuse to settle proceedings,
or will engage in tactics requiring the
other party to spend large amounts of time and resources to participate in the
Cancer Council of Australia commented that:
Since the mid 1990s, the development of patent insurance has also
increased the level of legal protection available to patent holders
litigation and in the US insurance can be obtained for a little as $3000USD.
This form of additional protection would therefore
place legal challenges to
patents outside of the financial capacity of most individuals and institutions
other than Government itself.
9.142 The RCPA suggested that patent litigation insurance may allow a patent
holder to maintain their patent rights unjustifiably:
A patent holder can take out patent insurance on the grounds that a
hostile challenge from a large competitor could spell ruin. Patent
however, can also be used to defend a weak patent, even one that should never
have been issued in the first place. Once
the patent holder takes out patent
insurance the merit of the patent becomes immaterial—it merely becomes an
issue of money.
9.143 The limitations of patent litigation insurance were, however, noted by
Patent insurance against infringement is available but is considered
costly by many companies, and may not offer complete
ALRC’s views
9.144 The ALRC acknowledges
the general concerns expressed in submissions and consultations about patent
litigation insurance. However,
in the ALRC’s view, intervention either to
encourage or further limit the availability of patent litigation insurance in
is not appropriate at this stage.
9.145 The decision to purchase patent litigation insurance is a commercial one
to be made by an inventor, research organisation,
biotechnology company or other
entity having regard to its own commercial needs and business strategy. Those
with limited resources
may be willing to risk involvement in litigation without
the cushion of insurance, and to invest the amount that would have been
insurance premiums in further research and development, or marketing efforts.
9.146 In relation to the operation of the patent system as a whole, the
existence of patent litigation insurance may be beneficial.
As outlined earlier
in this chapter, the cost of challenging or enforcing patent rights and the
complexity of such matters may be
prohibitive for certain entities or
individuals. Patent litigation insurance facilitates participation in such suits
and could encourage
challenges to accepted gene patent applications or granted
gene patents that may be of questionable validity.
9.147 The ALRC agrees with ACIP that information about patent litigation
insurance should be more readily available to Australian
As a practical
matter, the availability of patent litigation insurance to Australian inventors,
research organisations and biotechnology
companies is limited. However, such
entities would benefit from having a greater understanding of the benefits and
the limitations
of patent litigation insurance. This would assist in
determinations as to whether to invest in patent litigation insurance, as well
as how to deal with a third party who has such insurance in licence negotiations
or litigation. In Chapters 18, 19 and 23, the ALRC
has proposed that
Biotechnology Australia develop various programs to assist universities,
technology transfer offices and Australian
biotechnology
Patent litigation
insurance should be included as a topic in any such
Patents Act 1990
Note that the right to exploit an invention is subject to earlier patents not
owned by the patent holder, as well as any necessary
The assignment of a patent is
subject to certain formalities, namely that it must be in writing and signed by
both the assignor and
the assignee: Ibid
Partial assignment of a patent
is also contemplated under the
Patents Act
, although whether such a
transaction is properly characterised as a licence or results in co-ownership of
a patent is an open question:
Patents, Trade Marks & Related
Rights: Looseleaf Service
The grant of an exclusive
licence may carry with it some of the indicia of ownership; for example, an
exclusive licensee has the
right to enforce the licensed patent rights and a
patent holder must seek a licensee’s consent to amend a patent
specification
(unless this requirement is waived by the Commissioner of
Patents): see
Patents Act 1990
s 16(1)(c).
For example,
recent difficulties have arisen in connection with the licensing of patents on
siRNA (co-owned by the Whitehead Institute,
Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, the Max Planck Institute and the University of Massachusetts Medical
School) because the patent
holders cannot agree on the terms on which the
patents should be licensed: M Moser Jones,
RNAi Roundup: Waltham Conference
Participants Focus on Selection, Delivery and IP Issues
, GenomeWeb Daily
News, 9 May 2003, <www.genomeweb.com> at 9 May
Patents Act 1990
. Compulsory licensing is discussed in Ch 27. In addition, relevant
provisions of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) and the Crown use
provisions of the
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) may provide a remedy if a patent
holder fails to exploit its patent rights: see Ch 24 and
See Ch 19 for a discussion of blocking
patents and possible solutions to address
Patent Cooperation Treaty
[1980] ATS 6
, (entered into force on 24 January
An equivalent provision relating
to innovation patents provides for a similar notice to be filed after the grant
of an innovation
patent but prior to its certification:
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations 1991
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations 1991
(Cth) r 2.5.
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations 1991
Patents Act 1990
Patents, Trade
Marks & Related Rights: Looseleaf Service
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations 1991
An innovation patent may be
opposed any time after it has been certified:
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations 1991
(Cth) r 5.3AA. See Ch 5 for a chart
(reproduced from s 4 of the
Patents Act
) showing the stage at which an
opposition may be filed.
Sections 40(2)
and (3) of the
Patents Act
require that the patent specification
describes the invention fully including the best method known to the applicant
to make the
invention; that it ends with claims defining the invention; and that
the claims are clear and succinct and fairly based on the subject
described in the specification. See further Ch
Patents Act 1990
Parallel provisions exist setting out the grounds on which an innovation patent
may be opposed: see
Patents Act 1990
Examination of patent
applications and IP Australia’s practices are discussed in Ch 5 and 8,
respectively.
In other jurisdictions,
such as the United States and Europe, which have larger case loads, the
opposition procedure is independent
and involves different personnel to the
patent examiners responsible for the initial examination of patent applications:
Intellectual
Property and Competition Review Committee,
Intellectual Property Legislation under the Competition Principles Agreement
(2000), 173.
Patents Regulations
(Cth) r 5.5.
Patents Act
(standard patents). The Commissioner may revoke an
innovation patent where a ground for opposition is made out:
Patents Act
Patents Act
(standard patents),
(innovation patents). See
Ch 10 for a discussion of the jurisdiction of the Federal Court in patent
IP Australia,
, 4 November 2003.
proceedings in relation to patent applications covering genetic sequences have,
however, been filed: see C Lawson and
C Pickering, ‘Patenting Genetic
Material: Failing to Reflect the Value of Variation in DNA, RNA and Amino
Australian Intellectual Property Journal
Recently, Benitec Ltd announced that opposition proceedings filed by the
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization
(CSIRO) and the
Queensland Department of Primary Industries regarding Benitec Ltd’s
DNA-directed RNA interference technology
(ddRNAi) had been settled: GenomeWeb,
Benitec Settles ddRNAi Dispute with Australia’s CSIRO and DPI
GenomeWeb Daily News, 9 December 2003, <www.genomeweb.com> at 10 December
2003; Benitec Ltd,
Milestone Strategic Agreement to Commercialise Australian
Biotech Invention
, <www.benitec.com/news/index.htm> at 15 December
In this context,
‘successful’ means that the Patent Office decided in favour of the
opponent on at least some grounds.
It does not mean that the opposed application
was refused in all cases, because the applicant may have been given an
opportunity
to amend the specification to remove any
deficiencies.
Advisory Council on
Industrial Property,
Review of Enforcement of Industrial Property Rights
Intellectual Property and
Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation
under the Competition Principles Agreement
Advisory Council on Industrial
Review of Enforcement of Industrial Property Rights
Intellectual Property and
Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation
under the Competition Principles Agreement
Advisory Council on Industrial
Review of Enforcement of Industrial Property Rights
Intellectual Property and
Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation
under the Competition Principles Agreement
IP Australia,
Response to Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee
Recommendations
, <www.ipaustralia.gov.au/pdfs/general/response1.pdf>
at 2 May 2003.
The division of
responsibility for patent matters among the various sections within IP Australia
are outlined in Ch 8.
Patents Act
(standard patents),
(innovation patents).
Re-examination was introduced as a result of the recommendations of the
Industrial Property Advisory Committee:
Industrial Property Advisory Committee,
Patents, Innovation and Competition in Australia
(1984), rec 31.
Re-examination is only available for patent applications filed after 30 April
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act 1990
(standard patents),
s 101(G)(3)
(innovation
(standard patents),
(innovation patents).
Spann, ‘Re-examination in Australia: 10 Years on’ (2002) 13
Australian Intellectual Property Journal
Patents Act 1990
(2)(b) (standard patents),
s 101J(3)(c)
(innovation
(standard patents),
(innovation
(standard patents),
(innovation
IP Australia,
Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
‘Re-examination in Australia: 10 Years on’ (2002) 13
Intellectual Property Journal
For example, opposition to a patent
involves a hearing
inter partes
and provides broader grounds on which an
accepted application may be challenged. Alternatively, litigation may be a more
appropriate
forum in which to examine complex issues of validity with a high
degree of commercial significance: Ibid,
Patents Act 1990
The grounds for revocation of a patent in a counter-claim to
infringement are set out in
An innovation
patent must be certified before an application for revocation under
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act 1990
Additional grounds for revocation of an innovation patent exist as
part of the examination procedure for an innovation patent:
Patents Act
, (4), (5) - (7). In essence, the grounds for
revocation of an ‘uncertified’ innovation patent are equivalent to
upon which the Commissioner may refuse an application for a standard
Patents Act 1990
The factors relevant to an assessment as to whether the ‘reasonable
requirements of the public’ have been met are stipulated
Patents Act
(Cth) s 135. See also Ch
Patents Act 1990
See further the
discussion of re-examination
Ontario Ministry of Health and
Long-Term Care,
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting: Charting New
Territory in Healthcare: Report to the Provinces and Territories
Canadian Biotechnology Advisory
Higher Life Forms and The Patent Act
Ontario Ministry of Health and
Long-Term Care,
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting: Charting New
Territory in Healthcare: Report to the Provinces and Territories
Canadian Biotechnology Advisory
Patenting of Higher Life Forms and Related Issues: Report to the
Government of Canada Biotechnology Ministerial Coordinating Committee
(2002), rec 13; Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care,
Testing & Gene Patenting: Charting New Territory in Healthcare: Report to
the Provinces and Territories
(2002), rec 13(g). The two reports had
different views as to the time period within which an opposition should be
filed. The CBAC
Report set the time limit at six months, whereas the Ontario
Report considered a nine-month period should be
United States Federal Trade
Commission,
To Promote Innovation: The Proper Balance of Competition and
Patent Law and Policy
(2003), rec
35 USC §§302 - 304
re-examination); 35 USC §§311 - 313 (
re-examination). United States patent law does not allow challenges
to patent rights in the form of opposition proceedings, as in
Australia and
35 USC §314. The right of
third parties to appeal an adverse decision in federal court was only introduced
in 2002. A third
party requestor is also estopped from raising certain issues in
any subsequent litigation involving a re-examined patent: 35 USC
§§315(b), 315(c).
States Federal Trade Commission,
To Promote Innovation: The Proper Balance of
Competition and Patent Law and Policy
(2003), ch 5,
Ibid, ch 5,
Ibid, ch 5,
Ibid, ch 5,
Submission P30
October 2003; Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
October 2003; GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; Davies
Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003; IP Australia,
Submission P56
, 4 November
Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September
Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003; New South Wales Health Department,
Submission P37
, 17 October 2003; Cancer Council South Australia,
Submission P41
, 9 October 2003; Cancer Council Tasmania,
, 29 September 2003; G Suthers,
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003;
Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003;
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
October 2003; Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory Council,
, 23 October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
Institute of Patent and Trade
Mark Attorneys of Australia,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 September
Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
September 2003.
Department of Health
Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November 2003. See also South
Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Department of Health Western
Submission P53
, 3 November
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003; Department of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
, 24 October 2003.
A McBratney
and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
AusBiotech Ltd,
, 7 November 2003.
Intellectual
Property and Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property
Legislation under the Competition Principles Agreement
IP Australia,
Response to Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee
Recommendations
, <www.ipaustralia.gov.au/pdfs/general/response1.pdf>
at 2 May 2003.
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
‘The Australian Medical Biotechnology Industry and Access to Intellectual
Property: Issues for Patent
Law Development’
[2001] SydLawRw 16
W Cornish, M Llewelyn and M
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and Genetics
Ibid, rec 4. The UK Report also made
recommendations in relation to ‘licensing in’ and ‘licensing
out’ genetic
materials and technologies: W Cornish, M Llewelyn and M
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and Genetics
(2003), Recs 2,
United States Federal Trade
Commission,
To Promote Innovation: The Proper Balance of Competition and
Patent Law and Policy
(2003), recs 1 - 5,
Ibid, ch 6,
Ibid, ch 6,
See Public Patent Foundation,
The Public Patent Foundation
, <www.pubpat.org> at 11 December
Public Patent Foundation,
Public Patent Foundation Receives Seed Funding, Begins Operations
<www.pubpat.org> at 8 December
Public Patent Foundation,
Public Patent Foundation
, <www.pubpat.org> at 11 December
Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003. See also Cancer
Council Tasmania,
Submission P40
, 29 September 2003; Cancer Council South
Submission P41
, 9 October
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003. Also: A Morley,
Submission P18
30 September 2003; Cancer Council Tasmania,
Submission P40
, 29 September
2003; Cancer Council South Australia,
Submission P41
, 9 October
Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September
See Australian Law Reform
Commission and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The
Protection of Human Genetic Information in Australia
, ALRC 96 (2003), rec
5 - 1 to 5 - 9.
Royal College
of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; G
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003; Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; Department of Industry
Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003; South Australian
Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
See Ch 11, 12, 13, 18, 19 and
See Ch 20 and
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
6, 81 - 82.
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual Property
Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
6, 147 - 148, 257.
Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual
Property Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
The respondents to the
Nicol-Nielsen Study suggested that such factors may be particularly relevant
where academic institutions are
potentially infringing gene patent rights: D
Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis
of Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6, 220.
United States: Trends in Enforcing and Licensing Patents
Mondaq, <www.mondaq.com> at 23 May
Patents Act 1990
The grounds upon which revocation may be sought are set out in
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
Biotechnology Australia,
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
(2001), 152. The cost of
patent infringement actions in Australia appears to be relatively low compared
with the United States, where
it has been estimated that the average cost of
patent infringement litigation (including appeals) is US$1.5 million:
Biotechnology
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
(2001), 152. Higher amounts have also been suggested; for example, the FTC
Innovation Report noted that litigation costs in biotechnology
matters have
ranged from US$5 million to US$7 million: United States Federal Trade
Commission,
To Promote Innovation: The Proper Balance of Competition and
Patent Law and Policy
(2003), ch 3,
See further Ch 17; D Nicol and J
Nielsen, ‘The Australian Medical Biotechnology Industry and Access to
Intellectual Property:
Issues for Patent Law Development’
[2001] SydLawRw 16
Sydney Law Review
exclusive licensee who initiates infringement proceedings must join the patent
holder as a party to the suit, and the licensee’s
interest in the patent
must be entered on the register of patents maintained by IP Australia:
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations 1991
(Cth) r 19.1. In infringement proceedings initiated by an exclusive licensee,
the licensee stands in the shoes of the patent holder,
subject to any additional
terms relating to enforcement of patent rights in the licence agreement (for
example, allocation of any
damages awards, liability for the costs of any
infringement proceedings, or the right to control
proceedings).
Direct infringement of
a patent is not defined in the
Patents Act 1990
(Cth). However, it can be
inferred from
that direct infringement will occur if a person engages in
any activity in relation to which a patent holder is granted exclusive
see R Reynolds and N Stoianoff,
Intellectual Property: Text and Essential
(2003), 318.
Section 117(2)
specifies that the use of a product
falls within the scope of the provision if: (a) it is the only use of which the
product is reasonably
capable; (b) the supplier had reason to believe the
customer would put the product to an infringing use and the product is not a
‘staple commercial product’; or (c) the infringing use is in
accordance with any instructions or inducement to use the
product emanating from
the supplier.
Populin v HB
Nominees Pty Ltd
[1982] FCA 37
(1982) 41 ALR 471
Fisher & Paykel
Healthcare Pty Ltd v Avion Engineering Pty Ltd
(1991) 103 ALR
Populin v HB Nominees Pty
[1982] FCA 37
(1982) 41 ALR 471
, 476. However, a recent decision has cautioned against
broadening the scope of a claim by relying on a purposive construction:
Quality Pty Ltd v Root Control Technologies Pty Ltd
[2000] FCA 980
(2000) 177 ALR 231
Patents Act
Roussel Uclaf v
Pan Laboratories Pty Ltd
[1994] FCA 1176
(1994) 51 FCR
Interlocutory relief may also
be available by means of an Anton Piller Order:
Anton Piller KG v
Manufacturing Processes Ltd
[1976] Ch 55. See also R Meagher, D Heydon and M
Meagher, Gummow and Lehane’s Equity: Doctrine and Remedies
(4th ed, 2002), [21.495] - [21.500]; B Fitzmaurice, ‘Protecting
Intellectual Property with Anton Piller Orders’ (2002)
Intellectual Property Law Bulletin
Patents Act 1990
See further Ch
Patents Act 1990
. A declaration of non-infringement is a court order that use of an
invention does not fall within the scope of the claims of a particular
It may be obtained only if a person or company has previously sought an
admission from the patent holder that their proposed
activities are not within
the scope of the relevant patent claims and the patent holder has refused, or
failed to provide, such an
admission. A declaration of non-infringement is not a
complete defence and may limit but not negate the award of damages:
Patents Act 1990
See Ch 14 and
Biotechnology Australia,
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
Woodbridge Foam
Corp v AFCO Automotive Foam Components Pty Ltd
See also Biotechnology
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
(2001), 155; J
Bergmann and T Davies, ‘Junk DNA or Junk Debate?’,
Allens Arthur
Robinson Biotech News
, 3 September 2003, <www.aar.com.au/pubs/bt>. The
Patents Act
provides that infringement proceedings must be commenced
within three years from the day on which the patent at issue was granted,
years from the day on which the infringing act was done, whichever period is
Patents Act 1990
Biotechnology Australia,
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003. See also Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
November 2003.
Royal College of
Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; G Suthers,
Submission P30
, 2 October
AusBiotech Ltd,
, 7 November
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
, 24 October 2003.
Submission P58
, 7 November
Royal College of Pathologists
of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; G Suthers,
, 2 October 2003; Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
, 3 October 2003; Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
, 2 October 2003. See also Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
Department of Industry Tourism
and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003. See also Queensland
Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
Royal College of Pathologists
of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; Genetic Technologies
Submission P45
, 20 October 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
, 7 November 2003.
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November 2003. See also D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
6, 220, 257.
Royal College of
Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003;
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
, 24 October 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003; Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
, 24 October 2003; Queensland Government,
Submission P57
January 2004; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
October 2003 (referring to
Genetic Technologies
Submission P45
, 20 October 2003; A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
6, 38, 201 - 204, 217,
Ibid, 61 - 63,
139 - 140, 199 - 203. Referring to studies conducted by Dr Mildred Cho
and her colleagues: see, eg, M Cho and others,
‘Effects of Patents and
Licenses on the Provision of Clinical Genetic Testing Services’ (2003) 5
Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
3; J Merz and others, ‘Diagnostic
Testing Fails the Test’ (2002) 415
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
6, 106, 139 - 140, 202, 256. GTG’s licensing practices and its
DNA patents are discussed in Ch
Most patent applications are
published 18 months after the date on which the application was first filed: see
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
6, 181 - 182.
259. Note that Nicol and Nielsen considered mechanisms for regulating the use of
biotechnology patents might provide a solution
to this issue: see further Ch 23
The supplement to the
Official Journal
only contains information about patents included in the
NPS system (see further below). A complete copy of the
Official Journal
containing information about all Australian patents is available from IP
Australia’s offices and is distributed on CD - ROM
to libraries and
other reference organisations throughout
The International Patent
Classification marks are described in Ch
Once transferred to the
EPO’s esp@cenet website, a user must conduct a new patent search using the
World Patent Number, not
the Australian Patent
IP Australia is in the
process of ensuring that APPS contain abstracts from patent applications that
are included in both the PatAdmin
and NPS system so that a search of the APPS
system alone would be sufficient in this
For example, the USPTO
application serial number; type of patent
application; inventor name, applicant
and assignee name or location; patent title; issue date; application date; claim
and specification
details; patent classification; registered interested (eg,
security interests, exclusive licenses and US government interests); patent
examiner who assessed the application; patent attorney of
Until relatively recently,
United States patent applications were not published prior to a patent being
granted so information about
United States patent applications was limited
unless based on a PCT application first filed in a jurisdiction outside the
Western Australian
Department of Health and others (legal issues),
Consultation
, Perth, 17
September 2003; Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October
2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003;
Department of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November
Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October
of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November
Ibid. See also: E Milward and
Submission P46
, 20 October
of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November
A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003; Queensland Government,
Submission P57
January 2004; Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003;
AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November
AusBiotech Ltd,
, 7 November 2003; Department of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
As outlined in this chapter, a
number of different types of insurance policies may cover the costs of patent
litigation. The term
‘patent litigation insurance’ is used in the
Discussion Paper to refer generally to all such
See further: Biotechnology
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
This type of
insurance may also be called, ‘offensive patent insurance’,
‘patent pursuit insurance’ or ‘infringement
insurance’.
made’ policies indemnify an insured against any liability that arises from
an occurrence that happened during
the relevant policy
This type of insurance may
also be called, ‘defensive patent
insurance’.
Such coverage is
based upon judicial interpretation of the scope of coverage for
‘advertising injury’ provided in commercial
general liability
policies: see M Simensky and E Osterberg, ‘The Insurance and Management of
Intellectual Property Risks’
Cardozo Arts and Entertainment
Law Journal
; J Cahill and T Fitzgibbon, ‘Intellectual Property
Assets Raise Insurance Issues’,
National Law Journal
, 25 October
1999; IPO Insurance Committee,
Status Report of the Insurance Committee
(2002) Intellectual Property Owners
Association.
M Simensky and E
Osterberg, ‘The Insurance and Management of Intellectual Property
Cardozo Arts and Entertainment Law Journal
325 - 329, 331 - 334.
Corporation Ltd,
Correspondence
, 10 December 2003. Until recently, patent
litigation insurance was offered in Australia by Dexta
Corporation.
‘Patents Insurance Has Its Virtues’,
Business Review Weekly
30 May 2002, 78.
For details of
European and United States insurance companies offering patent litigation
insurance, see: CJA Consultants Ltd,
Patent Litigation Insurance: A Study for
the European Commission on Possible Insurance Schemes against Patent Litigation
(2003), app A; IPO Insurance Committee,
Status Report of the
Insurance Committee
(2002) Intellectual Property Owners Association,
CJA Consultants Ltd,
Patent Litigation Insurance: A Study for the European Commission on Possible
Insurance Schemes against Patent Litigation Risks
N Rawlingson Plant,
‘Competitive Advantage of Patent Insurance’ (2002) 15
Intellectual Property Law Bulletin
ABC Television,
‘Patently a Problem’,
Four Corners
, 11 August 2003,
<www.abc.net.au/4corners/archive.htm>.
Technologies Limited,
Annual Report 2002
J Walker, ‘Patents
Insurance Has Its Virtues’,
Business Review Weekly
, 30 May 2002,
78, ABC Television, ‘Patently a Problem’,
Four Corners
August 2003,
<www.abc.net.au/4corners/archive.htm>.
Connors, ‘New Insurance to Help SMEs Protect IP’,
Biotechnology Australia,
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
N Rawlingson Plant,
‘Competitive Advantage of Patent Insurance’ (2002) 15
Intellectual Property Law Bulletin
Ibid, 27 - 28; Biotechnology
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
Biotechnology Australia,
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
(2001), 156,
IPO Insurance Committee,
Status Report of the Insurance Committee
(2002) Intellectual Property
Owners Association, 16; Biotechnology Australia,
Biotechnology Intellectual
Property Manual
(2001), 156. As no Australian insurer currently offers
patent litigation insurance, information about insurance premiums is available
only in United States dollars.
‘validity opinion’ is an opinion by a patent agent or attorney as to
whether the claims of an issued patent would likely
be held by a court in view
of the available facts.
‘freedom to operate opinion’ (or ‘non-infringement
opinion’) is an opinion provided by an attorney as to
the likely holding
of a court on whether a particular product or process would infringe any
identified third party patents.
Insurance Committee,
Status Report of the Insurance Committee
Intellectual Property Owners Association, 15; Biotechnology Australia,
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
IPO Insurance Committee,
Status Report of the Insurance Committee
(2002) Intellectual Property
Owners Association, 15, 16; Biotechnology Australia,
Biotechnology
Intellectual Property Manual
(2001), 156. A co-payment, like an excess or
deductible payment, is the amount that the insured must pay if a claim is made
a patent litigation insurance policy. Co-payments are typically calculated
based on a percentage of a
CJA Consultants Ltd,
Patent Litigation Insurance: A Study for the European Commission on Possible
Insurance Schemes against Patent Litigation Risks
J Bergmann and T Davies,
‘Junk DNA or Junk Debate?’,
Allens Arthur Robinson Biotech
, 3 September 2003, <www.aar.com.au/pubs/bt>; Biotechnology
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
J Bergmann and T Davies,
‘Junk DNA or Junk Debate?’,
Allens Arthur Robinson Biotech
, 3 September 2003,
<www.aar.com.au/pubs/bt>.
Consultants Ltd,
Patent Litigation Insurance: A Study for the European
Commission on Possible Insurance Schemes against Patent Litigation Risks
(2003), ch 11.
Biotechnology Australia,
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
CJA Consultants Ltd,
Litigation Insurance: A Study for the European Commission on Possible Insurance
Schemes against Patent Litigation Risks
Advisory Council on Industrial
Review of Enforcement of Industrial Property Rights
(1999); CJA
Consultants Ltd,
Patent Litigation Insurance: A Study for the European
Commission on Possible Insurance Schemes against Patent Litigation Risks
Advisory Council on
Industrial Property,
Review of Enforcement of Industrial Property Rights
Ibid, 28. Biotechnology
Australia included information about patent litigation insurance in its
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
: Biotechnology Australia,
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
CJA Consultants Ltd,
Patent Litigation Insurance: A Study for the European Commission on Possible
Insurance Schemes against Patent Litigation Risks
Ibid, [15.2],
[15.15] - [15.16].
Health Ministers’ Advisory Council,
Submission P49
, 23 October
2003. See also Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
October 2003; New South Wales Health Department,
Submission P37
October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Health Ministers’ Advisory Council,
Submission P49
, 23 October
Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003. See also Cancer
Council South Australia,
Submission P41
, 9 October
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003.
See also G Suthers,
Submission P30
, 2 October
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
Advisory Council on Industrial
Review of Enforcement of Industrial Property Rights
See Proposals 18 - 1,
19 - 1, 23 - 2.
See further
Ch 18, 19 and 23.
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
10. Jurisdictional Issues
Introduction
Judicial review and enforcement of patents
Existing allocation of jurisdiction
Reform of jurisdiction in patent matters
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Role of assessors in patent cases
Other jurisdictions
ALRC's views
10. Jurisdictional Issues
Introduction
chapter addresses the jurisdiction of Australian courts and tribunals to make
determinations about the validity and enforcement
of patent rights. The chapter
outlines the current allocation of jurisdiction with respect to matters arising
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act
). It then considers
various proposals for changing this allocation of jurisdiction in order to
provide a more consistent approach
to patent law in Australia and to facilitate
enforcement of patent rights by small and medium-sized Australian enterprises.
The chapter
also discusses the relevance of these proposals to the enforcement
of gene patents in Australia, and concludes with a discussion
of the role of
assessors in providing expert advice to judges in patent proceedings.
Judicial review and enforcement of patents
Existing allocation of jurisdiction
outlined in Chapter 5, state and federal courts, as well as the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal (AAT), have a role in the
Australian patent system. Decisions
of the Commissioner of Patents may be subject to various types of review by the
AAT or the Federal
Court of Australia (Federal
The AAT may undertake
merits review of the Commissioner’s decisions with respect to certain
procedural matters prescribed by
Decisions of the AAT on
matters of law may be appealed to the Federal
A direct approach may be
made to the Federal Court for judicial review in relation to other decisions of
the Commissioner, essentially
those related to the grant of patents or matters
closely allied to the grant (for example, amendments to patent specifications
revocations).
The Federal Court
also has jurisdiction to review decisions of the Commissioner under the
Administrative Review (Judicial Decisions) Act 1977
(Cth), and under
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth), on the basis of legal or procedural
10.3 The Federal Court and state and territory Supreme Courts share original
and enforcement of patent
including infringement
proceedings, applications for relief against unjustified threats of
infringement, the grant of declarations
of non-infringement, and compulsory
10.4 Appeals from decisions of a single judge of the Federal Court and from
decisions of state and territory Supreme Courts may be
heard by a Full Court of
the Federal Court,
and then by the
High Court, with special leave to
Reform of jurisdiction in patent matters
10.5 Several reports in
recent years have reviewed the allocation of jurisdiction over intellectual
property matters (including patents)
among various judicial or quasi-judicial
These reports have
identified two competing concerns underpinning criticisms of the current
enforcement system for intellectual property
rights: on the one hand, a need for
consistency in decision making; and on the other hand, a need to reduce the cost
and complexity
of the current system to facilitate the enforcement of
intellectual property rights, particularly by small and medium-sized
enterprises.
10.6 In the context of gene patents, both of the concerns underpinning arguments
for reform of the existing system are evident. Gene
patents raise a range of
complex legal and scientific issues, which require a high level of expertise. In
addition, there is a need
for consistency in decision making by the courts in
this relatively new area. However, as discussed in Chapter 9, there are concerns
infringement suits, as a plaintiff or defendant. This concern
is particularly
significant in the context of gene patents because universities and non-profit
organisations hold more than half
of the gene patents granted in Australia to
and these institutions have
limited resources to undertake patent enforcement actions. Accessible and
cost-effective enforcement
mechanisms for gene patents are therefore
10.7 A range of options have been canvassed to address these issues, including:
limiting or entirely removing the jurisdiction of
state and territory Supreme
Courts in patent matters; expanding the jurisdiction of the Federal Magistrates
Court to include patent
matters; and expanding the jurisdiction of the AAT to
undertake merits review of all decisions of the Commissioner. These options
discussed below.
Concentration of jurisdiction in federal courts
10.8 The ALRC and the Advisory Council on Industrial
Property (now the Advisory Council on Intellectual Property—ACIP) have
each recommended that jurisdiction over intellectual property matters (including
patents) be concentrated in federal courts, such
as the Federal
The Judicial Power
of the Commonwealth: A Review of the
Judiciary Act 1903
and Related
Legislation
(ALRC 92), the ALRC recommended that:
Federal legislation should be amended to provide that original and
appellate jurisdiction in matters arising under federal intellectual
laws be conferred exclusively on federal courts. The original jurisdiction
presently exercised by state and territory courts
in these matters should be
10.9 In ACIP’s report,
Review of Enforcement of Industrial Property
(the ACIP Report), the recommendations on this issue were not as
far-reaching. ACIP recommended only that the
Patents Act
be amended to
‘remove the jurisdiction of state and territory supreme courts to revoke a
ACIP considered
that state and territory Supreme Courts would retain jurisdiction over patent
infringement suits.
10.10 Both the ACIP Report and ALRC 92 noted that uniformity of decision making
in intellectual property decisions is highly
In particular, the
ACIP Report expressed concern about interpretations of Australian patent law
that had produced ‘inconsistencies
with international
The ACIP Report
considered that this could ‘weaken our strong international IP
position’ and suggested that such problems
could be reduced by ‘the
development of a core of specialist IP judges in
Australia’.
expressed a similar view and commented that the ‘Federal Court has already
developed substantial expertise and international
standing in [the intellectual
property] area’.
10.11 The Federal Court currently has an intellectual property panel comprising
selected judges based in Sydney and Melbourne. Judges
from this panel sit on
appeals in intellectual property matters on a national
The ACIP Report noted and
approved of this practice, but recommended that the Federal Court should be
encouraged to promote further
specialisation of intellectual property
Specialist intellectual property courts in other jurisdictions
10.12 The recommendations of the ALRC and ACIP relating
to increased specialisation of intellectual property judges and concentration
For example,
the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit was created in 1982
and has exclusive jurisdiction to hear
appeals from decisions of United States
District Courts relating to patent validity and
infringement.
Similarly, in the
United Kingdom, the Patents Court and Patents County Court have been established
with jurisdiction to resolve disputes
concerning patent
10.13 In July 2003, the creation of a specialist intellectual property court in
Japan was also proposed as part of package of reforms
intended to improve the
protection of intellectual property rights under Japanese
The reform package
indicated that the creation of an Intellectual Property High Court could
strengthen ‘the competitiveness
of intellectual property’ and
‘emphasize the intellectual property-oriented national policy both inside
and outside of
Bill establishing such a court is scheduled to be submitted to the Japanese Diet
for consideration in 2004.
10.14 A report of the Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) in 2004 commented favourably on the concentration
of jurisdiction over
patent matters in a single court as one mechanism to improve the quality of
granted patents. The OECD considered
A centralised court system is necessary for ensuring higher level
certainty of enforcement and the validity of
Criticisms of a specialist patent court
Concentration of jurisdiction with respect to patent matters in a single court
has, however, been criticised. Justice Drummond
of the Federal Court considered
the merits of creating a specialist intellectual property court in Australia and
identified a number
of concerns with such an approach based on the operation of
similar courts in the United States and the United Kingdom.
10.16 The problems with a specialist intellectual property court identified by
Justice Drummond included:
A greater likelihood of ‘pro-patentee’ decisions;
The tendency for a specialist court to be ‘captured’ by
special interest groups, resulting in choices between competing
considerations—such as patent versus competition issues—being masked
as technical issues of patent law; and
Insufficient evidence that a specialist intellectual property court
would resolve patent suits more quickly or
the Federal Magistrates Court
10.17 As noted above, proposals have also been made to
address concerns about the cost and complexity of enforcing intellectual
rights (including patent rights) in Australia. The need for a simpler,
less expensive means of adjudicating patent rights was noted
in the ACIP Report
and in the report of the Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee
(the IPCRC Report).
Both reports
considered that the Federal Magistrates Court (which is also called the Federal
Magistrates Service) might have a role
The IPCRC Report
recommended that:
the Federal Magistracy be used as a lower court for the patent system,
particularly for matters involving the Innovation
10.18 The Australian Government deferred its response to this recommendation of
the IPCRC Report and asked ACIP to consider the issue
ACIP’s final
report on this matter has not yet been released, but a discussion paper
published in July 2002 noted that there
is ‘strong divergence of opinion
as to whether the jurisdiction of the Federal Magistrates Service should be
to include, among other things, patent
Submissions and consultations
10.19 IP 27 asked whether the
administration and enforcement of gene patents would benefit from concentrating
matters in a single court and, if so, how concerns about
the cost and complexity of enforcing gene patents might be addressed.
10.20 Submissions did not support the establishment of a specialist court that
would address only issues relating to gene
Two submissions
commented that the cost and complexity of litigation involving gene patents is
not significantly different from that
of litigation involving patents in other
fields of technology.
submission suggested that the cost of establishing such a court would not be
justified, particularly given it is unlikely to
have a sufficient case load to
be in continuous use.
10.21 However, a number of submissions supported concentration of jurisdiction
with respect to the administration and enforcement
of all patent matters in a
single court.
Submissions
suggested this would increase consistency and certainty in judicial
interpretation of the
because judges would
develop specialised skills, knowledge and experience in dealing with patent
10.22 A multi-national pharmaceutical company, GlaxoSmithKline, submitted
given the technical nature of ... fields [such as genetics, chemistry and
electronics] it is important that there are appropriately
experienced judges who
deal regularly with patent litigation. From these perspectives it is advisable
that patent litigation should
be dealt with in a single Court (which could
conduct hearings wherever in Australia is most appropriate for the particular
10.23 An Australian biotechnology company, Genetic Technologies Limited,
considered that ‘there is some merit in the idea of
patent matters being
dealt with by a “single
The company
indicated that it is difficult for Australian courts ‘to accumulate
experience and build a consistent corpus of
understanding and interpretation of
Patents Act
]’ because of the low frequency of patent
The South Australian
Government commented that concentrating patent matters might also expedite
proceedings.
10.24 Two submissions considered the potential disadvantages of concentrating
the administration and enforcement of patent matters
in a single court. Dr
Amanda McBratney and others noted the objections raised by Justice Drummond
(discussed above), in particular
that a specialist court may be too
‘patent friendly’.
The Australian Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture (ACIPA)
articulated a similar view and proposed that, although the
Federal Court should
continue to be the primary court to deal the administration and enforcement of
patent matters, the state and
territory Supreme Courts and the AAT could
‘continue to play an important secondary
Further, ACIPA
suggested that the AAT’s role in reviewing decisions of the Commissioner
of Patents should be
10.25 A small number of submissions commented that the current system for
challenging and enforcing gene patents was effective, and
no change to the
current allocation of jurisdiction was required. The Queensland Government
expressed concern about the removal of
the original jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court of Queensland in relation to intellectual property
The Department of
Industry, Tourism and Resources indicated that:
the current arrangement provides easy and cost-effective access to the
legal system by parties who wish to oppose or contest
10.26 Only two submissions considered mechanisms to address concerns about the
cost and complexity of gene patent litigation. GlaxoSmithKline
proposed that
these issues could be addressed by measures such as: ensuring that any costs
award adequately reflect the ‘winner’s’
actual costs;
penalising inefficient or oppressive litigation in costs awards; providing
public funding for patent litigation; and
encouraging alternative dispute
resolution.
ACIPA submitted
that, although conferring jurisdiction on the Federal Magistrates Court might
provide a more cost-effective and expeditious
avenue for enforcing Australian
patents, it was not an appropriate forum to address ‘the complex legal and
scientific issues
associated with gene
ALRC’s views
10.27 The ALRC considers that
Patents Act
should be amended to confer original jurisdiction in
matters arising under the Act exclusively on federal courts and that the
under the Act should be abolished. The Federal Court should
continue to exercise
appellate jurisdiction in matters arising under the
Patents Act
However, the ALRC agrees with the view that a specialist
patent’ court is neither necessary nor desirable, and has expressed
Proposal 10 - 1 in general terms applicable
to patents relating to all types
of technology.
10.28 In the ALRC’s view, it is important that a uniform body of patent
law develops in Australia, particular in relation to
new technological areas
such as genetics, where the application of patent law principles might not be
clear. Consistency in the interpretation
Patents Act
fundamental to patent holders’ and potential patent applicants’
understanding of the scope of Australian patent rights.
It is also significant
for international perceptions of Australian patent law, and foreign
entities’ willingness to invest
in research and development in Australia.
A coherent and consistent interpretation of the
Patents Act
facilitated by concentration of judicial experience and expertise with respect
to patent matters in a single court system.
10.29 Few submissions commented on which court was the appropriate one in which
to concentrate jurisdiction with respect to patent
matters. However, the ALRC
considers that the federal court system is the most appropriate. Alleged
infringements of patent rights—particularly
gene patent rights—are
often factually and legally complex. The Federal Court has already developed
substantial expertise in
determining such cases. It has an established panel of
specialist intellectual property judges and continuing education programs
assist judges in keeping up to date with current patent law developments. In
addition, available statistics suggest that the Federal
Court is already the
occasional basis.
10.30 The ALRC recognises the concerns that have been expressed regarding
judicial specialisation, including that the concentration
of patent matters in a
single court may lead to such a court being too ‘patent friendly’
and subject to the influence
of particular interest groups. However, the Federal
Court has jurisdiction over a very broad range of matters, including competition
law issues. The ALRC considers that this breadth of jurisdiction will facilitate
the Court’s appreciation of the competing
policy objectives that may be at
issue in a particular patent
10.31 It has been suggested that there is already
specialisation
in patent matters in Australia, and that there is value in preserving an
alternative avenue for enforcement of patents
in state and territory Supreme
Courts. However, the choice of the forum in which a patent suit is filed is made
by the plaintiff,
and the proceeding may not be readily transferable to the
Federal Court under cross-vesting legislation. This may create an element
injustice to a defendant if the litigation is brought in a state or territory
court whose judges do not regularly deal with patent
matters and thus lack
relevant expertise.
10.32 The ALRC’s proposal that original jurisdiction in matters arising
Patents Act
should be conferred exclusively on federal courts
intentionally leaves open the issue of which federal courts are the most
appropriate.
However, as discussed earlier in this chapter, ACIP is currently
considering whether the Federal Magistrates Court might also be
matters arising under the
Patents Act
. Proposal 10 - 1 does not
preclude the Federal Magistrates Court assuming such a role in appropriate
patent matters, although it
should be noted that the complexity and length of
some patent matters may make the Federal Magistrates Court an inappropriate
for trial. Further, this proposal is not intended to affect the
10.33 Chapter 9 outlined concerns expressed in submissions and consultations
Australia. As indicated in
that chapter, the ALRC is not inclined to make any specific proposals to address
the costs of gene patent
litigation at this stage. However, Proposals 20 - 3
to 20 - 6 will assist in addressing these concerns because they envisage
government participation, particularly by health departments, in
monitoring the application of intellectual property laws to genetic
and technologies, including by coordinating challenges to gene patents.
Proposal 10 - 1
The Commonwealth should amend the
Patents Act
Patents Act
) to provide that original jurisdiction in
matters arising under the Act be conferred exclusively on federal courts. The
the Act should be abolished. The Federal Court of Australia
should continue to
exercise appellate jurisdiction in matters arising under the Act, exclusive of
all courts other than the High
Court of Australia.
Role of assessors in patent cases
10.34 As discussed elsewhere
in this Discussion Paper, gene patents raise complex scientific and legal issues
whose resolution may
require expert advice and assistance. In Chapter 8, the
ALRC proposed that IP Australia have access to expert assistance in examining
patent applications claiming genetic materials and technologies to assist
Australian patent examiners in addressing such
This section addresses
the role of experts in providing advice to judges hearing gene patent
Section 217
Patents Act
provides for Australian judges to have access to expert
assistance in patent proceedings in appropriate cases. The provision states:
A prescribed court may, if it thinks fit, call in the aid of an assessor
to assist it in the hearing and trial or determination of
any proceedings under
10.36 The term ‘assessor’ is not defined the
Patents Act
role of an assessor was, however, considered by the ALRC in its report
Managing Justice: A Review of the Federal Civil Justice System
The ALRC explained
that an assessor is an expert available for a judge to consult if the judge
requires assistance in understanding
the effect or meaning of expert
10.37 Justice Heerey considered the benefits provided by an assessor in
Genetic Institute Inc v Kirin-Amgen Inc (No
That case involved
complex and contested issues of molecular biology and, between them, the parties
intended to call 15 scientific
experts from various
disciplines.
Heerey J held that,
in such a case, a non-expert judge would likely be aided by expert assistance,
such as that provided by an assessor,
and perform the judicial task
10.38 Concerns have, however, been expressed that assessors might be in a
position to exercise too much influence over a judge, and
fairness of contact between judges and experts in
These matters may be
appropriately addressed by a clear and detailed prescription of an
assessor’s functions.
Further, Heerey J explained that:
There is no question of an assessor giving any judgment or making any
order (even by consent) or otherwise exercising any judicial
functions. An
assessor is to assist the judge, both in hearing and trial and/or in
determination of any proceeding. The judgment
in the case, the exercise of the
judicial power, remains that of the judge. In exercising judicial power, a judge
is routinely assisted
by persons who are not judges: counsel, solicitors,
witnesses, the judge’s associate and secretary and other court
10.39 The appointment of assessors in Australian patent cases is, however, rare.
Although the power to appoint assessors had been
included in Australian patents
legislation since 1903,
been considered and invoked in a very limited number of cases to
10.40 Amendments to the
Federal Court Rules 1979
Federal Court
) in 1999 have established a second regime for the appointment and use
of an expert by the judges of the Federal Court in any type
proceedings.
Such ‘expert
assistants’ may assist the Court on ‘any issue of fact or
opinion’ identified by the Court or
a judge (other than an issue involving
a question of law).’
10.41 However, the procedures for the appointment of an expert assistant, and
role of such an expert in the proceedings, are more
restricted than in the case
of an assessor appointed pursuant to
Patents Act
appointment of an expert assistant under the
Federal Court Rules
the consent of both parties, and any assistance provided by the expert must be
reduced to writing and made available to
In contrast, as
discussed above, an assessor appointed under the
Patents Act
require the consent of the parties, and the manner in which the assessor assists
a judge may be more flexibly adapted to
the circumstances of a particular
Other jurisdictions
10.42 Patent statutes in
other jurisdictions also provide for assessors—or expert
—to assist judges
in hearing and determining patent cases in appropriate circumstances. In the
United Kingdom, the Patents Court
may, by its own motion, or following the
application of a party, appoint an independent scientific adviser to assist the
patent proceedings.
New Zealand, the
Patents Act 1953
(NZ) provides for the appointment of
scientific advisers to assist the court in patent infringement proceedings, and
other proceedings
arising under the
In Singapore, a judge
hearing proceedings arising under the
Patents Act 1995
(Singapore) has
discretion to appoint one or more scientific advisers, from a panel of advisers
established under the Act, to assist
the court and the Registrar of
10.43 In the international arena, there are also initiatives to provide
resources for the judges of national courts dealing with
cases involving
biotechnology and other novel scientific areas. The United Nations has recently
agreed to fund the International
Science and Technology Reference Forum, an
advisory body of scientific and legal experts for national courts that are
unable to resolve
complex scientific
Details of the
composition of the Forum and its procedures are yet to be
determined.
It is, however,
anticipated that cases before national courts may be referred to the Forum for a
non-binding verdict
that will be
founded upon analysis of the science and technology involved, risk assessment,
and the ethical and religious values
that shape national legislation. In
addition, private parties and administrative, regulatory and legislative bodies
will be eligible
for the Forum’s
assistance.
ALRC’s views
10.44 In ALRC 89, the ALRC
noted that the use of assessors is relevant in patent cases before the Federal
Court, given the novel and
technical issues frequently
The ALRC recommended
The Federal Court should continue to develop appropriate procedures and
arrangements, in consultation with legal and professional
user groups, to allow
judges to benefit from expert assistance in understanding the effect or meaning
of expert evidence.
10.45 In its response to the ALRC’s recommendation, the Australian
Government indicated that this was a matter for the Federal
The Government noted that
Federal Court Rules
had been amended to provide for the appointment
of a Court expert assistant, and that the Court had advised it would continue to
consult with the legal profession and user groups on issues concerning expert
The Government’s
response did not make specific reference to the use of assessors pursuant to s
Patents Act
10.46 In a paper delivered in 2002 about techniques used by the Federal Court to
address issues posed by expert evidence, Justice
Heerey commented that:
Today the complexity of science expands at an exponential rate ...
Looking back to the 1960s, a decade when many of today’s
judges commenced
their professional careers, there are many fields of science which were not
merely less complicated than today;
they simply did not exist ... [Further,]
scientific issues about which eminent scientists themselves have doubt, fall to
by judges who, in common law countries at any rate, usually do not
have much in the way of formal scientific
10.47 While some Australian judges may have specialist scientific training, or a
familiarity with scientific matters as a result
of their professional or
personal interests, many judges could benefit, in appropriate cases, from the
additional assistance that
an assessor may provide in interpreting and
understanding scientific evidence. As Justice Heerey observed, the pace of
change is rapid, and expert evidence may be complicated and
voluminous. Even those judges who have specialist training in a relevant
discipline are unlikely to have the detailed knowledge of an assessor or
scientific adviser in the specific field to which the case
10.48 The ALRC considers that the use of an assessor may be particularly
beneficial in gene patent litigation, which may involve
novel issues in the
genetics field and complex scientific and technical evidence. The ALRC
recognises the concerns that have been
identified about the use of assessors,
including issues relating to the appropriate role of an assessor in patent
proceedings, the
costs involved and potential conflicts of interest. However,
the ALRC considers that such issues are capable of being addressed on
case-by-case basis with appropriate cooperation between the court and the
parties to the proceedings.
Proposal 10 - 2
Courts exercising jurisdiction under the
should continue to develop procedures and arrangements, in consultation
with relevant stakeholders, to allow judges to benefit from
the advice of
assessors or scientific advisors in litigation involving patents over genetic
materials and technologies.
A limited set of decisions by the
Commissioner of Patents (primarily those made under the
Patents Regulations
(Cth)) are generally not subject to review by either the AAT or the
Federal Court. See also Administrative Review Council,
Administrative Review
of Patents Decisions: Report to the Attorney General, Report 43
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations 1991
Administrative Appeals Tribunal
Patents Act
Judicial review is
also available by the High Court under s 75(v) of the
Constitution
Patents Act 1990
Federal Court’s leave is required to appeal a decision of a single Federal
Court judge in relation to a decision or direction
of the Commissioner:
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act 1990
See: Industrial Property Advisory
Patents, Innovation and Competition in Australia
Administrative Review Council,
Administrative Review of Patents Decisions:
Report to the Attorney General, Report 43
(1998); Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Federal Judicial System
ALRC 89 (2000), ch 7; Australian Law Reform Commission,
The Judicial Power of
the Commonwealth: A Review of the
Judiciary Act 1903
and Related
Legislation
, ALRC 92 (2001), ch 20; Advisory Council on Industrial Property,
Review of Enforcement of Industrial Property Rights
(1999); Intellectual
Property and Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property
Legislation under the Competition Principles Agreement
See further Ch
A 1984 review of the
Patents Act
(Cth) by the Industrial Property Advisory Committee also recommended
that the jurisdiction of state and territory Supreme Courts in
patent matters be
transferred exclusively to the Federal Court of Australia: Industrial Property
Advisory Committee,
Patents, Innovation and Competition in Australia
(1984), rec
Law Reform Commission,
The Judicial Power of the Commonwealth: A Review of
Judiciary Act 1903
and Related Legislation
, ALRC 92 (2001), rec
Advisory Council on
Industrial Property,
Review of Enforcement of Industrial Property Rights
(1999), rec 6.
Ibid, 20; Australian Law Reform
Commission,
The Judicial Power of the Commonwealth: A Review of the
and Related Legislation
, ALRC 92 (2001),
[20.23] - [20.32].
Advisory Council
on Industrial Property,
Review of Enforcement of Industrial Property
(1999), 19.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
The Judicial Power of the Commonwealth: A Review of the
Judiciary Act 1903
and Related Legislation
, ALRC 92 (2001), [20.24],
Advisory Council on Industrial
Review of Enforcement of Industrial Property Rights
(1999), rec
28 USC §§1295, 1338. See
further: R Posner,
The Federal Courts: Challenge and Reform
1999), 252 - 253; United States Federal Trade Commission,
Innovation: The Proper Balance of Competition and Patent Law and Policy
(2003), ch 6, 9 - 18. Note that concentration of jurisdiction over patent
matters in the United States occurs at the appellate level,
whereas the ALRC and
ACIP recommended concentration of both original and appellate jurisdiction over
Australia patent matters.
The Patents
Court was established in 1981 and is part of the Chancery Division of the High
Supreme Court Act
(UK) s 6. The Patents County Court
was created in 1990 pursuant to
(UK) s 287. See also: D Drummond, ‘Are the Courts Down Under Properly
Handling Patent Disputes?’
Intellectual Property Forum
, 20 - 21. Further expansion of the Patents County Court has recently
been proposed by the United Kingdom Department of Trade and
Industry: United
Kingdom Department of Trade and Industry,
Innovation Report
Japan Intellectual Property
Policy Headquarters,
Strategic Program for the Creation, Protection and
Exploitation of Intellectual Property
, Japan Government,
<www.kantei.go.jp/foreign/policy/titeki/kettei/030708f_e.html> at 5
January 2004, [2.4.1].
Ibid, [2.4.1]. See also R
Cunningham, ‘Specialist Court to Boost Profile of IP in Japan’,
Legal Media Group News
, 1 June 2003, <www.legalmediagroup.com>; R
Cunningham, ‘New Court is Feature of Japanese IP Reforms’,
Media Group News
, 16 July 2003,
<www.legalmediagroup.com/news>.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,
Patents and
Innovation: Trends and Policy Challenges
D Drummond, ‘Are the Courts
Down Under Properly Handling Patent Disputes?’
Intellectual
Property Forum
Advisory Council on
Industrial Property,
Review of Enforcement of Industrial Property Rights
(1999), 18 - 20; Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation under the Competition Principles
Advisory Council on
Industrial Property,
Review of Enforcement of Industrial Property Rights
(1999), 20; Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee,
Intellectual Property Legislation under the Competition Principles Agreement
(2000), 177. See also Australian Law Reform Commission,
The Judicial Power of
the Commonwealth: A Review of the
Judiciary Act 1903
and Related
Legislation
, ALRC 92 (2001),
Intellectual
Property and Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property
Legislation under the Competition Principles Agreement
(2000), 178. At the
time the ACIP Report was released in March 1999, the establishment of the
Federal Magistrates Court was still
under consideration by the Australian
Government. As a result, ACIP made no formal recommendations on this
IP Australia,
Response to Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee
Recommendations
, <www.ipaustralia.gov.au/pdfs/general/response1.pdf>
at 2 May 2003.
Advisory Council on
Intellectual Property,
Discussion Paper: Should the Jurisdiction of the
Federal Magistrates Services be Extended to Include Patent, Trade Mark and
(2002), 1. The final report has been presented to the
Australian Government but has not been made publicly
, 30 September 2003; G Suthers,
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003;
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; Genetic Technologies
Submission P45
, 20 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
October 2003.
South Australian
Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003; Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003; A McBratney and others,
, 22 October 2003; Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
20 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003;
South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003; AusBiotech
Submission P58
, 7 November
Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October 2003; A McBratney and others,
, 22 October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
October 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute
of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October
Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003. See also A
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003. This submission concluded, however, that
despite such criticisms a specialised patent court could be
beneficial.
Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September
Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January 2004. The Queensland Government
endorsed the submission of the Queensland Supreme Court to ALRC 92 which, among
matters, proposed that uniformity of decision making could be achieved if
a state and federal court system was maintained and expressed
concerns about
narrowing of legal principles and agency capture if jurisdiction was
concentrated solely in the Federal Court: see
Australian Law Reform Commission,
The Judicial Power of the Commonwealth: A Review of the
Judiciary Act 1903
and Related Legislation
, ALRC 92 (2001),
[20.15] - [20.18].
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003.
Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
September 2003.
D Drummond, ‘Are
the Courts Down Under Properly Handling Patent Disputes?’
Intellectual Property Forum
, 22 - 29; Australian Law Reform
Commission,
The Judicial Power of the Commonwealth: A Review of the
and Related Legislation
, ALRC 92 (2001),
The Federal Court’s
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) was cited by the Industrial Property Advisory Committee as
‘extremely relevant’ to its recommendation that the
state and territory Supreme Courts over patent law matters be transferred
exclusively to the Federal Court: Industrial
Property Advisory Committee,
Patents, Innovation and Competition in Australia
See also Ibid,
See Proposals 8 - 2 and
A ‘prescribed court’ is defined to mean
the Federal Court, the Supreme Court of a State and the Supreme Court of each
the Australian Capital Territory, the Northern Territory and Norfolk Island:
Patents Act 1990
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Federal Judicial System
(2000). See also P Heerey, ‘Expert Evidence in Intellectual Property
Australian Intellectual Property Journal
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Federal Judicial System
ALRC 89 (2000), [7.150].
Institute Inc v Kirin-Amgen Inc (No 2)
(1997) 149 ALR
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Federal Judicial System
ALRC 89 (2000),
[7.153] - [7.155].
Institute Inc v Kirin-Amgen Inc (No 2)
(1997) 149 ALR 247
Institute Inc v Kirin-Amgen Inc
[1999] FCA 742
(1999) 92 FCR 106
, 117 - 118;
Group Ltd v Bristol-Myers Company
[1980] 1 NZLR 185
Institute Inc v Kirin-Amgen Inc (No 2)
(1997) 149 ALR 247
Patents Act 1903
86(8). See also Australian Law Reform Commission,
The Judicial Power of the
Commonwealth: A Review of the
Judiciary Act 1903
and Related Legislation
ALRC 92 (2001), [7.149].
Pty Ltd v Aktieselskabet Dansk Gaerings-Industri
[1935] HCA 83
(1935) 55 CLR 523
appointed by consent);
Genetic Institute Inc v Kirin-Amgen Inc (No 2)
(1997) 149 ALR 247
(assessor appointed by court order), upheld on appeal to the
Full Federal Court, see
Genetics Institute Inc v Kirin-Amgen Inc
[1999] FCA 742
F Hoffman-La Roche AG v New England Biolabs Inc
[1999] FCA 1424
(1999) 47 IPR
(appointment of assessor considered and deferred until later stage of
proceedings). In addition, Branson J commented on the role
of assessors in
patent proceedings in a case arising under the
Evidence Act
(Cth) concerning whether evidence given by an expert witness in response to
questions was relevant in the proceeding: see
EI DuPont de Nemours & Co v
Imperial Chemical Industries plc
[2002] FCA 230
(2002) 54 IPR
Federal Court Rules 1979
(Cth) O 34B. ‘Expert’ is defined in the rules as a ‘person who
has specialised knowledge based on the person’s
training, study or
experience’:
Federal Court Rules 1979
(Cth) O 34B r
Federal Court Rules 1979
(Cth) O 34B r 2(1).
Ibid O 34B r
See also P Heerey, ‘Expert
Evidence: The Australian Experience’ (Paper presented at World
Intellectual Property Organization
Aisa - Pacific Colloquium, New Delhi, 6
February 2002).
In some countries, such
as the United Kingdom, New Zealand and Singapore, the term ‘scientific
adviser’ is used instead
of the term
‘assessor’.
(UK) ss 54(9), 70(3), 70(4);
Civil Procedure
(UK), rr 35.15,
Patents Act
(NZ) s 113(2). For consideration of the role of a scientific adviser in New
Zealand patent proceedings:
Beecham Group Ltd v Bristol-Myers Company
[1980] 1 NZLR 185
Beecham Group Ltd v Bristol-Myers Company (No 2)
[1980] 1 NZLR 192
, 194 - 195.
Patents Act
Chapter 221 (Singapore) s
N Nosengo, ‘Biotechnology at
the Bar’ (2003) 425
Ibid, 117. The Forum’s
provisional governing council is due to be elected in March 2004 and is likely
to comprise a permanent
team of judges, with scientific members acting as
part-time consultants.
Ibid, 117. It is
anticipated that national courts will be free to use or ignore the Forum’s
advisory verdict in resolving a
dispute and that the Forum will not seek to
enforce its decisions.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the Federal Judicial System
Australian Government,
Government Response to Recommendations of Australian Law Reform Commission
Report Managing Justice: A Review of the Federal Civil
Justice System
(2003), 39.
‘Expert Evidence: The Australian Experience’ (Paper presented at
World Intellectual Property Organization Aisa
- Pacific Colloquium, New
Delhi, 6 February 2002).
example, the orders made by Emmett J in a case relating to identification of an
assessor at a time when a party was still
in the process of retaining expert
F Hoffman-La Roche AG v New England Biolabs Inc
[1999] FCA 1424
(1999) 47 IPR
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
11. Funding for Research and Development
Introduction
Value of investing in research and development
Healthcare benefits
Funding scientific research
Promoting commercialisation of research
Backing Australia's Ability
Support for research
National Health and Medical Research Council
Australian Research Council
Public-private research linkages
Cooperative Research Centres
ARC linkage programs
NHMRC linkage schemes
State government linkage initiatives
Support for commercialisation of research
Biotechnology Innovation Fund
Innovation Investment Fund
R&D Start program
Pooled Development Fund program
R&D Tax Concession
State government support
Support for the pharmaceutical industry
Submissions and consultations
PART C: Patents and Genetic Research
11. Funding for Research and Development
Introduction
The Terms of Reference require the ALRC to consider the impact of patent laws
and practices related to genes and related technologies
on the conduct of research
and its subsequent application and commercialisation.
11.2 This chapter outlines the structure of public research and development
(R&D) funding in Australia, particularly in relation
to medical research
and human genetics. There are three broad categories of funding: support for
basic research largely at
public institutions; support for creating linkages
between public sector research institutions and industry; and support for the
commercialisation of that research by public sector spin-off companies and private
sector biotechnology companies. The second
and third categories of funding are
an element of the Commonwealth Government’s policy of encouraging the
development of intellectual property generated through publicly funded
research. The implications of this policy for the ownership
of patents, and
the question of whether there should be more direct public benefit derived from
patents on research undertaken
with public funds, are discussed in Chapter 12.
Value of investing in research and development
11.3 Public investment in research
and development to promote innovation is widely recognised as a means of promoting
economic growth.
For example, the Science and
Innovation Mapping Taskforce recently commented:
A strong science and innovation system can contribute to Australia’s
future through economic growth, environmental sustainability
and social well-being.
Science and innovation can provide the tools to manage risk, solve complex problems
and adapt to change.
They can underpin sustainable economic growth and the management
of social and environmental challenges such as population ageing,
land degradation
and soil salinity.
11.4 The 1999 National Health and Medical Research Strategic Review (the Wills
, which resulted from a major strategic
review of health and medical research in Australia, cited Australia’s growing
trade imbalance in pharmaceuticals, medical equipment and other health
and medical industries as the basis for seeking to improve
and enhance Australia’s
research performance. It stated that:
Technology-based industries built on publicly funded research are the key
to economic growth and prosperity. Academic research
has shown that companies’
stock performance in high technology industries is strongly related not only
to the number
of patents produced, but also to the strength of the linkage
between these patents and basic science publications. Most linkages
publicly funded research; 73% of the references to scientific publications
listed as ‘prior art’ on
the front pages of US patents are to
publicly funded academic research. Patent references to basic public science
nearly tripled over the period from 1988 to 1994, highlighting the growing
value of linkages between basic science and technological
revolution ...A
vigorous industry sector in health and medical fields would bring additional
benefits including:
A reduction in Australia’s negative balance of trade in medical goods.
Better research workforce opportunities and salaries.
11.5 In its discussion of Australia’s negative balance of trade in the
medical and pharmaceutical sector, the Wills Report
suggested that:
[s]elling Australian developed intellectual property or licensing it for
royalties is one way to help reduce this deficit although
not in a significant
manner. Even better would be the development of Australian intellectual property
through local biotechnology
companies combined with marketing and distribution
throughout the region alone or in association with international pharmaceutical
companies based in Australia.
11.6 These views were reiterated in the 2003 - 04 Innovation Report on the
Backing Australia’s Ability
initiative (the 2003 - 04
Innovation Report), which stated ‘the important characteristic of R&D
is that it can permanently
lift the rate of economic
11.7 Funding initiatives to support the overall process of innovative research
leading to the development of healthcare products
for the community can be
divided into three broad categories of support:
funding for scientific research, generally undertaken in publicly
funded research institutions;
funding and initiatives to promote transfer of technology to enable
commercial development, which sometimes take the form of linkage
initiatives to support commercial development of this research into
products, such as tests and treatments.
Healthcare benefits
11.8 Public investment in
biotechnology research and development specifically, has the additional benefit
of providing healthcare
benefits to the community in the form of new tests,
treatments and therapies.
Funding scientific research
11.9 More than half of human
health related biological research in Australia is funded by the Commonwealth
Government and undertaken
by publicly funded institutions alone, or with
industry through links such as Cooperative Research Centres
The major funding schemes
are outlined below. In 2001, approximately $300 million was spent on publicly
funded research in
biotechnology.
Promoting commercialisation of research
11.10 Commonwealth Government
policy encourages publicly funded researchers and research organisations to work
with private industry
to develop Australia’s intellectual capital. This
policy is discussed in Chapter 18.
11.11 Linkages between research, government and private industry have been
described as a ‘virtuous cycle’ that provides:
a structure of mutual support which [will] facilitate change and
strengthen Australia’s capacity to participate in the biotechnology
revolution.
11.12 The 1999 White Paper stated that:
The culture of university research ... should become more
entrepreneurial, seeking out opportunities in new and emerging fields of
research that will provide social, cultural and economic benefit ... An
entrepreneurial approach is needed to harness the full cycle
of benefits from
their endeavours through commercialisation, where
appropriate.
11.13 There are two statutory organisations principally responsible for funding
public sector biotechnology research and implementing
research policies: the
National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) and the Australian Research
Council (ARC). In addition,
the Department of Education, Science and Training
(DEST) funds and administers the CRC program. Biotechnology
and the ARC jointly
fund the Biotechnology Centre of Excellence, which is the National Stem Cell
Centre. A number of programs are
administered through
AusIndustry,
to support R&D
funding in industry and to assist with the commercialisation of research.
Australian Biotechnology Report 2001
states that the
biotechnology industry is supported by ‘effective public investment in
substantial investment in fundamental research and research infrastructure
occurs through universities, research institutes,
the Commonwealth Scientific
and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), CRCs and state funded research in
biotechnology.
11.15 Government policy to encourage research commercialisation has been stated
in a number of discussion papers and reports including:
Knowledge and Innovation: A Policy Statement on Research and
Research Training
the Science Capability
the Innovation Summit Implementation Committee’s final
Backing Australia’s Ability: An Innovation Action Plan for
(the Innovation
Statement).
Innovation Statement outlines the Australian government’s current strategy
for promoting research and commercialisation,
Backing Australia’s
Backing Australia’s Ability
Backing Australia’s
is a five-year strategy launched by the Australian Government in 2001
designed to promote research, development and innovation. The
strategy was announced
in the 2001 Innovation Statement,
Backing Australia’s Ability: An Innovation
Action Plan for the Future.
11.18 Three broad themes were identified in the Statement: generating ideas
through research; commercialisation of those ideas; and
developing and retaining
a highly skilled workforce.
Intellectual property protection was nominated as one of the strategies for
accelerating the commercialisation of ideas:
A strong Intellectual Property (IP) protection regime including easy
access to information on IP protection is central to building
a strong national
innovation system in Australia. It promotes R&D through helping to better
capture returns from commercialising
Australian ideas and products. A strong IP
system will also help create spin-off companies, especially from public sector
institutions and
universities.
11.19 As part of the strategy, the Australian Government announced a variety of
measures to achieve its stated goals, including increased
funding to the ARC;
boosts to research infrastructure funding; expanding the CRC program with an
additional $227 million; continuing
the R&D Start program with funding of
$535 million over five years; and reforming the R&D tax concession to
provide a premium
rate of 175% for additional R&D activity and a tax rebate
for small and medium enterprises
A recent evaluation of
the CRC program has led to the program’s objectives and selection criteria
being further focused on
‘industrial, commercial and economic
Support for research
11.20 Two main bodies, the
NHMRC and the ARC, provide funding support for early stage research in the
National Health and Medical Research Council
11.21 The NHMRC is an
independent statutory body established under the
National Health and Medical
Research Council Act 1992
(Cth) and falling within the portfolio of the
Minster for Health and Ageing. It is the key national organisation for all
of health and medical research and brings together all major
stakeholders in the medical sector. The NHMRC comprises nominees of
Commonwealth, State and Territory health authorities, professional and
scientific colleges and associations, unions, universities,
business, consumer
groups, welfare organisations, environmental groups and the Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Commission.
11.22 The NHMRC funds research in areas ranging from biomedicine to clinical,
health services and public health. It provides grants
for research projects and
more large-scale programs. The NHMRC also offers a variety of awards to
individual researchers, including
training awards, career development awards and
research fellowships. Graduate, post-graduate and post-doctoral students are
to undertake further training through scholarship and fellowship
Australian Research Council
11.23 The ARC is an
independent statutory body established under the
Australian Research Council
(Cth) and reporting to the Minister for Education, Science and
Training. It funds research in science, social science and the humanities
basis of a peer review system. Four areas were identified as priority areas for
ARC funding in 2003, with one third of all
funding to be directed towards these
One of these is
‘genome/phenome research’.
Public-private research linkages
11.24 As discussed above, it
is government policy for public sector organisations to work with the private
sector in carrying out
or commercialising research. The importance of such
linkages was affirmed recently by the Science and Innovation Mapping Taskforce,
which noted that research - industry linkages were a key aspect of the
Australian biotechnology
11.25 A key strategy in this policy has been the establishment of CRCs. Other
initiatives include:
the ARC’s Centres and Networks, and Linkage programs;
the NHMRC’s Development Grants, Industry Fellowships and
Health Research Partnerships;
the Major National Research
Facilities;
linkages established by particular organisations.
May 2003, the Minister for Education, Science and Training announced the
creation of a new body to foster research - industry
linkages. The Council
for Business/Industry/University Collaboration will be chaired by a
representative of a key business, industry,
or employer group and its initial
priorities will include:
participation in the selection of business/industry/university
projects for funding;
development of strategies to encourage business/industry to invest
more in the higher education sector;
facilitation of involvement of small and medium enterprises in
collaborative arrangements with universities;
establishment of Awards for Business/University Collaborations; and
advice to Government on initiatives to further facilitate the
commercialisation of intellectual property.
11.27 The Council will
receive seed funding of $200 million over its first two
11.28 Some State governments have also established linkage programs, which are
outlined briefly below.
Cooperative Research Centres
11.29 CRCs are collaborative
centres for research between publicly funded researchers (universities,
government laboratories or the
CSIRO) and the private sector or public agencies.
The Commonwealth Government established the CRC program in 1990. In December
there were 71 CRCs, nine in the field of medical science and
technology,
and one specifically
in the human genome field. DEST funds and administers the CRC program. The
Commonwealth Government contributes
around $145 million annually in funding
support for the CRC program. An extra $227 million in funding for CRCs will be
supplied over
three years from 2003/04 - 2005/06, as announced in the
Innovation Statement.
11.30 The average annual budget of a CRC is $7 million, with public funding of
between $1.6 million and $3.14 million a year, averaging
$2.45 million a
Successful CRC applicants
are required to enter into a formal agreement of up to seven years duration with
the Commonwealth. Under
these agreements, the Commonwealth agrees to provide a
specified level of annual funding to a CRC and participants agree to undertake
certain activities, contribute specified personnel and certain levels of
resources. As a condition of the funding, CRCs are required
to have plans for
the management of intellectual property.
11.31 The objectives of the CRC program are to enhance:
the contribution of long-term scientific and technological research
and innovation to Australia’s sustainable economic and
social development;
the transfer of research outputs into commercial or other outcomes
of economic, environmental or social benefit to Australia;
the value to Australia of graduate researchers; and
collaboration among researchers, between researchers and industry or
other users, and to improve efficiency in the use of intellectual
focus strongly on commercialisation and technology transfer. In 2001 - 02,
116 patents were filed and 810 maintained, 107
intellectual property licences
were established, 17 spin-off companies created and 31 technology agreements
made, together valuing
close to $13.5
CRCs also aim to
produce future researchers with entrepreneurial, as well as research skills by
encompassing postgraduate training
11.33 As noted above, there is one CRC in the field of human genome
research—the Discovery of Genes for Common Human Diseases
CRC (the Gene
CRC) based in Queensland and Victoria. Participants in the Gene CRC are the
Institute for Molecular Bioscience at the
University of Queensland, the Murdoch
Children’s Research Institute, the Queensland Institute of Medical
Research, the Walter
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, and the
Menzies Centre for Population Health Research, with Cerylid Biosciences Ltd
industry partner. The Gene CRC was established in July 1997 for an initial
period of seven years. The CRC funding for the total
of the grant period is
$13.1 million from a total of $45.6
11.34 The importance of CRCs has been recognised within the biotechnology
industry. For example, the
Australian Biotechnology Report 2001
that Australia’s fundamental research base ‘is now beginning to
deliver products or services, that will provide
financial returns for
reinvestment in Australia. The CRC Program ... spearheads this
To date, CRCs
have undertaken nearly 5,000 contracts for industry and other users, generating
more than $350 million.
ARC linkage programs
11.35 The ARC supports a
variety of collaborative centres and networks, including:
Research Networks;
Centres of Excellence; and
Special Research Centres and Key Centres for Teaching and
11.36 The Centres for Excellence program aims to
‘promote research that will enhance Australia’s future economic,
and cultural well being’ and ‘establish Centres of such
repute in the wider community that they will serve as points
of interaction
among higher education institutions, Governments, industry and the private
sector generally’.
Interaction with industry is not mandatory for grant recipients, and is not
expected within the short to medium term, however it
is considered likely that
the Centres will pursue research with the potential for commercial
development.
The National Stem
Cell Centre is one of the three Centres of Excellence that have been established
11.37 The Research Networks program aims to encourage large-scale collaborative
research across disciplines.
Special Research Centres and Key Centres for Teaching and Learning were
established under older programs, and focus on collaborative
arrangements and building the scale of research
endeavours.
The Special Research
Centres and Key Centres will eventually be replaced by Centres of
Excellence.
11.38 The ARC funds linkage programs to encourage collaboration between publicly
funded research bodies and industry partners. Linkage
program grants are
designed to encourage links between public institutions and researchers and the
private sector. In 2002, a total
of $25.9 million was awarded in the form of 470
linkage program grants, involving 736 industry
Of these, 98 were in
the health and community sector, but it is not possible from the figures to
determine those specifically awarded
for work related to genetics.
NHMRC linkage schemes
11.39 The NHMRC administers
a number of schemes to support research and commercialisation of research. Of
particular relevance to
the biotechnology industry are NHMRC Development Grants.
These seek to boost the commercialisation of biomedical research where there
health and cost benefits for the Australian community and where the project has
commercial potential and is close to marketing
and commercialisation.
Development Grants provide pre-seed funding for one year to enable the
commercialisation of research at the
proof of concept stage. The NHMRC states
that the scheme:
is pitched at the perceived funding gap between the end of a high quality
basic research program and the developments required to
make the project
commercially attractive to potential
11.40 The NHMRC also awards Health Research Partnership Grants to encourage
collaborative research between the public and private
sector. Private sector
partners must contribute at least 50% of the cost of the research, with the
NHMRC making up the balance.
11.41 The NHMRC Strategic Plan for 2000 - 2003 identified the commercial
development of health and medical research as one of its
key strategies in the
‘translation of knowledge for the benefit of the Australian
community’.
It indicated
that the success of the effectiveness of this strategy will be measured by a
number of factors, including:
(ii) Numbers of patents applied for, awarded and licensed based on health
and medical research;
(iii) Amount of private sector money/numbers of seed projects attracted
to institutions for proof of concept or other development
work based on their
(iv) Numbers of Australian start-up companies based on local IP or health
service/health care know-how; ...
(vii) Number and value of research agreements with public and private
sector entities including spin-offs and joint ventures relative
to the total
NHRMC funding.
State government linkage initiatives
11.42 State governments have
established a variety of programs to encourage collaboration between the
research industry sectors. Examples
include the NSW Government’s BioFirst
program and the Queensland Government’s Smart State agenda.
Support for commercialisation of research
11.43 The Industry Research
and Development Board (the IR&D Board), an independent statutory body
administered through AusIndustry,
is responsible for a range of programs that
seek to encourage commercialisation of research. The IR&D Board notes that
to a range of science fields remains an important objective of
and that it
‘has continued to provide high levels of support for small and medium
sized businesses’.
2001 - 2002, SMEs received about $422 million in assistance through the
Board’s programs.
programs most relevant to the human genetics sector are described below.
Biotechnology Innovation Fund
11.44 The Biotechnology
Innovation Fund (BIF) is a competitive grants program running from
2001 - 2004 to increase the rate and level
of commercialisation of
biotechnology developed in Australia and to assist with biotechnology
developments in order to attract private
sector investment. It provides
financial assistance to companies seeking to move from the initial research
stage of a biotechnology
project to the early stage of its commercialisation.
The BIF seeks to assist companies at the proof of concept stage of development.
The fund provides grants of up to 50% of a project cost of
Innovation Investment Fund
11.45 The Innovation
Investment Fund (IIF) seeks to promote the commercialisation of Australian
R&D through the development of
an Australian venture capital market for
early-stage technology companies. It provides venture capital to small companies
with an annual revenue of $4 million or less, averaged over the previous
two years), in sectors including biotechnology. Eligible
companies are those
that are at the seed, start-up or early expansion stages. Funding is provided on
a 2:1 government to private
sector ratio and works through Commonwealth
licensing of nine private sector fund managers. In 2001 - 2002, $34.5
million ($22.2
million from the Commonwealth) was provided to 31 companies, 14
of them in bioscience.
Innovation Report 2003 - 04 suggested that the program has
‘contributed to an increase in the number of early stage venture
funds and the development of IIF fund
R&D Start program
11.46 The R&D Start
program is a competitive, merit-based grants and loans program providing
assistance to firms to undertake
research and development and its
commercialisation. There is some support for biological and medical sciences
projects but the majority
of the funds go to the information technology, applied
sciences and general engineering sectors. In 2002 - 03, 156 new applications
were considered all from SMEs, of which 94 were successful and in total received
$92 million in funding.
Pooled Development Fund program
11.47 The Pooled Development
Fund Program (PDF program) seeks to increase equity capital to SMEs. Established
Pooled Development Fund Act 1992
(Cth), pooled development
funds (PDFs) are private companies that raise funds to take equity capital in
Australian SMEs. The incentive
to do so is a favourable tax rate of 15% for PDFs
and their shareholders on the income generated through PDFs. There were 11 PDFs
registered in 2002.
11.48 Kelvin Hopper and Lyndal Thorburn suggest that ‘the scheme is
clearly only providing a very small amount of early stage
funding for
biotechnology firms’.
Ernst & Young have commented:
Current PDF legislation provides no protection against the potential down
side risk associated with such investments. While an investor
whose investment
increases in value gains access to tax free capital gains and concessionary
taxed income, no mechanism exists for
an investor who makes a loss on their
investment to utilise that loss against another investment. Due to the level of
business risk
associated with the early stages of biotechnology ventures, such
losses are common.
11.49 They recommend the introduction of
‘legislation aimed specifically at the issues faced by investors in the
start-up phase
of biotechnology
companies’.
Discussion of
the merits of this suggestion is outside the terms of reference of the
R&D Tax Concession
11.50 Tax concessions are
available for eligible R&D expenditure. The R&D Tax Concession program
is the principal means by
which the Commonwealth Government encourages R&D
expenditure. Under the program, there is a 175% premium incremental tax
for companies that increase their R&D expenditure above a
three-year average. In addition, there are tax offsets for smaller
companies and
a 125% deduction for assets used in
At August 2003, 4,707
companies had registered for the concession for the 2001 - 02 financial
year, and had reported $6.0 billion
in R&D expenditure.
11.51 The Innovation Report 2003 - 04 stated that preliminary data on the
tax concessions offered under
Backing Australia’s Ability
that these measures were encouraging business investment in R&D. Reported
expenditure for firms with collaborative research
and development arrangements
with Registered Research Agencies and CRCs in 2002 - 03 increased by 28% and
21% respectively from expenditure
in the previous
Preliminary results of a
current independent review of the R&D Tax Concession program support the
conclusion that the program
is encouraging R&D expenditure by
businesses.
State government support
11.52 There is strong
support at the state government level for the development of the biotechnology
industry in Australia. Examples
are found in schemes to attract researchers to
universities within the various States; R&D funding to businesses operating
the States; and grants to set up biotechnology incubator
facilities.
Specific examples
include BioFirst, a $68 million initiative of the NSW Government; the Queensland
Government’s $100 million
sponsorship for the BioCapital venture fund and
Victoria’s $347 million Biotechnology Strategic Development
Support for the pharmaceutical industry
11.53 Several schemes have
operated within the pharmaceutical industry to promote investment in R&D.
The ‘Factor f’
scheme operated for about a decade and, combined with
150% tax deductibility for R&D, led to some increase in investment. The
purpose of the Factor f scheme was to compensate for low prices under the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).
11.54 The Pharmaceuticals Industry Investment Program (PIIP) replaced the Factor
f scheme in July 1999. PIIP is due to expire in
2004. Under the Factor f scheme,
firms could raise prices on selected pharmaceuticals in return for undertaking
R&D and manufacturing
within Australia. Under PIIP, participating companies
are subsidised 20% for production and R&D activity that exceeds a prescribed
base level. The subsidy is only available to the extent that the price of PBS
listed drugs is below those charged by the European
11.55 In 2003, the Productivity Commission conducted an evaluation of PIIP and
concluded that change was warranted, suggesting that
‘the program is
unlikely to generate net
Productivity Commission found that PIIP had had a positive effect on R&D in
the pharmaceutical industry. It said that the
amount of R&D generated by the
program per dollar of subsidy was ‘much higher than have been found for
other R&D incentives
in Australia and
internationally’.
the Productivity Commission suggested that a revised program should be refocused
towards subsidising only R&D and that
eligibility be confined to those firms
with products currently listed on the PBS. The Productivity Commission
acknowledged that this
would leave the domestic biotechnology industry
‘outside the scope of the program’ but stated it ‘would still
through collaborations and other interactions with the pharmaceutical
11.56 A new program was announced in the 2003 federal budget. The
Pharmaceuticals Partnership Program (P3) will commence on 1 July
2004, replacing
PIIP. The new scheme will provide $150 million over five years for a grants
program to encourage new R&D by pharmaceutical
Submissions and consultations
11.57 Comments on funding
received in consultations largely agreed that there is a funding gap between the
research stage and the
development of saleable products that is not well covered
by current funding programs.
one consultation, this stage was referred to as a funding
Benitec Ltd suggested that government funding was problematic as there was too
much nurturing of early stage
The ARC commented
that the Australian Government provides large amounts of funding to support
research commercialisation.
11.58 The South Australian Government commented that limited funding means that
intellectual property developed in publicly funded
research institutions cannot
always be developed to the point where it is useful to the community. However,
it considered it was
a role for industry, rather than government, to fund this
further development.
submission noted that limits on the resources of publicly funded research
institutions may preclude them from filing patent
applications on inventive
research outputs in multiple
11.59 The Department of Health Western Australia made the point that:
public funding supports the many scientific breakthroughs while patent
holders are allowed to acquire monopolies that capitalise on
the newly acquired
knowledge. It is a concern that the commercialisation of publicly funded
research is being embraced as de facto
11.60 Chapter 12 discusses issues relating to patenting of publicly funded
See, eg, Health and Medical Research
Strategic Review Committee,
The Virtuous Cycle: Working Together for Health
and Medical Research
(1998), 144; Commonwealth of Australia,
Australia’s Ability: Real Results, Real Jobs: The Government’s
Innovation Report 2001 - 02
(2002), 3 - 4; Science and Innovation
Mapping Taskforce,
Mapping Australian Science and Innovation
Science and
Innovation Mapping Taskforce,
Mapping Australian Science and Innovation
Health and Medical Research
Strategic Review Committee,
The Virtuous Cycle: Working Together for Health
and Medical Research
Australian Government,
Australia’s Ability: The Australian Government’s Innovation Report
(2003), 24.
Productivity
Commission,
Evaluation of the Pharmaceutical Industry Investment Program
(2003), [1.2].
Biotechnology Australia,
Freehills and Ernst & Young,
Australian Biotechnology Report
Medical Research Strategic Review Committee,
Enabling the Virtuous Cycle:
Implementation Committee Report
Minister for
Education Training and Youth Affairs,
Knowledge and Innovation: A Policy
Statement on Research and Research Training
Biotechnology Australia is a agency
of the Commonwealth Government which is responsible for co-ordinating
non-regulatory biotechnology
issues across
departments.
AusIndustry is the
Commonwealth Government’s business agency within the Department of
Industry, Tourism and Resources. It seeks
to foster investment through a program
of tax and duty concessions, grants, and access to venture
Biotechnology Australia,
Freehills and Ernst & Young,
Australian Biotechnology Report
Health and Medical Research
Strategic Review Committee,
The Virtuous Cycle: Working Together for Health
and Medical Research
Minister for Education Training
and Youth Affairs,
Knowledge and Innovation: A Policy Statement on Research
and Research Training
Australian Science Capability
The Chance to Change
Innovation Summit
Implementation Group,
Innovation: Unlocking the Future
Commonwealth of Australia,
Backing Australia’s Ability: An Innovation Action Plan for the
Minister for Science,
‘2004 CRC Selection Round Announced’,
Media Release
December 2003,
<www.dest.gov.au/ministers/mcg/media.asp>.
Health and Medical Research Council,
Description of Types of Research Grants
for Funding Commencing in 2005
Australian Research Council,
Annual Report 2001 - 02
Science and Innovation Mapping
Mapping Australian Science and Innovation
Department of Education Science
and Training, ‘Major National Research Facilities Programme’,
, 15 December 2003,
<www.dest.gov.au/MNRF>.
for Education Science and Training, ‘Bringing Business and Universities
Closer Together’,
Media Release
, 13 May 2003,
<www.dest.gov.au/ministers/nelson/media.asp>.
and Innovation Mapping Taskforce,
Mapping Australian Science and
(2003), 257.
of Education Science and Training,
CRC Compendium
Department of Education Science
and Training,
Frequently Asked Questions about CRCs
<www.crc.gov.au/faq.htm> at 14 April
Department of Education Science
and Training,
CRC Compendium
Science and Innovation Mapping
Mapping Australian Science and Innovation
Department of Education Science
and Training,
CRC Compendium
Biotechnology Australia, Freehills
and Ernst & Young,
Australian Biotechnology Report
Australian Government,
Australia’s Ability: The Australian Government’s Innovation Report
Australian Research Council,
ARC Centres of Excellence
<www.arc.gov.au/grant_programs/centre_excellence.htm> at 12 December
Science and Innovation Mapping
Mapping Australian Science and Innovation
Australian Research Council,
ARC Research Networks
<www.arc.gov.au/grant_programs/centres_networks/research_networks.htm> at
12 December 2003.
Australian Research
Centres & Networks
<www.arc.gov.au/grant_programs/centres_networks/default.htm> at 12
December 2003.
Science and Innovation
Mapping Taskforce,
Mapping Australian Science and Innovation
Australian Research Council,
Annual Report 2001 - 02
Health and Medical Research Council,
Description of Types of Research Grants
for Funding Commencing in 2004
National Health and Medical Research
Strategic Plan 2000 - 03
AusIndustry,
Industry Research
and Development Board Annual Report 2001-02
AusIndustry, ‘Biotechnology
Innovation Fund’,
, 26 March 2003,
<www.ausindustry.gov.au>.
AusIndustry,
Industry Research and Development Board Annual Report 2001-02
Australian Government,
Australia’s Ability: The Australian Government’s Innovation Report
(2003), 66.
K Hopper and L Thorburn,
Bioindustry Review: Australia & New Zealand
Ernst & Young, Committee for
Melbourne and BioMelbourne Network,
Growing Our Knowledge Economy: Proposals
for Further Reform
AusIndustry,
Research and Development Board Annual Report 2001-02
Australian Government,
Backing Australia’s Ability: The Australian Government’s
Innovation Report 2003 - 04
See K Hopper and L
2002 Bioindustry Review: Australia & New Zealand
See Science and Innovation
Mapping Taskforce,
Mapping Australian Science and Innovation
Productivity Commission,
Evaluation of the Pharmaceutical Industry Investment Program
Treasurer of the Commonwealth of
Australia and Minister for Finance and Administration,
2003 - 04 Budget
Paper No 2: Budget Measures 2003 - 04
Consultation
Brisbane, 3 October 2003; Western Australian Department of Health and others
(legal issues),
Consultation
, Perth, 17 September 2003; Queensland
Biotechnology Advisory Council,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 2 October 2003;
Medical Researchers,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 15 September 2003;
Australian Research Council,
Consultation
, Canberra, 22 September
Queensland Biotechnology Advisory
Consultation
, Brisbane, 2 October
Benitec Ltd,
Consultation
Brisbane, 3 October 2003.
Research Council,
Consultation
, Canberra, 22 September
South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Confidential Submission P54
, 3 November
of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November 2003.
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
12. Publicly Funded Research and Intellectual Property
Introduction
Public funding of research
Public benefit from research funding
Institutional benefit
Intellectual property ownership
Current law and practice
Students and visitors
Institutional intellectual property policies
Collaborative research
Jointly funded research
Intellectual property and public funding
National Principles
NHMRC Interim Guidelines
Issues and concerns
Exploitation of intellectual property in the public interest
Effective commercialisation
Lack of clear guidance on ownership
Submissions and consultations
Options for reform
Ownership and access models
Expanding the National Principles
'No Australian disadvantage'
ALRC's views
March-in rights
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Government contracted research
ALRC's views
12. Publicly Funded Research and Intellectual Property
Introduction
The Terms of Reference direct the ALRC to examine the impact of current patenting
laws and practices on the subsequent application
and commercialisation of research
into genes and genetic and related technologies. In doing so, the ALRC is to consider
that may encourage the creation and use of intellectual property to further
the health and economic benefits of genetic research.
12.2 This chapter examines the relationship between public funding of research
and intellectual property ownership. The majority
of human health related biotechnology
research conducted in Australia is funded by the Australian government and occurs
public research institutions and universities. As a general rule, the government
and its public funding agencies do not claim
intellectual property rights over
the results of the research they fund. This chapter considers the effectiveness
of this approach
in promoting research commercialisation to generate returns
on government investment in research and in producing health care
products and
services for the Australian population. It examines a variety of approaches
taken in other jurisdictions and a
number of reform options.
Public funding of research
12.3 The Australian government
provides public funding of medical and scientific research with the broad aim
of promoting the national
interest. Within this aim, there are a number of more
defined objectives:
promoting research;
improving healthcare; and
stimulating economic growth.
12.4 This policy is also reflected in guidelines for intellectual property
management released by the Australian Research Council
(ARC) and the National
Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC)
For example, the NHMRC indicated
a number of reasons why the protection
and commercial exploitation of research provides important public benefits:
The rapid development of science and technology, especially the emergence
of modern biotechnology, provides Australia with an unprecedented
opportunity
to use its strong position in health and medical research to build knowledge-based
industries that can compete
in the global knowledge economy. Commercial exploitation
of research findings benefits the economy through employment growth and
wealth generation, as well as being an essential step in the delivery of new
drugs or health treatments to the community.
It also presents new challenges
for the research community to participate in the cultural change that is needed
to position
Australia to capture the benefits from the generation and diffusion
of knowledge and technology.
Promoting research
12.5 The Australian government provides funding for research
through various agencies, principally the ARC and the NHMRC, with the
of supporting research activities within universities and research institutions.
Such funding enables researchers to
purchase equipment and resources and may provide
financial support for researchers to devote time to pursuing a particular project.
12.6 The outcome of this research may be placed directly in the public domain
or may be the basis for the commercial development
of new products. Promoting
research is also a means of increasing the population of skilled researchers
in Australia. It may
contribute to the creation of a critical mass of researchers
in a particular area, which may aid Australia in becoming well recognised
a field of research and consequently attract researchers from other countries.
Improving healthcare
12.7 Funding research into genetics and biotechnology
allows researchers to investigate the causes of disease and promotes the development
of new or improved treatments and tests. Such research may improve the options
available to the medical profession for identifying
and treating disease. For
example, the development of a genetic test to establish a predisposition to an
inherited condition may
enable doctors to identify at-risk patients earlier. This
may enable preventative measures to be taken earlier and to greater effect,
it may provide patients with greater knowledge about their condition and the choices
available to them. Most publicly funded
research is upstream research and further
development may be needed to turn the outcomes of this research into downstream
The public benefits from improved healthcare through reduced mortality
and illness when new treatments and therapies are developed.
Stimulating economic growth
12.8 Public investment in research is a means by which
the government can foster the development of a strong research base needed
a knowledge-based economy. It is recognised that developing such an economic structure
is crucial for Australia’s continuing
economic growth. For example, it has
been estimated that encouraging commercial development of research results has
the potential
to generate between 10,000 and 15,000 new jobs in Australia over
five years.
12.9 As noted above, it is government policy to promote the commercialisation
of publicly funded research.
Encouraging effective
commercial development of research stimulates growth by creating products and
product ideas. These might
be manufactured and sold by Australian companies,
creating employment and helping to develop the Australian manufacturing sector.
If these products are marketed overseas, this may increase the export of Australian
products. Alternatively, research results
may be commercially developed to the
stage where licensing agreements can be made with overseas companies to develop
the product
to market-ready stage. This generates income for Australian institutions
holding intellectual property in the form of licensing
fees and royalties. The
financial returns from such agreements may be put back into research and development
to support the
Australian biotechnology research sector and industry further.
Public benefit from research funding
12.10 Few people would dispute
that if public money is used to fund research, benefit from this research should
flow back to the
community in some form. IP 27 raised the issue of how best to
ensure that the benefits of publicly funded research are realised.
One issue is the tension between freely sharing the results of publicly funded
research and commercialisation of this research.
There are arguments that the
results of such research, because it has been supported with public funds, should
also be publicly
available. Exclusive control of new technology, such as through
patent protection, may prevent others from freely using it.
12.11 However, the public benefits of such research may sometimes be realised
more effectively through attracting investment for
commercial development to
take research through to the product stage. This chapter considers where the
intellectual property
rights should vest to ensure the public benefits from
the research it helps to fund. This involves considering which organisation
will most effectively realise these benefits.
Institutional benefit
12.12 Research institutions
can benefit from holding intellectual property by exploiting it to generate financial
returns that can
be used for further research and to support the institution.
They are able to do this by:
establishing spin-off companies linked to the institution that develop and
market products created from technology patented by
the institution; and
licensing patented technology to industry and other research institutions
in return for licence and royalty payments or transfer
agreements.
12.13 The Garvan Institute of Medical Research (Garvan Institute) in Sydney,
is an example of an institution realising such benefits.
The Garvan Institute
is an autonomous, not-for-profit medical research institute with strengths in
gene-based research. In
2002, the Garvan Institute’s commercial relationships—which
include licensing agreements, spin-off companies and research
collaborations
with biotechnology companies—generated $2.5 million, which it used for
its operations and growth.
Intellectual property ownership
12.14 Where research is carried
out in an organisation such as a university, hospital, or other government research
organisation,
normally the employer would be entitled to claim ownership of any
intellectual property rights arising out of the research of its
staff. This is
a general principle of the common law and may also be found in relevant statutes,
policies and employment agreements.
However, where the research has been funded
from outside the institution, such as by the NHMRC or the ARC, a question could
as to whether such bodies should have rights to any resulting intellectual
Current law and practice
12.15 Publicly funded research
institutions are entitled to apply for a patent over an invention created by researchers
in the course
of employment pursuant to
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act
). Relevantly, the section provides that:
a patent for an invention may only be granted to a person who:
(a) is the inventor; or
(b) would, on the grant of a patent for the invention, be entitled
to have the patent assigned to the person; or
(c) derives title to the invention from the inventor or a person mentioned
in paragraph (b).
12.16 Although the
Patents Act
does not explicitly address an employer’s
rights to inventions created by employees during employment,
is generally
relied upon by an employer to claim proprietary rights over an invention by virtue
of its employment of the inventor,
or by virtue of the terms of an employment
12.17 The terms of the employment contract may include an explicit agreement
to assign rights to an invention to the employer,
allowing the employer to apply
for a patent under
s 15(1)(b).
Where there
is no explicit agreement to assign, the court may imply such an agreement into
a contract of employment. According
to Professors Jill McKeough and Andrew Stewart:
the courts have basically tended to favour employer ownership. Any
invention will impliedly belong to the employer, so long as
it is arrived at
in the course of the duties the employee is engaged to perform.
12.18 The nature of the employment and the duties it encompasses will therefore
be determinative of whether an employer may assert
rights to an invention created
by the employee in the absence of an explicit assignment. Factors relevant to
determining the nature
of the employment include the business of the employer,
the level of trust and responsibility of the employee and whether the resources,
trade secrets, know-how or technology of the employer were used.
12.19 Where the employer is a publicly funded research institution, and the
employee is an academic staff member (in the case
of a university) or an employed
researcher (the researcher), the institution’s claim to ownership of inventions
by the researcher will be determined by the nature and scope of the
employment and the terms of the employment contract. The employer’s
may also be altered by institutional statutes and policies.
12.20 According to a report released by the Department of Education, Science
and Technology (DEST Report), universities may claim
ownership of:
inventions created using university resources;
inventions created by academic staff in the course of their employment;
inventions created through publicly-funded research received as part of
an agreement with a government funding agency.
12.21 However, the institution’s right to assignment of any resulting
patent may be limited in two ways. First, where the
express agreement in the
employment contract is considered a restraint of trade, the agreement may be
deemed unreasonable and
unenforceable.
Second, in the absence of express agreement, or where the agreement is unenforceable,
an agreement may not be implied if the
researcher was not employed to invent
in the specific field in which the invention falls, and the invention was not
during the hours of employment or using the institution’s resources.
12.22 In some instances, it may be difficult to determine which inventive
activities fall within the scope of the researcher’s
employment. Associate
Professor Anne Monotti and Professor Sam Ricketson note that:
any right of a university employer to claim ownership of IP that its
academic staff create during the term of employment is ...
dependent not only
upon establishing the employment relationship but also upon the particular work
being within the scope of
the creator’s duties of employment. As the scope
of those duties is often unclear, resolution of this issue is equally so,
particularly
where creation occurs at home, at nights and weekend, and with or without use
of university or third party resources.
12.23 Monotti and Ricketson indicate that the situation is further complicated
different research positions within institutions will have different duties
attached to them, including teaching, curriculum
development and leadership
within research groups;
a researcher will tend to move between institutions over the course of a
career, and will enter each new position possessing
knowledge and, in some
cases, intellectual property from previous positions;
a researcher may spend part of his or her time working in start-up companies,
in collaborative research projects and centres,
public teaching hospitals
and other institutions; and
a researcher may undertake research during leave or while on exchange to
another institution.
Students and visitors
12.24 A research institution’s
rights to inventions created by students and visitors are somewhat different to
the general
12.25 As the relationship between a student and a research institution is
not one of employment, the institution may not imply
a right to ownership of
inventions created by the student during the course of their education in the
same manner as for academic
staff. The relationship between the research institution
and a student is in part based in contract,
but may also be a public law relationship if the research institution is established
by statute.
While the student is bound
by the institute’s statutes, by-laws and regulations, he or she will not
be automatically
bound by non-legislative policies and resolutions.
A student may, however, agree to be bound and thereby agree to assign ownership
of intellectual property to the institution.
12.26 Students funded through government scholarship schemes, such as the
Australian Postgraduate Awards (APAs), may also be subject
to conditions on
the award including that the institution administering the scholarship controls
the grant and any research
results arising from it. As the institution is required
to adhere to its own intellectual property policy, which will generally
that the research is exploited for the public benefit, the institution will
exercise a degree of control over the intellectual
property that results from
the student’s research.
12.27 Visitors to research institutions include researchers on exchange from
other institutions, and honorary or salaried appointees.
The research institution’s
rights in relation to intellectual property created by a visitor will depend
on the nature
of the appointment.
12.28 A 1999 survey by the ARC of university research commercialisation in
Australia (ARC Survey) found that all respondent universities
had intellectual
property policies in place for staff, and most also had policies for postgraduate
students. However, fewer
had policies covering undergraduate students and university
Institutional intellectual property policies
12.29 As indicated above, publicly
funded research institutes generally address intellectual property ownership issues
through institutional
statutes and policies. Institutions vary in their practices
as to whether they will claim ownership of intellectual property generated
staff or within the university. Typically they will seek to claim ownership.
12.30 An example is the University of Adelaide, which released its intellectual
property policy in December 1989. The policy states
The University asserts common law ownership, either whole or partial,
of all intellectual property arising from the work within
its departments, institutes,
centres or research groups. In most cases the University will agree to share
the benefits derived
from the commercial applications of intellectual property
with the originator(s)/inventor(s), as defined in paragraph 8. However,
it reserves
its common law right of ownership as defined in paragraphs 4.3 to 4.9 inclusive
and will assert this right in the
event of dispute.
12.31 In addition, the policy also states that the University encourages publication
and the wide dissemination of research, however
it asserts that:
Where such creativity or research leads to invention the university
seeks to encourage and facilitate commercial development for
the benefit of
the university, the inventor(s) and government, commercial or other partners.
In such circumstances the University
may request and where appropriate require
a delay of publication while the potential for patenting and commercial development
is explored.
12.32 In some Australian research institutions that retain intellectual property
rights, where the institution does not wish to
develop these to commercial stage,
it may choose to assign these rights to the researcher. The researcher may then
choose to develop
the invention.
12.33 Alternatively, and more rarely, some institutions allow researchers
to retain intellectual property rights in their research
results. In these cases,
the institution may foster commercialisation by supporting individual researchers
through the commercialisation
process. An example of this is the University
of Melbourne, which allows academic staff who create intellectual property through
research undertaken at the University to retain ownership of that intellectual
property, instead of it being assigned automatically
to the University.
University staff holding such intellectual property are required to disclose
this to the University and must undertake to:
use all reasonable endeavours to engage in any commercial exploitation
in such a manner that any application of the intellectual
property is for the
benefit of Australia.
12.34 The University supports researchers in exploiting these intellectual property
rights through the Melbourne Research and Innovation
Office of the University.
Collaborative research
12.35 A growing feature of
biotechnology (and other) research in Australia is collaborative arrangements
between institutions or
between institutions and industry. These collaborations
may take a broad range of forms, from informal sharing of knowledge to highly
formalised collaborative arrangements. Collaboration may also involve staff, students
or visitors from a number of institutions,
funding bodies, government agencies
and commercial entities in a variety of combinations. Such collaborations raise
issues around
intellectual property ownership.
12.36 In the absence of clear agreement on the terms of the collaboration,
ownership of resulting intellectual property will be
determined by legislation
and common law principles.
allows for co-ownership of patents.
Section 16(1)
provides that:
subject to any agreement to the contrary, where there are 2 or more
(a) each of them is entitled to an equal undivided share in the patent;
(b) each of them is entitled to exercise the exclusive rights given
by the patent for his or her benefit without accounting to
the others; and
(c) none of them can grant a licence under the patent, or assign an
interest in it, without the consent of the others.
12.37 Some research institutions have included provisions to address collaborative
research in their intellectual property policies
and statutes. For example, James
Cook University’s policy for commercial research and consultancy services
states that:
Rights to intellectual property arising from collaborative research
and development projects is negotiated on a case by case basis
and depends on:
the equity contributions of the parties;
the existing intellectual property brought to the project by each party;
the capacity of the collaborator to commercialise project intellectual
property and to otherwise utilise research outcomes.
Joint ownership of intellectual property is a typical outcome, especially
where the collaborator is another research institution.
However joint ownership
must always be subject to terms that clearly set out the capacity of the joint
owners to use and
commercially exploit project intellectual property. Without
such terms the University may be disadvantaged by the rights accorded
owners under legislation.
12.38 However, regardless, of the policies of an institution, rights arising
out of a particular collaboration will be
determined by the contractual arrangements
between the parties to the arrangement.
12.39 Much collaborative research in Australia also occurs within Cooperative
Research Centres (CRCs). The model agreement for
the establishment of a CRC
provides that intellectual property generated through the research, training
and commercialisation
activities of the CRC shall be owned by the parties to
the CRC agreement ‘as tenants in common in proportion to their Participating
Research institution policies
may also provide that such agreements will override their own internal policies
for intellectual
property ownership.
Jointly funded research
12.40 Questions of intellectual
property ownership may also be complex where research is funded collaboratively
by a number of bodies,
as each body may have different policies regarding the
ownership of research results.
This may be
particularly problematic where research is funded partially from overseas bodies.
For example, the
National Health and Medical Research Council Act 1992
requires that intellectual property generated through NHMRC-funded research is
vested in an Australian institution, however
this may conflict with the requirements
of other bodies that also provide funding.
Intellectual property and public funding
12.41 As indicated above,
most health-related research in Australia is publicly funded. This raises issues
funding body in decisions about the commercialisation of
any resulting research.
12.42 Management and exploitation of intellectual property resulting from
publicly funded research is governed by guidelines and
principles released by
the ARC and the NHMRC. Each emphasises that institutions should seek to commercialise
intellectual property
for the public benefit where appropriate and addresses
issues of identification and protection of intellectual property and issues
of management.
12.43 In 2001, the then Minister for Education, Training and Youth Affairs
and the Minister for Health released the
National Principles of Intellectual
Property Management for Publicly Funded Research
National Principles
The decision to create the principles came as a result of the Australian Government’s
policy to reinforce research
investment and commercialisation.
12.44 The Principles were developed by a working party comprising representatives
from a number of key government organisations
involved with, or with an interest
in the outcomes from, publicly funded research.
The NHMRC also released its own intellectual property management guidelines
in 2001, the
Interim Guidelines: Intellectual Property Management for Health
and Medical Research
Interim Guidelines
), which largely mirror the
content of the
National Principles.
National Principles
state that public funding bodies should
have clear policies about whether they will claim ownership or associated rights
intellectual property generated from research supported by their funding.
A requirement for compliance with the
National Principles
is often included
in the ARC funding rules and agreements for particular grant programs. For example,
the ARC funding rules
for Discovery Projects require that:
Applicants must agree to comply with the intellectual property regulations
of the administering organisation and with the National
Principles of Intellectual
Property Management for Publicly Funded Research.
12.46 Neither the ARC nor the NHMRC assert rights to the ownership of intellectual
property arising out of their funding.
National Principles
The ARC and NHMRC do not wish to hold a stake in direct ownership
of IP nor do they intend to benefit directly from commercial
outcomes of the
research they fund through their financial support.
National Principles
National Principles
require institutions receiving funding to have procedures and policies to:
support researchers in recognising discoveries that may have commercial
value and provide for a review process to identify intellectual
property that
can be protected and exploited;
clarify staff responsibilities in relation to intellectual property, including
the prevention of premature public disclosure
of research results prior to
obtaining intellectual property protection;
outline whether they will claim any ownership or associated rights to intellectual
property from publicly funded research (including
research conducted by postgraduate
guide researchers in assessing the existing intellectual property that may
affect their freedom to operate in their field of
review intellectual property and associated commercial activities and outcomes;
recognise the rights and needs of all stakeholders involved in the research
and define the way in which benefits from the development
and exploitation
of the intellectual property will be allocated;
provide guidance in relation to potential conflicts of interest concerning
ownership, management, protection and exploitation
of intellectual property.
12.48 The Principles also state that institutions and, where appropriate, individual
researchers,
‘are expected to consider
the most appropriate way of exploiting the IP generated from publicly funded
The Principles indicate
that the options range from exclusive and non-exclusive licences, research agreements
or contracts,
through to joint ventures or the establishment of spin-off companies.
12.49 Institutions are also required to be in a position to report on their
intellectual property management.
the ARC does not currently take action to ensure that the results of ARC funded
research are commercialised. It also
does not require universities and research
institutions receiving ARC funding to comply with any national interest policy.
However, it does track the research projects it funds and conducts surveys with
the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organisation and the NHMRC
to see how many produce patents and commercial outcomes such as spin-off companies.
12.50 The expert advisory committees of the ARC also do not take account of
the commercialisation prospects of a project in granting
funds; the criterion
is excellence in research. However, grant applications must state the national
benefit of the project.
Patenting and commercialisation prospects are accepted
as part of the national benefit assessment.
Some grants are self-selecting for commercialisation prospects, such as linkage
grants, which require the applicant researcher
to have an industry partner.
Applications for such grants tend to be for research with an applied outcome,
and the ARC will
not fund them until there is a contract governing the intellectual
property with an industry partner (in accordance with the
National Principles
NHMRC Interim Guidelines
12.51 The requirements outlined
in the NHMRC’s
Interim Guidelines
are included within its grant application
and approval process. The Guidelines note that ‘commercial development,
patent registration will be considered along with other measures for
grant report and review’.
The Guidelines
state that, of various intellectual property rights:
that which has the greatest potential for a positive economic outcome
is patent, with some ‘blockbuster’ drugs and
developments having
multi-million sales. Specific tools, such as antibodies, probes, cell lines
etc that are generated in the
course of some research programs are an area of
additional importance and potential value. Patents and ‘materials transfer
agreements’ can be used to protect these ‘tools’.
12.52 The Guidelines also indicate the reasons for the promotion of commercialisation
of intellectual property:
IP per se is of little economic value unless it is protected and exploited;
it is the rights that are attached to it that are valuable.
In the case of patents
this is the exclusive right to exploit the invention, or authorise others to
exploit it; for a fixed
term; in the case of copyright it is the exclusive right
[among others] ‘...to reproduce the work in a material form’,
for a fixed term. These temporary exclusive rights reward investment in research
and innovation and can prevent others
‘freeriding’ on a creator’s
investment. Although there are established academic rights associated with the
generation and ownership of IP in most institutions, it is the commercial exploitation
of IP that has the major consequences
for national, institutional and individual
wealth creation.
12.53 The Guidelines note that the NHMRC recognises its responsibility for ‘setting
an environment that assists the development
of research findings to the national
advantage, and in ensuring that NHMRC supported researchers are vigilant that
they do not
inadvertently, or through inaction, lose potentially valuable IP’.
12.54 The provisions of the Guidelines largely mirror those of the
. The Guidelines direct institutions to have policies for the
identification, protection and exploitation of intellectual property.
As noted above, the Guidelines state that the NHMRC ‘will not claim any
ownership or associated rights for IP generated
from its research support’
however institutions are required to report intellectual property outcomes to
the NHMRC, including
information about:
newly generated intellectual property, and its status;
the status of existing registered intellectual property; and
commercialisation and income generation from the exploitation of intellectual
12.55 However, the Guidelines do not stipulate how research results are to
be commercialised nor what constitutes appropriate commercialisation:
Individual researchers and their administering institutions are expected
to consider the most appropriate way of exploiting their
IP rights. It is acknowledged
that there is no single ‘best approach’ to developing IP, and each
instance has to
be developed on a case by case basis. Options for consideration
may range from exclusive and non-exclusive licenses, research
agreements or
contracts through to joint ventures or the establishment of spin-off companies.
Issues and concerns
12.56 A range of issues arises
from the current allocation of intellectual property rights in publicly funded
research. These centre
on whether this allocation promotes the major objectives
of health and medical research funding, which is to generate health care
and economic
benefits for the Australian population.
12.57 In its 2003 report on patenting and licensing at public research organisations,
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) noted that
governments are increasingly recognising that ‘placing the outputs of
publicly funded
research in the public domain is not sufficient to generate
social and economic benefits from research’.
John Grace, former chief executive of Australian biotechnology company Amrad,
has made a similar point, that if the benefits
of research are to flow to the
community, they must be patented to enable commercialisation.
If a researcher is doing something really clever that might lead to
a new drug, the only way that benefit will get to the community
will be through
the commercial activities of the company in developing it. And no company in
the world will develop a drug
without a patent. So ... if you are a researcher
that really wants to benefit mankind through a discovery, via some treatment,
then a patent is not only essential, it is legitimate.
12.58 However, a concern raised by some researchers is that if an institution
exploits its intellectual property and makes a financial
gain, public funding
for that research will be reduced.
have suggested that shifting focus towards commercialisation of publicly funded
research will direct research efforts away
from some less lucrative fields. Some
researchers are concerned they must favour work areas that will yield patentable
discoveries
that can be commercialised because they are expected to exploit intellectual
property to fund further research.
Exploitation of intellectual property in the public interest
12.59 There may be concerns
that leaving the exploitation of research results to institutions will not ensure
they are effectively
translated into community benefits. This concern results
in part from the absence of any requirement for institutions receiving
funding to exploit any resulting intellectual property in a way that benefits
the national interest. As discussed above,
for the most part, public funding bodies
in Australia take a hands-off approach to the commercial development of research
and do not direct how those results should be exploited.
12.60 Allowing research institutions to hold intellectual property in the
results of publicly funded research may limit access
by other researchers and
developers to these results. Given that these results have been generated using
public money, there
may be some need to ensure that in return benefits flow
12.61 There may also be a tension between what might be perceived as institutional
benefit and national benefit. In deciding how
to develop its intellectual property,
a university may be confronted with a choice between maximising its own financial
and maximising the benefits that may flow to the Australian community
in the form of jobs, wealth and health care.
12.62 An institution holding valuable intellectual property might maximise
its own income through licensing agreements with larger
companies, which will
often be international firms. Depending on the terms of the licensing agreement
and the level of royalties
that flow back, this might bring initial financial
returns, however the overseas company will reap the downstream profits of developing
the research results into a marketable product. Conversely, the establishment
of local spin-off companies to develop and market
the technology locally, if
successful, might better promote Australian interests. In the long term, this
approach may also
improve the institution’s return on its initial investment.
12.63 The ARC has suggested that this tension results from the lack of industry
receptors in Australia, which causes institutions
and other patent holders to
license their technologies to larger, international companies with the capacity
to develop the
technology into a commercial product.
Effective commercialisation
12.64 Another concern raised
by allowing ownership of gene patents to vest in research institutions is whether
they have the capacity
to exploit patents on publicly funded research effectively.
If patents are not properly exploited, the research may not be translated
public healthcare benefits.
12.65 This may occur for a number of reasons. The research institution may
fail to transfer the technology to a commercial partner
for development into
a usable product, such as a test or therapy, if the institution does not prioritise
commercialisation
or lacks the skills needed for effective commercial negotiations.
Alternatively, the institution may attempt to develop the technology
the creation of a spin-off company. If the attempt is unsuccessful, the patent
may pass to another organisation, such
as a private company. These concerns
are discussed further in Chapter 18.
Lack of clear guidance on ownership
12.66 Genetic research undertaken
by students or visitors may raise concerns about the ownership of resulting gene
patents due to
the complex relationship between the institution and students or
visitors. Issues about clear ownership may arise in the absence
of policies determining
which party will own any resulting intellectual property.
12.67 Difficulties in determining ownership may also arise where research
is conducted jointly by researchers at a number of institutions.
as discussed above, disputes about ownership may occur where research has been
jointly funded and each funding body
has differing policies about ownership.
As noted in Chapter 18, joint ownership across institutions or other bodies
a barrier to commercialisation, as industry partners are generally
unwilling to invest in developing intellectual property where
negotiation with
multiple parties will be necessary.
Submissions and consultations
12.68 Comments received in
a number of submissions suggested that realising public benefit from publicly
funded genetic research
was an important issue in patent law reform, with some
submissions maintaining that such benefits should return to the community.
In particular, the NHMRC commented that:
there is some expectation in the community of return to the ‘public
purse’ from financial benefits acquired by private
organisations from
the commercialisation of NHMRC funded research. Similarly it has been suggested
that public institutions
that are able to realise financial benefits from the
commercialisation of NHMRC funded research should be required to use a certain
percentage of the money for further health or medical research in their institution.
12.69 The Human Genetics Society of Australasia (HGSA) suggested that:
gene patents arising from publicly funded projects should have exemptions
in regard to further research in human health. Such research
should help provide
cost effective health care in Australia.
12.70 Del Weston commented:
Genetic technology is the ultimate example of a sophisticated technology
in health provision, which concentrates power in the hands
of fewer expert elites.
Patenting of the basis of this technology will further take it out of the realm
of public direction
and governance. This is, amongst other consequences, a community
health issue.
12.71 Dr Graeme Suthers raised the concern that ‘if gene patents are awarded
to public-sector institutions, then there is
a potential conflict of interest
between the public basis of funding used to identify the gene involved and the
public interest
in having the gene freely accessible to all’.
12.72 Some submissions supported allowing researchers, rather than institutions,
to hold rights to intellectual property in publicly
funded genetic research,
to provide greater incentives for commercialisation.
12.73 To address some of the problems of inadequate commercialisation and
ensuring the public benefits from research, some submissions
advocated greater
involvement of either funding bodies or government. For example, the Australian
Centre for Intellectual Property
in Agriculture (ACIPA) supported allowing public
funding bodies to take a more active role in managing intellectual property
for the public good:
Arguably, though, there is need for greater government regulations
on intellectual property management in respect of collaborations
between the
private sector and the public sector ... Australian funding agencies should
follow the lead of the National Institutes
of Health, and the United Kingdom
Department of Health, and play a much more active role in intellectual property
management,
policy, and litigation.
It is recommended that Australian funding agencies—such as the
Australian Research Council and the National Medical and Research
Council—play
an active role in intellectual property management, policy and litigation in
the field of the life sciences.
12.74 Some suggested measures were the imposition of conditions for access to,
and exploitation of, patented genetic technologies
or prohibitions on exclusive
Support was also expressed for
the introduction of guidelines similar to those introduced by the United States
National Institutes
of Health (NIH) to ensure wide dissemination of genetic research
The NHMRC suggested that:
it may be appropriate for the NHMRC to review its current IP policy
and to consider the need for any changes to the conditions
included in deeds
of agreement. Consideration could, at this time, be given to the advantages
and disadvantages of providing
for some return to the ‘public purse’
or enabling the Commonwealth to have some sort of first right of refusal on
commercialisation opportunities arising from publicly funded research.
Options for reform
12.75 Given that the public
funding of research raises issues about the best ways to ensure public benefit,
there are a range of
possible options for reform. Some address the wide dissemination
of research results; others consider issues around intellectual
property identification,
ownership and management as a means of ensuring effective commercialisation, in
those circumstances where
commercialisation is appropriate.
Ownership and access models
12.76 One approach could be
to require all research results generated with public funding to be placed into
the public domain, precluding
anyone from claiming intellectual property rights
in the results and excluding the ability to patent them. This approach has the
advantage of making research results freely available for other researchers to
use and build on.
12.77 A variation of this approach is taken internationally by the SNP Consortium
(known as TSC). The TSC takes out patents over
the single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNP) that the project identifies but subsequently releases the details of each
public domain. The TSC does not plan to enforce the patents except
to prevent others from patenting the same information.
The TSC’s stated intellectual property objective is to ensure the SNP
map it produces is ‘free of third-party encumbrances
such that the map
can be used by all without financial or other IP obligations’.
12.78 However, freely available information may not always be the most appropriate
means of promoting the development of research
results into health care products
and services. Inventions that are not protected by a patent may not be further
into health care products. Without the incentive of a limited monopoly
to allow costs to be recouped, it is unlikely that a biotechnology
company will
make the significant investment in developing an invention to product stage.
12.79 For these reasons, various ownership approaches may be suitable depending
on the nature of the technology and its uses.
For example, free access may be
more appropriate for foundational technology such as genetic sequence information,
while patent
protection may be necessary for downstream research results to
promote investment in commercial development. As Professor Rebecca
has argued:
Neither the old-fashioned idea of leaving all new discoveries in the
public domain nor the newer idea of assigning exclusive rights
in such discoveries
to private parties should be uniformly applied across the entire range of publicly-supported
discoveries.
12.80 Property rights could vest in one of a range of individuals and organisations
involved in funding and producing research.
Intellectual property rights to publicly
funded research results could be vested in:
the government;
the body that provided funding for the research that led to the invention’s
the researcher; or
the institution, initially, but subsequently vested in the funding body
or government if the commercial potential of the invention
is not developed
within a reasonable time period.
12.81 In its 2003 report, the OECD asserted that for governments, granting
public research organisations rights to intellectual
property generated with
public funds
can lead to better use of research results that might otherwise remain
unexploited as well as to the creation of academic spin-offs
or start-ups that
create employment. For PROs [public research organisations] the benefits may
include increased licensing
and royalty revenues, more contract research and
greater cross-fertilisation between entrepreneurial faculty and industry. Equally
important, however, are the intangible benefits to an institution’s reputation
and to the quality of its research that
closer interaction with the private
sector can generate.
12.82 The ARC has indicated that to date it has left commercial development to
institutions and that intervention in commercialisation
has not been its practice
or that of the government.
However, when there is real problem requiring a real solution then
a top down approach may offer the most effective approach to
bring about a significant
change in the culture of Australia towards the commercialisation of university
12.83 In a report in 2000, the ARC raised the issue of granting university researchers,
rather than the institution, a licence to
exploit the results of publicly funded
research as a condition of the award of a grant. Such an approach would create
incentives for researchers to identify and develop the commercial potential
of their research.
This approach is sometimes
known as the Cambridge model, as it is Cambridge University policy to assign rights
to university researchers
in this way.
12.84 The strength of the approach lies in its potential to stimulate a more
entrepreneurial attitude to research among researchers,
which may focus early
research efforts on areas of study that may lead to commercially profitable
products. However, placing
the onus to exploit intellectual property onto researchers
may be problematic where they lack the financial capacity to take their
results through to the commercialisation stage. University researchers also
may not possess the business and legal
expertise required for successful commercial
negotiations.
12.85 The ARC has suggested that these problems could be overcome if universities
and research institutions provide appropriate
support to researchers.
This support might extend only to an advisory service, or more hand-ons involvement
in the commercialisation process.
12.86 The OECD Report supported ownership by institutions rather than vesting
rights in individuals because it provides:
greater legal certainty for firms interested in exploiting research
results, lowers transaction costs for partners and encourages
more formal and
efficient channels for knowledge and technology transfer.
12.87 The DEST Report also favoured institutional ownership
and suggested that the experience from Canada ‘reveals many problems that
may arise out of a laissez-faire approach to IP
ownership’.
The Report argued against funding bodies retaining ownership and suggested ‘the
UK experience reveals problems that arise
when research funders maintain too much
control over IP generated from their funds’ and concludes that ‘experiences
therefore point to research bodies as the most desirable owners of IP’.
Expanding the National Principles
12.88 The DEST Report argued
that the right of institutions to own intellectual property ‘should be coupled
with the assumption
of responsibility for the effective identification, protection,
management and commercialisation of the invention’. The Report
this could be achieved through an expansion of the
National Principles
Interim Guidelines
. In particular the Report suggested that the
National Principles
should be expanded to:
require research institutions to notify funding bodies of any identified,
valuable inventions created using public funds;
emphasise that the ultimate responsibility for commercialising inventions
rests with the research institution by adopting a time
limit for applying
for a patent;
require research institutions to have intellectual property management infrastructure
in place or that they allocate a certain
proportion of granted funds towards
exploitation;
emphasise the need to ensure employees’ work arrangements and responsibilities
do not act as a disincentive to commercialise
and to counter any existing
disincentives; and
direct research institutions to include knowledge transfer or commercialisation
as an express component of their mission statement.
12.89 The Report also noted of another possible reform, which it stressed would
need further consideration if it were to be included
in an expanded
. It suggested that preserving funding body rights to intellectual
property might be a means to ensure they are able to use and
benefit from the
research results generated with its investment. The Report commented, however,
such a proposal should not be adopted without detailed evaluation
of its potential to act as a disincentive to investment in commercialisation.
‘No Australian disadvantage’
12.90 The DEST Report also
raised the possible inclusion in the
National Principles
of a requirement that in commercialising intellectual property,
research institutions should prioritise local industry to prevent
Australian inventions
being lost overseas. In particular, institutions should favour local businesses
when licensing their intellectual
The Report noted, however, that ‘an obligation to favour Australian commercialisation
has several fairly complex indirect
and dynamic effects.’ It suggested that
some of these effects include:
an unclear net impact on employment;
the possibility that if there are a limited number of Australian companies
that have the expertise to undertake commercialisation,
then commercialisation
may not be as successful as it would have been were it undertaken by a foreign
organisation;
a reduction in researcher interaction with the ‘best’ companies,
resulting in less opportunities for the ‘best’
knowledge spill-overs
to further develop the idea; and
potential growth of the local industry.
12.91 The DEST report concluded that careful empirical and theoretical consideration
and a full assessment of different policy
options would be required to adequately
assess these effects. It also noted that there may be other means of protecting
promoting local industry.
12.92 This issue has also been considered by the Prime Minister’s Science,
Engineering and Innovation Council (PMSEIC),
which suggested that ‘government
funding for biotechnology should be given on the understanding that recipients
to a ‘no Australian disadvantage’ clause in any sale, licence
or partnership arrangement or for technology only to
be licensed, not sold’.
PMSEIC suggested the inclusion of such provision in arrangements for publicly
funded research would enable Australian companies
the best opportunity to capitalise
on Australian research results.
12.93 A requirement of this kind may aid the development of the Australian
biotechnology industry, and further ensure that benefits
from technologies developed
in this country are not prevented from flowing back to the Australian community.
For example, Australia
may be disadvantaged if a patent were assigned overseas,
and the patent holder subsequently does not license it in Australia or
it exclusively in such a way as to disadvantage Australian health care or research.
The ALRC is interested in receiving
comments on whether there is need for the
National Principles
Interim Guidelines
to include a requirement
to favour Australian industry, or alternatively to avoid disadvantage to Australia.
Question 12 - 1
National Principles for Intellectual
Property Management for Publicly Funded Research
and the National Health
and Medical Research Council’s
Interim Guidelines: Intellectual Property
Management for Health and Medical Research
be expanded to require research
institutions to favour Australian industry when commercialising patented inventions
through the use of public funds? Should the
National Principles
Interim Guidelines
include a ‘no Australian disadvantage’
clause in any sale, licence or partnership arrangement involving patented inventions
created through the use of public funds? If so, how should such requirements
be implemented?
ALRC’s views
12.94 The ALRC considers that
intellectual property rights in publicly funded research should vest in the individual
or organisation
that will best exploit them to promote national interest including
the provision of health care in Australia.
12.95 In the ALRC’s view, publicly funded research institutions are
best placed to develop intellectual property in results
of research and the
ALRC has no evidence about a need to alter the current framework for ownership
of publicly funded research
carried out in these institutions. Although the
capacity of some research institutions to commercialise technology may be limited
by a lack commercial expertise or funding to develop products, it is unlikely
that government funding agencies or researchers
themselves will be more able
to take on the task of commercialisation effectively. In the ALRC’s view,
commercialisation
problems are better addressed through providing support to
these institutions in the form of funding and advisory services. The
for providing support of this kind are discussed in Chapters 15, 18 and 23.
12.96 The ALRC is of the view that there may be merit in the ARC and the NHRMC
implementing ‘an expanded
National Principles
approach which would
enlarge the content of responsibilities currently applied to research institutions’.
Although the ALRC has not made a specific proposal on this issue, it does
consider that the ARC and NHMRC should draw on the reform
suggestions made in
the DEST Report listed above in any future review of the
National Principles
Interim Guidelines
12.97 The ALRC considers there is no single model for achieving public benefit
from genetic research. In some instances greater
public benefit may result from
making patented genetic materials or technologies freely accessible or widely
licensed, in others,
by allowing a patent to be exploited by a single company.
The most appropriate approach to exploiting or using the results of
research can only be considered on a case-by-case basis.
12.98 However, the ALRC is of the view that there is a need to ensure publicly
funded genetic research is commercialised in a
manner that benefits the Australian
public. The ALRC regards the
National Principles
Interim Guidelines
as the most appropriate forum in which to emphasise this need and proposes
that the ARC and NHMRC should review their principles
and guidelines on intellectual
property and research to ensure that publicly funded research, where commercialised,
in appropriate public benefit.
12.99 There may be differing conceptions of the public benefit and, in some
instances, there may be a variety of benefits that
could be generated through
exploiting patented research results in different ways. In the course of reviewing
their guidelines
and principles, the ARC and NHMRC should also develop guidance
on what is meant by appropriate public benefit in the context of
research, to
address this issue.
12.100 The ALRC also considers that the ARC and NHMRC should be prepared to
place conditions on grant funding to direct how any
resulting technologies are
exploited in those circumstances where it is considered that greater public
benefit would result
from the resulting research being placed in the public
domain either with no patent being sought or, where a patent is sought,
being widely licensed. Provision for such conditions to be placed on the grant
of public research funding should be incorporated
National Principles
Interim Guidelines
12.101 One issue raised by the current framework of ownership of gene patents
in publicly funded research is the need for guidance
on the rights of institutions
in research undertaken by students and visiting academics. In the ALRC’s
view, research
institutions should ensure they have clear policies and effective
practices in this area, although the ALRC does not seek to be
prescriptive about
the content of these policies or practices.
12.102 To avoid problems with determining ownership and rights to intellectual
property in genetic research conducted jointly,
either between research institutions
or collaboratively with industry, institutions should also ensure their intellectual
policies include clear guidance on ownership of results of joint research.
Proposal 12 - 1
The Australian Research Council (ARC) and the National
Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) should review their principles
guidelines on intellectual property and research to ensure that publicly funded
research, where commercialised, results
in appropriate public benefit. (See
also Proposal 12 - 2.)
Proposal 12 - 2
As part of the review proposed in Proposal 12 - 1,
the ARC and NHMRC should include guidance on what is meant by ‘public
benefit’ in their principles and guidelines on intellectual property and
Proposal 12 - 3
The principles and guidelines developed in accordance
with Proposal 12 - 1 should enable conditions to be attached to the grant
funding for genetic research, to limit the commercialisation of publicly funded
research in appropriate circumstances. Such
conditions might include a requirement
that research results be placed in the public domain, or that a patented invention
widely licensed.
Proposal 12 - 4
Universities and other publicly funded research organisations
should ensure that their guidelines on intellectual property ownership
research undertaken by visiting researchers and students, as well as staff—whether
undertaken solely within the
organisation or jointly with other bodies.
March-in rights
12.103 The approach discussed
above, and Proposals 12 - 2 and 12 - 3 in particular, are an alternative to a
more restrictive approach
under which the government maintains residual rights
in any publicly funded research, known as ‘march-in rights’.
12.104 Concerns about lack of commercially viable research emanating from
the public sector led the United States Congress to
enact a number of pieces
of legislation in the 1980s which aimed at improving technology transfer from
publicly funded research
institutions to the private sector. In particular,
Bayh - Dole Act 1980
Bayh - Dole Act
) allowed recipients
of government funding for the performance of experimental, developmental or
research work to retain title
to any invention made in the course of that work
and accordingly to be able to patent that invention, subject to meeting patent
requirements.
12.105 According to Eisenberg:
Since 1980, the presumption has been that patenting discoveries made
in the course of publicly funded research is the most effective
way to promote
tech transfer and product development in private sector (in US) because exclusive
rights are needed as an incentive
for commercialisation.’
12.106 More than 60% of gene patents in the United States are based on publicly
funded research.
One researcher has suggested
that ‘the close links between universities and industry are a principal
reason why US firms
now dominate the biotechnology market’.
12.107 However, unlike in Australia, under the
Bayh - Dole Act
Federal agency that funds research retains certain residual rights to inventions
developed from that research. These ‘march-in’
rights may be used
to promote the utilisation of inventions arising from publicly funded research,
including ensuring the commercial
development and public availability of inventions.
They allow the agency to take title to any inventions where practical application
has been slow or not forthcoming or where action is needed to meet health or
safety needs, or to meet the requirements for
public use or where an exclusive
licence has been granted. The agency may then assign title to another organisation
more likely
to pursue effective commercialisation.
12.108 A example of the use of march-in rights in the United States concerns
the broad patent held by the Wisconsin Alumni Research
Foundation (WARF) over
primate embryonic stem cells developed through publicly funded research. These
patents affect a number
of existing stem cell lines, including those held by
WiCell Research Institute Inc, a non-profit subsidiary of WARF created to
human embryonic stem cell research at the University of Wisconsin - Madison.
In September 2001, the NIH began negotiations
with WARF over access to human
embryonic stem cells. A subsequent agreement was reached providing access to
the patented stem
cells for federally funded researchers.
Submissions and consultations
12.109 IP 27 asked whether
there was any need in Australia for the government to retain a variety of rights
to intellectual property
developed from publicly funded research.
These rights included ‘march-in’ rights, the right to a government
use license and the right to limit exclusive licences.
The introduction of the
concept of residual rights found some favour in submissions, albeit with reservation
in a number of cases.
For example, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research (WEHI) commented that the use of ‘march-in’ rights
exceptional instances could protect the public who had funded research, emphasising
the need for clear and transparent
guidelines to determine when such rights could
be exercised. It cited a number of instances that might be appropriate, including
the need to access intellectual property for the national good in wartime, for
epidemics or for bio-defence purposes as examples
of such instances. It noted,
however, that:
Overuse of these rights will erode the confidence of potential commercial
users that such patents have real value and could prevent
the development of
effective treatments to the detriment of the public good. Overuse could also
lead to greater reliance on
reversion to proprietary protection rather than
patents and then such provisions would be powerless.
12.110 Professor John Mattick suggested that march-in rights could aid the government
in addressing inappropriately wide use of
gene patents,
while Dr Graeme Suthers suggested that if genes remained patentable, it might
be necessary for the government to retain some residual
rights to prevent exclusive
control of genetic sequences.
and the Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia (RCPA) took a similar view,
with the HGSA arguing that the government
could retain the right to use gene patents
in the provision of public health services, either completely or at a reduced
12.111 The Genetic Support Council (WA) founded its support for introducing
residual rights to the need to address equity of access
issues in the public
health system:
The Public Health System continues to make substantial demands on
financial resources of Government at both a State and Federal
level. There would
seem to be a very strong argument to support the proposition, that when public
funding is involved, some
controls be available to Government to protect individuals,
reduce costs and maintain equity of access or pass on any benefits
to individuals.
12.112 The South Australian Government stated:
Where research is publicly funded, agreements should be in place which
ensure government ownership (or part ownership) of the IP,
or which entitle
government to a share of any financial returns, commensurate with the resources
it contributes. The US arrangement
where the government retains certain residual
rights to IP developed from publicly funded research may be a strategy to ensure
continued access by the public to the results of publicly funded research.
12.113 Lack of incentive to commercialise was also raised as a reason to introduce
residual rights. The RCPA argued that the introduction
of residual rights could
address the lack of incentives for researchers to commercialise their research.
It commented that the
Australian approach of allowing institutions to claim ownership
of intellectual property arising from research conducted by employees
‘minimal incentives for individual researchers to develop their basic research
into a commercial product’.
By contrast, it stated that the
Bayh - Dole
was as ‘an excellent example of a social contract between government
and inventors that has had highly beneficial effects’.
12.114 Other submissions expressed a variety of reservations about the introduction
of residual rights. Some stressed the Government’s
limited capacity to
effectively commercialise patented genetic research. WEHI noted that:
commercial parties in general do not like to deal with governments
over IP (it is too slow and too complex) and governments in
general do not have
the capacity to actively seek commercial exploitation of the IP.
12.115 The NHMRC stated that if a form of march-in rights were considered desirable,
these could be exercised by the NHMRC through
grant conditions.
[I]f these outcomes (eg ‘march-in’ rights) are considered
desirable there may be means for achieving these outcomes
other than through
the patents legislation. For example, through conditions of grant agreements
that enable consideration of
the merits of such powers on a case by case basis.
12.116 The NHMRC commented that it is unclear how it, or the Government, would
be able to commercially develop gene patents that
arise from publicly funded research.
It suggested it is also not clear whether it is necessary or desirable for it
Similarly, Wondu Business &
Technology Services Pty Ltd stated that from experience ‘in contract research,
administrators and their agents are often, though not always, very
slow in acting on research, including in publication of research
that is to be
made available to the general public’.
Another submission commented:
the government should not intervene in the commercialization process
by retaining residual rights. The introduction of this type
of initiative would
only serve to complicate the process through increased bureaucracy and potential
delays in the process.
The Government does not have a good track record in ‘picking
winners’ and should allow competitive market pressures
to dictate outcomes,
where there is no evidence of market failure.
12.117 The Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources (DITR) agreed:
Realising the value of IP requires successful commercialisation which
is expensive and high risk. Effective government intervention
in this area would
require the establishment of the infrastructure necessary for commercialisation,
risk calculation, financial
and commercialisation skills. The public sector
has no advantage over the private sector in the relevant areas of experience
and expertise.
12.118 Although supporting the introduction of residual rights, the RCPA also
recognised this concern, noting that government agencies
are not necessarily ‘the
most suitable vehicles for product development and commercialisation.’
12.119 Others suggested that the introduction of residual or march-in rights
would be ineffective in addressing the barriers to
the commercialisation of
genetic research in Australia. In part, this was attributed to the differences
between the biotechnology
industry in the United States and Australia, and the
funding schemes for genetic research. For example, the Queensland Government
made the point that the United States model may not be applicable in Australia
for reasons of scale:
The conditions attached to NIH funding have to be balanced against
the sheer size of such agencies and the monetary amounts provided.
may view that the amount of funding and opportunities that agencies like NIH
provide, may outweigh the onerous conditions
imposed by those agencies and the
retention of residual rights in relation to intellectual property. However,
in the Australian
context, such incentives and trade-offs may not exist as the
Australian and State Governments operate on a much smaller scale.
12.120 DITR was of the view that the introduction of residual rights was not a
solution to the problems that face the Australian
biotechnology sector in developing
genetic research into marketable products, stating:
The objective of march-in rights introduced under the Bayh-Dole Act
in the US was to ‘force’ commercialisation of patented
arising from publicly funded research where IP ownership was unclear. In Australia
the institution undertaking research
funded by the Australian Government owns
the IP derived from that research. The failure to commercialise genetics and
medical inventions in Australia is usually attributed to the lack of venture
capital and the relatively small and risk-averse
nature of private sector investors.
Therefore, it is not apparent that march-in rights similar to the US provisions
an appropriate tool to address the difficulty in commercialising IP
in Australia from research funded by the Australian Government.
12.121 One submission argued that introducing residual rights would be a potential
disincentive to industry collaboration in commercialising
research. GlaxoSmithKline
cited its experience in collaborating with United States universities operating
Bayh - Dole Act
, stating that:
the prescriptive nature of the Act can limit flexibility in deal structure.
For example, the university is unable to assign ownership
of intellectual property
to a sponsor unless the degree of federal funds applied to the research is truly
zero. There are many
situations where ownership of intellectual property is
crucial to the sponsor. If this cannot be granted then the potential sponsor
may withdraw from discussion and thus the Act works against collaboration ...
[introducing] an equivalent Bayh-Dole Act in
Australia would almost certainly
result in a decrease in collaborative research between universities and industry
as our experience
shows it has in the United States.
12.122 GlaxoSmithKline emphasised that maximum flexibility is necessary to encourage
collaboration between publicly funded research
institutions and industry, which
would be limited by a restrictive approach. Instead, it argued that publicly funded
research institutions
should be free to manage their intellectual property without
being subject to government control. It further warned against making
technology-specific
provisions on these issues because this may create disincentives to undertaking
genetic research in Australia.
12.123 The introduction of residual rights was not supported in some submissions
on the basis that the Crown use, and compulsory
and statutory licensing provisions
Patents Act
could be used to address issues that are dealt with
through the
Bayh - Dole Act
in the United States.
For example, in one consultation it was suggested that compulsory licensing
was preferable to the use of residual rights to
address inadequate commercialisation
where researchers and investors are unable to reach an agreement.
12.124 The Queensland Government commented that ‘there already exists
the possibility of the government retaining certain
residual rights to intellectual
property under the provisions of the
Patents Act
relating to Crown use
and compulsory licensing’.
GlaxoSmithKline commented that:
Government ownership or retention of rights in intellectual property
resulting from government funding is not needed to manage
potential abuses of
the intellectual property, as compulsory licences, crown-use type provisions
and similar safeguards are
already built into the law.
12.125 Others suggested that the government would require very good evidence of
market failure before intervening in the licensing
activity of a patent holder
through Crown use.
DITR also pointed out
that the Government does not wish to retain ownership of intellectual property
in the research it funds,
but instead expects grantees to undertake commercialisation.
Under this policy, the government funds research, while commercialisation
resulting intellectual property is left to the private sector. DITR noted that
the private sector possesses greater expertise
and experience in commercialisation
than government.
ALRC’s views
12.126 March-in rights are
aimed at allowing the government to step in and commercialise a patented invention
where an institution
has failed to do so. The government might also use these
rights to take title to an invention and assign it to another organisation
is likely to commercialise it more effectively. For a variety of reasons, the
ALRC does not consider it necessary to accord
the Australian Government residual
rights in intellectual property from publicly funded research. First, the ALRC
concurs with
the view expressed in a number of submissions that the government
is not well placed to develop gene patents commercially. This
is in part because
the Government is neither structured to do so; nor do Government agencies generally
have the commercial skills
and experience to negotiate with industry to develop
patented technology.
12.127 By contrast, publicly funded research institutions have been developing
their capacity to undertake commercialisation over
the past decade, through
skill-building and the creation of infrastructure. This includes the establishment
of dedicated technology
transfer offices employing staff with commercial experience,
and the provision of a range of educational and networking programs.
12.128 Further, in Australia, commercialisation of gene patents is promoted
through a wide range of measures, including the
National Principles
Interim Guidelines
and other funding requirements, government funding
focused on industry linkages and technology transfer, state government programs
supporting biotechnology industry development and research institutional benefit
sharing schemes. Given the level of support
already provided by these measures,
it is unlikely that a lack of commercialisation activity in research institutions
is generally
attributable to reluctance to commercialise. Instead, as discussed
in Chapter 18, commercialisation is better promoted through
continuing financial
and educational support programs to provide monetary support and raise commercialisation
12.129 In addition, Proposal 12 - 3 is intended to allow funding bodies the
option to place conditions on research grants where
it is thought that public
benefit will be maximised by not patenting the research results. The ALRC anticipates
that this option
would be utilised very sparingly but it does allow for one
of the purposes of march-in rights to be achieved without the need
for the government
to retain residual rights.
12.130 Finally, the ALRC considers that there are already a number of mechanisms
available for addressing some of the concerns
at which march-in rights are directed,
for example, restrictions on access to significant patented technology or a
to exploit a patented invention appropriately. These include the compulsory
licensing and Crown use provisions under the
Patents Act
12.131 However, the ALRC also recognises that these mechanisms may have been
of limited use to date in some contexts and may not
provide a complete solution
to the issues raised in this chapter. For example, the Crown use provision under
Patents Act
enables the Government to exploit a patented invention
itself, or authorise another person to do so. To some extent, this provision
gives the Government powers similar to those provided under the
Bayh - Dole
. However, Crown use is more limited than the march-in rights provided
under the United States Act, as it only extends to use for
the services of the
Commonwealth or a State.
These mechanisms,
and proposed reforms for addressing some of these limitations, are discussed
in Chapters 26 and 27.
Government contracted research
12.132 Although it is Australian
Government policy for researchers or institutions whose research has been publicly
funded to own
any intellectual property generated by that research, this is not
necessarily the case for research that is contracted by government.
It is frequently
a condition of a contract with a government department that the government retains
any intellectual property rights.
12.133 For example, the Department of Health and Ageing indicated that it
retains intellectual property rights in research that
it has funded to ensure
that relevant information can be widely disseminated. In these cases the Department
grants non-exclusive
licences to the intellectual property.
12.134 IP 27 asked about the implications of the Government retaining ownership
of intellectual property arising from contracted
A number of submissions objected to the Government retaining intellectual property
in contracted research suggesting it was
not best placed to commercialise patented
genetic technology or ensure public benefits. AusBiotech Ltd stated:
If the government retains intellectual property in research carried
out pursuant to a contract, it may be that licensees will not
be actively sought,
and any inventions, which arise will not be developed for the benefit of the
community. Further information
on the outcome of government contracted research
is needed. Once again, the global impacts, and Australia’s ability to
compete on international markets, also need to be considered in relation to
this matter.
12.135 Dr Amanda McBratney and others commented:
IP is far better off being in the hands of the University commercialisation
companies than with a government department. The government
has limited ability
to commercialise technology (i.e. resources, ideology, risk appetite). By retaining
intellectual property
rights, commercialisation is, at best delayed, and at
worst stifled altogether. Retention of rights where the Government had a
mechanism for exploiting the results would be another matter, but this is not
the current situation. The likely outcome
would be additional expense for government
(patent expenses and additional staffing) and less community welfare outcome.
ALRC’s views
12.136 The ALRC has insufficient
evidence about government contracted genetic research to make a specific proposal.
It notes with
approval the Department of Health and Ageing’s response that
it seeks to disseminate widely the results of contracted research.
However, where
public benefit would be maximised through commercialisation of research, then
the government may not be best placed
to do this. In such circumstances, the government
may need to ensure policies are in place to promote appropriate commercialisation.
Australian Research Council and others,
National Principles of Intellectual Property Management for Publicly Funded
(2001); National Health and Medical Research Council,
Guidelines: Intellectual Property Management for Health and Medical Research
National Health
and Medical Research Council,
Interim Guidelines: Intellectual Property Management
for Health and Medical Research
Australian Research Council,
Research: Technology Transfer and Commercialisation Practices
(1999), xvii.
For example, the objective of the Cooperative
Research Centres program is ‘to enhance Australia’s industrial,
and economic growth through the development of sustained, user-driven,
cooperative public - private research centres that achieve
high levels of outcomes
in adoption and commercialisation.’: Department of Education Science and
Cooperative Research Centres Program: 2004 Selection Round Guidelines
for Applicants
(2004), [1.2.1].
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003). Ch 5.
Garvan Institute of Medical Research,
Patents Act 1990
Patents, Trade Marks &
Related Rights: Looseleaf Service
(2001), [8030]. See also J McKeough and
Intellectual Property in Australia
(2nd ed, 1997), [13.3].
It may also be that where no common law support can be found for assigning rights
to the invention
to the employer, and the inventor and the research institution
have executed an agreement for intellectual property assignment,
the institution
may be entitled to apply for a patent under
J McKeough and A Stewart,
Intellectual
Property in Australia
(2nd ed, 1997), [13.4].
Ibid, [13.5].
Sterling Engineering Co Ltd v Patchett
[1955] AC 534
R Reynolds and N Stoianoff,
Intellectual
Property: Text and Essential Cases
(2003), 329.
These are discussed further below.
Department of Education Science and Training,
Analysis of the Legal Framework for Patent Ownership in Publicly Funded Research
Institutions
(2003), vii.
J McKeough and A Stewart,
Intellectual
Property in Australia
(2nd ed, 1997), [16.5].
Ibid, [16.6].
A Monotti and
S Ricketson,
Universities and Intellectual Property: Ownership and Exploitation
(2003), [4.08].
Ibid, [4.09] - [4.20].
Bayley-Jones v University of Newcastle
(1990) 22 NSWLR 424.
A Monotti and S Ricketson,
Universities
and Intellectual Property: Ownership and Exploitation
(2003), [4.21].
Ex parte Foster; Re University of
[1964] NSWR 1000
, 1007. See also A Monotti and S Ricketson,
Universities
and Intellectual Property: Ownership and Exploitation
(2003), [4.22].
A Monotti and S Ricketson,
Universities
and Intellectual Property: Ownership and Exploitation
(2003), [4.49].
Australian Research Council,
Research: Technology Transfer and Commercialisation Practices
(1999), 28.
University of
Commercial Development of the University’s Intellectual Property
(1989), [4.1].
Ibid, [1.4].
University of Melbourne,
(2001), 2. The University does, however, require that it be assigned
ownership of intellectual property that arises directly from
a researcher’s
involvement in a project that has been established through an agreement between
the University and an
external body: Melbourne Research and Innovation Office,
Academic Researcher Deed: Frequently Asked Questions
, University of Melbourne,
<www.research.unimelb.edu.au/ridg/contracts/academic_resdeed_faq.html>
at 19 January 2004.
University of
Statute 14.1: Intellectual Property
(1996), 14.1.3(3)(a),
A Monotti and S Ricketson,
Universities
and Intellectual Property: Ownership and Exploitation
(2003), [4.59].
Patents Act 1990
James Cook University,
Commercial Research and Consultancy Services: Policy and Procedures
Cooperative Research Centres Programme,
Agreement for the Establishment and Operation of a Cooperative Research Centre
See, eg, Melbourne Research and Innovation
Guide for Researchers and Research Administrators: An Overview of
Research and Research-Related Policies and Procedures (2nd edn,
September 2003)
University of Melbourne, <www.research.unimelb.edu.au/guide/17.html> at
29 January 2004.
National Health and Medical Research
Consultation
, Canberra, 24 September 2003.
Australian Research Council and others,
National Principles of Intellectual Property Management for Publicly Funded
The organisations were: the Australian
Research Council, the Australian Tertiary Institutions Commercial Companies
Association,
the Australian Vice-Chancellors’ Committee, the Department
of Education, Training and Youth Affairs, the Department of Industry,
and Resources, IP Australia and the National Health and Medical Research Council:
National Health and Medical Research
Interim Guidelines: Intellectual Property Management for Health
and Medical Research
Australian Research
Discovery Projects: Funding Rules for Applicants for Funding Commencing
, December 2003, [10.5]. The NHMRC takes a similar approach. For
example, its Project Grant funding policy states that grant applicants
agree to comply with the
Interim Guidelines
: National Health and Medical
Research Council,
Project Grant Funding Policy for Funding Commencing in
(2004), [10.6].
Australian Research Council and others,
National Principles of Intellectual Property Management for Publicly Funded
Ibid, Principle 2.
Ibid, Principle 3.
Ibid, Principle 4.
Ibid, Principle 5.
Ibid, Principle 6.
Ibid, Principle 7.
Ibid, Principle 9.
In some organisations, individual researchers
can claim full or part ownership to rights arising from their research.
Australian Research Council and others,
National Principles of Intellectual Property Management for Publicly Funded
Ibid, Principle 7.
Australian Research Council,
in the National Interest: Commercialising University Research in Australia
(2000), 20.
Australian Research Council,
Consultation
Canberra, 22 September 2003.
National Health and Medical Research Council,
Interim Guidelines: Intellectual Property Management for Health and Medical
Ibid, Principles 2.1 - 2.8.
Ibid, Principle 2.7.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development,
Turning Science into Business: Patenting and Licensing at
Public Research Organisations
B Pheasant,
‘The Value of a Pure Thought’,
Australian Financial Review
(Sydney), 12 - 13 August 2000, 26.
Australian Research Council,
in the National Interest: Commercialising University Research in Australia
(2000), viii.
Ibid, viii.
Western Australian Department of Health
and others (legal issues),
Consultation
, Perth, 17 September 2003; Human
Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; D Weston,
Submission P62
, 12 November 2003; National Health and Medical Research
Submission P52
, 31 October 2003; Australian Centre for Intellectual
Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September 2003; Consumers’
Health Forum of Australia,
Consultation
, Canberra, 23 September 2003;
AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003.
National Health
and Medical Research Council,
Submission P52
, 31 October 2003.
Human Genetics
Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003.
, 12 November 2003.
Submission P30
, 2 October
Wondu Business & Technology Services
Submission P4
, 20 August 2003.
Australian Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Consultation
Brisbane, 3 October 2003.
Cancer Council Australia,
, 30 September 2003; Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia,
, 1 October 2003.
Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003.
National Health
and Medical Research Council,
Submission P52
, 31 October 2003.
Human Genome Project,
Genetics and
, United States Department of Energy, <www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/elsi/patents.shtml>
at 19 January 2004.
SNP Consortium Ltd,
The SNP Consortium:
Full Genome Representative SNP Map Program Summary
http://snp.cshl.org/about/program.shtml
at 19 January 2004.
R Eisenberg,
‘A Technology Policy Perspective on the NIH Gene Patenting Controversy’
University of Pittsburgh Law Review
Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development,
Turning Science into Business:
Patenting and Licensing at Public Research Organisations
Australian Research
Research in the National Interest: Commercialising University Research
in Australia
(2000), 20.
Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development,
Turning Science into Business:
Patenting and Licensing at Public Research Organisations
(2003), 11.
The report does however suggest that
research institutions should be able to assign patent rights “on a case-by-case
basis where the institution believes such an assignment would lead to an optimal
outcome with respect to commercialisation’:
Department of Education Science
and Training,
Analysis of the Legal Framework for Patent Ownership in Publicly
Funded Research Institutions
(2003), xii.
Ibid, 79 - 83.
Ibid, 84. The
Bayh - Dole Act
provisions of this kind:
Patents Act
35 USC (US), §204.
Department of Education Science and Training,
Analysis of the Legal Framework for Patent Ownership in Publicly Funded Research
Institutions
(2003), 84 - 85.
Prime Minister’s Science Engineering
and Innovation Council,
Profiting from the Biotechnology Revolution
Department of Education Science and Training,
Analysis of the Legal Framework for Patent Ownership in Publicly Funded Research
Institutions
(2003), xii.
R Eisenberg,
‘A Technology Policy Perspective on the NIH Gene Patenting Controversy’
University of Pittsburgh Law Review
L Andrews, M Mehlman and M Rothstein,
Genetics: Ethics, Law and Policy
See E Press and J Washburn, ‘Secrecy
and Science’,
The Atlantic Online
, March 2000, <www.theatlantic.com/issues/2000/03/press2.htm>,
citing the findings of Walter Powell.
Patents Act
(US), §203.
WiCell Research Institute Inc and
Public Health Service of the United States Department of Health and Human Services,
Memorandum of Understanding
, 5 September 2001.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question 5 - 3.
Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
Submission P35
13 October 2003. See also South Australian Government,
Submission P51
30 October 2003.
Submission P30
2 October 2003.
Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003.
Genetic Support
Council WA (Inc),
Submission P59
, 7 November 2003.
South Australian
Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003.
Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003.
Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
Health and Medical Research Council,
Submission P52
, 31 October 2003.
March-in rights are discussed in more detail below.
Wondu Business & Technology Services
Submission P4
, 20 August 2003. See also Queensland Department
of Innovation and Information Economy,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 2 October
A McBratney
and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003.
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003.
Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003.
Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January 2004.
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003.
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003.
AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
7 November 2003; Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January 2004.
Commonwealth Government Departments,
Consultation
, Canberra, 5 May 2003.
Queensland Government,
, 5 January 2004.
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003. See also AusBiotech Ltd,
, 7 November 2003; National Health and Medical Research Council,
, 31 October 2003.
Commonwealth Government Departments,
Consultation
, Canberra, 5 May 2003.
Department of Industry Tourism and
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003.
See further Ch 26. There are also
a number of practical concerns about the efficacy of compulsory licensing as
a solution in
this context. No compulsory licences have been granted in Australia
to date. In part, this may stem from costs involved in applying
to a court for
a compulsory order, or the difficulty in satisfying the legislative test for
such an order. Compulsory licences
may also be difficult to acquire because
of pressure on governments from major trading partners. However, several commentators
have suggested that the threat of compulsory licensing can encourage patent
holders to negotiate a voluntary licence. See further
Department of Health and Ageing,
Consultation
Canberra, 24 September 2003.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question 5 - 4.
Submission P58
, 7 November 2003.
A McBratney
and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003. See also Walter and Eliza
Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003.
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
13. Patents and Human Genetic Research
Introduction
The research continuum
Impact of gene patents on research
Empirical studies
Submissions and other views
Broad patents
Patents and research tools
What are research tools?
Use and licensing of research tools
Concerns about patents on research tools
ESTs, SNPs and other types of tools
ALRC's views
New principles and guidelines on research tools
13. Patents and Human Genetic Research
Introduction
Terms of Reference direct the ALRC to consider the impact of current patent laws
and practices related to genes and genetic
and related technologies on the
conduct of research. This chapter considers whether gene patents may have a
‘chilling effect’
on the conduct of research and, if so, in what
situations this effect may be evident and what reform options may address this
13.2 Research may be conducted at all stages of the continuum from basic
research to research directed towards marketable end products.
This chapter
begins by briefly describing the research continuum, and the different interests
of those involved in ‘upstream’
and ‘downstream’
research and inventions, and the different ways in which they may experience the
impact of patent laws
and practices.
13.3 The chapter discusses the general impact of gene patents on research, with
reference to Australian and international empirical
studies and the views
expressed in submissions to this Inquiry and elsewhere.
13.4 The chapter then describes the specific subject matter and claims of gene
patents that are most likely to hinder research—that
is, broad patents on
upstream or ‘foundational’ inventions. Patents on research tools are
discussed in detail, with particular
reference to the licensing of research
tools, ‘reach-through’ licence agreements, and patents on isolated
genetic materials.
13.5 The primary focus of this chapter is the impact of gene patents on basic or
upstream research. Subsequent chapters examine the
effects on downstream
research environments and the commercialisation of patented inventions. For
example, Chapter 15 describes the
concept of the patent
‘anti-commons’ and examines the extent to which patent thickets and
royalty stacking may hinder
the commercialisation of research.
The research continuum
13.6 The terms
‘upstream’ and ‘downstream’ are commonly used to
describe two ends of a continuum from basic
research through to research
directed toward marketable end products or
Dr Dianne Nicol and Jane
Nielsen have observed:
The nature of biomedical research is that it is conducted on a cumulative
basis: much basic research forms the foundation for later
research and there are
many steps between initial pioneering research and what consumers would consider
to be end products.
13.7 For example, in human genetic research, basic research may involve the
identification of genetic sequences associated with particular
biochemical
functions. Downstream research may focus on the eventual use of these genetic
sequences in the diagnosis of genetic disease
or in novel therapies, such as
gene therapy or the production of therapeutic proteins. Many steps may be
involved before this end
is reached:
Different stakeholders conduct research at each stage of the research
spectrum, developing products, methods or technologies that
can be characterised
as inputs into subsequent steps in the development of drugs, therapies, and
diagnostic methods.
13.8 Patents may be issued at different stages of the research continuum.
Researchers developing downstream products will require
access to patented
inventions, including research tools. Access to many patented inventions may be
required in order to develop a
marketable product. While downstream researchers
may view such inventions as essential research inputs to which open access is
upstream patent holders may view research tools as valuable end
products in themselves.
13.9 It follows that the implications of patent reform may be quite different
for different actors in the research and biotechnology
sectors. For example,
while small or start-up biotechnology firms may need patents on upstream
discoveries in order to attract investors,
for pharmaceutical companies, patents
are needed not to raise capital but to ensure an effective commercial
exploitation of their
13.10 It has been suggested that patents have ‘created an economic
division in the research community’ between those
who benefit from and
those who are hindered by such patents, particularly with regard to research
tools. John Barton states:
Those who benefit include universities and certain biotechnology firms.
Now that universities and public institutions are encouraged
to file for patents
on their inventions, they often seek such patents on their fundamental
innovations, and may seek to exercise
these patents against those who might use
the technologies in their research. Many biotechnology firms also support
research-tool
patents. These firms acquire such patents, either though their own
research or by taking licences from universities ... The opposing
side, which
includes many scientists and the pharmaceutical industry itself, is more
doubtful about the wisdom of certain genomic
and research-tool patents. This
section of the industry would like to have complete freedom to use all the
available research tools
in order to be able to identify possible
13.11 The changing nature of research institutions is another important
background factor in considering the impact of patent law
and practice on
research. As discussed in more detail in Chapters 11 and 12, Australian
Government policy is to promote the commercialisation
of publicly funded
research, including that conducted by universities. Traditionally, upstream
research has been the province of
the public sector, and the private sector has
focused more on the downstream application of that
13.12 In the United States, similar government policies have encouraged
universities and other recipients of public research funding
to patent the
results of their research. As a consequence, there has been ‘a dramatic
increase in patent filings from institutions
that, in an earlier era, were more
likely to make their discoveries freely
available’.
Professor Rebecca
Eisenberg notes:
Two dimensions of this change are particularly relevant to current
problems surrounding the exchange of research tools. First, it
has expanded and
diversified the type of institutions claiming proprietary rights in their
discoveries, as academic and nonprofit
institutions have established technology
exchange offices to patent faculty inventions and market them to commercial
firms. Secondly
is a corresponding expansion and diversification in the types of
discoveries that are the subject of proprietary claims to include
early-stage discoveries, considerably removed from product development, that
typically emerge from government-sponsored biomedical
13.13 A 1998 study by the United States National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Working Group on Research Tools found evidence that American
universities are
hindering the free exchange of basic research tools, such as genetic sequences
and reagents, while making similar
complaints about industry. The study found
that universities impose conditions on the use of their research tools, such as
on vetting manuscripts before publication and claiming future
discoveries derived from the use of their research
Eisenberg has observed
that, in the United States:
Universities have embraced the patent system as patent owners and have
been in the vanguard of claimants seeking patents on ‘upstream’
research discoveries that would have looked too far removed from the commercial
marketplace to qualify for patent protection just
a generation ago ...
Universities have barely begun to contemplate the patent system’s
implications for their interests as
users of the patented technology of
13.14 These changes, which also apply in Australia, mean that academic and
non-profit research institutions increasingly have interests
not only as
potential users of patented inventions, but also as patent holders. Australian
research institutions actively use the
patent system in order to obtain
protection for their inventions and routinely seek to license these rights to
commercial organisations
enterprises.
Impact of gene patents on research
13.15 The major debate in
this area revolves around whether gene patents have a chilling effect on
research and innovation, rather
than promoting them. Two reasons are generally
advanced for this possible effect. The first is that research may be hindered by
researchers’
concerns about infringing patents or about the difficulties
of obtaining licences to use patented inventions on appropriate terms.
second reason, discussed in Chapter 15, is that researchers may be reluctant to
put information about research outcomes into
the public domain because of the
potential to commercialise their own research.
13.16 Whether patent laws are the best means of encouraging research and
innovation in knowledge-based areas, such as medical research,
has been a matter
of debate. The United Kingdom Commission on Intellectual Property Rights
observed that, in contrast to the model
for developing patented consumer
products, which are most often the outcome of a ‘linear research
[in] many industries, and in particular those that are knowledge-based,
the process of innovation may be cumulative, and iterative,
drawing on a range
of prior inventions invented independently, and feeding into further independent
research processes by others.
Knowledge evolves through the application of many
minds, building often incrementally on the work of others ... Moreover much
consists of the relatively routine development of existing
technologies. For instance, gene sequencing, formerly a labour intensive
technique, is now a fully automated process, involving little
creativity.
Empirical studies
13.17 Whether the
proliferation of upstream intellectual property claims in rapidly advancing
fields of technology such as genetics
promotes or retards research and
innovation has been described as ‘an empirical question of considerable
complexity’.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has referred to
the ‘conspicuous absence of rigorous economic
studies’ that explore
the impact of gene patents on
13.18 There have been some limited empirical studies about the impact of gene
patents and licences on research. In general, their
conclusions have been
equivocal. For example, a study in the United States by John Walsh, Ashish Arora
and Wesley Cohen (the Walsh
study) noted that, while the patenting of upstream
discoveries had increased, almost no-one reported that worthwhile projects had
stopped because of restrictions on access to intellectual property rights for
research tools.
Instead, the
Walsh study found that most researchers, both in universities and industry, had
adopted ‘working solutions’:
These working solutions combine taking licenses (ie successful
contracting), inventing around patents, going offshore, the development
of public databases and research tools, court challenges and using the
technology without a license (ie infringement), sometimes
under an informal and
typically self-proclaimed research
13.19 In 2002, the OECD Working Party on Biotechnology Report (OECD Report)
identified a number of issues concerning the possible
adverse impact of gene
patents on research, including blocking patents or overly broad patents;
increases in secrecy and a slower
pace of research; increased research and
transaction costs; and increased litigation involving public research
organisations.
documenting some specific concerns held by
researchers,
the OECD Report did
not substantiate fears that growth in the number and complexity of biotechnology
patents is preventing access
to inventions for research purposes.
13.20 In Australia, Dr Dianne Nicol and Jane Nielsen of the University of
Tasmania have recently completed an empirical study of
medical biotechnology
patenting (the Nicol-Nielsen
They analysed 49 written
survey responses from respondents from private sector biotechnology and
pharmaceutical companies, 23 from
research institutions and 18 from diagnostic
testing facilities, together with the results of 40 targeted
interviews.
13.21 While it is hard to draw firm conclusions from these empirical studies,
their specific findings and conclusions are important
in understanding how the
impact of gene patents on research is perceived by researchers and others. These
are discussed throughout
this chapter.
Submissions and other views
ALRC received a wide range of comments in submissions concerning the impact of
gene patents and licensing on the conduct
of research. Many submissions
maintained that there is no current evidence that gene patents are inhibiting
research in Australia.
13.23 Some of these submissions focused on the benefits of patent protection for
research. For example, AusBiotech Ltd submitted:
There is no real evidence that gene patents or licences are inhibiting
research in biotechnology in Australia. To the contrary, the
flexibility of the
Australian Patents Act, the availability of patents in this field and the
resulting opportunity to obtain research
funding from commercial sources has
been an enormous boost to research in Australia in this field. This would not be
possible if
patent protection were not
13.24 Dr Amanda McBratney and others stated that in their experience the patent
system allows further investment into areas of human
Medical research cannot exist on government funding alone. In Australia,
there is simply not a large enough tax base to provide the
amount of funding
required for wide-spread top level research. In many cases, the existence of
gene and other biotechnology patents
has attracted crucial financial support
from the biotechnology and pharmaceutical industries (as well as private
investors) and has
allowed the continuation of medical
13.25 The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research stated that
patents have a major potential impact on the biotechnology
industry, since they
define the freedom to operate in certain areas. In relation to patents over
isolated genetic materials the Institute
To date academic research in Australia has been largely unaffected and it
is essential that this freedom
13.26 One reason for suggesting that research is not inhibited by gene patents
is that ‘researchers are often oblivious to
the patent rights held by
commercial entities’.
McBratney and others stated:
Moreover, even where research may infringe patent rights, the absence of
infringement proceedings in Australia and the lack of enforcement
of such rights
by industry suggests that gene patenting is not in fact stifling
innovation—at least in Australian
universities.
13.27 Other submissions were more equivocal. The South Australian Government
suggested that, while gene patents do not appear to
have an adverse effect on
research to date
this appears to be because patents are not being enforced rather than
because they either encourage or inhibit biotechnology research.
The successful
enforcement of one patent could lead to a change in this situation which would
result in a significant cost to research
institutions and
government.
13.28 Dr Graeme Suthers suggested that while there may be no evidence that
research is being hindered by gene patents ‘the
field is very new and
there has been little time to observe such
The Royal College
of Pathologists of Australasia (RCPA) made the same observation and noted that
it is not appropriate ‘to
stand back and wait for problems to
The ALRC must learn from the overseas experience and evaluate not only
the previous or current problems but also the potential
13.29 The National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) noted comments
from members involved in the research sector that the
complexities of the patent
system may have a ‘dampening’ impact on research, particularly where
organisations lack expertise
in intellectual property
management.
13.30 Other submissions highlighted possible adverse impacts on
The Australian Health
Ministers’ Advisory Council referred to difficulties arising in
‘negotiating commercially viable
licences with patent holders in order to
explore the development of alternative technologies in relation to an already
patented gene’.
stated that:
Excessively broad patents, particularly on an upstream discovery, can
block or place severe constraints on the ability of others to
develop new tests
or therapies that build on the patented discovery or invention. There is
evidence that such practices have inhibited
research in
biotechnology.
13.31 The Nicol-Nielsen Study provides other views on patents and research in
biotechnology. Respondents from research institutions
had predominantly positive
views about the impact of patents on research and
development.
Respondents in
biotechnology companies also viewed the impact of patents on their research
positively.
However, Nicol and
Nielsen found that all sectors of the biotechnology industry had greater concern
patents to have a negative impact on research than
for any other types of
13.32 Consistently with comments made in submissions to this Inquiry, warnings
were sounded about the future. Nicol and Nielsen note
that, as Australian
companies and institutes gain an international presence, they may attract more
attention from patent holders.
While vigorous patent enforcement has not been
this is something that seems certain to change. Both overseas and
Australian companies are starting to take a more aggressive approach
enforcement ... The issue of restricted access to patents is therefore an
important issue for the Australian industry. Even though
a considerable amount
of upstream research is conducted by the Australian industry, respondents in all
of the sectors we investigated,
frequently require access to upstream
13.33 Nicol and Nielsen conclude that there has been some evidence in Australia
of exclusionary practices in relation to biotechnology
patents. This is not
surprising, as the right to exclude others from exploiting a patented invention
is fundamental to patent protection.
Nicol and Nielsen conclude:
Our data demonstrates that there has been some evidence of restricted
access to patents within the industry ... However, it is probably
fair to say
that few of our respondents were concerned at the long-term effects of
restricted access, and in most cases research
was able to proceed albeit in a
modified fashion.
Broad patents
13.34 A specific category of
concern in relation to research has been on what may be described as broad
patents—patents that
grant broad rights to the patent holder and which may
be seen as covering applications invented later by someone else.
13.35 IP 27 noted that, unless widely licensed, broad patents could discourage
further research and innovation either because researchers
will be concerned
pay licence fees or royalties to
those whose patents were granted
By contrast, a narrowly
expressed patent may encourage others to ‘work around’ the patent,
thereby having less impact
on related research. Submissions confirmed a level of
concern about the impact of broad patents on
13.36 As discussed in Chapter 6, when gene patents are described as
‘broad’, the intended meaning may vary. Genetic discoveries
occur from the top down—that is, the discovery of the gene often precedes
discovery of its constituent parts, proteins
As a consequence,
patents covering an isolated genetic sequence are the most upstream category of
gene patent.
Concern about the
impact of broad gene patents on the conduct of research is most often expressed
in relation to these kinds of gene
13.37 Where gene patents contain ‘product per se’ or
‘composition of matter’ claims over isolated genetic
materials (such
as DNA sequences), the patents may be considered broad because all uses of the
product may be covered by the patent:
In analysing gene patents such as the BRCA patents, we have seen that
claims are made to gene sequences, gene products, therapies,
diagnostics. Patents that are cast in these terms effectively give the patent
holder the exclusive right to control all
downstream uses of the gene sequence,
including commercial research and development of tests, therapies and
13.38 Other gene patents do not claim isolated genetic materials but may
nevertheless be considered broad because the claims—for
example, over the
diagnostic use of a DNA sequence—allow the patent holder, in effect, to
assert rights over the DNA sequence
itself because any other diagnostic test for
the disease specified in the claim would infringe the
13.39 The Nicol-Nielsen Study examined the views of respondents on ‘patent
breadth and its impact on
innovation’.
Seven of 23
research institution respondents, and similar proportions of other categories of
respondent, said patent breadth had
some negative impact on
Nicol and Nielsen
observe that:
There is clearly a theoretical link between patent breadth and
limitations on research, and it is often impossible to provide adequate
to both basic inventors and follow-on inventors. Despite this, most respondents
were fairly optimistic about their ability
to continue research despite the
presence of broad patents, and felt that the problem of broad patents was
dissipating as patent
offices tightened up their examination
procedures.
13.40 In the research context, patents may also be considered
‘broad’ because they cover a generally applicable research
or resource. Such patents are better referred to as ‘foundational’
inventions because the subject matter is
the basis for a wide range of further
potential discoveries and
inventions.
Foundational
inventions are discussed below in the context of research tools.
Patents and research tools
single most important concern has been about the effects on research of patents
on genetic materials or technologies that
are used as research tools. The
literature in Australia and overseas expresses a range of concerns about the
impact of patents on
the use of research tools. The following material examines
these concerns, some of which relate to research tools generally and some
which relate to those used in genetic research specifically—and in
particular the use of isolated genetic materials.
13.42 IP 27 asked for comments on the impact of patent law and practice,
including the terms of licensing agreements, on access to
research tools, and in
particular to expressed sequence tags (ESTs), single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) and other isolated genetic
materials. Comments from submissions to the
Inquiry are also discussed.
13.43 In order to assess the significance of the concerns and possible means of
addressing them, it is important to distinguish between
the types of products
and processes that may be referred to as research tools and the different
meanings that may be given to this
What are research tools?
13.44 In IP 27, the ALRC
defined research tools as the wide range of resources used by scientists in
their laboratories, where those
resources have no immediate therapeutic or
diagnostic value. In biotechnology, research tools may include cell lines,
antibodies, reagents, animal models, growth factors, combinatorial
chemistry libraries, drugs and drug targets, clones and cloning
tools, methods,
laboratory equipment and machines, databases and computer
In the context of
genetic technologies, the OECD Report noted that the term research tool can be
used to include genomics databases,
DNA chips, recombinant DNA technology,
polymerase chain reaction (PCR), combinatorial libraries, genes and receptors,
and even transgenic
13.45 There are many different ways to categorise research tools used in
genetic research. For example, three basic categories are:
Research techniques. Some gene patents cover laboratory techniques that
molecular biologists use in genetic research, such as the
Cohen-Boyer techniques
and the PCR methodology.
Research consumables. Some gene patents cover particular enzymes or reagents
that are used in the laboratory, such as Taq polymerase
(used in PCR) and
restriction enzymes (used in cloning and other applications).
Research targets. Some gene patents cover genetic materials that are
targeted in research, for example genes for receptor proteins
used in designing
new drugs or vaccines, such as the HIV-receptor
This category also
includes ESTs and SNPs, which can be targets of research or used to target other
genetic materials.
Foundational research tools
13.46 In considering their impact on research, it is
useful to distinguish foundational or upstream research tools from other
tools. The most important research tools are said to be
fundamental research platforms that open up new and uncharted areas of
investigation. These platforms can most fruitfully be developed
by a variety of
follow-on researchers. ... a single patent holder is unlikely to see the myriad
directions in which a broadly enabling
research platform could be
13.47 Foundational inventions are of such importance that all or much that
follows in the relevant field flows from
Examples include the
Cohen-Boyer
patents. The Cohen-Boyer
technique has been described as a ‘quintessential’ research platform
in that these recombinant
DNA techniques were used in many different ways by
many researchers.
Other research
tools, including research consumables and some research targets, are not of this
nature. For example, while genetic
material used in diagnostic testing for a
particular disease may be used in future research, it is unlikely to open up any
significant
new research
13.48 A more recently developed genetic technology that might be characterised
as foundational is RNA interference
Concerns about the
impact of patents on foundational inventions were encapsulated by the following
comments by the Medical Genetics
Elective Group of the University of
The area covered by these patents is at the cutting edge of research. The
owners have the power to limit or extend the amount of research
done. By their
selectivity in granting licences, they may slow, or even halt, the discovery of
further beneficial mechanisms of RNAi
technology not only in mammals but also in
plants and other organisms. A further means of selectivity of who performs
research in
this area is the cost of the licences. Small universities or
hospital-based research laboratories may not be able to afford the privilege
conducting studies in this area, again limiting the progression of RNAi
13.49 There is no bright line between foundational research tools and other
tools. Further, the characterisation of a specific research
tool may vary with
time. As explained by Professor Arti Rai:
Distinguishing broad research platforms from more downstream research is
difficult ... For example, it is not clear whether genes
encoding receptors or
enzymes that may be useful as drug targets should be considered research
platforms ... Once [the CCR5 gene]
had clearly been identified as the
HIV-receptor gene, the gene probably did not represent a broad research
platform. When a gene
has been fully characterized, it’s difficult to say
that the research in that area is really inchoate or uncharted. On the
hand, at the time that [the patent holder] isolated the gene, much less was
known about it. At that point, the gene plausibly
could have been thought of as
a research platform. The arguments for thinking of targets as broad research
platforms is bolstered
by the fact that some targets may play roles in different
disease pathways. Identifying a target’s role in one disease pathway
should not necessarily give the patent owner plenary rights over all uses of the
13.50 The Walsh study suggests that if a research
tool is foundational, the extent to which restricted access is likely to hinder
progress in research will depend on whether the tool can be used in the
development of a number of inventions that will eventually
compete with one
another. If a foundational invention is fundamental to competing downstream
research applications, access is more
likely to be restricted in some way, for
example, through exclusive licensing. The problem then is that:
exclusive exploitation of a foundational discovery is unlikely to realize
the full potential for building on that discovery because
no one firm can even
conceive of all the different ways that the discovery might be exploited, let
alone actually do so.
13.51 Nicol and Nielsen state that ‘more prolific patenting’ of
research tools sets up the main precondition for the
concern that research may
be impeded.
Two further preconditions may exacerbate the problem. First, broad
interpretation of claims on upstream foundational discoveries may
reach of upstream patents and deter downstream innovators from researching in
what they perceive to be a broad area of
research. Second, reach-through rights
to future inventions (for example, a right to a compound that acts on a patented
target even
though the compound itself is not described in the patent claims)
could deter subsequent innovation.
13.52 There are important differences between the Australian and United States
research environments which are relevant to the impact
of patents on
foundational research tools. The Nicol-Nielsen Study investigated the patent
status in Australia of a number of foundational
biotechnology patents that have
been mentioned in the literature as being problematic. The study found that, in
many cases, the patents
had not been filed or granted in Australia, meaning that
certain avenues of research may not be as restricted in Australia as in
United States.
Research tools and end products
13.53 One characteristic of genetic research is that
patents are commonly held over genetic materials and technologies needed for
further research, as well as over the ultimate products of research, like
diagnostic tests and pharmaceuticals.
13.54 IP 27 noted that one institution’s end product may be another
institution’s research tool. Further, some research
tools have uses other
than in research. For example, a patented DNA sequence may be used as part of a
diagnostic test, as well as
research to understand better the role of the
relevant gene in disease. As Professor Eisenberg, who served as Chair of the NIH
Group on Research Tools,
The term ‘research tool’ would seem to connote a user
perspective, indicating something that is not yet an end product
and has its
primary value as an input into further research. Yet a user’s research
tool may be a provider’s end
13.55 Some biotechnology enterprises focus on developing, manufacturing and
supplying research tools to researchers. In relation
to genetics, Clarissa Long
has stated:
The core business of an increasing number of new market entrants is
information about the genetic codes of various organisms, not
the sale of drugs
or diagnostics.
13.56 To these organisations, research tools are commercial end products. They
have a strong commercial interest in full recognition
of intellectual property
rights over them. Further, institutions that obtain a competitive advantage from
proprietary research tools
will be unwilling to make them freely available and
may seek to limit access, restrict use or delay disclosure of research
Eisenberg has
Institutions tend to be high-minded about the importance of unfettered
access to the research tools they want to acquire from others,
institution is willing to share freely the materials and discoveries from which
they derive significant competitive advantage.
Thus many of the people that
spoke with the Working Group were eager to establish that the term
‘research tool’ means
something other than their own
institution’s crown jewels.
Use and licensing of research tools
13.57 Access
to patented research tools is largely dependent on the availability and terms of
licences granted by patent holders to
researchers who wish to use them during
the term of the patent. As discussed in Chapter 23, licensing is a means by
which a person
may use a patented product or process with the agreement of the
patent holder, who would otherwise have exclusive rights to use the
It is also a means of transferring knowledge from an inventor to a researcher
who wishes to make use of the invention,
or to a party wishing to commercialise
13.58 There are many models for licensing research tools and other patented
inventions. The following material highlights some aspects
of licensing
practice, as applied to the licensing of research tools in Australia and
overseas. Other aspects of licensing are discussed
in Chapter 23.
13.59 Licences may be exclusive or non-exclusive. For example, the Cohen-Boyer
patents held by the University of California San Francisco
and Stanford
University were subject to the grant of multiple, non-exclusive licences in
return for minimal licence fees. This licensing
strategy meant that potential
infringers were inclined to obtain licences, which led to broad distribution of
the technology.
One view is
The dominance of these patents did not inhibit further development but
instead spurred further innovation while providing profits
to the patent
13.60 Alternative strategies for university based patent holders include
granting an exclusive licence to a biotechnology company
that can then develop
and apply the technology, making it available by contract to other biotechnology
enterprises. Firms with such
business plans ‘offer services such as the
use of genomic array chips, procedures for producing a large variety of
drug compounds, and use of proprietary cell culture or identification
techniques’.
13.61 Licensing models may provide rights to use research tools with the
purchase of products, rather than by a direct licence agreement.
This is the
model applied to PCR, where the Taq polymerase that is required for PCR is
purchased from a biotechnology company licensed
to manufacture and sell the
enzyme. The purchase price includes limited non-transferable rights to use that
product for research
purposes only. Further, for PCR to be authorised it may
have to be performed in thermal cyclers purchased from a licensed
13.62 It is not uncommon for patent holders to distinguish between academic and
commercial researchers in applying a licensing strategy.
Licences granted for
academic research may involve much lower fees than research licences granted to
commercial entities or where
the same patented invention is licensed for
therapeutic or diagnostic use. For example, access to the Cohen-Boyer patents
to academic researchers, yet involved a substantial fee for commercial
researchers. F.Hoffmann-La Roche Limited, the PCR patent holder,
has established
different categories of licence, depending on the application and the users.
Research and development licences do
not include a right to perform or offer
commercial services of any kind using
13.63 Australian biotechnology companies have also distinguished between
academic and commercial research in their patent licensing
practices. In July
2003, Genetic Technologies Limited (GTG) granted a licence to the University of
Sydney to use GTG’s patents
on methods of using non-coding DNA
polymorphisms
non-coding patents) in basic research for the remaining duration of the patents.
GTG noted that the $1000 fee was ‘several
thousand-fold’ less than
the fee for similar licences granted to ‘pure commercial
Reach-through licence agreements
13.64 Licence agreements for
the use of research tools may contain ‘reach-through’ provisions.
Reach-through licence agreements
may give the patent holder ownership, licence
rights or royalties in relation to future discoveries made by licensed
researchers.
In effect, this approach calls for payment in future intellectual
property rights or royalties on future products in lieu of cash.
The primary
motive for these reach-through provisions appears to be to obtain something of
value for the firm in exchange for the
contribution of a valuable asset.
Recognizing that most academic users will not discover anything of commercial
value, the owner
of the tool seeks to recover a substantial profit in the rare
case when a valuable discovery is made in order to cover the costs
other, unprofitable transfers.
13.65 Reach-through licence agreements may offer advantages to both patent
holders and researchers.
They permit researchers with limited funds to use patented tools right
away and defer payment until the research yields valuable results.
holders may also prefer a chance at larger payoffs from sales of downstream
products rather than certain, but smaller, upfront
13.66 The NIH Working Group on Research Tools suggested that reach-through
licence agreements are more often entered into where a
research tool may be used
directly to produce another
rather than in relation
to ‘more basic research tools that have a more remote relationship to
commercial products’.
13.67 Reach-through rights may be the best way for some patent holders to
protect their investment. For example, where the patented
invention is a
molecule, its use provides significant competitive advantage in the search for
therapeutic products and the ultimate
therapeutic product is not covered by the
the firm will quickly lose its competitive advantage if the product is
discovered elsewhere through use of the molecule as a research
nonexclusive license to new uses may also be of little value in such a
situation. Some firms will simply keep the proprietary
molecule for their own
exclusive use, or perhaps share it with commercial collaborators. If the firm
makes the molecule available
to a university scientist, the only way to ensure
that it is not undermining its own proprietary advantage may be to secure some
form of reach-through rights to future
discoveries.
13.68 However, researchers may perceive reach-through
rights as having the potential to benefit patent holders disproportionately,
the event that research outcomes may be commercialised. Further, the existence
of reach-through rights may prejudice researchers’
later technology
transfer and commercialisation prospects. Potential commercial partners are
likely to demand that intellectual property
be unencumbered by competing
13.69 In the United States, Heller and Eisenberg provide examples of
universities and other non-profit research institutions baulking
reach-through licence agreements for the use of research
The DuPont Cre-lox
gene-splicing tool is one such
This research tool was
initially developed by Harvard University but licensed exclusively to DuPont
Pharmaceutical Co, which required
public sector researchers to sign agreements
that limited their use of the technique and required pre-publication vetting of
DuPont also sought reach-through rights to future inventions that
might result from experiments using the technique. These licence
terms were said
to give DuPont:
the right to participate in future negotiations to develop commercial
products that fall outside the scope of their patent claims.
In effect, the
license terms permit DuPont to leverage its proprietary position in upstream
research tools into a broad veto right
over downstream research and product
development.
13.70 Although some public sector institutions agreed to these terms, the NIH
objected and the issue was resolved with a memorandum
of understanding in 1998,
which simplified access for public sector researchers in the United
One colourful criticism
of this approach to reach-through rights stated that Cre-lox would be:
no more an element of any eventual products or businesses that emerge ...
than a hammer is part of the eventual table it helps build
... Some university
licensing groups have come to call DuPont’s approach the ‘Steinway
Piano Model’— ‘If
you sell me a piano, do you deserve
royalties if I write a song on it?’ asks one technology transfer
Infringing use of research tools
13.71 A range of commercial
and practical factors are important in determining whether researchers seek to
obtain licences from patent
holders and, if not, whether patent holders enforce
their rights against researchers. In practice, factors that influence whether
researchers use patented research tools without obtaining a licence include
‘the often secret nature of the experiments, the
limited expectation of
damages by a patentee, the significant cost of patent litigation, and the often
limited impact on a patentee’s
interests’.
13.72 It can often be difficult to detect patent infringement. The use of
research tools occurs behind laboratory doors, making infringement
difficult to
For example, even in
the case of Taq polymerase and the PCR patents, where a licence fee is
incorporated into the purchase price
of the product, some laboratories
performing PCR or any other reaction reliant on enzymes may decide that it is
cheaper to prepare
their own enzyme. Such a process necessarily involves
expression of a gene in a host cell before purifying the enzyme to make it
for use in a biochemical reaction. This procedure is routine in molecular
biology laboratories, even though it may infringe
patent rights if the gene
encoding the enzyme is the subject of a patent.
13.73 Researchers may be unaware of the legal implications of using patented
research tools and, even if they are, the prospect of
litigation may appear
remote. As discussed in Chapter 14, researchers may assume that their use of
research tools is exempt from
claims of patent infringment. It has been
suggested that, in practice:
fear of litigation is low in the public sector, as research institutions
usually generate no revenue through the use of the research
tool and thus the
patent owner has little incentive to sue. In short, many groups act as if an
‘informal research exemption’
exists for the use of patented
research tools.
13.74 Patent holders often tolerate academic research infringements. One recent
study reported that some of the reasons patent holders
may allow academic
research to proceed unchallenged, include:
the possibility that research would increase the value of the patent;
the cost of a challenge;
the risk that the patent itself would be narrowed or invalidated;
the negative publicity from suing a university; and
a reluctance to upset norms of open access for fear of losing the goodwill
of peers and associated access to materials and
information.
discussed in Chapter 9, the remedies for patent infringement include injunctions
and compensation in the form of damages,
or an account of
In the case of
infringement by researchers, the most relevant remedy is likely to be an
injunction to prevent further infringement.
Damages or an account of profits
will generally be relevant only where a product has been developed and sold.
Most claims of infringement
never reach the courts because the parties reach a
settlement—possibly involving the payment of a licence fee.
Concerns about patents on research tools
Access to research tools
13.76 Concern
has been expressed that patents on some research tools (particularly those
referred to earlier as foundational research
tools) can ‘pre-empt large
areas of medical research and lay down a legal barrier to the development of a
broad category of
It has been
suggested that this result is highly likely in biotechnology because:
there are so many broadly relevant patents; research builds on the use of
so many prior discoveries; and solid and clear title to
a product is so
important to the pharmaceutical
13.77 The OECD Report referred to broad concern about the impact of research
tool patents on collaboration and sharing of materials
between researchers,
stating that:
the terms of licences or material transfer agreements—restricting
publication and exchange of materials, demanding reach-through
be such that they ultimately make collaboration and communication with other
researchers more difficult.
13.78 In Australia, the Nicol-Nielsen Study found that research tool patents
were not considered to be particularly problematic by
the majority of
respondents.
In our view this may be because industry participants in Australia may
not yet have been faced with the aggressive enforcement practices
research tool patent holders that have occurred in the United States, either
because the relevant research tools have not
been patented in Australia or
because attention has not yet been focused on the Australian
13.79 Their surveys found that refusals to license were not a pervasive issue
within the industry.
researchers and companies stated that they avoided certain areas of research
‘if patents were held by competitors,
or if it looked like obtaining a
licence might prove to be too
problematic’.
interviews, some respondents expressed frustration at difficulties in
licensing-in enabling technologies, but they were greatly
outnumbered by
respondents who had not experienced any
13.80 In its submission to the Inquiry, the Queensland Government stated that
Queensland universities are generally able to obtain
fair and reasonable
licences to use gene patents.
McBratney and others stated:
We have no experience of research being hindered due to licensing or
MTAs. Most researchers do not obtain licences for research purposes.
on a perceived exemption as a researcher and usually obtain the material through
an MTA or produce it themselves.
13.81 A common theme in consultations was that the marketplace is capable of
solving most problems concerning access to patented
research tools. A frequently
cited example is PCR, where a number of different licensing models have been
adopted by the patent holders
as they responded to the reactions of potential
licensees of the
technology.
Cost and delay
13.82 Patents on research
tools may hinder research by requiring licence fees to be paid by researchers.
From the perspective of researchers,
the price demanded for use of a genetic
invention may be too high.
13.83 Researchers also face transaction costs in negotiating licences.
Negotiations over access to technologies can be long and complicated,
delays and administrative burdens on research. Even if the total licence fees
can be kept low, one ‘hold out’
may be enough to cause a research
project to be cancelled.
Researchers may choose not to pursue research using patented research tools
where they have to navigate complex sets of patents held
by a number of
different patent holders.
13.84 In the United States, the NIH Working Group on Research Tools reported
that ‘many scientists and institutions involved
in biomedical research are
frustrated by growing difficulties and delays in negotiating the terms of access
to research tools’.
reasons for this included that the value of research tools is difficult to
assess, and varies greatly from one tool to the next
and from one use to the
next—so providers and researchers are likely to differ in their
assessments of the value of research
tools. Users of research tools may also
have limited resources for paying up-front fees and be reluctant to share
profits from potential
future discoveries (under the terms of licensing
agreements) with institutions that do not share the risks and costs of product
development.
13.85 These complexities mean that case-by-case negotiation for permission to
use research tools and materials may create significant
administrative burdens,
which delay research.
Working Group noted that efforts to standardise licence terms for research tools
had experienced ‘limited success’
Differences in the nature and value of research tools and differences in
the missions and constraints of owners and users of research
tools make it
difficult and perhaps undesirable to standardize terms of access to research
tools across the broad spectrum of biomedical
13.86 Summarising information gathered from scientists, university technology
transfer professionals, and private firms in the pharmaceutical
biotechnology industries, Eisenberg has stated:
Within these communities, there seems to be a widely-shared perception
that negotiations over the transfer of proprietary research
tools present a
considerable and growing obstacle to progress in biochemical research and
product development. Scientists report
having to wait months or even years to
carry out experiments while their institutions attempt to renegotiate the terms
of [Materials
Transfer Agreements], database access agreements and patent
license agreements.
13.87 Eisenberg concludes that the exchange of research tools within the United
States research community may cause delay in or abandonment
of research.
Transaction costs have remained persistently high in this setting as the
heterogenous institutions involved in the exchange of research
tools have been
unable to agree upon standardized contract language, or even to agree upon a
universe of materials, information and
techniques that are properly termed
‘research tools’.
13.88 In Australia, Nicol and Nielsen reported that a
number of respondents had experienced difficulties in conducting negotiations,
particularly in terms of delay:
A respondent from an upstream company who had been involved in frequent
deals estimated that it can take months to negotiate a licence,
which can damage
cash flow projections. In addition, some parties may be becoming increasingly
difficult to deal with. About a third
of our industry interview respondents
commented that they were encountering difficulties dealing with universities,
and that often
the problem did not lie with the scientists who were often
willing to provide unrestricted access to technology and materials, but
technology transfer or business management personnel. At the same time, a few
respondents said that they felt the increased
expertise within universities and
in the industry generally was actually streamlining the negotiation
Licence terms
13.89 Objections have been raised about the terms that
may be proposed by patent holders in licensing agreements or Materials Transfer
Agreements (MTAs).
include reach-through rights and restrictions on the publication of research
13.90 In the United States, reach-through rights are said to have led to some of
the ‘more intractable disagreements’
agreements.
In Australia, the
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research expressed concern about
problems where materials suppliers
‘seek inappropriate levels of control
or commercial reach-through into the recipients’ research
activities’.
13.91 Ultimately, it is up to patent holders and prospective licensees to reach
mutually acceptable contractual terms. In some cases,
patent holders have been
unsuccessful in seeking to impose reach-through rights, for example in relation
to the PCR patents, where
reach-through rights were abandoned as a licensing
model after strong resistance from downstream
13.92 Nicol and Nielsen reported complaints from some respondents that patent
holders over some research tools unreasonably demanded
reach-through
They observed that
a number of variables will determine whether or not reach-through rights to
future inventions are likely to be
included in a licensing arrangement:
the nature of the technology or product being licensed;
whether or not the licensed technology is core to the activities of the
licensee; and
the relative bargaining power of the negotiating
13.93 Heller
and Eisenberg have suggested that while reach-through licence agreements may
offer advantages in principle, in practice,
reach-through licence agreements
‘may lead to an anticommons as upstream owners stack overlapping and
inconsistent claims on
potential downstream
discusses issues relating to patents and the commercialisation of research by
the biotechnology industry.
ESTs, SNPs and other types of tools
13.94 Particular
concerns have been raised about patents over isolated genetic materials and the
genetic sequences they contain. As
discussed above, an important category of
research tools comprises isolated genetic materials that are targeted in
research or used
to target other genetic materials. Such materials, and
information about the genetic sequences they contain, are an important starting
point for genetic research. The USPTO has noted:
The characterization of nucleic acid sequence information is only the
first step in the utilization of genetic information. Significant
and intensive
research efforts, however, are required to glean the information from the
nucleic acid sequences for use in, inter
alia, the development of pharmaceutical
agents for disease treatment, and in elucidating basic biological
13.95 The USPTO summarised concerns about patents restricting access to the use
of isolated genetic materials as research tools as
Many feel that by allowing genetic information to be patented,
researchers will no longer have free access to the information and
necessary to perform biological research. This issue of access to research tools
relates to the ability of a patent holder
to exclude others from using the
material. Further, if a single patent holder has a proprietary position on a
large number of nucleic
acids, they may be in a position to ‘hold
hostage’ future research and development
13.96 The United Kingdom’s Nuffield Council on Bioethics has suggested a
number of ways in which patents covering genetic sequences,
whose primary
function is as research tools, might inhibit innovation. These included
increased costs of research; impediments to
research if patents must be
negotiated; possible issues about exclusive licensing or the withholding of
licences to force up prices;
and difficulty in negotiating a number of royalties
stacking’).
13.97 While the Nuffield Council stated that the granting of patents that assert
rights over DNA sequences as research tools should
be discouraged, it conceded
that there was:
insufficient evidence to judge the extent to which the granting of
patents that assert a primary right over DNA sequences based on
a primary use as
research tools is producing the potentially deleterious
13.98 IP 27 noted two categories of isolated genetic material that raise
particular concerns in the context of research use, namely,
ESTs and SNPs.
Expressed sequence tags
13.99 EST patents are patents over gene fragments with
unknown function.
Once an EST
has been identified it can be used to locate a full-length gene or to infer the
function of a gene. The use of ESTs has
allowed the study of many genes whose
function is not yet known. The patentability of ESTs is discussed in Chapter
13.100 The Human Genome Organisation (HUGO) has suggested that although it is
not particularly difficult to generate an EST, it is
much more difficult to
isolate a gene and to determine its function. HUGO says that it is this work
with a gene, rather than the
generation of the EST, that ought to receive the
greater incentive.
Nuffield Council recommended that ‘when rights are asserted in terms
intended to cover all sequences that contain an EST
that is the subject of the
original patent, no patent should be
13.101 In Australia, Melanie Howlett and Professor Andrew Christie concluded
from a study of the practices of the United States,
European and Japanese Patent
Offices that
the fear of a flood of EST patent claims for probes without useful
functions seems to be unjustified ... not many ESTs will pass the
requirements for patentability. Accordingly, it seems that the fear of numerous
EST patents inhibiting later research is
13.102 It has been suggested that concerns about the impact of EST patents on
research have turned out to be ill-founded because
such patents have not been
granted in any number. GlaxoSmithKline noted:
We are not aware of any patents that have been granted on ESTs in
Australia. None has been granted in Europe and only one has been
granted in the
USA (seemingly in error). As a result, it is difficult to see how research can
be affected.
13.103 The submission of the Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources
stated that IP Australia’s current examination practices
substantially
lessen the potential for patents to be granted over ESTs. The potential for
multiple patents relating to parts of a
single gene inhibiting research was thus
considered unlikely.
contrast, the Australian Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture (ACIPA)
submitted that there remain ‘real and serious’
concerns about the
patenting of ESTs.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms
13.104 The patenting of SNPs raises similar concerns to
those about ESTs. SNPs are valuable in determining the genetics of a disease
understanding the role of genetics in patients’ responses to
pharmaceuticals. However, as discussed below, much information
the public domain and therefore there are generally fewer problems about access
for researchers. Submissions suggested
that, as with ESTs, problems caused by
the patenting of SNPs are unlikely to
Other types of research tools
13.105 Some concerns were expressed in submissions and
consultations about the implications for research of GTG’s non-coding
patents. These patents are fundamental to many key applications in genetic
analysis, molecular diagnostics and genomics.
13.106 While GTG has offered non-exclusive licences for basic research using
GTG’s non-coding patents for modest fees, much
higher payments have been
negotiated with commercial
organisations.
In the United
States, a major biotechnology company, Applera Corporation, is facing an
infringement action for refusing to obtain
a licence to use GTG’s
non-coding patents.
suits against United States biotechnology companies settled
13.107 Another specific set of concerns were expressed in relation to the
effects on research of Chiron Corporation’s patents
relating to the
Hepatitis C virus, which include claims to the composition of the virus itself
and its use in diagnostic tests, vaccines
development.
It was suggested
that the broad nature of the claims in these patents inhibit research on this
In contrast, another
submission maintained that the existence of Chiron’s Hepatitis C patents
was no deterrent to subsequent
ALRC’s views
The ALRC’s preliminary view, based on submissions and its extensive
consultation and research program, is that there
is limited evidence to date
that gene patents have had any significant adverse effect on the conduct of
genetic research in Australia.
International empirical studies suggest that
patent holders and those in the research and biotechnology sectors are capable
of developing
‘a robust combination of working solutions’ for
dealing with problems that
While these solutions
sometimes take time to work out, and may not be optimal, research generally
moves forward.
13.109 The concerns that have been expressed to the Inquiry relate more to
possible future problems for research. This is consistent
with the conclusions
of a literature review conducted for the United Kingdom Department of Health,
which concluded that:
There seems to be consensus that without an adequate exception, patents
could adversely affect the ability of researchers to carry
on R&D, but that
to date there is only limited anecdotal evidence that such an adverse outcome is
actually occurring. This seems
to be an issue which commentators regard as
requiring monitoring, not least to see whether a proliferation of patents
directed at
essentially the same genetic investigation creates an unduly
monopolistic barrier to future
13.110 In view of the equivocal nature of evidence about adverse impacts on
research, the ALRC considers that it should adopt a cautious
approach towards
recommending major changes in patent law and practice in this area. As Nicol and
Nielsen counsel:
a very delicate balance exists between the role played by patents in
encouraging innovation and the potential for patents to impact
negatively on
research into, and the development of, new drugs, therapies and diagnostics.
Whilst the existing system is not perfect,
great care will need to be taken in
modifying this system to ensure that the balance is not too greatly
13.111 The ALRC recognises that the current position may change, particularly if
patent holders become more active in enforcing patent
rights. As the Walsh study
observed, it is not possible to rule out future problems, including those
resulting from patents currently
under review, court decisions, new technology,
and assertions of patents on foundational
discoveries.
13.112 It is difficult to assess the nature and extent of the potential
problems, and whether existing legal mechanisms to address
them, such as those
in patent and competition law, provide appropriate and effective remedies. More
detailed consideration of reform
options to address the impact of gene patents
on research is justified.
13.113 In line with the cautious approach counselled above, the ALRC proposes a
pattern of laws and practices that is flexible enough
to anticipate and respond
to future problems. This approach has influenced the proposals made elsewhere in
this Discussion Paper,
which are more often directed to influencing patent
practices, rather than to proposing substantive changes to patent law. There
several existing mechanisms through which problems might be addressed, should
they manifest. These include use of the compulsory
licensing and Crown use and
acquisition provisions of the
Patents Act
, competition law and prices
surveillance.
13.114 Elsewhere in this Discussion Paper, the ALRC proposes reforms intended to
address the potential for future harm, including
with respect to the conduct of
genetic research. These include:
changes to Patent Office practice relevant to some research tools, such as
ESTs (see Chapter 8);
the development of new Australian Research Council (ARC) and NHMRC
principles and guidelines (see Chapter 12 and below);
enacting a new experimental use defence (see Chapter 14);
encouraging health departments or other agencies to challenge questionable
gene patents that may impact adversely on medical research
(Chapter 20);
establishing a role for the proposed Human Genetics Commission of Australia
in monitoring the application of intellectual property
laws to genetic materials
and technologies, where these may have implications for human health (Chapter
model licensing agreements to encourage access to genetic inventions (see
Chapter 23); and
amendment and clarification of Crown use and compulsory licensing provisions
(see Chapters 26 and 27).
New principles and guidelines on research
13.115 A particular focus of
this chapter has been on genetic materials or technologies used as research
tools. In addition to reforms
proposed elsewhere in this Discussion Paper in
relation to research, the ALRC proposes a specific initiative in relation to
tools, aimed at using the Australian Government’s research
funding leverage to reduce transaction costs and to encourage and
widespread access.
13.116 In Chapter 12, the ALRC proposed that the ARC and the NHMRC should review
their principles and guidelines on intellectual
property and research to ensure
that publicly funded research, where commercialised, results in appropriate
public benefit.
13.117 One model for such an approach is found in the NIH’s
and Guidelines for Recipients of NIH Research Grants and Contracts on Obtaining
and Disseminating Biomedical Research Resources
(the NIH principles and
guidelines), which apply to recipients of NIH research grants and
13.118 The NIH principles and guidelines derive from the report of the NIH
Working Group on Research
which observed that
‘the social value of research tools as a means of making future
discoveries is greatest when they are widely
distributed on a nonexclusive
basis’. The NIH principles state that institutions should:
Minimise administrative impediments to academic research. This principle
states that recipients of NIH funds should streamline processes
for transferring
their own research tools to other academic institutions. Organisations that seek
to make a profit are required to
minimise restrictions on not-for-profit bodies
in relation to academic use of research tools.
Ensure dissemination of research resources developed with NIH funds. This
principle states that ‘progress in science depends
upon prompt access to
the unique research resources that arise from biomedical research ... ideally
these resources should flow to
others who advance science by conducting further
13.119 With
specific reference to research tools, the NIH guidelines provide, among other
things, that:
exclusive licences for research tools should generally be avoided except in
cases where the licensee undertakes to make the research
tool widely available
to researchers through unrestricted sale, or the licensor retains rights to make
the research tool widely available;
when an exclusive licence is necessary to promote investment in commercial
applications of a subject invention that is also a research
tool, the recipient
should ordinarily limit the exclusive licence to the commercial field of use,
retaining rights regarding use
and distribution as a research tool;
recipients are expected to avoid signing agreements to acquire research
tools that are likely to restrict recipients’ ability
to promote broad
dissemination of additional tools that may arise from the research;
in determining the scope of licence or option rights that are granted in
advance to a provider of materials, recipients should balance
the relative value
of the provider’s contribution against the value of the rights granted,
the cost of the research, and the
importance of the research results; and
recipients should reserve the right to negotiate licence terms that will
ensure the continuing availability to the research community
of any resulting
new invention that is a unique research
13.120 Australia’s
principal research funding bodies, the ARC and the NHMRC, should take a similar
approach to ensure that the
public interest in encouraging commercial
exploitation of inventions generated from publicly funded research is balanced
wide dissemination of important research tools. Such an approach would
be consistent with the conclusions of the OECD Report, which
suggested that
governments should give attention to the development, in consultation with
industry, of guidelines on acceptable licensing
Proposal 13 - 1
The Australian Research Council and the National
Health and Medical Research Council, as part of the review proposed in Proposal
12 - 1, should develop principles and guidelines for researchers to ensure
that the public interest in encouraging commercial exploitation
of inventions is
balanced with the public interest in the wide dissemination of important
research tools.
See, eg, D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
R Eisenberg, ‘Bargaining over the Transfer of Proprietary Research Tools:
Is the Market Failing or Emerging?’ in
R Dreyfuss, D Zimmerman and H First
Expanding the Boundaries of Intellectual Property: Innovation Policy
for the Knowledge Society
(2001), 223, 228 - 229; D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
R Eisenberg, ‘Patenting
Research Tools and the Law’ in National Research Council (ed)
Intellectual Property Rights and Research Tools in Molecular Biology, Summary
of a Workshop Held at the National Academy of Sciences,
February 15-16
http://books.nap.edu/html/property
Barton, ‘Research Tool Patents: Issues for Health in the Developing
World’ (2002) 80
Bulletin of the World Health Organization
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and
Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
R Eisenberg, ‘Bargaining over
the Transfer of Proprietary Research Tools: Is the Market Failing or
Emerging?’ in R Dreyfuss,
D Zimmerman and H First (eds),
Expanding the
Boundaries of Intellectual Property: Innovation Policy for the Knowledge
(2001), 223,
National Institutes of
Health Working Group on Research Tools,
Report of the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) Working Group on Research Tools
Eisenberg, ‘Patent Swords and Shields’ (2003) 299
1018, 1019.
Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October
of Intellectual Property Rights,
Integrating Intellectual Property Rights and
Development Policy
(2002), 124.
Eisenberg, ‘Bargaining over the Transfer of Proprietary Research Tools: Is
the Market Failing or Emerging?’ in R Dreyfuss,
D Zimmerman and H First
Expanding the Boundaries of Intellectual Property: Innovation Policy
for the Knowledge Society
(2001), 223,
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual Property
Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
J Walsh, A Arora and W Cohen,
‘Effects of Research Tool Patenting and Licensing on Biomedical
Innovation’ in W Cohen
and S Merrill (eds),
Patents in the
Knowledge-Based Economy
(2003), 285,
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual Property
Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
For example, about the
impact of reach-through licensing agreements: Ibid,
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
Royal College of
Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; G Suthers,
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003; GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
10 October 2003; Department of Industry Tourism and Resources,
, 13 October 2003; Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003; Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October 2003; A McBratney and others,
, 22 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
October 2003; Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January 2004;
AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November
Submission P58
, 7 November
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003. Issues surrounding infringement by
researchers and their reliance on legal and normative research exemptions are
discussed in more detail in Ch
Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Submission P30
2 October 2003.
Royal College of
Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
Health and Medical Research Council,
Submission P52
, 31 October
Australian Centre for Intellectual
Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September 2003; Royal College
of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; Caroline
Chisholm Centre for Health Ethics Inc,
Submission P38
, 17 October 2003;
Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory Council,
Submission P49
October 2003; Department of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
November 2003.
Australian Health
Ministers’ Advisory Council,
Submission P49
, 23 October
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003)
For example, Royal College of
Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; Australian
Health Ministers’ Advisory Council,
Submission P49
, 23 October
2003; Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
, 17 October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
October 2003.
Ontario Ministry of
Health and Long-Term Care,
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting: Charting
New Territory in Healthcare: Report to the Provinces and Territories
D Nicol and J Nielsen, ‘The
Australian Medical Biotechnology Industry and Access to Intellectual Property:
Issues for Patent
Law Development’
[2001] SydLawRw 16
Sydney Law Review
and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of
Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6, 36.
Legal Aspects of Gene Technology
(2003), 121 - 122; Ch
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
See, eg, Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual Property
Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
National Institutes of Health
Working Group on Research Tools,
Report of the National Institutes of Health
(NIH) Working Group on Research Tools
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual Property
Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
(2002), 50: ‘A
good proportion of the entire range of biotechnology can fall under this
Receptor proteins are
proteins that are found on the cell-surface. Upon binding a ligand, they set off
a signal reaction inside the
cell inducing a response. Many viruses gain entry
to the cell by sticking to (or ‘docking’) a receptor protein. The
gene makes a receptor protein that the HIV virus uses as a docking receptor
to gain access to an immune
‘Genome Patents: A Case Study in Patenting Research Tools’ (2002) 77
Academic Medicine
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual Property
Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
The Cohen-Boyer patents described a
gene-splicing technique and were an important foundation of recombinant DNA
technology. The patents
The PCR technique enables a
single piece of DNA to be copied exponentially and is used in most molecular
biology laboratories.
clearest contemporary example of a research platform is probably human genetic
stem cell lines’: A Rai, ‘Genome
Patents: A Case Study in Patenting
Research Tools’ (2002) 77
Academic Medicine
RNA-mediated interference is the
inhibition of expression of specific genes by double stranded RNA (dsRNA): E
Milward and others,
Submission P46
, 20 October
Rai, ‘Genome Patents: A Case Study in Patenting Research Tools’
Academic Medicine
A Arora and W Cohen, ‘Effects of Research Tool Patenting and Licensing on
Biomedical Innovation’ in W Cohen
and S Merrill (eds),
Patents in the
Knowledge-Based Economy
(2003), 285, 333. See also D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
54. In this context, reach-through rights are rights that derive from the patent
claims themselves, as distinct from rights
negotiated in reach-through licence
agreements.
See National Institutes of
Health Working Group on Research Tools,
Report of the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) Working Group on Research Tools
Eisenberg, ‘Bargaining over the Transfer of Proprietary Research Tools: Is
the Market Failing or Emerging?’ in R Dreyfuss,
D Zimmerman and H First
Expanding the Boundaries of Intellectual Property: Innovation Policy
for the Knowledge Society
(2001), 223, 228. See also National Institutes of
Health Working Group on Research Tools,
Report of the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) Working Group on Research Tools
Long, ‘Re-engineering Patent Law: The Challenge of New Technologies: Part
II: Judicial Issues: Patents and Cumulative Innovation’
Washington University Journal of Law and Policy
National Institutes of Health
Working Group on Research Tools,
Report of the National Institutes of Health
(NIH) Working Group on Research Tools
Eisenberg, ‘Bargaining over the Transfer of Proprietary Research Tools: Is
the Market Failing or Emerging?’ in R Dreyfuss,
D Zimmerman and H First
Expanding the Boundaries of Intellectual Property: Innovation Policy
for the Knowledge Society
(2001), 223, 229.
J Clark and others,
Patent Pools: A
Solution to the Problem of Access in Biotechnology Patents?
(2000) United
States Patents and Trademarks Office,
J Barton, ‘Research Tool
Patents: Issues for Health in the Developing World’ (2002) 80
of the World Health Organization
Patent Information
for PCR Products
, <www.qbiogene.com/products/pcr/patent.shtml> at 25
August 2003. Thermal cyclers are machines specifically designed to perform
PCR. They are capable of rapidly heating and cooling reaction tubes to specific
temperatures. The PCR requires rapid cycling
between approximately 50 and 95
degrees and so must be performed in a thermal
Sometimes also referred to as
GTG’s ‘intron sequence
Genetic Technologies
Limited, ‘Letter from GTG to Medical and Scientific Colleagues’,
Press Release
, 21 July 2003,
<www.gtg.com.au/Announcements.html>.
Institutes of Health Working Group on Research Tools,
Report of the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) Working Group on Research Tools
Heller and R Eisenberg, ‘Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons in
Biomedical Research’ (1998) 280
For example, a drug screening
tool or a cell line that is used to produce an
National Institutes of Health
Working Group on Research Tools,
Report of the National Institutes of Health
(NIH) Working Group on Research Tools
M Heller and R Eisenberg,
‘Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons in Biomedical
Research’ (1998) 280
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual Property
Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
and R Eisenberg, ‘Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons in
Biomedical Research’ (1998) 280
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual Property
Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
Freundlich, ‘Cre-lox Controversy Divides Institutions, Prompts NIH
Signals Magazine
, 6 December 1998,
<www.signalsmag.com>.
‘Experimental Use Exception to Patent Infringement: Where Does Australia
Intellectual Property Forum
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual Property
Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
J Walsh, A Arora and W Cohen,
‘Working through the Patent Problem’ (2003) 299
See also D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An
Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre
for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6, 88 - 89: Some research
institution respondents stated they were ‘content
to ignore relevant
patents and challenge their validity if approached by the patent
Patents Act 1990
‘Research Tool Patents: Issues for Health in the Developing World’
Bulletin of the World Health Organization
Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual
Property Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of
Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6, 92. Nicol and Nielsen caveat this conclusion with the
observation that
their data was collected before it became widely known that GTG
was enforcing its non-coding patents, which may change
Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
For example, Institute of
Patent and Trade Mark Attorneys of Australia,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5
September 2003; M Simons,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 4 September 2003;
Genetic Technologies Limited,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 September 2003.
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual Property
Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
J Barton, ‘Research Tool
Patents: Issues for Health in the Developing World’ (2002) 80
of the World Health Organization
National Institutes of Health
Working Group on Research Tools,
Report of the National Institutes of Health
(NIH) Working Group on Research Tools
Eisenberg, ‘Bargaining over the Transfer of Proprietary Research Tools: Is
the Market Failing or Emerging?’ in R Dreyfuss,
D Zimmerman and H First
Expanding the Boundaries of Intellectual Property: Innovation Policy
for the Knowledge Society
(2001), 223,
Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis
of Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6, 158.
discussed in Ch 18.
R Eisenberg,
‘Bargaining over the Transfer of Proprietary Research Tools: Is the Market
Failing or Emerging?’ in R Dreyfuss,
D Zimmerman and H First (eds),
Expanding the Boundaries of Intellectual Property: Innovation Policy for the
Knowledge Society
(2001), 223,
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute
of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
See M Heller and R Eisenberg,
‘Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons in Biomedical
Research’ (1998) 280
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
M Heller and R Eisenberg,
‘Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons in Biomedical
Research’ (1998) 280
Clark and others,
Patent Pools: A Solution to the Problem of Access in
Biotechnology Patents?
(2000) United States Patents and Trademarks Office,
Nuffield Council on Bioethics,
The Ethics of Patenting DNA
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003),
HUGO Ethics Committee,
Patenting of DNA Sequences
Nuffield Council on
The Ethics of Patenting DNA
Howlett and A Christie, ‘An Analysis of the Approach of the European,
Japanese and United States Patent Offices to Patenting
Partial DNA Sequences
(ESTs)’ (2003) 34
International Review of Industrial Property and
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Department of Industry Tourism
and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003; Department of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
For example, Sequenom
($US500,000): Z Moukheiber, ‘Junkyard Dogs’,
Forbes Magazine
29 September 2003.
Genetic Technologies Limited,
‘GTG Law Suits Against Nuvelo and Covance Now Settled’,
, 17 November 2003,
<www.gtg.com.au/Announcements.html>.
Submission P28
, 1 October 2003; D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
, 1 October 2003.
Submission P58
, 7 November
J Walsh, A Arora and W Cohen,
‘Effects of Research Tool Patenting and Licensing on Biomedical
Innovation’ in W Cohen
and S Merrill (eds),
Patents in the
Knowledge-Based Economy
(2003), 285,
Cornish, M Llewelyn and M Adcock,
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and
and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of
Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6, 251.
A Arora and W Cohen, ‘Effects of Research Tool Patenting and Licensing on
Biomedical Innovation’ in W Cohen
and S Merrill (eds),
Patents in the
Knowledge-Based Economy
(2003), 285,
See Ch 24 (competition law); Ch
25 (prices surveillance); Ch 26 (Crown use and acquisition); Ch 27 (compulsory
licensing);
National Institutes of
Health, ‘Principles and Guidelines for Recipients of NIH Research Grants
and Contracts on Obtaining
and Disseminating Biomedical Research
Resources’ (1999) 64
National Institutes of
Health Working Group on Research Tools,
Report of the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) Working Group on Research Tools
National Institutes of
Health, ‘Principles and Guidelines for Recipients of NIH Research Grants
and Contracts on Obtaining
and Disseminating Biomedical Research
Resources’ (1999) 64
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions,
Intellectual Property Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
(2002), 82. As discussed in Ch 19, the OECD’s Working Party on
Biotechnology has established a steering group of experts to
develop best
practice guidelines for the licensing of genetic inventions: Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development,
Brief Explanation of the Working Party
on Biotechnology’s Project on Best Practice Guidelines for the Licensing
of Genetic Inventions
, <www.oecd.org/dataoecd/2/39/9230380.PDF> at 29
August 2003.
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
14. Experimental and Research Use Defences
Introduction
Existing law
Australian law
Other jurisdictions
Reform proposals
Related defences
Private and non-commercial use
Regulatory review
Research exemption in practice
Is reform needed?
The content of new defences
Commercial purpose
Experimentation or research?
Private and non-commercial use
The TRIPS Agreement and experimental use
ALRC's views
14. Experimental and Research Use Defences
Introduction
chapter examines the existing law concerning experimental and research use of
patented inventions in Australia and, in particular,
the legal uncertainty about
the existence and scope of an implied experimental use defence. The chapter also
discusses the law in
other jurisdictions, including New Zealand, the United
States, Canada, the United Kingdom and other member states of the European
14.2 The chapter examines a range of options for reform. Reform could be limited
to better protecting experimental use relating to
the subject matter of a
patented invention—that is, research with a narrow focus on discovering
more about the invention and
its properties (an experimental use defence). An
experimental use defence is recognised in many jurisdictions and applies to all
patented subject matter, not just gene patents.
14.3 Other reform options concern the establishment of a defence to claims of
infringement of gene patents, or some defined subset
of gene patents, where the
patented invention is used in research, extending to activities that would not
necessarily be considered
‘experimental’ (a research use defence).
Such defences are not well established elsewhere, but have been proposed in
number of jurisdictions.
14.4 Finally, the implications of reform for Australia’s compliance with
its obligations under the
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights 1994
(TRIPS Agreement) are also
considered.
Existing law
Australian law
source of an experimental use defence in case law is said to be
—a nineteenth century
English case—in which Jessel MR stated:
no doubt if a man makes things merely by way of bona fide experiment, and
not with the intention of selling and making use of the
thing so made for the
purpose of which a patent has been granted, but with the view to improving upon
the invention the subject of
the patent, or with the view to seeing whether an
improvement can be made or not, that is not an invasion of the exclusive rights
granted by the patent.
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act
) does not expressly
except experimental or research use of patented inventions from liability for
infringement.
However, an implied
experimental use defence may exist in Australian law, as it does in other common
law jurisdictions.
Patents Act
provides that the grant of a patent
confers upon a patent holder the exclusive right to exploit, or to authorise the
exploitation
of, an invention during the patent term. The definition of
‘exploit’ in Schedule 1 of the
Patents Act
sets out the
activities that a patent holder has the exclusive right to conduct, including
making, using, selling and importing a
patented product, or a product resulting
from use of a patented process. Arguably, it is implicit that these activities
are commercial
in nature. If so, activities that are not
commercial—including those undertaken for scientific or research purposes
results of the research will not be commercialised—may not amount
to exploitation of a patent and may, therefore, be exempt
from claims of
infringement.
14.8 An experimental use defence might also be inferred from
Patents Act
, which excludes use ‘for the purpose of reasonable
trial or experiment’ from the definition of ‘secret
This provision allows
the patent holder to undertake trial and experimentation prior to filing a
patent application. It could be
argued that the patent holder should not be able
to later claim that trial and experimentation by others during the life of the
amounts to infringement of the holder’s exclusive
However, such an argument
is difficult to make because the purpose and the nature of the experiments that
an alleged infringer might
want to conduct will be different from those of a
prospective patent holder. Further, while experimentation may be excluded from
the definition of ‘secret use’, there is no provision in the Act
expressly excluding experimentation from the patent
holder’s exclusive
14.9 While no Australian court has ruled on the
the existence of an
experimental use defence is widely assumed. For example, Australia’s third
party arguments in the
Canada - Patent Protection
stated that, in Australia,
‘an experimental use exception did apply, but only to the extent that a
court would find that specific
experimental activities did not constitute
infringing use’.
14.10 Others have argued that, as a matter of statutory interpretation, it is
difficult to argue that the
Patents Act
implies an experimental use
defence, especially given the breadth of the exclusive rights given to patent
14.11 Submissions to the Inquiry from legal commentators tended to cast doubt on
the existence of an experimental use defence in
Australian law. For example, Dr
Amanda McBratney and others considered that arguments for its existence, based
on interpretation
of the term ‘exploit’ were ‘strained’.
They further submitted that:
In any event ... the interpretation would not be upheld by a court for
the same kind of reasons that courts have generally been reluctant
the ‘generally inconvenient’ exception. Patent rights exist in order
to encourage and stimulate invention.
Courts do not often feel it appropriate to
derogate from a patentee’s rights by reading down the patent legislation,
expanding exceptions or defences not clearly set out in the
legislation.
14.12 The Advisory Council on Intellectual Property (ACIP) is currently
undertaking a review of patents and experimental use. The
terms of reference of
the review are to examine whether some types of patents are inhibiting research
and development in Australia
and to determine whether Australian researchers and
business would benefit from introducing an experimental use defence (or some
other provision) into Australian patent
legislation.
ACIP expects to
release an Issues Paper in February 2004, with a request for written submissions
by 30 April 2004. Given this timetable,
it has not been possible for the ALRC to
take ACIP’s recommendations into account in formulating the proposals in
this Discussion
Other jurisdictions
14.13 In some jurisdictions,
including New Zealand, the United States and Canada, experimental use defences
are recognised in case
law—although there remains some dispute over their
parameters. Other jurisdictions, including the United Kingdom and some other
member states of the European Union, have express statutory provisions relating
to the experimental use of patented inventions. The
laws in these jurisdictions
are briefly discussed below.
New Zealand
14.14 As in Australia, New Zealand patents legislation
does not provide an express exception for experimental use of patented
inventions.
However, in at least two cases, the courts appear to have accepted
that such a defence is
14.15 The most recent of these is
Smith Kline & French Laboratories v
Attorney General
the Court of Appeal considered whether the importation of a patented
pharmaceutical constituted an infringement of patent
rights. The Court accepted
the existence of an experimental use defence, referring to
and to the earlier New
Zealand case of
Monsanto v Stauffer Chemical Company
In relation to the
scope of the exception, Hardie Boys J commented:
Doubtless experimentation will usually have an ultimate commercial
objective; where it ends and infringement begins must often be
a matter of
degree. If the person concerned keeps his activities to himself, and does no
more than further his own knowledge or skill,
even though commercial advantage
may be his final goal, he does not infringe. But if he goes beyond that, and
uses the invention
or makes it available to others, in a way that serves to
advance him in the actual market place, then he infringes, for the marketplace
is the sole preserve of the
Monsanto v Stauffer Chemical Company
it was held to be an
infringement to supply a patented herbicide to potential customers in order that
they might conduct field trials
with a view to obtaining regulatory approval for
the use of the product once the patent had expired. This was found to be a use
obtain a commercial advantage by making potential customers aware of the
existence and efficacy of the
This decision was cited
with approval in Australia by the delegate of the Commissioner of Patents in
New York University v Nissin Molecular Biology Institute
14.17 Although the New Zealand courts have drawn distinctions between
experimental and commercially directed research, the law is
said to remain
‘uncertain as to where the line actually falls between pure research and
research for gaining a commercial
advantage’.
United States
14.18 United States case law recognises a limited
experimental use defence. In
Roche Products Inc v Bolar Pharmaceutical
the defence was
found to be dependent on the experiments involved being ‘for amusement, to
satisfy idle curiosity, or for strictly
philosophical inquiry’, and not
for business reasons. The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit
also stated
that the experimental use defence cannot be construed ‘so
broadly as to allow a violation of the patent laws in the guise of
“scientific inquiry”, when that inquiry has definite, cognisable,
and not insubstantial commercial
Embrex v Service Engineering
the Court of Appeals
reaffirmed that the exception was to be interpreted narrowly and that a use is
disqualified from the defence
if it has even the ‘slightest commercial
implication’.
14.20 A recent high profile decision dealing with the experimental use defence
Madey v Duke
). The case involved the research use of patented free electron
laser technology by Duke University. In
, the Court of Appeals
stated that the
cases emphasised that the defence
is ‘very narrow and strictly limited’. In particular, ‘use in
keeping with the
legitimate business of the alleged infringer does not qualify
for the experimental use
14.21 The Court held that the non-profit (or educational) status of the alleged
infringer does not determine the availability of
the experimental use
Rather, the focus
should be on whether the act was in furtherance of the alleged infringer’s
legitimate business.
context, the Court noted that:
Major research universities, such as Duke, often sanction and fund
research projects with arguably no commercial application whatsoever.
these projects unmistakably further the institution’s legitimate business
objectives, including educating and enlightening
students and faculty
participating in these projects. These projects also serve, for example, to
increase the status of the institution
and lure lucrative research grants,
students and faculty.
14.22 In June 2003, the Supreme Court of the United States denied a petition for
review of the
decision. It has been argued that the
decision will render the experimental use defence unavailable to research
institutions simply because their legitimate business is
The decision in
has major implications for the research community as a whole, and
for United States universities in
particular.
It has been claimed
that researchers will have to redirect their attention from research to
expensive and time-consuming patent searches
and licensing activities. As a
result, academic research could be diverted to foreign institutions in countries
with broader experimental
use exceptions, or no corresponding patent.
14.23 Proponents of the
decision have contended that universities
should not be categorically exempted from patent infringement when
university - industry
collaborations are common and universities are
actively commercialising their
Critics of the
decision argue that the Court’s decision will have a significant chilling
effect on academic scientific
One view is that
fails to adequately recognise that the purposes of the patent
system include facilitating research into the patented subject matter
other than the patent holder.
14.24 As in New Zealand and the United States, case law
in Canada establishes an experimental use defence. The defence dates from
1971 decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in
Micro Chemicals Ltd v Smith
Kline & French Inter-American
Corporation
). In that case, the Supreme Court focused on the fact that the
experimentation involved was ‘not for profit’. Hall J
The use Micro was making of the patented substance here was not for
profit but to establish the fact that it could manufacture a quality
accordance with the [patent] specifications ... Micro’s experiments ...
were not carried out for the purpose of
improving the process but to enable
Micro to produce it commercially as soon as the licence it had applied for could
be obtained.
I cannot see that this sort of experimentation and preparation is
an infringement. It appears to me the logical result of the right
to apply for a
compulsory licence.
Micro Chemicals
case has been
to reflect the perspective
expressed in
Frearson v Loe
, where Jessel MR said:
Patent rights were never granted to prevent persons of ingenuity
exercising their talents in a fair way. But if there be neither using
vending of the invention for profit, the mere making for the purpose of
experiment ... ought not to be considered within the
meaning of the prohibition,
and if it were, it is certainly not the subject for an
injunction.
Micro Chemicals
decision was made in the context of research
aimed at sustaining a compulsory licence under provisions of the Canadian Act
subsequently repealed. In the light of this, the Canadian
Biotechnology Advisory Committee (CBAC) concluded that the experimental
exception established by the
Micro Chemicals
case is ‘vague’
and later cases ‘do little to amplify the meaning of the
exception’.
14.27 The existence of an experimental use defence is recognised in s 55.2(6) of
Patent Act 1985
(Can). This provides that the Canadian
‘springboarding’ provisions, which are intended to permit activities
to obtaining regulatory
do not affect:
any exception to the exclusive property or privilege granted by a patent
that exists at law ... in respect of any use, manufacture,
construction or sale
of the patented invention solely for the purpose of experiments that relate to
the subject-matter of the patent.
14.28 However, the enactment of this provision, while preserving the exception
identified by the Supreme Court of Canada, does nothing
to clarify either its
nature or extent.
One view is
that under Canadian law as it currently stands:
it is unclear whether a researcher conducting research using a patented
invention could successfully be sued where that research has
potential in the
longer term to result in a commercial
United Kingdom
14.29 The United Kingdom enacted an experimental use
defence in s 60(5) of the
Patents Act
(UK). This provision
states that:
(5) An act which, apart from this subsection, would constitute an
infringement of a patent for an invention shall not do so if—
(b) it is done for experimental purposes relating to the subject-matter
of the invention.
14.30 Section 60(5) was enacted to ensure that United Kingdom law conformed with
corresponding provisions of the Community Patent
Monsanto Co v Stauffer Chemical
Falconer J in the High
Court stated that s 60(5)
was intended ‘to continue in statutory
form the prior United Kingdom law as to experimental use of a patented
invention’.
He said it was
reasonable to assume that Parliament intended to use the term
‘experimental’ in the sense in which it
had previously been
understood in case law.
Following an examination of this case law, the judge stated that an experiment
something done on a small scale having regard to the nature of the
subject matter of the invention; and
done for the purpose of finding out something about the invention
(for example, whether it works or can be improved
14.32 While the
decision in favour of Monsanto was largely upheld on appeal, the Court of Appeal
differed on the relationship between
the Act and prior case law. Dillon LJ
stated that:
Section 60 was ... enacted to bring UK patent law into line with the
corresponding provisions of the Community Patent Convention and
I have no reason
to suppose that the signatories of that convention were concerning themselves
with the minutiae of earlier UK patent
law. Beyond that, however, the word
‘experiment’ is an ordinary word in the English language and has
never been a term
of art in UK patent
14.33 Dillon LJ held that use for ‘experimental purposes’ may have a
commercial end in view.
the underlying purpose of the experiments must be technical—‘to
discover something unknown or to test a hypothesis’
relating to the
patented invention.
case involved field trials of a patented herbicide. The Court of
Appeal held that the experimental use defence did not extend to
any tests or
trials designed to expand the commercial acceptance of the invention, or to
increase marketability—including trials
designed to obtain clearances or
approvals from regulatory bodies.
14.34 The other element of s 60(5) is that the experimental purposes must relate
to the subject matter of the invention. United Kingdom
cases have held that this
relationship is ‘in the sense of having a real and direct connection with
that subject matter’
that, in determining what constitutes the subject matter of the patent, the
court is to look at the entire patent document, including
European Union
14.35 Article 27(b) of the
provides that the rights
conferred by a community patent shall not extend to ‘acts done for
experimental purposes relating
to the subject-matter of the patented
invention’—words virtually identical to those enacted in United
Kingdom legislation.
This provision has been widely incorporated into the
national laws of other member states of the European
in most cases without any
significant variation in its English
14.36 Reviewing European case law on the interpretation of art 27 of the CPC,
Professor William Cornish has concluded that the scope
of permissible
experimental use has expanded since art 27 began to be incorporated into
national laws.
experimental use exception was previously confined, in at least some
experimental use:
The changing nature of research among industrial competitors and in
academic-industrial relationships has led to a step-wise expansion
experimental use exception and this was apparently the intention of the
governments which negotiated the CPC. No longer is
any exception confined to the
strictly non-commercial, because frequently scientific curiosity operates in
conjunction with the desire
to turn successful work to account. It has long been
a major objective of the patent system that the latter should follow from the
14.37 European case law establishes that experimentation to seek further
knowledge about the patented
or to determine the
adequacy of the disclosure in the patent application or other matters going to
the validity of the patent are
permissible.
A distinction is
drawn between such experimentation and that which simply reiterates or
publicises existing knowledge. Where the
purpose of an experiment is not to
obtain knowledge about an invention, but to demonstrate the effectiveness of a
product to a third
party, then the experiments will not fall within the
experimental use exception.
Testing undertaken merely to satisfy regulatory requirements will also fall
outside the exception.
14.38 Cornish concludes that courts are likely to search for the primary
motivation behind experimentation when deciding whether
a defence is
Even if the concern initiating the trial is a commercial organisation,
the exception may apply if the immediate purpose is to discover
more about the
properties of the invention. The courts will no longer insist that that
motivation must be ‘solely’ or
‘exclusively’ to gain
more scientific knowledge.
14.39 European case law does not treat the collection of data for the purpose of
regulatory approval as justified under the experimental
However, where
scientific or technical improvement forms one genuine reason for the
experimentation, a defence against infringement
may be available, even if there
are other motivations.
14.40 The high-water mark is the decisions of the German Supreme Court in
Klinische Versuche I
Klinische Versuche II.
Klinische Versuche I
the Court accepted that clinical trials aimed at
finding further indications for a patented substance (interferon-gamma) were
the scope of the experimental use exception. The Court stressed that it
made no difference that one motive for the clinical trial
was to later obtain
authority to market.
Klinische Versuche
the same conclusion was
reached in relation to clinical trials of patented human erythropoietin, even
though the tests were not in
relation to new indications but to compare the
effectiveness of the patented product with the defendant’s own product and
present data to obtain regulatory
Cornish concluded that
these cases are ‘strong statements’ that:
Art. 27(b) [of the CPC] should be interpreted so as to permit all
clinical testing of a drug which genuinely seeks further information
uses and about side-effects and other consequences of treatment ... Accordingly,
in my opinion they are likely to be followed
in other European Union
Summary of comparative law
14.42 The material above has highlighted significant
variations in the nature and extent of the experimental use defence in different
necessary to differentiate between experimentation
invention and experimentation
a patented invention for broader
research purposes.
14.43 The patent laws of the United Kingdom and other member states of the
European Union explicitly state that the experimental
use defence applies only
where the experimentation relates to the subject matter of the patented
invention. The defence is limited
to research that ‘builds upon the
knowledge provided by the patent, and aims to discover something unknown about
the subject
matter of the patent or to test a hypothesis about
14.44 This constraint is also evident in the case law of the other jurisdictions
discussed. However, it has not been a major focus
of the cases, perhaps because
they have so clearly involved use for purposes primarily related to obtaining
regulatory approval,
rather than to find out more about the invention. In other
cases, such as
, the commercial or business motives of the
researchers were the determining factor, leaving no reason to focus on the
relationship
between the research and the subject matter of the patent.
14.45 An important difference between national laws concerns the extent to which
experimental use of a patented invention may have
a commercial motivation. In
this respect, United States law, especially following the
is significantly more restrictive than the law in the United Kingdom and other
member states of the European Union. The
position with regard to the
significance of commercial motivations in New Zealand and Canada is unclear due
to the paucity of case
law. The law in these jurisdictions appears to be closer
to that in Europe than the United States in that permissible experimentation
have some commercial objectives.
Reform proposals
14.46 Options for reform of
experimental use defences have been under active consideration in several
proposals are discussed below. In assessing the
relevance of these proposals it is important to bear in mind the starting point
the existing law of these jurisdictions, when compared with Australia.
United States
14.47 In the United States, there is a long history of
reform proposals relating to experimental and research use defences. The
limiting the ability of universities or non-profit organisations to rely on an
experimental use defence, has been said to ‘almost
guarantee’ that
the United States Congress will reconsider earlier attempts to provide a
statutory experimental or research
One reason is that a
very narrow defence may provide incentives for certain industries to locate
their research operations outside
the United States.
14.48 In 1990, a general exemption for the use of patented inventions ‘for
research or experimentation purposes’ was
proposed in Title IV of the
Patent Competitiveness and Technological Innovation Bill 1990. The proposed
defence did not apply to
research tools except to allow study of an invention to
create a second invention that falls outside the scope of the original patent.
In other words, if an invention’s primary use was as a research tool, and
the use was not directed towards improving the tool,
it did not fall under the
14.49 More recently, a defence specific to infringement of gene patents was
proposed in the Genomic Research and Diagnostic Accessibility
The provision stated:
It shall not be an act of infringement for any individual or entity to
use any patent for or patented use of genetic sequence information
for purposes
of research. This paragraph shall not apply to any individual or entity that is
directly engaged in the commercial manufacture,
commercial sale, or commercial
offer for sale of a drug, medical device, process, or other product using such
patent for or patented
use of genetic sequence
information.
14.50 This provision was a response to the fact that United States patent law
does not ensure protection for ‘scientists doing
basic, fundamental,
non-commercial research when they use patented tools, techniques and
materials’. It would exempt from patent
infringement the use of patented
genetic sequence information for non-commercial research
14.51 For these purposes, genetic sequence information was defined as ‘any
ordered listing of nucleotides comprising a portion
of an organism’s
genetic code’. Research was defined to mean ‘systematic
investigation, including research development,
testing, and evaluation designed
to develop or contribute to generalizable
knowledge’.
The co-sponsor
of the Bill, the Hon Lynn Rivers, stated that creating a research use exemption
would make genetic patent law comparable
to copyright law, which has a
‘fair use’ defence that permits socially valuable uses without a
14.52 In Canada, recent inquiries have expressed
concern about the effect that uncertainty regarding the status of the
experimental
use defence may be having on the Canadian biotechnology sector. In
2002, CBAC recommended that Canada should enact a ‘research
experimental use exception’ to provide that:
It is not an infringement of a patent to use a patented process or
product either:
(a) privately and for non-commercial purposes; or
(b) to study the subject-matter of the patented invention to investigate
its properties, improve upon it, or create a new product
14.53 The recommended reform is based on the wording of art 27 of the CPC, with
certain modifications, and does not distinguish between
research conducted for
purely academic purposes and research with a commercial interest. The term
‘study’, which is broader
than ‘research’ or
‘experimental’, was used to clarify that classroom use of an
invention is excluded from
infringement.
CBAC emphasised
that only study related to the nature of the invention itself would be covered.
Therefore, ‘scientists who
use patented inventions as mere tools to
conduct further research will need to pay a licence
14.54 CBAC’s conclusions were supported in the Ontario government report,
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting: Charting New Territory in
(the Ontario Report), which concluded that Canadian law was not
‘broad enough to assure that molecular biologists will not
be sued for
patent infringement respecting research that may ultimately have a commercial
The Ontario Report
recommended that the
Patent Act 1985
(Can) be reviewed with a view to
clarifying the experimental use exception to indicate that ‘general
research use of patented
material’ is protected from infringement
United Kingdom
14.55 The Nuffield Council on Bioethics (Nuffield
Council) has expressed particular concern about the experimental and research
of ‘patented DNA
sequences’.
The Nuffield
Council stated that:
We consider that the concept of the research exemption is very important,
particularly in the area of research involving the use of
genetic information.
The knowledge embodied in patents claiming DNA sequences should, in our view, be
freely available for all scientists
to apply in the pursuit of non-commercial
14.56 The Nuffield Council noted some of the constraints on, and legal
uncertainties relating to, the ‘research exemption’
Kingdom, European and United States law. The Council recommended that this
exemption be ‘given a statutory basis
in the US and clarified in Europe by
policy makers as a matter of
14.57 The Council referred to genetic research and development being hindered by
the need for researchers to seek multiple licences
for many DNA sequences and
recommended that ‘companies work together to extend the concept of the
“research exemption”
throughout industry for DNA sequences which
appear in patents and which have a use in
meaning of this recommendation is unclear, it suggests that the Council believes
that the scope of existing defences should
be extended to cover research that
may have commercial purposes.
Related defences
14.58 Some jurisdictions,
including Australia, recognise other defences that may protect some forms of
experimental or research use
of patented inventions. These defences are
discussed below and relate to:
the private and non-commercial use of a patented invention; and
the use of a patented invention for regulatory review purposes (or
‘springboarding’).
Private and non-commercial use
14.59 Article 27(a) of the
provides that the rights
conferred by a community patent shall not extend to ‘acts done privately
and for non-commercial purposes’.
As with art 27(b), discussed above, this
provision has been incorporated into the national laws of the United Kingdom and
other member
states of the European Union. For example, s 60(5) of the
Patents Act
(UK) provides:
An act which, apart from this subsection, would constitute an
infringement of a patent for an invention shall not do so if—
(a) it is done privately and for purposes which are not commercial;
14.60 In Canada, the existence
of a defence for private and non-commercial use is recognised in s 55.2(6) of
Patent Act 1985
(Can), which provides that Canadian regulatory review
or ‘springboarding’
do not affect:
any exception to the exclusive property or privilege granted by a patent
that exists at law in respect of acts done privately and
on a non-commercial
scale or for a non-commercial purpose ...
14.61 In Australia, a defence for private and non-commercial use of a patented
invention is not expressly included in the
Patents Act
. However, the Act
may be said to imply such a defence on the same basis that the Act has been said
to support an implied experimental
use defence, namely, the definition of
‘exploit’ in the Act.
14.62 There has been limited consideration of the ambit of the private and
non-commercial use defence and exactly how it differs
from the experimental use
It appears, however,
that a private use defence will apply only where activities involving the
patented invention have not been carried
out in public, are intended for the
benefit of the person who has conducted those activities, and do not have a
commercial purpose.
At least in
the United Kingdom, even a possible commercial application of activities
involving a patented invention has been held
to preclude the application of the
Regulatory review
14.63 The experimental use
defence is broad enough in some jurisdictions to cover at least some activity
connected with regulatory
review and approval processes, but in others it is
not. Some jurisdictions have, therefore, enacted regulatory review or
‘springboarding’
provisions designed expressly to permit activities
directed to obtaining regulatory approval.
14.64 In the United States, these provisions are sometimes referred to as the
exemption’, after a case bearing that
case, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit held that an
experimental use defence did not entitle a generic
pharmaceutical manufacturer
to conduct experiments with a patented pharmaceutical in order to prepare a
regulatory application to
the United States Food and Drug Administration
14.65 Shortly after the
decision, the United States Congress passed
Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act 1984
Hatch - Waxman Act
) to overrule it. The relevant provision
It shall not be an act of infringement to make, use, or sell a patented
invention ... solely for uses reasonably related to the development
submission of information under a Federal law which regulates the manufacture,
use or sale of drugs or veterinary biological
14.66 Whether an activity is ‘reasonably related’ to seeking FDA
approval has been narrowly interpreted in the case law.
The legislative history
exemption indicates that only a limited amount of testing to
establish the bioequivalence of a generic drug substitute is
14.67 Canadian legislation contains a broader regulatory review exception, the
application of which is not restricted to approval
processes for drugs or
veterinary products. The
Patent Act 1985
(Can) provides:
It is not an infringement of a patent for any person to make, construct,
use or sell the patented invention solely for uses reasonably
related to the
development and submission of information required under any law of Canada, a
province or a country other than Canada
that regulates the manufacture,
construction, use or sale of any
14.68 In Australia, the
Patents Act
has included a regulatory review
exception since 1999.
provision is applicable only to patented pharmaceutical substances and only
where an extension of patent term has been granted
It is not an
infringement if a person exploits a patented pharmaceutical substance solely for
purposes in connection with obtaining
regulatory approval for therapeutic use in
Australia or any foreign country. Further, during the term of the extended
patent period,
a patent will not be infringed if a person exploits the claimed
pharmaceutical substance for a purpose other than for a therapeutic
exploits any form of the invention other than the pharmaceutical substance per
Research exemption in practice
14.69 Academic researchers
often assume that their use of patented inventions is immune from claims of
patent infringement.
conducted by Dr Dianne Nicol and Jane Nielsen confirms that many Australian
researchers and research institutions harbour
erroneous assumptions about the
scope of an existing experimental or research use defence. They note that some
respondents to their
2003 survey of research institutions ‘put forward the
argument that all research as such is exempt, whether it is conducted
research institutions or private
respondents commented on the difficulties of determining whether an exemption
from patent infringement applies and confirmed
that enforcement by patent
holders is rare.
14.70 Based on the survey results, Nicol and Nielsen looked at the scope of what
they term the ‘practice-based research exemption’,
that is, where
the line is drawn between basic research, which is assumed to be exempt, and
commercial research, about which there
assumption.
14.71 The scope of the practice-based research exemption is dependent on the
enforcement practices of patent holders. A number of
company respondents said
that they would not ‘seek licences from participants in the research
institution sector because this
was not a wise decision from a business
perspective’.
explaining the reasons for this view, company respondents referred to the
benefits to be derived from encouraging research in
areas in which they have an
interest; the adverse consequences of enforcing patent rights for a
company’s reputation in the
academic community; and problems in recovering
damages from public sector
researchers.
14.72 However, company respondents indicated that patents would be enforced once
research became commercial. One respondent provided
the following examples of
the types of research that his company would consider sufficiently commercial to
justify patent enforcement:
if there is a fee for service;
if an invoice is raised and there is a revenue stream;
if the purpose of the research is for generating intellectual
property; or
if the research is done with a clear intention to lead to a
14.73 Submissions
to the Inquiry confirmed that the existence of an experimental or research use
‘exemption’ is frequently
relied on by Australian researchers,
although the extent to which this is based on legal understandings or on
expectations about
the enforcement practices of patent holders is not entirely
14.74 The Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia (RCPA) noted ‘a
long standing scientific convention that non-commercial
research is exempt from
patent enforcement’.
Davies Collison and Cave referred to evidence of ‘substantial
misunderstanding, and even ignorance, on the part of academic
researchers who do not understand the rights conferred by a granted patent or
the present position in relation to research
or experimental use which may be
The Queensland
Government stated that industry seems to have adopted the practice that as long
as they themselves are not commercially
exploiting the patent, then the research
use defence should apply.
National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) also observed that some
researchers have assumed an implied exemption from
patent protection for
research as long as there are no attempts to commercialise the
14.75 Patent holders’ decisions about whether or not to require licence
fees from research organisations are often commercial
and pragmatic, rather than
legal in nature. Dr McBratney and others submitted:
Patentees do not generally institute infringement proceedings against
universities and other research institutes (because the damages
are typically
negligible); scientists usually conduct their research in disregard of the
existence of patents. Generally, patentees
favour research and development on
their patented technology by universities because it adds value to their
technologies.
14.76 Patent holders may choose not to seek licence fees in respect of some gene
patents so as not to prejudice the ongoing sale
of equipment or consumables to
major clients.
patented inventions in research without a licence may be encouraged by the small
size of the Australian market, which
makes enforcement less worthwhile for
patent holders.
research organisations may make decisions about seeking licences based on their
own risk or financial assessments.
Is reform needed?
14.77 Submissions to the
Inquiry revealed broad support for a new experimental or research use
although they were
generally not explicit about the desirable scope of the defence. A cross-section
of stakeholders indicated that
it is desirable to eliminate uncertainty as to
the existence of the defence and its
Ian Turnbull wrote:
It is all very well to talk about implied research exceptions to
infringement but who will be the first to test it in court? It will
only be when someone has achieved a valuable product resulting from their
research that the original gene patent owner
will be seeking to enforce his
rights to share in the profits. Arguments supporting the suggested existing
implied defence are not
strong on my reading of
14.78 GlaxoSmithKline stated:
In our opinion the research community (including commercial organisations
engaged in research) benefits from clarity in the scope
of any research
exemption from infringement, which enables them to understand the boundaries of
the acts they are free to carry out
with respect to a patented invention without
infringement.
14.79 Similar conclusions about the need for clarity were reached in Canada by
CBAC, which observed that:
the lack of clarity that currently exists in Canadian patent law can only
cast a pall on university and independent researchers afraid
of even the
possibility of facing a patent infringement lawsuit. This chilling effect could
lead to under-investment in basic research
and the withholding of experimental
results for fear that the disclosure of those results will draw the negative
attention of the
patent holder.
14.80 Depending on the scope of any proposal, the justifications for an
experimental or research use defence may be summarised as
follows. The
enables the validity of existing patents to be properly tested by
experimentation;
enables experiments to be conducted to determine whether a
patentable invention falls within the scope of an existing patent;
promotes attainment of new knowledge about patented inventions;
promotes the development of new and improved inventions and reduces
the likelihood of monopolisation of a new area of technology
by a patent
removes a burden on researchers, who might otherwise need to conduct
extensive patent searches and obtain advice from lawyers and
patent attorneys;
involves minimal interference with the patent holder’s
14.81 Submissions
put forward a range of reasons for recognising an experimental or research use
defence. The Australian Association
of Pathology Practices Inc advocated
‘exemption of basic research from patent compliance’, stating:
We feel that this not only delivers genes and other genetic material back
to the true owners, i.e. the human race, but helps stimulate
further ongoing
research and development of better diagnostic genetic tests whilst still
protecting patent holders rights in relation
to pharmaceutical exploitation of
their ‘discoveries’.
14.82 The RCPA considered that non-commercial research should be exempt from
patent infringement, based on the principle that ‘public
institutions
should be free to conduct research of a non-commercial
Suthers referred to the need for research exemptions to prevent research being
compromised by broad patents on genetic
14.83 The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research submitted that a
new research use defence should be enacted to further
encourage innovation:
In principle the purposes of the original patent acts were to exchange
potential monopolies for the right of others to use the information
the product or produce new products. In this sense use of patent information for
research purposes (even in the private
domain) should not be seen as an
infringement of the patent. Courts can then determine if the improved or new
products themselves
are in fact infringements of the original patent claims.
This devolves consideration of infringement to issues of obtaining commercial
advantage without impeding the further development of improved medical
14.84 Some submissions opposed the introduction of any new experimental or
research use defence.
Technologies Limited (GTG) stated:
The question is where does public domain research stop and commercial
research start. Whatever the answer is, the border is not the
gates of the
publicly funded research institutes; these entities are collectively the biggest
patenters and licencers in the world.
At the end the answer lies in jettisoning
the idea of a research exemption and developing a standard form of research
licence that
would be readily granted by ‘all’ patent holders for a
nominal fee, but that would limit coverage to only certain types
of activity.
Activity beyond this limit would require a commercial
14.85 Dr McBratney and others submitted that:
the research exception or defence is of little use even where it has been
introduced either legislatively or at common law. It should
not be introduced
into Australian law. The better approach is to review and reform the compulsory
licensing regime.
14.86 These and other submissions highlighted the difficulties in framing an
appropriate experimental or research use defence and,
in particular, in
distinguishing between commercial and non-commercial activity, and in dealing
with the exploitation of research
tools. These issues, and others related to the
framing of a new defence, are examined in more detail below.
14.87 Some other approaches to the treatment of experimental or research use of
patented inventions are discussed in other chapters
of this Discussion Paper.
One alternative approach is to introduce a statutory licensing scheme to
facilitate access to gene patents
for the purpose of research, however defined.
Statutory licensing schemes involve the payment of a reasonable licence fee to
patent holder for use of the
Another suggestion
is that patent law could be amended to bring it in line with the ‘fair
dealing’ exemption available
in copyright
Finally, some
submissions and consultations suggested that regulatory review provisions could
provide useful models for reform concerning
the experimental or research use of
patented genetic
inventions.
The content of new defences
14.88 A persistent
difficulty is how to define the scope of any new statutory defence. Two issues
raise particular concern:
the extent to which experimental uses may have commercial purposes;
the relationship between permitted experimental use and the subject
matter of the patented invention.
Commercial purpose
14.89 In framing a statutory
experimental use defence an important consideration is the extent to which
experimental use may have
a commercial purpose. If the immediate purpose of the
experimentation is technical—that is, to discover more about the patented
invention—to what degree should the presence of potential commercial
interests be permissible?
14.90 Many submissions suggested that the defence should be available only for
non-commercial research, or research conducted by
not-for-profit entities. For
example, the Caroline Chisholm Centre for Health Ethics submitted that no
licence should be required
for patented inventions used in ‘pure research,
ie the pursuit of scientific knowledge’ but that this should not apply
research with a commercial
The Cancer Council
Australia suggested that there should be an exemption if patented genetic
sequences are used in ‘bona fide,
not-for-profit
14.91 In practice, it is difficult to distinguish between ‘pure’ or
‘basic’ research and research whose purpose
or effect is to produce
a commercial outcome.
often unclear when research with potential application to the development of a
new product or process becomes directed to commercial
14.92 This difficulty is exacerbated by policies promoting the commercialisation
of publicly funded research, as discussed in Chapters
12 and 15. These policies
mean that commercial objectives are defined early in the research
cycle—making it harder to argue
that the research has no commercial
motivation. For example, commercialisation prospects may be identified in
research funding applications
to bodies such as the NHMRC or the Australian
Research Council (ARC).
14.93 It has been suggested that, for any new experimental or research use
defence to be workable, it should avoid, as far as possible,
the need to decide
whether research is commercial or non-commercial in
that will disqualify an alleged infringer from
relying on an experimental use
14.94 This difficulty was highlighted in
submissions.
The Department
of Industry, Tourism and Resources (DITR) stated that:
care needs to be exercised in defining the phrase ‘research
use’ as the boundaries between research and commercialisation
are blurred
and the potential exists for patent infringement under the guise of
14.95 AusBiotech Ltd submitted that the defence should relate to research that
might lead to a possible commercial application some
time in the future, while
excluding clinical or field trials undertaken to obtain regulatory approval for
marketing of a product.
14.96 Some submissions suggested that any attempt to construct a defence based
on distinctions between commercial and non-commercial
research would be unlikely
to work. The RCPA submitted:
the distinctions between public and private institutions and commercial
and non-commercial research are becoming blurred. Almost all
public research
institutions have active programmes to commercialise their intellectual property
and conversely many private companies
receive substantial public funding to
support their research programmes and business development. This is, therefore,
likely to make
such proposals
unworkable.
14.97 Dr McBratney and others, in opposing a new experimental or research use
defence, referred to this issue as ‘an almost
intractable
A particular
problem is that research may start out as non-commercial but acquire a
commercial intent—raising questions about
exactly when the defence would
cease to apply and infringement
14.98 GlaxoSmithKline submitted that a research defence based on distinctions
between commercial and non-commercial purposes would
be misconceived. Rather,
the defence should distinguish between the types of acts carried out, rather
than the nature or intentions
14.99 Professor John Mattick suggested that research should be exempt from
obligations to pay licence fees or royalties to patent
holders where the
research activity does not directly generate
Experimentation or research?
14.100 A second key issue
concerns the relationship that must exist between experiments and the patented
invention in order for use
to be protected by an experimental or research use
defence. Existing experimental use defences distinguish between experimental use
‘relating to the subject matter of a patented
forms of research use. Only the former category of use is covered by the
14.101 This distinction has been explained in various ways. One simple
explanation is that while research
a patented invention is exempt from
claims of patent infringement, research simply involving the
patented invention is not.
other words, the defence:
does not cover any use without a licence of a patented research tool or
medium which is needed for the research but is not being experimented
its own sake.
14.102 For example, work to provide an improved polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
methodology would probably qualify as experimental
use, but not work which
simply used PCR as a standard methodological
Inevitably, there will
be doubts about where permitted experimental use merges into broader research
use that is not covered by the
defence. A particular issue for healthcare
provision is whether experimental use may encompass clinical treatment that
provides research
results at the same
A 2003 report for the
United Kingdom Department of Health stated:
As research on genetic diagnosis and therapy grows in volume and
effectiveness the question of clinical testing will become urgent.
On balance a
health authority appears to have a greater interest in ensuring (preferably by
clear legislation) that the exception
does apply to all testing that can
reasonably be said to have research as one main purpose, provided that the
prospects for further
knowledge are not
14.103 There are particular complexities with regard to the application of the
CPC’s experimental use defence to DNA sequences
and other isolated genetic
materials. One view is that art 27 of the CPC:
means that researchers will be able to conduct research on patented DNA
sequences without violating that patent if the research relates
to improving,
further developing or testing the DNA sequence. Research aimed at discovering
another function of the DNA sequence,
its interrelation with another DNA
sequences, or its involvement in the development of disease, for example, all
arguably fall within
the meaning of improving or further developing the DNA
14.104 Associate Professor Richard Gold and Alain Gallochat state that there are
two schools of thought on the scope of the experimental
use defence as applied
to DNA sequences. The first approach is to say that much research using a
patented DNA sequence as a base
falls within the defence, including research
aimed at discovering new biological pathways on which pharmaceuticals can act or
pharmaceuticals that change the expression of the sequence. The second
approach, however, would limit the defence to research aimed
at discovering the
properties of the patented DNA itself, but not involving the discovery of new
products through the use of that
14.105 To clarify the issue, CBAC found it desirable to add the words ‘to
investigate its properties, improve upon it, or create
a new product or
process’ to the wording of its proposed experimental use defence. This
modification was designed to make it
clear that researchers can rely on the
experimental use provision ‘to use a DNA sequence, for example, to find
molecules that
bind to it or act upon
14.106 Submissions to the Inquiry addressed the distinction between research on
a patented invention and research involving its use.
Associate Professor Ross
Barnard stated:
In my experience, researchers have to date operated with the belief that
it was permissible to work ‘on’ an invention
(for the purposes of
improving the invention or making a new invention), but not to work
‘with’ an invention with a view
to providing a service or delivering
14.107 Associate Professor Barnard noted that the line between these forms of
research is not easy to draw ‘particularly when
one considers that basic
research can lead in the long term, or sometimes serendipitously in the short
term, to commercial
considered that it would be most advantageous for Australian researchers if
research of any type could be
14.108 However, one problem with such a broad exemption would be that patent
rights over research tools could be rendered illusory:
where the only use of the
patented invention is in the conduct of research, the invention may not be able
to be exploited effectively
by the patent holder. Such a situation might
penalise the Australian biotechnology
GTG stated:
A generic research exemption would totally devalue significant new
inventions specifically directed towards assisting research ...
organisations do not get their computers free, they do not get software from
Microsoft free, nor do they get their chemical
lab supplies, staff, space,
equipment and utilities free of charge. Why should they be empowered to utilise
intellectual property
free of charge without consideration or benefit for the
inventor ... ?
14.109 The Human Genetics Society of Australasia, while supporting the
introduction of an experimental or research use defence, considered
defence should be limited ‘to research on an invention claimed in a gene
GlaxoSmithKline also submitted that the exemption should apply to
experimentation or research on a patented invention. That is:
activities carried out seeking to discover new knowledge about the
patented invention, irrespective of whether that research is undertaken
commercial purposes or not and irrespective whether it is undertaken in an
academic or commercial organisation. The defence would
extend to the elucidation
of how the invention works, improving upon it and finding new uses for it, but
not to using the invention
in research for the very purpose for which the patent
was granted. This is the basis of the European defence of research into the
subject matter of the invention.
14.110 Davies Collison Cave also supported the introduction of a new
experimental use defence limited to activities involving research
or experiment
on a patented invention. It submitted that:
whilst the scope of the defence may encompass research or experimental
use directed to improving upon the claimed invention or finding
a new use for
the claimed invention, if a new product or process is created using the claimed
invention, this would not appear to
be research on the patent and accordingly
should be excluded from the scope of the
14.111 The European model received explicit support from the Australian Centre
for Intellectual Property in Agriculture
ACIPA recommended
the introduction of a research use exemption intended to encourage experimental
testing and follow-on innovation,
and defined ‘along the lines of European
Union model’.
Private and non-commercial use
14.112 IP 27 asked whether
Patents Act
should be amended to include a defence for private and
non-commercial use of a patented
Submissions
offered a mixed response to this question.
14.113 Some submissions supported the idea of such a
GlaxoSmithKline
stated that it would be useful in protecting the end users of patent infringing
products, while leaving others in
the manufacturing and supply chain liable.
Whilst the presence of such a defence in the Patents Act would make
little difference to patentees, who are unlikely to find out about
or to object
to any use which is truly private, or to commercial or public service
organisations whose activities would be very unlikely
to be covered, such a
provision may give a greater sense of security to the truly private
14.114 Other submissions opposed the introduction of a private and
non-commercial use defence, mostly on the basis that such a defence
unlikely to serve any useful purpose, given its narrow
DITR noted that
genetic technologies are unlikely to be used for private and non-commercial
purposes as they require use by experts
under controlled
conditions.
Dr McBratney and
others stated that such a defence would be of ‘minimal practical
use’ because:
(i) the patentee would likely never learn of such private, non-commercial
use; (ii) the patentee would not be likely suffer the kind
of losses that would
support the grant of injunction or award of damages; and (iii) the infringer in
such circumstances would likely
not have deep enough pockets to pay any damages
that were assessed.
The TRIPS Agreement and experimental use
14.115 Any proposed new
experimental or research use defence needs to be consistent with
Australia’s obligations under the TRIPS
Agreement, and in particular with
art 27, which requires that member States make patent protection available
without discrimination
by field of technology and art 30, which allows member
States to provide only limited exceptions to patent
14.116 The World Trade Organization Panel Report in the
Canada - Patent
significant commentary on the interpretation of relevant provisions of the TRIPS
Agreement. The complaint concerned the
patent protection of pharmaceutical
products and the operation of regulatory review (or springboarding) provisions
contained in the
Patents Act 1985
By analogy, the
case provides guidance on the allowable extent of experimental or research use
defences under the TRIPS Agreement.
14.117 The Panel concluded that the words ‘limited exception’ in art
30 of the TRIPS Agreement express a requirement
the exception make only a narrow curtailment of the legal rights which
Article 28.1 requires to be granted to patent owners, and that
the measure of
that curtailment was the extent to which the affected legal rights themselves
had been impaired.
14.118 The second condition of art 30 prohibits exceptions that unreasonably
conflict with the ‘normal exploitation’
of a patent. The Panel noted
it is normal exploitation ‘to exclude all forms of competition that could
detract significantly
from the economic returns anticipated from a patent's
grant of market
exclusivity’.
14.119 The third condition of art 30 prohibits exceptions that unreasonably
prejudice the legitimate interests of the patent holder,
taking into account the
legitimate interests of third parties. The Panel rejected an argument that
legitimate interests were limited
to legal interests and found that the term
must be defined:
in the way that it is often used in legal discourse—as a normative
claim calling for protection of interests that are ‘justifiable’
the sense that they are supported by relevant public policies or other social
14.120 In its discussion of ‘legitimate interest’, the Panel
referred to research use exceptions in national laws. The
Panel noted that such
exceptions may be ‘based on the notion that a key public policy purpose
underlying patent laws is to
facilitate the dissemination and advancement of
technical knowledge’.
Both society and scientists have a ‘legitimate interest’ in using
patent disclosure to support the advance of science
and technology.
14.121 The TRIPS Agreement places significant constraints on the allowable ambit
of exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred
by patents. While the precise
extent of these constraints is uncertain, the Inquiry has reached some
preliminary conclusions in relation
to experimental or research use defences.
14.122 It seems clear that the enactment of an experimental use defence into
Australian law, covering acts done for experimental
purposes relating to the
subject matter of the patented
would not conflict
with the provisions of the TRIPS Agreement, as it would constitute an
appropriately limited exception to patent
14.123 In the
Canada - Patent Protection
case, both parties accepted
that experimental use exceptions, which are found in the law of most members of
the WTO, comply with
the TRIPS Agreement. The European Communities and their
member states (EC) stated that such exceptions are limited in character as
apply only to one of the five patent rights in art 28.1—that is, to
‘using’, but not to making, offering for
sale, selling or
There was no
conflict with the normal exploitation of the patent because it is a consequence
of the ‘basic patent deal’
that others may use the patent
holder’s invention to further develop the state of the art. Further, no
monopoly on research
is included in the patent holder’s legitimate
interests and, therefore, there is no need to balance those interests with those
of third parties.
noted that the experimental use exception was grounded in the theory that the
experimentation was either a
use of the invention or a form of
scientific experimentation—that is, a ‘fair
As such, the exception was well within the four corners of Article 30 of
the TRIPS Agreement. It was ‘limited’ in that
it only applied to
non-commercial experimentation, i.e. testing for academic or scientific
purposes, or to commercial experimentation
when a licence was anticipated. It
would not be worth the trouble to sue a researcher or university for patent
infringement, particularly
if the research did not threaten the commercial
interests of the patent holder.
14.124 Further, it was said that such exceptions do not conflict with the normal
exploitation of the patent, or unreasonably prejudice
the legitimate interests
of the patent owner, in that the latter retained the right to prevent the
marketing or sale of any infringing
Experimental use
exceptions take account of the legitimate interests of third parties in the
advance of scientific and technical
knowledge, to the benefit of society at
14.125 Australia’s third party arguments noted that ‘purely
experimental use’ could be justified under the TRIPS
Agreement as
not falling within the scope of exclusive patent rights under art 28
(and therefore not constituting an infringing act); or
a specific limited exception to patent rights under art
position becomes more uncertain where it is proposed to provide more extensive
protection. The broader the classes of experimental
or research activity given
protection, the more likely an exception will conflict with the TRIPS
14.127 A significant uncertainty concerns the extent to which a defence could
extend beyond experimental use to broader research
use. For example, is it
possible to cover a broad category of research activity if the exception is
limited to ‘pure’
or ‘basic’ research that does not have
immediate commercial application?
14.128 Article 27 of the TRIPS Agreement does not ‘prohibit bona fide
exceptions to deal with problems that may exist only
in certain product
possible to craft a broader research use exception that is specific to some
defined subset of gene patents, so that the
provision does not discriminate by
field of technology in terms of TRIPS. However, there would need to be strong
arguments to justify
differentiating a relevant category of gene patents from
patents in other fields of technology.
14.129 The ALRC has received some comments on the implications of the TRIPS
Agreement for reform relating to experimental or research
use defences. In
consultations it was suggested that, providing any such defence applied only to
non-commercial research, there would
be minimal interference with the rights of
the patent holder, helping ensure the reform was
TRIPS - compliant.
GlaxoSmithKline considered that reform along the lines of the European Union
model would comply with the TRIPS Agreement, but noted:
in order to avoid any conflict with Australia’s obligations under
the TRIPs agreement, any research defence should not be limited
to activities
involving only gene patents, as this would be to discriminate on the basis of
technology.
14.130 ACIPA stated that the defences mooted in IP 27 did not go beyond
international norms and practices and that the European Union
and the United
States have long recognised research use defences as ‘a legitimate limited
exception to the exclusive rights
conferred by a
ALRC’s views
14.131 The ALRC has
concluded that it is desirable to remove uncertainty about the existence and
scope of an experimental use defence
in Australian law. Such a reform received
broad support in submissions. The existing uncertainty is unhelpful to the
research community
and commercial organisations. It has the potential to lead to
under-investment in basic research and hinder innovation because researchers
concerned that their activities may lead to legal action by patent holders.
14.132 In the
Canada - Patent Protection
it was noted that an
experimental use defence is closely linked to the ‘basic underlying
deal’ embodied in the grant
of a patent by the
The patent holder is
given the exclusive right to exploit the patent for the term of the patent but
in return agrees to disclose
the invention at an early stage in order to avoid
research investment being duplicated, and to make the invention available as the
basis for further research. In a sense, therefore, an experimental use defence
may be seen as a corollary to the disclosure requirement
because otherwise
researchers would be allowed only to read the description of the patented
invention, without being able to experiment
with the invention to see if and how
14.133 The ALRC’s view is that the
Patents Act
should be amended to
incorporate an express experimental use defence. However, the full benefit of
reform will not be achieved unless
the scope of any new experimental use defence
is carefully defined. In those jurisdictions in which common law defences are
firmly established than in Australia, significant doubts exist about the
ambit of the defence. Doubts may persist even where statutory
defences exist, as
in the United Kingdom and other member states of the European Union, unless the
scope of the defence is articulated.
14.134 There are many possible criteria that might be used to delineate the
boundary between permissible and impermissible experimentation
or research
involving a patented invention. For example, distinctions might be drawn
experimentation
a patented invention and research
involving the
of a patented invention;
the purpose or intention of experimentation or research, in terms of
its technical, scientific or commercial motivations;
the technical, scientific or commercial outcomes of experimentation
or research; or
the nature of the organisation conducting the experimentation or
research, for example whether the organisation is a commercial or
not-for-profit
14.135 The ALRC’s preliminary view is that the key
element should be the first listed criterion—that is, the required
relationship between the experimentation or research and the patented invention.
At a minimum, experimentation that seeks further
knowledge about the patented
invention and its uses should be covered. The defence should also extend to
experimentation or research
on the patented invention aimed at improving the
invention, as suggested by CBAC. This appears to be consistent with the views of
Professor Rebecca Eisenberg, who has suggested that the proper scope of an
experimental use defence should include research ‘in
the field of the
invention, which could potentially lead to improvements in the patented
technology or to the development of alternative
means of achieving the same
14.136 It has been suggested that, under an experimental use defence, the
following acts should not constitute patent infringement:
(a) testing an invention to determine its sufficiency or to compare it to
prior art; (b) tests to determine how the patented invention
worked; (c)
experimentation on a patented invention for the purpose of improving on it or
developing a further patentable invention;
(d) experimentation for the purpose
of ‘designing around’ a patented invention; (e) testing to determine
whether the
invention met the tester’s purposes in anticipation of
requesting a licence; and (f) academic instructional experimentation
14.137 In Australia, depending on the view taken of the current law, many uses
of patented genetic materials and technologies in
medical research would
infringe gene patents. An experimental use defence should protect some of these
uses from claims of patent
infringement, at least where the properties of the
genetic materials and technologies are being investigated.
14.138 It is not a simple matter to describe what kinds of experimental uses of
genetic materials or technologies should be regarded
as involving
experimentation
a patented invention, and therefore protected by an
experimental use defence. However, a good starting point is that study or
experimentation
on patented genetic materials or technologies for the purpose of
improving, further developing, or testing them should be covered
14.139 For example, the ALRC suggests that experimentation on patented genetic
materials aimed at discovering another function of
a genetic sequence or its
interrelation with another genetic sequence should generally be covered by such
a defence. On the other
hand, the use of some genetic materials, such as gene
promoters and repressors,
should not be covered by the defence because the material is not itself being
investigated, but is being used as a research tool
to investigate a gene and its
expression. As discussed in Chapter 13, researchers developing downstream
products often require access
to patented inventions, including research tools,
to conduct their research. Patent holders properly view these research tools as
valuable end products in themselves, for which patent protection is important.
The use of patented research tools should not be covered
by a new experimental
use defence.
14.140 In the ALRC’s view, it would be unrealistic to insist that the
purpose of experimentation be solely to gain more technical
or scientific
knowledge and that it have no commercial motivation. As CBAC explained:
Given that even basic research often leads to commercial products, we
have not attempted to distinguish between research conducted
for purely academic
purposes and research with a commercial
14.141 An important purpose of the patent system is to promote experimentation
as a stepping stone to the development of new or improved
inventions. Whether
experimentation is conducted by a non-profit or commercial entity, or with
altruistic or commercial motivations,
does not seem central to this purpose.
14.142 Whatever its exact formulation, and with one important qualification, the
ALRC’s view is that a statutory defence should
more closely resemble the
law of the United Kingdom and other member states of the European Union (which
permit experimentation to
have some commercial motivation, though not perhaps a
dominant commercial motivation) than the more restrictive position reflected
United States case law. Member states of the European Union have included
experimental use exceptions in legislation without any
apparent negative
effects. Moreover, basing a new defence on the European Union model would
promote harmonisation of Australian patent
law with the law of a major trading
bloc, and would give Australian courts the benefit of considering European case
law in applying
the new provisions.
14.143 The qualification, however, is that the existence of a commercial purpose
or intention (even if a dominant purpose) should
not be relevant to the
application of an experimental use defence, so long as experimentation is on,
rather than simply using, the
This perspective
is consistent with the view that the patent system is intended to facilitate
research and promote innovation. It
is also consistent with views expressed by
Newman J in the case of
Integra Life Sciences v Merck
in the United States
Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit. Newman J stated that the patent
both contemplates and facilitates research into patented subject matter,
whether the purpose is scientific understanding or evaluation
or comparison or
improvement. Such activities are integral to the advance of
technology.
14.144 In response to arguments that commercial motivations should disqualify
researchers from relying on the United States common
law defence, Newman J
an ultimate goal or hope of profit from successful research should not
eliminate the exemption. The better rule is to recognize the
exemption for
research conducted in order to understand or improve upon or modify the patented
subject matter, whatever the ultimate
goal. That is how the patent system has
always worked: the patent is infringed by and bars activity associated with
development and
commercialization of infringing subject matter, but the research
itself is not prohibited, nor is comparison of the patented subject
matter with
improved technology or with designs whose purpose is to avoid the
14.145 For these reasons, the ALRC proposes that the Commonwealth enact a new
defence under the
Patents Act
to a claim of infringement relating to the
use of a patented invention to study or experiment on the subject matter of a
invention, for example, to investigate its properties or to improve
upon it (Proposal 14 - 1). The legislation should make it clear
existence of a commercial purpose or intention does not affect the availability
of the defence, provided the study or experimentation
is on the subject matter
of the patented invention.
14.146 It may be that some commercially-orientated research falls outside the
scope of such a defence; if so, this is not because
the research has a
commercial objective but because it is not experimentation on the subject matter
of the patented invention. This
may be the case, for example, where trials are
conducted not to find out more about the subject matter of a patented invention
simply to prove known characteristics of the invention to the satisfaction
of a regulator. In practice, because the scope of the
proposed defence is
limited to study or experimentation on the subject matter of the patented
invention, most research
patented inventions will not be covered by
14.147 As currently formulated, Proposal 14 - 1 applies to all patented
inventions, not just those concerning genetic materials and
technologies.
Submissions and consultations emphasised that the problems encountered in
relation to the experimental use of patented
genetic technologies are similar to
those applicable to other subject matter, such as business methods and
pharmaceuticals.
For example,
Davies Collison Cave submitted that any amendment should apply in all fields of
for the simple reason that the current difficulties are not confined to
the ‘gene patent’ field, but apply in all fields
of technology,
particularly in the pharmaceutical and related
14.148 Similarly, DITR stated:
The use of advanced technologies in the course of further research is a
need that is common to all areas of technology and therefore
there is no
apparent reason why this defence needs to be instituted for genetic research
14.149 In addition, the TRIPS Agreement imposes constraints on the extent to
which the national laws of signatory countries may discriminate
of technology’.
provides another important reason why it is appropriate to extend this proposed
reform beyond gene patents to all patented inventions.
14.150 Finally, as noted above, the CPC, the
Patents Act
and the CBAC recommendations each incorporate a private and non-commercial use
defence. While there may be some advantage in
also incorporating this defence
Patents Act
in terms of promoting the harmonisation of
Australian patent law with European laws, the ALRC does not find the arguments
of such a defence compelling. The defence would have little practical
application to the use of genetic materials and technologies,
and it received no
significant support in submissions to the Inquiry.
Proposal 14 - 1
The Commonwealth should amend the
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) to establish a new defence to a claim of patent infringement based on
the use of a patented invention to study or experiment
on the subject matter of
the invention; for example, to investigate its properties or improve upon it.
The legislation should make
it clear that the existence of a commercial purpose
or intention does not affect the availability of the defence.
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects
of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into
force on 1 January 1995).
(1876) 9 ChD
Nor was such a defence
available under the
Patents Act 1952
Patents Act 1990
‘Experimental Use Exception to Patent Infringement: Where Does Australia
Intellectual Property Forum
Some consideration of experimental use
has occurred in cases relating to patent validity, focusing on ‘secret
an element of patentability under
Patents Act
s 18(1)(d).
Longworth v Emerton
[1951] HCA 45
(1951) 83 CLR 539
Re Application of
[1992] APO 24
(1992) 24 IPR 281.
New York University v Nissin Molecular Biology
Institute Inc
[1994] APO 22
(1994) 29 IPR 173
, the delegate of the Commissioner of Patents
agreed that the words ‘experimental purposes’ in r 3.25(4) of the
Patents Regulations 1991
(Cth) should be ‘construed analogously to
those experimental uses that do not give rise to infringement of a
patent’—suggesting
the existence of an experimental use defence:
Canada: Patent
Protection of Pharmaceutical Products: Complaint by the European Communities and
their Member States
, 17 March 2000, WT/DS114/R. The Australian Government
submission was prepared by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, IP
Australia, and the Department of Industry, Science and Resources: See C Smith,
‘Experimental Use Exception to Patent Infringement:
Where Does Australia
Intellectual Property Forum
See C Smith, ‘Experimental Use
Exception to Patent Infringement: Where Does Australia Stand?’
Intellectual Property Forum
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Advisory Council on Intellectual
, <www.acip.gov.au/reviews.htm#expuse> at 24
November 2003.
Monsanto Co v
Stauffer Chemical Co
[1985] RPC 515
Smith Kline & French
Laboratories Ltd v Attorney-General (NZ)
[1991] 2 NZLR
Smith Kline & French
Laboratories Ltd v Attorney-General (NZ)
[1991] 2 NZLR
Frearson v Loe
(1876) 9 ChD
Monsanto Co v Stauffer Chemical
Kline & French Laboratories Ltd v Attorney-General (NZ)
[1991] 2 NZLR
Monsanto Co v Stauffer
Chemical Co (NZ)
Smith Kline & French
Laboratories Ltd v Attorney-General (NZ)
[1991] 2 NZLR 560
New York University v Nissin
Molecular Biology Institute Inc
[1994] APO 22
(1994) 29 IPR 173.
The springboarding
provisions of the
Patents Act
(see below) were introduced in part because
it was assumed that
would be followed and that clinical trials
carried out in order to obtain regulatory approval would not be covered by an
experimental
use defence.
G Lynch and J
Experimental Defence to Patent Infringement
, Baldwin Shelston
Waters, <www.bsw.com/articles/xfactor9.html> at 19 May
Roche Products Inc v Bolar
Pharmaceutical Co
[1984] USCAFED 216
(1984) 733 F 2d
Embrex Inc v Service
Engineering Corp
[2000] USCAFED 103
216 F 3d 1343
Madey v Duke University
[2002] USCAFED 222
307 F 3d 1351
1362 - 1363.
1362. The Court was not required to determine whether the experimental use
defence was made out on the facts. The Court ordered
the case to be remanded to
the District Court for such a
determination.
Another view is that
this approach is not compelled by the
decision when read as a
whole. Research institutions are neither automatically entitled, nor
automatically ineligible for the experimental
use defence: see
University v Madey
No 02 - 1007 (Supreme Court of the United States,
2003): Brief for the United States as Amicus Curiae (May
See, eg, Ibid: Brief for the
Association of American Medical Colleges et al, as Amicus Curiae (January 2003);
J Johnson, ‘Experimental
Use Exception Does Not Exempt University from
Patent Infringement’,
(2002) 10(1) Center for Advanced Study and
Research on Intellectual Property Newsletter
<www.law.washington.edu/casrip/newsletter/newsv10i1us1.PDF>; R Matthews,
United States: Experimental: Use Defense Does Not Automatically Shield
Non-profit Universities
, Mondaq, <www.mondaq.com> at 4 August
J Johnson, ‘Experimental
Use Exception Does Not Exempt University from Patent Infringement’,
(2002) 10(1) Center for Advanced Study and Research on Intellectual Property
<www.law.washington.edu/casrip/newsletter/newsv10i1us1.PDF>.
University v Madey
No 02 - 1007 (Supreme Court of the United States,
2003): Brief for the Association of American Medical Colleges et al, as Amicus
Curiae (January 2003).
See T Sampson,
‘Madey, Integra and the Wealth of Nations’
Intellectual Property Review
and the dissenting judgment of Newman J in
Integra Life Sciences v Merck KgaA
[2002] USCAFED 222
307 F 3d 1351
Micro Chemicals Ltd v Smith
Kline & French Inter-American Corporation
(1971) 25 DLR (3d)
By the Ontario Court of Appeal in
Dableh v Ontario Hydro (CA)
[1996] 3 FC 751
(1876) 9 ChD 48
Biotechnology Advisory Committee,
Patenting of Higher Life Forms and Related
Issues: Report to the Government of Canada Biotechnology Ministerial
Coordinating Committee
P-4 (Canada) s 55.2(1). Springboarding (regulatory review) provisions are
Canadian Biotechnology
Advisory Committee,
Patenting of Higher Life Forms and Related Issues: Report
to the Government of Canada Biotechnology Ministerial Coordinating Committee
Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care,
Genetics, Testing & Gene
Patenting: Charting New Territory in Healthcare: Report to the Provinces and
Territories
(UK) s 60(5).
Monsanto Co v Stauffer
Chemical Co
[1985] RPC 515.
537 - 538. See
Patents Act
Monsanto Co v Stauffer
Chemical Co
[1985] RPC 515
Smith Kline & French
Laboratories Ltd v Evans Medical Ltd
[1989] FSR 513
Auchinloss v Agricultural &
Veterinary Supplies Ltd
Council Agreement relating to
Community Patents No 89/695/EEC
, 15 December 1989, OJ L 401/01. The
Convention must be ratified by all European Union member states before it takes
effect. Fewer
than half of the member states have ratified it: European Union,
, <www.eurunion.org/legislat/iiprop/patents.htm> at 5 August
C Smith, ‘Experimental Use
Exception to Patent Infringement: Where Does Australia Stand?’
Intellectual Property Forum
W Cornish, ‘Experimental Use
of Patented Inventions in European Community States’ (1998) 29
International Review of Industrial Property and Copyright Law
Possibly including clinical tests
of formulations of a patented active substance, as this will necessarily involve
seeking new knowledge
Ibid, 752, 753.
C Smith, ‘Experimental Use
Exception to Patent Infringement: Where Does Australia Stand?’
Intellectual Property Forum
, 19 referring to
Monsanto Co v Stauffer
Chemical Co
[1985] RPC 515
Klinische Versuche I
W Cornish, ‘Experimental Use
of Patented Inventions in European Community States’ (1998) 29
International Review of Industrial Property and Copyright Law
Klinische Versuche
[1994] RPC 623.
Versuche II
[1998] RPC 423.
See W Cornish, ‘Experimental Use of
Patented Inventions in European Community States’ (1998) 29
International Review of Industrial Property and Copyright Law
747 - 751; C Smith, ‘Experimental Use Exception to Patent
Infringement: Where Does Australia Stand?’
Intellectual
Property Forum
‘Experimental Use of Patented Inventions in European Community
States’ (1998) 29
International Review of Industrial Property and
Klinische Versuche II
[1998] RPC 423.
See W Cornish, ‘Experimental Use of Patented Inventions in
European Community States’ (1998) 29
International Review of Industrial
Property and Copyright Law
735, 747 - 751; C Smith, ‘Experimental
Use Exception to Patent Infringement: Where Does Australia Stand?’
Intellectual Property Forum
C Smith, ‘Experimental Use
Exception to Patent Infringement: Where Does Australia Stand?’
Intellectual Property Forum
‘Experimental Use of Patented Inventions in European Community
States’ (1998) 29
International Review of Industrial Property and
735, 750 - 751.
Cornish, M Llewelyn and M Adcock,
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and
(2003), 71.
Duke University
[2002] USCAFED 222
307 F 3d 1351
S Maebius and H Wegner,
Ruling on Research Exemption Roils Universities: Finding of No Academic
Privilege from Infringement May Lead to New Legislation
Lardner, <www.foley.com/publications/pub_detail.aspx?pubid=1416> at 12
August 2003.
See S Michel, ‘The
Experimental Use Exception to Infringement Applied to Federally Funded
Inventions’ (1992) 7
Berkeley Technology Law Journal
The Bill was referred to the House
Subcommittee on the Courts, the Internet, and Intellectual Property on 5 May
2002, but lapsed
at the end of the 107th
Research and Diagnostic Accessibility Bill 2002 (HR 3967) (US) s
United States,
Congressional
Debates, House of Representatives
, 14 March 2002, E353 (L Rivers),
Genomic Research and Diagnostic
Accessibility Bill 2002 (HR 3967) (US) s
United States,
Congressional
Debates, House of Representatives
, 14 March 2002, E353 (L Rivers),
Biotechnology Advisory Committee,
Patenting of Higher Life Forms and Related
Issues: Report to the Government of Canada Biotechnology Ministerial
Coordinating Committee
Ontario Ministry of Health and
Long-Term Care,
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting: Charting New
Territory in Healthcare: Report to the Provinces and Territories
Nuffield Council on Bioethics,
The Ethics of Patenting DNA
Ibid, 61. In July 2003, a study of
intellectual property rights within the United Kingdom healthcare sector
recommended that the
Department of Health ‘should support the work
currently being undertaken to clarify the concept of research use at the UK,
and international levels’: W Cornish, M Llewelyn and M Adcock,
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and Genetics
Nuffield Council on Bioethics,
The Ethics of Patenting DNA
Council Agreement relating to
Community Patents No 89/695/EEC
, 15 December 1989, OJ L
RS c P-4 (Canada) s 55.2(1). Springboarding (regulatory review) provisions
are discussed
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual Property
Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
M Fysh, ‘Infringement,
Experimental Use and Clinical Trials: The Experience of the United Kingdom and
Ireland’ (Paper
presented at Legal Issues in Exploiting Drug Patents in
Europe, Licensing Executives Society Italy Conference, Milan, 12-13 December
McDonald v Graham
Roche Products Inc v Bolar
Pharmaceutical Co
[1984] USCAFED 216
(1984) 733 F 2d
§ 271(e)(1).
S Michel, ‘The
Experimental Use Exception to Infringement Applied to Federally Funded
Inventions’ (1992) 7
Berkeley Technology Law Journal
RS c P-4 (Canada) s 55.2(1). New Zealand enacted a similar
provision in 2002:
Patents Act
Patents Act 1990
See, eg, C Dennis,
‘Geneticists Question Fees for Use of Patented “Junk”
DNA’ (2003) 423
See D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
6, 218. The research institutions surveyed included universities, government
institutions, publicly funded independent research institutions and private
research institutions.
For example, the Queensland
Government stated: ‘Universities are often able to obtain free licences or
“peppercorn”
licence fees for research purposes, by adopting the
research use defence’: Queensland Government,
Submission P57
January 2004.
Royal College of
Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October
Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
National Health and Medical
Research Council,
Submission P52
, 31 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Australian Genome Research
Consultation
, Melbourne, 4 September
BresaGen Limited,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 15 September
See, eg, Cancer Council of New
South Wales,
Submission P1
, 5 June 2003; Australian Association of
Pathology Practices Inc,
Submission P10
, 24 September 2003; I Turnbull,
Submission P11
, 25 September 2003; Cancer Voices NSW Inc,
, 16 September 2003; Australian Centre for Intellectual Property in
Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September 2003; Children’s Cancer
Institute Australia for Medical Research,
Submission P13
, 30 September
2003; Breast Cancer Network Australia,
Submission P22
, 30 September 2003;
Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003; Royal
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; G
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003; Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; R Barnard,
, 7 October 2003; GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
2003; J Mattick,
Submission P35
, 13 October 2003; Department of Industry
Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003; Caroline Chisholm
Centre for Health Ethics Inc,
Submission P38
, 17 October 2003; Walter and
Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
2003; Cancer Council Tasmania,
Submission P40
, 29 September 2003; Cancer
Council South Australia,
Submission P41
, 9 October 2003; A McBratney and
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003; Queensland Government,
, 5 January 2004; Commonwealth Department of Health and Ageing,
Submission P65
, 28 January
See, eg, R Barnard,
Submission P32
, 7 October 2003; I Turnbull,
Submission P11
September 2003; GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003;
Commonwealth Department of Health and Ageing,
Submission P65
, 28 January
Submission P11
, 25 September
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Biotechnology Advisory Committee,
Patenting of Higher Life Forms and Related
Issues: Report to the Government of Canada Biotechnology Ministerial
Coordinating Committee
(2002), 14 - 15. Similarly, the Ontario report
noted that legal uncertainty about the extent of the experimental use exception
lead to abandonment of research projects and product development: Ontario
Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care,
Genetics, Testing & Gene
Patenting: Charting New Territory in Healthcare: Report to the Provinces and
Territories
(2002), 49.
Smith, ‘Experimental Use Exception to Patent Infringement: Where Does
Australia Stand?’
Intellectual Property Forum
Association of Pathology Practices Inc,
Submission P10
, 24 September
Royal College of Pathologists
of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
, 2 October
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003; Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October
Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
See M O’Rourke,
‘Toward a Doctrine of Fair Use in Patent Law’ (2000) 100
Law Journal
Submission P32
, 7 October 2003; Institute of Patent and Trade Mark
Attorneys of Australia,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 September
Caroline Chisholm Centre for
Health Ethics Inc,
Submission P38
, 17 October
Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003; Cancer Voices NSW Inc,
, 16 September 2003.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions,
Intellectual Property Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
(2002), 58 - 59; Nuffield Council on Bioethics,
The Ethics of Patenting
(2002), 60 - 61.
Australian Clinical Genetics Service,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 16
September 2003; Gene CRC,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 3 September 2003;
Institute of Patent and Trade Mark Attorneys of Australia,
Consultation
Melbourne, 5 September 2003.
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003;
Department of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
2003; A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003;
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; Genetic Technologies
Submission P45
, 20 October 2003; Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
AusBiotech Ltd,
, 7 November
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
, 13 October 2003.
the words used in
Council Agreement relating to Community Patents No
, 15 December 1989, OJ L 401/01 art 27(b) and
Patents Act
(UK) s 60(5).
Nuffield Council on Bioethics,
The Ethics of Patenting DNA
Cornish, M Llewelyn and M Adcock,
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and
(2003), 71.
and A Gallochat,
The European Directive on the Legal Protection of
Biotechnological Inventions: History, Implementation, and Lessons for Canada
(2001), 10.
Canadian Biotechnology
Advisory Committee,
Patenting of Higher Life Forms and Related Issues: Report
to the Government of Canada Biotechnology Ministerial Coordinating Committee
Submission P32
, 7 October
Consultation
, Brisbane, 3 October
Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October
Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October
Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September
Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003),
Question 14 - 2.
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Department of Industry Tourism
and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003; Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
, 24 October 2003; Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
20 October 2003.
Department of
Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Canada: Patent Protection of
Pharmaceutical Products: Complaint by the European Communities and their Member
, 17 March 2000, WT/DS114/R,
The approximate Australian
equivalent is
Patents Act 1990
However, unlike the
Canadian provision, this provides a defence to the infringement of a patent only
after an extension of patent
has been granted under
Patents Act 1990
, and is expressly limited to the exploitation of
‘pharmaceutical substances’. The Canadian provisions also included a
provision allowing the ‘stockpiling’ of articles intended for sale
after the expiry of the patent. The general regulatory
review provision was
found to be ‘not inconsistent’ with TRIPS. The stockpiling provision
was found to be inconsistent
and was repealed in 2001: 2001, c. 10, (Bill
Patent Protection of Pharmaceutical Products: Complaint by the European
Communities and their Member States
, 17 March 2000, WT/DS114/R,
The Panel found that the
regulatory review exception did not conflict with a normal exploitation of
patents. Using patent rights
to preclude submissions for regulatory
authorisation and exploiting an additional period of
rights should not be considered ‘normal’: Ibid,
That is, consistent with United
Kingdom law:
Patents Act
(UK) s 60(5)(b); and
Agreement relating to Community Patents No 89/695/EEC
, 15 December 1989, OJ
L 401/01 art 27(b).
Patent Protection of Pharmaceutical Products: Complaint by the European
Communities and their Member States
, 17 March 2000, WT/DS114/R,
Institute of Patent
and Trade Mark Attorneys of Australia,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September
Canada: Patent Protection
of Pharmaceutical Products: Complaint by the European Communities and their
Member States
, 17 March 2000,
WT/DS114/R.
Ibid, 56. See also T Sampson,
‘Madey, Integra and the Wealth of Nations’
Intellectual Property Review
R Eisenberg, ‘Patents
and the Progress of Science: Exclusive Rights and Experimental Use’
University of Chicago Law Review
, 1078. Eisenberg notes that
‘it might be appropriate in some cases to award a reasonable royalty after
the fact’ to the
patent holder. See also A Rai, ‘Regulating
Scientific Research: Intellectual Property Rights and the Norms of
Northwestern University Law Review
of Legislative History of Title V of Patent Competitiveness and Technological
Innovation Bill 1990 (US) in H Wegner,
Patent Law in Biotechnology, Chemicals
& Pharmaceuticals
(2nd ed, 1994),
For example, a CMV
(cytomegalovirus) promoter: US Patent Nos 5,168,062 and
Biotechnology Advisory Committee,
Patenting of Higher Life Forms and Related
Issues: Report to the Government of Canada Biotechnology Ministerial
Coordinating Committee
As we have seen, under European
laws, permissible experimentation may have some commercial objective but the
commercial objective,
it seems, may not be the dominant motivation. The courts
are thus still required to inquire into the commercial motivation for
Integra Life Sciences v
[2002] USCAFED 222
307 F 3d 1351
(2002). The case was heard at the same time as
dissenting).
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003;
Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003; South Australian
Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003; Institute of Patent and
Trade Mark Attorneys of Australia,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 September
2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November
Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into
force on 1 January 1995) art 27.1.
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
15. Research Culture, Patents and Commercialisation
Introduction
Researchers, patenting and commercialisation
Resistance to commercialisation
Submissions and consultations
Options for reform
ALRC's views
Lack of skills and experience
Submissions and consultations
Education programs and support
ALRC's views
Secrecy and publication
Submissions and consultations
The general grace period
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
15. Research Culture, Patents and Commercialisation
Introduction
Terms of Reference direct the ALRC to consider the impact of current patenting
laws and practices related to genes and genetic
and related technologies on the
conduct of research and its subsequent application and commercialisation.
15.2 Obtaining patent protection for new inventions in genetics is often vital
to ensure the invention is developed to the stage
where it has a useful
application, particularly in healthcare provision. One submission commented:
Without patents the discovery and development of new and cost effective
medicines and vaccines will not [take] place, with or without
public funding.
Without gene patents, there would be little or no incentive to invest in this
area of research and develop new innovative
medicines on the basis of this
15.3 Failure to patent genetic research may therefore affect healthcare
provision if it is not picked up by industry. This may occur
where researchers
fail to obtain patent protection either due to a lack of experience with the
patenting process or because of resistance
to the need to protect and
commercially exploit research. It may also occur if the research is made public
before a patent application
has been made, as the invention may no longer be
15.4 This chapter considers the impact of patenting on research practice. It
examines the role of academic researchers in the patenting
and commercialisation
process and considers some factors that may adversely affect this process.
15.5 This chapter also explores the relationship between the need for secrecy to
protect the novelty of a new invention prior to
obtaining a patent and the
scientific tradition of peer review and replication of studies and briefly
considers how this affects
research practice. The effect of the provisions for
non-prejudicial disclosures and the grace period prior to filing a patent
application
provided under the
Patents Act 1990
) are considered in relation to early publication of research results and
the ability to obtain a patent.
Researchers, patenting and commercialisation
15.6 It is Australian
Government policy to promote the commercial exploitation of innovative
As discussed in Chapter
12, the responsibility to obtain intellectual property protection and pursue
commercialisation of research
lies with the institution that receives government
funding and carries out research. Within institutions, it is researchers who are
usually best placed to identify research with commercial potential.
15.7 This emphasis on commercialisation is a relatively new development in the
culture of research. As John O’Connor has suggested:
Before the advent of the commercial potential of biotechnology,
researchers were not motivated to seek patent protection. This is
because it was
regarded as being against scientific norms to claim exclusive rights in research
discoveries. Consequently, commercial
potential of recent advances in
biotechnology has created a conflict between traditional policies of patent law
and scientific research.
15.8 Dr Dianne Nicol and Jane Nielsen have also observed that academics involved
in upstream research must now respond to commercial
considerations, noting:
Many of the scientists who are involved in upstream research and for whom
academic kudos has in the past been sufficient reward are
now required to
consider the best ways to protect their intellectual property rights and
transfer their technology to industry. This
introduces sharper focus on
commercial considerations in the research
environment.
15.9 The skills, experience and attitudes of academic researchers may affect the
capture and exploitation of intellectual property
in genetic research. This is
particularly so in relation to genetic research, where more than 50% of
Australian holders of gene patents
are public sector
organisations.
Resistance to commercialisation
15.10 One factor that may
prevent genetic research from being patented and subsequently commercialised is
researcher resistance to
obtaining and exploiting patents. It has been suggested
that some academic researchers resist patenting and commercialisation because
perceptions that commercially-focused work is ‘dirty’
A recent study of
biotechnology patenting and technology transfer practices by Nicol and Nielsen
(Nicol-Nielsen Study) reported:
one respondent said that researchers hate patents, and see patenting as
prostitution, but they pay the bills. Another said that some
researchers just
don’t want to know about patents and others make jibes about the patent
system. He described attempts to change
attitudes about patents in the research
sector as ‘trying to turn around a big
15.11 Some comments received in consultations also suggested that there is an
anti-commercialisation attitude prevalent among
researchers.
For example, Bio
Innovation SA suggested that this might in part be because some researchers do
not regard commercially-focused science
as ‘real’ science, or
because of a belief that placing research results in the public domain without
patenting them will
allow others to benefit from the
Another stated that:
Observation suggests that most scientists see patents and IP generally as
a necessary evil that they wish would simply go away because
of the work
involved and costs of administration, associated with licensing for example. All
of which interferes with their actual
job of doing
15.12 Scientists may also resist commercialisation due to the need for the
scientific community to freely and widely disseminate
their research results.
This freedom may be restricted by the need to keep results confidential prior to
making a patent application
or due to contractual terms in licensing or
collaborative agreements. The impact of secrecy requirements on scientific
research is
discussed further below.
15.13 However, it appears that this resistance is decreasing and that the
research culture in Australia has undergone a shift over
the past decade. In
some consultations, it was suggested that there is now greater acceptance of the
need to commercialise research
For example, the
Queensland Biotechnology Advisory Council suggested that in the past, commercial
application of research results
had been ‘frowned upon’, but said
that research culture is now more accepting of
commercialisation.
respondent in the Nicol-Nielsen Study, a technology transfer officer, stated:
there are two types of researchers: those that always have their eye on
further activities. For them, intellectual property is the
currency. They know
that it is an important part of their work. Others (generally older academics)
find it really annoying. They
find it difficult to understand corporate bodies,
ownership of intellectual property and employment issues. But this culture is
We rarely come across problems
15.14 Respondents in the Nicol-Nielsen Study suggested a number of causes for
this change in culture. These included the preference
of funding bodies such as
the Australian Research Council (ARC) and the National Health and Medical
Research Council (NHMRC) for
funding research with commercial potential; the
need to obtain funding from the private sector due to a lack of public sector
the desire for economic viability, and for some, the view that
successful commercial exploitation may be
Changed attitudes
have also been attributed to researcher experience working within Co-operative
Research Centres.
15.15 However, some researchers do not seek patents and pursue commercialisation
because they regard other aspects of research activity
as more important.
Although most publicly funded research institutions provide for researchers to
share in royalties flowing from
the successful commercialisation of an
invention, this may not be a sufficient incentive for some researchers to put in
required to apply for and exploit a
15.16 Another aspect of this resistance is that applying for patents may reduce
the time available for researchers to pursue other
activities that are more
likely to contribute to career progression. For academic researchers, publishing
research results is an
important factor in career progression and obtaining
funding grants, as a good publication record affords both prestige and evidence
of research excellence.
15.17 A 1999 survey by Toss Gascoigne and Jenni Metcalfe (Gascoigne-Metcalfe
Survey) of 126 scientists across Australia demonstrated
that some researchers
believe that their career progression will be limited if they spend time
patenting and commercialising research
rather than on publication. Survey
participants reported having missed promotion because time spent on
commercialisation had taken
them away from publishing and seeking
However, it should be
noted that this survey was carried out largely before the major government
initiatives for stimulating commercialisation
of research had begun. As noted
above, attitudes do appear to be shifting towards greater acceptance of
commercialisation as a result.
15.18 The Department of Education, Science and Training report,
of the Legal Framework for Patent Ownership in Publicly Funded Research
Institutions
(DEST Report) suggested that wariness about patenting can be
partially attributed to that fact that:
academic performance appraisal is still often based on publication or
grants received rather than efforts to commercialise. Not only
does this provide
inadequate incentive to commercialise, but when ‘commercialisation
activities remove them from ‘mainstream’
activities’ it can
jeopardise academics’ chances for promotion and thus act as a
disincentive.
15.19 Similarly, the Gascoigne-Metcalfe Survey reported that some participants
criticised research organisations:
for making promotions and appointments on the basis of the number of
academic papers an applicant had published rather than commercial
activities,
notwithstanding formal policies to the
15.20 According to the DEST Report, although some universities have begun to
include commercialisation activity as a criterion for
assessing performance, the
practice is still not widespread: ‘Instead, it seems that grants and
publications are the primary
criterion used in
promotions’.
15.21 More generally, in 2003, Research Australia released the
Medical Researcher Opinion Poll 2003
Health and Medical Researcher
Opinion Poll
a survey of health and medical researcher attitudes
to, among other issues, research
commercialisation.
Respondents,
who encompassed researchers at universities, hospitals, medical research
institutes, and pharmaceutical and biotechnology
companies, were asked to rate
the importance of a variety of research outcomes. Only 55% of respondents rated
patenting research
results as important, while 99% rated improving health
outcomes as important. The survey findings also suggested that researchers
reticent about commercialising their research. Only 40% agreed they would like
to be involved in the commercialisation process,
while 34% said they would not
like to be involved at all.
Submissions and consultations
15.22 The ALRC sought comment
in consultations on whether the intention to obtain patents and other
intellectual property has had
adverse effects on the timely publication of
research outcomes. It was generally recognised that in the increasingly
commercialised
research environment, publication is often delayed because
organisations seek to protect their positions with regard to intellectual
15.23 While this did not necessarily have a significant impact on the overall
progress of science,
concern was expressed about the possible impact of publication constraints on
the careers of individual
researchers.
It was suggested
that there is a need to change the system of grant assessment to recognise
experience in commercialisation and obtaining
patents as well as research record
as indicators of research
15.24 On the other hand, the ALRC also heard that promotion panels and research
grant committees have procedures for taking patents
into account in assessing
researchers’ track
For example, the ARC
commented in submissions that it is relatively straightforward to balance
publications and patents in assessing
the research record of applications for
grants or before promotion panels. An assessment of an applicant’s
research ability
can be made even where they hold patents but have no
publications.
The NHMRC pointed
out that it is possible to take account of researchers’ time spent on
other projects in relation to their
achievements in assessing funding
applications.
Options for reform
15.25 One solution to a lack of researcher involvement in patenting and
commercialisation is to foster a research culture that is
positive towards
commercialisation. In 1999, the Health and Medical Strategic Review report,
The Virtuous Cycle: Working Together for Health and Medical Research
(Wills Report) noted a number of factors that might affect the development
of this culture. These were whether there was appropriate
recognition of
commercial success in the academic environment; appropriate role models for
commercialisation practice; or barriers
to researcher involvement in commercial
enterprises. The report included recommendations that:
Australian academic, research and funding bodies develop ways to
incorporate commercial measures of research outcomes, such as patents
receipt of industry funding, when assessing the performance of a researcher,
project or institution;
successful commercialisation role models be highlighted and networks
for mentorship be established and promoted to researchers; and
researchers be provided with incentives to develop technology
commercially, including royalty-sharing arrangements, the ability to
hold equity
and accept directorships in biotechnology companies; and the capacity to move
between academia and industry be
facilitated.
ARC suggested a variety of strategies for promoting commercialisation in its
2000 report,
Research in the National Interest: Commercialising University
Research in Australia
(ARC report)
These included creating the right
academic environment, in which individuals and institutions were
‘committed to increasing
the opportunities and rewards for
commercialisation’. It outlined a number of means of achieving this, such
as improving understanding
of the commercialisation process within the
institution and establishing policies for intellectual property ownership and
management.
15.27 The ARC also suggested that one model for reform could be to ‘ensure
in the conditions of award for an ARC grant that
the researchers hold the
licence to exploit the IP arising from the
This approach
would provide incentives for researchers to develop research to
commercialisation stage. However, the report suggested
it might also be a
barrier to commercialisation if researchers lack the skills, the financial means
and the time and networks needed
to undertake this development. The ARC
suggested that this might be addressed by providing support to researchers
during the commercialisation
process, in exchange for a share of
15.28 Such arrangements are in place at many research institutions. In 2001, the
ARC released the
National Principles of Intellectual Property Management for
Publicly Funded Research
National Principles
), which stipulate that
publicly funded research institutions should provide researchers with adequate
incentives to participate in
the commercialisation
The NHMRC’s
Interim Guidelines: Intellectual Property Management for Health and Medical
Interim Guidelines
) contain similar
provisions.
15.29 The DEST Report recommended implementing an expanded National Principles
model placing greater emphasis on the need for institutions
to ensure competing
demands on researchers do not act as a disincentive to participation in
commercialisation. It suggested this
should include recognising
commercialisation activity as a criterion for assessing
performance.
ALRC’s views
15.30 The ALRC’s
preliminary view is that it endorses the policies and actions of the NHMRC and
ARC in seeking to promote commercialisation
in appropriate cases. While the
NHMRC and ARC policies do take account of patents when considering applications
for research funding,
it also appears that there is a perception among some
researchers that patents are not adequately valued in this process. This is
particularly so because of the time required to make and support patent
applications, which may lead some researchers to prioritise
publication over
patent protection. The ALRC is interested in comments on any disincentives to
patenting of genetic research that
affect researchers.
Question 15 - 1
In assessing the research record of grant applicants,
is sufficient weight given to the applicant’s record in applying for
obtaining patents? Are there any other disincentives for researchers to seek
patents over genetic research outcomes?
Question 15 - 2
Are any additional strategies or policies required by
the National Health and Medical Research Council, the Australian Research
universities, or other publicly funded research institutions to
encourage researchers to patent and commercialise the outcomes of
Lack of skills and experience
15.31 As indicated above,
researchers are increasingly encouraged to participate in the process of
patenting and commercialising genetic
The first stage in
translating genetic research into healthcare benefits is the identification of
new technology with potential healthcare
applications. Once identified, the next
stage is obtaining patent protection and subsequently developing the technology
into a usable
product. Hence, the initial identification stage is crucial to
ensuring the benefits of genetic research reach the community.
15.32 While researchers are obviously well-placed to identify new technologies,
where they lack the skills to do so effectively,
the potential health benefits
of these technologies may not be realised. They may also lack the commercial
skills and experience
to contribute effectively to the process of
commercialisation.
15.33 The Gascoigne-Metcalfe Survey suggested that:
Thinking commercially does not come naturally to scientists. They do not
see careers in the commercial world or recognise the problems
that industry is
trying to solve.
15.34 Some participants in the Gascoigne-Metcalfe Survey commented that they
found it difficult to recognise when their research
had potential commercial
value and that they lacked knowledge of the commercialisation process. One
participant noted, ‘We
don’t know what we don’t know’
and reported that lack of experience extended to obtaining patents and
intellectual
management.
15.35 Participants in the Gascoigne-Metcalfe Survey also reported that they
needed access to advice on commercialisation and
‘“translators”
who can speak both the language of industry and
the language of research’.
Responses to the
Health and Medical Research Researcher Opinion Poll
similar, with a significant number of respondents stating that they did not feel
they had the skills to commercialise their
research results. Although 50% agreed
that they would know how to find help to develop their product (with only 10%
strongly agreeing),
33% said they would not know how to find advice on
developing the commercial potential of their
discoveries.
National Principles
Interim Guidelines
institutions to inform staff of their responsibilities in relation to
intellectual property
protection.
Most publicly funded
research institutions also have pre-publication review procedures, where papers
to be submitted for publication
are reviewed to identify potentially patentable
and technology
transfer offices to manage intellectual property and commercialisation. These
offices assist academics in applying
for and commercialising patents, and may
take on a considerable portion of the responsibility for the process of
commercialisation.
However, it
appears that not all researchers are aware of the functions of these offices,
and do not access the support available
15.37 Marc Berry and Dr Amanda McBratney have also suggested that there are
inadequate proper educational frameworks to ‘support
users of the patent
system and ensure that those users are aware of their rights and obligations
under that system’.
ARC report stated that unless there was appropriate support for individual
researchers, they could be disadvantaged because of
a lack of expertise in
intellectual property management and a lack of commercial and legal expertise to
negotiate deals involving
intellectual
Question 15 - 3
Do researchers in human genetics possess sufficient
expertise to participate in the process of applying for and exploiting gene
If not, what measures might be taken to address any lack of
Submissions and consultations
15.38 To some extent,
comments received in consultations supported the view that researchers lack the
skills to identify new inventions
that may be commercially
One problem cited was
that some valuable research results produced by public institutions are not
protected by the patent system
because it has been published before a patent
application was filed. Researchers may be unaware of the need to protect their
and once publication has occurred the research is no longer novel and
cannot be patented.
15.39 Bio Innovation SA pointed out that some researchers are unaware of the
need to meet supporting research requirements for patent
applications. This
research differs from academic research, and encompasses experimental results
that will support the invention
through to commercialisation
15.40 However, others noted that researchers are becoming more active about
commercialisation now that they are expected to make
returns on their
Comments received in
consultations also suggested that researchers’ awareness of, and skills in
dealing with, patenting and
commercialisation are increasing. For example,
AusBiotech Ltd stated that researchers have become more aware of the need to
intellectual property protection over the past ten
However, it further
suggested that academic researchers need to be able to understand the
commercialisation process and be aware
of how to package their ideas to make
them attractive to investors.
Others suggested that the difficulty is not a lack of awareness among
researchers, but a lack of funding to support their efforts
commercialise.
15.41 It was also noted that in Australia researchers are isolated from, and
have less access to, industry partners and commercial
support. By contrast, in
the United States academic researchers have greater links with industry and
therefore do not need to develop
the same level of business know how required in
15.42 Comments in submissions and consultations emphasised the need for ongoing
skill building to ensure the value of Australian
research is not lost through
failure to obtain appropriate protection. Improving researcher skills at
capturing and exploiting the
results of research was also considered crucial to
the development of a mature and internationally competitive biotechnology
in Australia.
particular, one submission suggested that:
Usually the person who knows the most about the new innovation is the
inventor, so this person’s connection to the technology
needs to be
nurtured with appropriate financial
connections.
15.43 Educating scientists about patenting issues was recognised as a continuing
challenge, and support was shown for including subjects
covering intellectual
property and commercialisation issues in health sciences and biotechnology
degree programs.
Education programs and support
15.44 Research institutions
and industry organisations are addressing some of the concerns about researcher
skills and experience
with patenting and commercialisation through education
programs. Many institutions provide seminars and workshops on intellectual
property protection and commercialisation for
researchers.
educational resources for staff are also provided through technology transfer
offices established in most
institutions.
Some institutions
take a pro-active approach to assist researchers to identify commercially
valuable technology by placing technology
managers in each faculty where they
are able to work closely with research
15.45 The Nicol-Nielsen Study reported that:
Respondents indicated that researchers generally are conscious that the
key issue when protecting intellectual property is not to
publish. One
university technology transfer officer said that in her view the organisation
had not lost any intellectual property
through publication to date. She noted
that the university has a package telling scientists how to keep track of their
intellectual
15.46 A number of recent reports on patenting and research commercialisation
have recommended that capture of valuable intellectual
property could be
improved by building researcher skills and expertise in recognising potentially
patentable inventions. Suggested
mechanisms for doing so include the provision
of extra training and support personnel to identify inventions, the inclusion of
covering commercialisation and business skills in undergraduate and
postgraduate courses, and mechanisms to encourage researchers
to form links with
industry partners.
ALRC’s views
15.47 There is evidence that
the Australian research culture has shifted toward general acceptance of the
role of patent protection
over genetic research results. Government policy and
education programs have raised awareness and improved skills, as well as
that researchers appreciate the benefits of patenting and exploiting
15.48 Significant steps are already being taken to improve researcher knowledge
and skills in patenting and commercialising research.
The ALRC recognises that
many universities and publicly-funded research institutions are already
undertaking this task, and endorses
this action. These programs should inform
researchers about the basic elements of intellectual property law, including
and the processes for obtaining patent protection for their research.
Researchers should also be aided to improve their skills in
the commercial
aspects of patent exploitation and technology transfer.
15.49 The ALRC also considers there would be merit in ensuring that
familiarisation with intellectual property and commercialisation
begins at the
undergraduate level.
Proposal 15 - 1
Universities and other publicly-funded research
institutions should continue to take steps to raise the awareness of researchers
in the health sciences and biotechnology about intellectual property issues and
the commercialisation of research, and should provide
relevant advice to
researchers as required.
Proposal 15 - 2
Universities should ensure that students undertaking
degrees in the health sciences or biotechnology are made familiar with
intellectual
property issues and the commercialisation of research.
Secrecy and publication
15.50 While scientific
research necessarily involves a period of non-publication for proving and
developing the relevant theories,
scientific research is built on a tradition of
peer review and replication of studies—which are dependent on the critical
of published research:
This public exposure has two main functions. One is to maintain high
standards of quality control through peer review. This is through
refereeing process and the later replication of the research. The other function
is to promote rapid advances in critical
15.51 It has been suggested that the commercialisation of research, and the
consequent relationships and obligations on researchers,
have the potential to
constrain this tradition and result in previously open research becoming secret.
Nicol and Nielsen state that:
One of the ways in which this new commercialised research culture could
affect upstream research is in its impact on the dissemination
of research
results. The integrity of the individual researcher is promoted by the strong
communal traditions of team-work and free
exchange of ideas, results and
research reagents. Integrity is further assured by subjecting research results
to external testing
and criticism through the peer review system and the
publication of results in wide circulation refereed journals. This publication
tradition has been the primary reward for academic scientists and the dominant
measure of academic excellence.
15.52 Further, a 2002 report from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual Property Rights and Licensing
Practices: Evidence and Policies
, suggested that:
there is some evidence in the biomedical sciences that research delays
(before the publication of research results) are increasing,
although it is
unclear why this is occurring. The withholding of data, research materials and
research results is reputed to be more
common in genetics and especially in
human genetics than in other
15.53 Scientists who perform research with private funding may be required to
delay publication of research outcomes, at least until
the commercial partner
has had time to evaluate an
In the United States,
the National Institutes of Health (NIH) recommends that universities allow
commercial partners to prohibit
publication for no more than one or two
However, survey evidence
indicates that much longer delays may be common. A 1994 study found that 58% of
210 life science companies
that sponsor research required delays of more than
six months before
publication.
15.54 Another United States survey conducted in 1994 - 95 of 2,167
scientists in universities receiving NIH funding revealed that
nearly 20% had
delayed publication for more than six months at least once in the preceding
three years in order to allow for a patent
application, protect their scientific
lead, slow the dissemination of undesired results, allow time to negotiate a
patent, or to
resolve disputes over the ownership of intellectual
The study concluded
that while withholding of research results was not a widespread phenomenon, it
was more common among the ‘most
productive and entrepreneurial
15.55 Problems with the withholding of research results in human genetics may
extend beyond the time at which research results are
published. A 2000 survey
found that 47% of geneticists who had asked other academics for additional
information, data, or materials
regarding published research, reported that at
least one of their requests had been denied in the preceding three
It has been suggested
that secrecy may be more common in human genetic research than in other
Reasons may include the increased scientific competitiveness of the field
and the opportunities for commercial applications. Research
has shown that
scientists who reported conducting research on goals similar to that of the
Human Genome Project (HGP) were more likely
to deny requests for information,
data, and materials than other life
scientists.
15.56 Patent law and practice may significantly contribute to publication delays
and reluctance to share information. In particular,
since patent law depends on
novelty, publication before a patent application has been filed may prevent a
patent being granted (see
Chapter 6). For this reason it is said that:
delays in publication may arise where preliminary findings need more work
before patent filing is possible or desirable, or to permit
the aggregation of
incremental advances over a period of time (none of which on their own would be
patentable) into a patentable
invention. Piecemeal publishing as research
progresses is generally incompatible with any reasonable patenting strategy. If
is the pre-eminent concern, it will disturb this natural phasing of
research papers and will necessarily result in secrecy and delay
dissemination
of the research.
15.57 Restraints on publication may also affect the free exchange of new
technology. As Nicol and Nielsen commented:
Where, in the past, researchers often freely exchanged newly developed
research reagents and other research tools, public sector institutes
require recipients to enter into contractual arrangements in the form of
material transfer agreements. Even if no costs
are involved, limitations are
placed on the range of uses to which such materials can be
15.58 On the other hand, patents may sometimes aid research because, without
patent protection, some results might be kept as trade
secrets, and potentially
never revealed. Information that is the subject of a patent application is
available in the public domain
18 months after the application is filed, through
publication in the
Official Journal of
This can be a
valuable source of technical information for use in further research and
development.
15.59 In the United States, the NIH has taken steps to help researchers gain
access to information for research through the promulgation
principles and guidelines. The principles include that institutions should:
Ensure academic freedom and publication. ‘Recipients are
expected to avoid signing agreements that unduly limit the freedom
investigators to collaborate and publish’ and ‘excessive publication
delays or requirements for editorial control,
approval of publications, or
withholding of data all undermine the credibility of research results and are
unacceptable’.
Ensure appropriate implementation of the
Recipients of NIH funds
‘are expected to maximize the use of their research findings by making
them available to the research
community and the public, and through their
timely transfer to industry for
commercialization’.
NIH guidelines provide that agreements to acquire materials for use in NIH
funded research should address the timely dissemination
of research results.
Recipients should not agree to significant publication delays, any
interference with the full disclosure of research findings, or
influence on the objective reporting of research results. A delay of 30-60 days
to allow for patent filing or review for
confidential proprietary information is
generally viewed as reasonable.
15.61 In the United States, the Genomic Research and Diagnostic Accessibility
Bill of 2002 would have required faster disclosure
of genomic sequence
information in a patent application when federal funds were used in the
development of the invention. The Bill
required information to be released
within 30 days of the patent application rather than the current 18
The Bill’s sponsor
cited the example of research for autism being delayed due to some researchers
hoarding tissue samples in
order to be the first to find the relevant gene and
thus get commercial benefits.
Submissions and consultations
15.62 A variety of opinions
submissions. Some suggested that
the necessity of keeping new research secret
until a patent application had been filed reduced the free exchange of
information between
researchers. For example, the Cancer Council of New South
Wales commented that:
The increasing shift towards patenting of genetic inventions, and the
necessary secrecy and confidentiality surrounding patent applications,
contrary to the scientific tradition of publication and rapid dissemination of
new knowledge. This possible barrier for the
sharing of information is worthy of
further investigation.
15.63 The Department of Health Western Australia submission commented that the
need to apply for patents may result in publication
delays, slow dissemination
of undesired results or suppression or selectivity in publishing
15.64 Others were more positive about the effects of patenting requirements on
research culture. GlaxoSmithKline pointed out that:
confidential information can be shared with others without jeopardising
the subsequent filing of a patent application if the disclosure
takes place
under an appropriate agreement. There are standard forms of such agreements,
which can be executed and brought into effect
15.65 GlaxoSmithKline also noted that patenting encourages sharing of
information once an application has been filed:
Without strong patent protection, those engaged in research are far more
likely to keep innovations secret for longer than they do
now i.e. patenting
encourages knowledge sharing after filing for patent protection ... failure to
provide adequate patent protection
will in itself discourage both research and
knowledge sharing. This raises the issue of whether failure to provide adequate
protection is unethical as it impedes the rapid and free flow of
information and the delivery of new medical treatments to
15.66 AusBiotech Ltd suggested that delays in publication due to the need to
maintain confidentiality until a patent application
has been filed will be
Because of the lead time involved in scientific publication, and because
a submitted manuscript is still regarded as being confidential,
any delay in
publication will be minimal. Moreover, all patent applications are published
eighteen months after their earliest priority
date, and most patent
specifications contain far greater detail than any corresponding literature
publication.
15.67 Should patent protection be eroded and the rights of patent holders
weakened, the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research suggested that
this might lead inventors to assess ‘the relative value of a patent versus
commercial secrecy as the
means of protecting their investment in developing the
invention’. It suggested that as a consequence:
Rather than increasing public access to inventions and encouraging
further improvements a weak patent system can have exactly the
opposite effect
... Not granting patents could encourage secrecy which would impede further
research by others. Not granting patents,
coupled with disclosure, would make IP
unattractive to a company since it would have to invest heavily in further
research and especially
clinical development with no protection from competitors
using the invention and underselling them because they do not have to recover
extensive R&D costs. The result could be no further development of the
potential health care product by
The general grace period
15.68 As discussed in
Chapter 5, a patent will only be granted for an invention that is
‘novel’ and involves an ‘inventive
The novelty of each
claim in a patent application is assessed against the ‘prior art
base’ that comprises publicly available
information’ as it existed before the priority date of the relevant patent
Whether an invention
involves an inventive step is also assessed against the prior art base at that
15.69 An invention may be deprived of novelty by prior use, information
disclosed in oral communications or information contained
in documents.
Similarly, prior use or publicly available information may prejudice claims that
an invention involves an inventive
or innovative
Patents Act
provides that for the purposes of deciding whether
an invention is novel or involves an inventive or innovative step certain use or
information must be disregarded (disclosures of this nature are referred to
below as ‘non-prejudicial
disclosure’).
15.71 Non-prejudicial disclosure includes any information made publicly
available, through any publication or use of the invention,
in circumstances
prescribed by regulation. The circumstances prescribed are set out in the
Patents Regulations 1991
Patents Regulations
) and include
publication or use of the invention:
by the showing or use of the invention at a recognised exhibition,
or the publication of the invention during an exhibition where
the invention was
shown or used;
by the publication of the invention in a paper written by the
inventor and read before a learned society or published by a learned
by the working in public of the invention within a period of 12
months before the priority date for the purposes of reasonable
15.72 In each of
these cases, the protection only applies if a patent application is made for the
invention within a prescribed period.
The prescribed periods range from between
6 or 12 months after the publication or public use of the invention, depending
on the circumstances.
to comply with these requirements and protect patent rights, it is usual to
lodge a provisional patent application to secure
a priority date, after which
disclosure becomes possible.
15.73 The above categories of non-prejudicial disclosure are recognised in many
other jurisdictions. For example, national laws dealing
with disclosure at
official or international exhibitions is obligatory for all member states of the
Paris Convention.
categories of non-prejudicial disclosure mentioned above are harmonised in the
law of member countries of the European
Convention.
15.74 In Australia, since 2002, there are also general grace period
provisions.
These apply to
any publication or use by, or with the consent of, the prospective patent holder
within 12 months of the filing date
of the complete patent application provided
it is filed within 12 months after the information was made publicly
These provisions
are referred to in this Discussion Paper as the ‘grace period
provisions’. Associate Professor Ann Monotti
explains the rationale for
the grace period provisions as follows:
Within the university research community, the provisional patent
application makes it possible to combine the patenting process with
traditional need for academic inventors to publish their new theories and data
without undue delay. However, the provisional
application does not protect
against public disclosures of the invention that occur before the priority date
or that occur in the
priority period if they go beyond the scope of the
invention described in the provisional application. One way of dealing with this
problem is to introduce a general ‘grace
15.75 While some other countries have similar grace period
provisions,
most European
countries do not.
whether such provisions should be introduced into the European Patent Law has
been the subject of extensive
15.76 The grace period provisions followed recommendations of the Intellectual
Property and Competition Review Committee
The IPCRC stated:
[T]here is merit in introducing a grace period for public disclosure
affecting the prior art base for novelty and inventive step.
In the event that
moves to introduce such a grace period are made by the European Patent
Organisation on an expeditious basis, in
the context of the European Patent
Convention, then the introduction of a grace period in Australia should be
coordinated with an
introduction in Europe. However, if it appears that such
moves in Europe will take more than five years from October 2000, then Australia
should seriously consider proceeding before its European
counterparts.
15.77 While the primary reason for introducing the grace period was directed to
problems that inventors face when they wish to publish
their inventions
immediately following the filing of a provisional
application,
the potential
benefits of grace periods are said to include encouraging the sharing of
research results between inventors and allowing
researchers and academics to
publish results in journals and peer reviewed literature without putting at risk
any patentable subject
matter that may be
15.78 However, disclosure permitted by the grace period provisions may destroy
the novelty of the invention in countries that do
not have equivalent
provisions—notably in Europe. Associate Professor Ann Monotti and
Professor Sam Ricketson argue that:
The new grace period will do nothing to promote prompt dissemination of
university research while significant markets operate within
countries that
apply the absolute novelty test. It will continue to be important to delay
public disclosure of inventions until after
a priority date is
15.79 On the other hand, Monotti and Ricketson conclude that the grace period
provision provides a ‘safety net’ for those
who make inadvertent
disclosures and that the grace period must be seen as a ‘positive
development’ from the point of
view of academics and
universities.
Submissions and consultations
15.80 The grace period
provisions were a specific focus of submissions. IP 27 asked whether the 12
month grace period encourages the
publication of scientific results and
overcomes problems of secrecy or delay in
publication.
15.81 Most submissions that addressed this question indicated that the grace
period provisions do not significantly encourage early
publication,
mainly because
not all countries recognise grace
For example,
GlaxoSmithKline submitted that:
Because of the need to take a global perspective, the introduction of a
grace period in Australia has had no effect either way. No
grace period exists
in Europe and so, if a European patent is required, the patent application must
still be filed before any publication
15.82 Similarly, Genetic Technologies Limited stated that:
The good intentions of the grace period ... are completely undermined by
the absence of such a grace period in Europe. Under this
new rule premature
publication may not prevent the issue of a patent in Australia but the same
publication will prevent corresponding
patents being issued in Europe. Given the
relative size of the markets, the European patent is vastly more valuable than
the Australian
one so the Australian grace period is irrelevant to the patenting
15.83 Dr Amanda McBratney and others submitted that it is ‘highly
doubtful’ that the grace period works to encourage
scientific disclosure
or overcome secrecy because most scientists will want to patent not just in
Australia or the United States,
but in Europe as
15.84 The motivations of academic researchers were cited as another reason why
the grace period was not seen as important in encouraging
publication. McBratney and others stated that, based on surveys of university
research practices:
the majority of researchers tend to research those areas which are of
most appeal to them personally (often for altruistic reasons)
publication of those results is the dominant driving paradigm. Issues of
secrecy, commercialisation and patentability are
a distant concern. This is
hardly surprising given the modus operandi of publicly funded research
institutions or the criterion for
promotion for University
15.85 Some negative effects of the grace period provisions were identified.
GlaxoSmithKline stated that, from a pharmaceutical industry
perspective, grace
periods ‘increase the uncertainty around decisions to invest without
encouraging earlier publication of
invention’.
15.86 Some submissions expressed concerns that researchers may not be aware or
understand the implications of the grace period
provisions.
For example,
Davies Collison Cave stated:
It is likely that early publication will not be accompanied by a proper
understanding of the implications of such publication in relation
to obtaining
patent protection both in Australia and in overseas
15.87 In contrast, AusBiotech Ltd expressed the view that scientists in
Australia have become much more aware of the importance of
patent protection
over the last ten years, so the need to rely on the grace period is relatively
ALRC’s views
15.88 The Australian
government introduced the general 12 month grace period despite the
IPCRC’s recommendation that Australia
should try to coordinate any changes
with Europe, where the issue remains alive and unresolved.
15.89 One view is that it may be too early to assess the effect of the
introduction of the grace period provisions in
However, many
submissions highlighted the dangers that reliance on the grace period may have
for patentability in other jurisdictions.
15.90 Given the limited progress towards introducing equivalent provisions in
the ALRC proposes
that the Advisory Council on Intellectual Property should undertake a review of
the grace period
provisions to ascertain whether these are having an
adverse impact on the commercialisation of Australian research in Australia or
overseas (Proposal 15 - 3).
15.91 The IPCRC, in recommending the introduction of the grace period, stated
that IP Australia should actively inform inventors
‘of the risks that
disclosure may incur to patentability in jurisdictions without a grace
Concerns about
inventors misunderstanding the grace period were raised during debate over the
introduction of the grace period
provisions.
Monotti has
concluded that:
it is critical that there be adequate education and publicity campaigns
other) inventors are
not misled into believing that they can now publish before they file an
Australian patent application.
15.92 The ALRC proposes that universities and other publicly funded research
organisations should ensure that their researchers are
fully informed about the
operation of the grace period provisions, particularly in relation to the effect
of publication before filing
a provisional patent application, and the effect of
publication on the patentability of their inventions in countries that do not
have equivalent provisions (Proposal 15 - 4).
Proposal 15 - 3
The responsible Minister should request the Advisory
Council on Intellectual Property to review the grace period
provisions in
Patents Regulations 1991
Patents Regulations
ascertain whether these provisions are having an adverse impact on the
commercialisation of Australian research in Australia
or overseas.
Proposal 15 - 4
Universities and other publicly funded research
organisations should ensure that their researchers are fully informed about the
of the grace period provisions in the
Patents Regulations
particularly in relation to the effect of publication before filing a
provisional patent application, and the effect of publication
patentability of their inventions in countries that do not have equivalent
provisions.
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003. See also Walter and Eliza Hall Institute
of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003; Genetic
Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October 2003; A McBratney and
Submission P47
, 22 October
O’Connor, ‘The Commercialisation of Human Tissue: The Source of
Legal, Ethical and Social Problems: An Area Better
Suited to Legislative
Resolution’ (1990) 24
Loyola of Los Angeles Law Review
D Nicol and J
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues
Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional
Paper No 6, 35.
See Ch 17, figure
T Gascoigne and J Metcalfe,
Scientists Commercialising their Research: Federation of Australian
Scientific and Technological Societies (Occasional Paper No 2)
D Nicol and J
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues
Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional
Paper No 6, 125.
AusBiotech Ltd,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 September 2003; Bio Innovation SA,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 16 September
Bio Innovation SA,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 16 September
Submission P11
, 25 September
Medical Researchers,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 15 September
Queensland Biotechnology Advisory
Consultation
, Brisbane, 2 October 2003. See also Medical
Researchers,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 15 September
and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of
Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6,
Australian Research Council,
University Research: Technology Transfer and Commercialisation Practices
(1999), xxii.
Department of Education
Science and Training,
Analysis of the Legal Framework for Patent Ownership in
Publicly Funded Research Institutions
M Berry and A McBratney,
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Regulations & Ordinances:
An Analysis of Issues Relevant to the Patents Amendment
Regulations 2002 (No 1)
which Introduced a Grace Period into Australian Patent Law
T Gascoigne and J Metcalfe,
Scientists Commercialising their Research: Federation of Australian
Scientific and Technological Societies (Occasional Paper No 2)
of Education Science and Training,
Analysis of the Legal Framework for Patent
Ownership in Publicly Funded Research Institutions
T Gascoigne
and J Metcalfe,
Scientists Commercialising their Research: Federation of
Australian Scientific and Technological Societies (Occasional Paper No 2)
Department of Education
Science and Training,
Analysis of the Legal Framework for Patent Ownership in
Publicly Funded Research Institutions
(2003), 82. See also R Johnston, M
Matthews and M Dodgson,
Enabling the Virtuous Cycle: Identifying and Removing
Barriers to Entrepreneurial Activity by Health and Medical Researchers in the
Higher Education Sector
Research Australia,
Medical Researcher Opinion Poll 2003
Australian Academy of Science,
Consultation
, Canberra, 22 September 2003; Gene CRC,
Consultation
Melbourne, 3 September 2003.
Academy of Science,
Consultation
, Canberra, 22 September 2003; Gene CRC,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 3 September
Australian Academy of Science,
Consultation
, Canberra, 22 September
Western Australian Department of
Health and others (legal issues),
Consultation
, Perth, 17 September
Australian Research Council,
Consultation
, Canberra, 22 September 2003; National Health and Medical
Research Council,
Consultation
, Canberra, 24 September 2003; Queensland
Biotechnology Advisory Council,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 2 October 2003;
Medical Researchers,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 15 September
Australian Research Council,
Consultation
, Canberra, 22 September
National Health and Medical
Research Council,
Consultation
, Canberra, 24 September
section is written on the premise that there is value in patenting genetic
research. This is not, however, a statement that
all genetic research ought to
be patented.
Health and Medical
Research Strategic Review Committee,
The Virtuous Cycle: Working Together for
Health and Medical Research
Australian Research
Research in the National Interest: Commercialising University
Research in Australia
Australian Research
Council and others,
National Principles of Intellectual Property Management
for Publicly Funded Research
(2001), Principle
National Health and Medical Research
Interim Guidelines: Intellectual Property Management for Health and
Medical Research
(2001), Principle
Department of Education Science
and Training,
Analysis of the Legal Framework for Patent Ownership in
Publicly Funded Research Institutions
T Gascoigne and J Metcalfe,
Scientists Commercialising their Research: Federation of Australian
Scientific and Technological Societies (Occasional Paper No 2)
Research Australia,
Medical Researcher Opinion Poll 2003
Australian Research Council and
National Principles of Intellectual Property Management for Publicly
Funded Research
(2001), Principle 2; National Health and Medical Research
Interim Guidelines: Intellectual Property Management for Health and
Medical Research
(2001), Principle
Department of Education Science
and Training,
Analysis of the Legal Framework for Patent Ownership in
Publicly Funded Research Institutions
M Berry and A McBratney,
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Regulations & Ordinances:
An Analysis of Issues Relevant to the Patents Amendment
Regulations 2002 (No 1)
which Introduced a Grace Period into Australian Patent Law
Australian Research Council,
Research in the National Interest: Commercialising University Research in
(2000), 21.
Innovation SA,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 16 September 2003; Medical
Researchers,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 15 September
Bio Innovation SA,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 16 September 2003. This issue is discussed
Australian Department of Health and others (legal issues),
Consultation
Perth, 17 September 2003; Queensland Biotechnology Advisory Council,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 2 October
AusBiotech Ltd,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 September
AusBiotech Ltd,
, 7 November 2003.
Australian Department of Health and others (legal issues),
Consultation
Perth, 17 September
Innovation SA,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 16 September 2003; Western
Australian Department of Health and others (research issues),
Consultation
, Perth, 17 September 2003; Western Australian Department of
Health and others (legal issues),
Consultation
, Perth, 17 September
Confidential
Submission P54 CON
, 3 November
Western Australian Department of
Health and others (legal issues),
Consultation
, Perth, 17 September 2003;
Western Australian Department of Health and others (research issues),
Consultation
, Perth, 17 September 2003; Bio Innovation SA,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 16 September 2003; UniQuest,
Consultation
Brisbane, 3 October 2003.
For example,
the University of Melbourne Research and Innovation Office runs workshops for
staff members covering commercialisation
and license agreements and may tailor
the contents of programs to suit the needs of faculties and departments:
Melbourne Research
and Innovation Office,
Workshop and Information
, University of Melbourne,
<www.research.unimelb.edu.au/infosessions> at 6 January
The role of technology transfer
offices in patenting and commercialising biotechnology research is discussed in
See, eg, UniQuest,
, <www.uniquest.com.au/?id=13> at 16 December
and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of
Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6, 127.
of Education Science and Training,
Analysis of the Legal Framework for Patent
Ownership in Publicly Funded Research Institutions
(2003), 72; T Gascoigne
and J Metcalfe,
Scientists Commercialising their Research: Federation of
Australian Scientific and Technological Societies (Occasional Paper No 2)
Monotti and S Ricketson,
Universities and Intellectual Property: Ownership
and Exploitation
Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis
of Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6,
Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual
Property Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
(2002), 13.
See also Royal Society,
Keeping Science Open: The Effects of Intellectual
Property Policy on the Conduct of Science
A Monotti and S Ricketson,
Universities and Intellectual Property: Ownership and Exploitation
(2003), 250.
E Press and J Washburn,
‘Secrecy and Science’,
The Atlantic Online
, March 2000,
<www.theatlantic.com/issues/2000/03/press2.htm>.
Blumenthal and others, ‘Withholding Research Results in Academic Life
Science’ (1997) 277
Campbell and others, ‘Data Withholding in Academic Genetics’
Monotti and S Ricketson,
Universities and Intellectual Property: Ownership
and Exploitation
and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of
Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6,
Patents Act 1990
(standard patents),
(innovation
See the discussion in Ch
National Institutes of Health,
‘Principles and Guidelines for Recipients of NIH Research Grants and
Contracts on Obtaining
and Disseminating Biomedical Research Resources’
Bill was referred to the House Subcommittee on the Courts, the Internet, and
Intellectual Property on 6 May 2002, but lapsed
at the end of the 107th
United States,
Congressional Debates, House of Representatives
, 14 March 2002, E353 (L
Council of New South Wales,
Submission P1
Department of Health Western
Submission P53
, 3 November 2003, citing P Baird,
‘Getting It Right: Industry Sponsorship and Medical Research’ (2003)
Canadian Medical Association Journal
1267 - 1269.
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Submission P58
, 7 November
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
Patents Act 1990
(standard patents),
s 18(1A)(b)
(innovation
s 18(1)(b)(i)
s 18(1A)(b)(i)
(innovation patents), sch
However, under the
, examiners are specifically directed not to include information made
publicly available only through the doing of an act as part
of the prior art
base when examining a patent application: Ibid
Patents Regulations 1991
(Cth) r 2.2(2)(a) - (b).
2.2(2)(c)(i) - (ii).
2.2(2)(d)(i).
A Monotti, ‘The Impact of
the New Grace Period under Australian Patent Law on Universities’
European Intellectual Property Review
Paris Convention for the
Protection of Industrial Property 1883
[1972] ATS 12
, (entered into force
on 27 September 1975), art 11(1).
Monotti, ‘The Impact of the New Grace Period under Australian Patent Law
on Universities’
European Intellectual Property Review
The provisions apply
to publication or use on or after 1 April 2002:
Patents Amendment Regulations
2002 (No 1) 2002
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations 1991
(Cth) rr 2.2(1A),
Monotti, ‘The Impact of the New Grace Period under Australian Patent Law
on Universities’
European Intellectual Property Review
For example, Japan and
Canada: see W Condon and R Hoad, ‘Amazing Grace: New Grace Period for
Patents in Australia’ (2002)
Australian Intellectual Property Law
73, 74. The position in the United States is somewhat different as
it has a ‘first to invent’ system. The critical date
is the date on
which the inventor made the invention, and novelty is not prejudiced by
disclosures during the year prior to the date
of the application for a patent.
See A Monotti, ‘The Impact of the New Grace Period under Australian Patent
Law on Universities’
European Intellectual Property Review
Opinion on the Introduction of a Grace Period in the European Patent Law:
Submission to the European Patent Organisation
See A Monotti, ‘The
Impact of the New Grace Period under Australian Patent Law on
Universities’
European Intellectual Property Review
Intellectual Property and
Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation
under the Competition Principles Agreement
Ibid, 159 - 161; A Monotti and S Ricketson,
Universities and Intellectual
Property: Ownership and Exploitation
W Condon and R Hoad,
‘Amazing Grace: New Grace Period for Patents in Australia’ (2002) 15
Australian Intellectual Property Law Bulletin
Monotti and S Ricketson,
Universities and Intellectual Property: Ownership
and Exploitation
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September 2003;
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; Department of Industry
Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003; Genetic
Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October 2003; A McBratney and
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003; Walter and Eliza Hall Institute
of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003; South Australian
Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
, 24 October 2003. The Queensland Government stated that the grace period
has overcome some of the problems associated with secrecy
and delay in
publication of research findings: Queensland Government,
Submission P57
5 January 2004.
See also D Nicol and
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues
Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional
Paper No 6, 57. Respondents noted that ‘whilst it is good to have a grace
in Australia, it will not really assist them because there is a lack of
uniformity with regard to this provision world
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October
A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Department of Health Western
Submission P53
, 3 November 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October
Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October
AusBiotech Ltd,
, 7 November 2003.
Submission P56
, 4 November
See A Monotti, ‘The
Impact of the New Grace Period under Australian Patent Law on
Universities’
European Intellectual Property Review
Intellectual Property
and Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation
under the Competition Principles Agreement
IP Australia,
, 4 November
Monotti, ‘The Impact of the New Grace Period under Australian Patent Law
on Universities’
European Intellectual Property Review
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
16. Stem Cell Technologies
Introduction
Scientific background
What are stem cells?
Potential of stem cell research
Issues and problems
Stem cell research in Australia
Regulation of stem cell research
Regulation of the use of excess ART embryos
Regulation of other types of stem cell research
Patentability of stem cell technologies
Existing patents and patent applications
Application of patent law to stem cell technologies
Options for reform
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Exploiting patents over stem cell technologies
Broad stem cell patents
Licensing stem cell patents
Stem cell banks
Commercialisation of stem cell technologies in Australia
ALRC's views
16. Stem Cell Technologies
Introduction
Terms of Reference require the ALRC to consider the impact of current patenting
laws and practices related to ‘gene
and genetic and related
technologies’. One group of such technologies relates to stem cells. As
stem cell research progresses,
and as understanding about the potential
application of stem cell technologies improves, the role of patents in the
commercialisation
of such research is likely to receive more attention.
16.2 The chapter first provides an overview of stem cell science. The approach
to the patentability of inventions involving stem
cell technologies under
Australian law is then compared to legal developments in the United States, the
European Union, the United
Kingdom and Canada. The chapter then examines
concerns that have been raised about access to stem cell lines and licensing
involving patented stem cell technologies.
16.3 The application of patent law and practices to stem cell technologies
raises many of the same concerns that have been expressed
has been suggested that both genetic inventions and inventions involving stem
cell technologies should be
excluded from patentability on the basis of ethical
considerations because both types of inventions involve the use of human
material. Concerns about the exploitation and commercialisation of
stem cell technologies are also similar to those that have been
expressed about
gene patents, including that access to stem cell technologies may be unduly
restricted if patent protection is available.
Scientific background
section gives an overview of stem cell science in order to provide a background
for the discussion of patent issues relating
to stem cell technologies. The
overview is based on the ALRC’s current understanding of this developing
scientific area, and
focuses on those aspects of stem cell science that raise
particular issues for patents.
What are stem cells?
16.5 Stem cells are biological
materials that are present in all human beings, and in other
Stem cells have two
characteristics that distinguish them from other cell
stem cells are able to differentiate into specialised cell types, a
process known as differentiation; and
stem cells are able to renew themselves, allowing stem cell
populations to be maintained for long periods through cell division;
known as proliferation.
16.6 Stem cells are typically characterised
according to the tissue from which the cells are derived. As described further
stem cells may be obtained from embryos, foetal tissue and certain adult
Depending on the tissue
source, stem cells may have particular characteristics for potential
development, which scientists call ‘pluripotent’
‘multipotent’.
Figure 16 - 1: Stem cell cultivation
University of Wisconsin Board of Regents. The illustration is reproduced with
permission.
Embryonic stem cells
16.7 A fertilised ovum and the cells comprising an
embryo in the earliest stages following fertilisation—up until about the
eight-cell stage—are ‘totipotent’. These cells have the
capacity to form the placenta and other supporting tissue
necessary for the
development of an embryo
, as well as post-embryonic tissues and
organs. Some literature refers to the embryo during this stage of development as
‘totipotent cells’. Where necessary, this term is also
used in this chapter, although scientists generally consider it
inaccurate to
describe totipotent cells as stem cells.
16.8 Embryonic stem cells appear at the blastocyst stage of embryonic
development, approximately four days after fertilisation. A
blastocyst is a
hollow sphere of about 120 cells with an outer layer (which later develops into
the placenta and other supporting
foetal tissue) and an inner cell mass. The
inner cell mass comprises embryonic stem cells that are pluripotent. Pluripotent
stem cells are capable of giving rise to almost all of the different
supporting tissues necessary for foetal development in the uterus. Thus, if
placed in a woman’s uterus, pluripotent
embryonic stem cells do not have
the capacity to develop into a human being.
16.9 Embryos from which stem cells may be obtained can be made available in
different ways. The most widely used source is surplus
embryos from assisted
reproductive technology (ART) programs. Alternatively, embryos could be created
specifically for use in research;
such as by the process of somatic cell nuclear
—commonly referred to
as ‘cloning’.
accounts of human embryos being successfully produced by cloning techniques are
and, in some cases, have
been called into question by the wider scientific
In addition, as
discussed later in this chapter, following the enactment of recent legislation
regulating the use of surplus embryos
from ART programs in Australia, embryonic
stem cells may lawfully be derived only from embryos that are produced during
ART procedures
and that are no longer required for reproductive purposes.
Foetal stem cells
16.10 Foetal stem cells may be isolated from primordial
germ cells in the incipient gonads (ovaries and testes) of aborted foetuses
are often referred to as ‘embryonic germ cells’. Embryonic germ
cells are pluripotent—that is, they have the
capacity to develop into many
or all of the tissues in the human body, but cannot develop into a human being
if placed in a woman’s
uterus. Multipotent stem cells—that is, stem
cells that can give rise to various types of cells but only within a certain
umbilical cord blood.
Adult stem cells
16.11 Adult stem
exist in human organs and
tissues and are responsible for the normal replacement and repair of different
organs and tissues. Currently,
been identified. Adult stem cells are multipotent. Adult stem cells are thought
to be less flexible than embryonic stem cells, and to be capable of
differentiating into a more restricted range of specialised cells.
there is some evidence that adult stem cells may be able to give rise to cell
is, cells from a different tissue
To date, scientists have
found adult stem cells difficult to identify, isolate and grow in
Potential of stem cell research
16.12 There
has been widespread discussion about the potential applications of stem cell
Research into the
events that lead to cell specialisation in humans and the stages of human
development may increase scientific understanding
of the causes of birth defects
and abnormal cell activity, such as cancer.
16.13 Stem cells may also be used to generate cells and tissue that may be used
for transplantation in the treatment of diseases
of the nervous system such as
Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease, as well as treatment
for spinal cord damage,
strokes and burn injuries. The use of stem cells to
regenerate damaged organs or to create new organs for transplantation purposes
has also been proposed. Such therapeutic applications of technologies involving
embryonic stem cells are unlikely to be available
However, certain
therapeutic applications of adult stem cells are already in use; for example,
bone marrow transplants and regrowth
of skin cells for burn victims.
16.14 In addition, stem cell research may change the way in which drugs are
developed and tested. In the future, stem cell lines
might be used for
toxicology testing of candidate drugs—known as cell-based drug
screening—although research use of embryonic
stem cell lines for this
purpose is controversial. Promising drugs might then be further tested on
animals and finally in clinical
Issues and problems
cell research has generated much controversy both in Australia and in other
countries. In particular, research involving
human embryonic stem cells has been
objected to on the basis that the potential for an embryo to develop into a
human being should
preclude the use or destruction of embryos in scientific
research. Critics of stem cell research also object to the patenting of
inventions involving human embryonic stem cell technology. A 2002 report of the
European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies
(the EU Stem Cell
Report) commented that those who are opposed to human embryo research
‘cannot, a fortiori, consider any patenting
16.16 Specific objections to the patenting of inventions involving stem cell
technologies have also been raised, including that stem
cell patents may:
represent an inappropriate commodification of human biological
material, and in particular human reproductive
violate fundamental principles against the ownership of human
beings, as well as the principle of free and informed consent of the
inhibit continued research and development relating to stem cell
technologies.
of the ethical objections that have been raised in relation to patenting human
stem cell technologies are similar to those
that have been articulated about
gene patents. The variety of perspectives on these ethical concerns are
canvassed in Chapter 3.
In addition, as discussed in Chapter 3, ethical concerns
that may be raised about whether it is acceptable to grant gene (or stem
patents may in fact be based upon objections to the way in which the research is
conducted, or the way in which patents (if
granted) are exploited.
16.18 The issues surrounding human embryonic stem cell research, and research
involving human embryos generally, were recently considered
in the report of the
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Human Cloning: Scientific, Ethical and Regulatory Aspects of Human Cloning
and Stem Cell Research
(the Andrews
Following this report,
legislation was introduced into federal Parliament, leading to a further report
of the Senate Community Affairs
Legislation Committee,
Provisions of the
Research Involving Embryos and Prohibition on Human Cloning Bill
A new regulatory
regime governing embryo research has now been implemented at the federal
and corresponding
legislation is in the process of being implemented by the various States and
Territories.
Relevant aspects of
this regime are outlined in the following section. However, beyond this, the
chapter does not address in any
detail the moral and ethical concerns related to
the conduct of human stem cell research.
Stem cell research in Australia
16.19 Research
conducted by Australian scientists has made, and continues to make, a valuable
contribution to knowledge about human
stem cells and the potential applications
of stem cell technologies, particularly in relation to adult stem
16.20 Both publicly funded organisations and companies are involved in adult and
embryonic stem cell research in Australia. The establishment
of the National
Stem Cell Centre (NSCC) in 2002 has augmented these research efforts. The NSCC
initiative is part of the Australian
Government’s Innovation Statement,
Backing Australia’s
It is a national
endeavour with headquarters on the Monash University campus, and will coordinate
the research efforts of public
and private sector institutions in a number of
States and internationally.
Biotechnology Australia and the Australian Research Council (ARC) have jointly
committed $46.5 million in funding to the NSCC over
16.21 Australian companies also feature in the international arena in the
research and development of stem cell technologies. A 2003
report produced by
Invest Australia indicated that these companies included BresaGen Ltd, ES Cell
International Pte Ltd, Norwood
Abbey Ltd, and Stem Cell Sciences Pty
Since the publication of
the Invest Australia report, BresaGen Ltd has entered voluntary
administration.
Regulation of stem cell research
16.22 Various
aspects of research involving stem cells are subject to federal, state and
territory legislation, as well as guidelines
and standards issued by the
National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) and the Australian Health
Ethics Committee (AHEC).
However, Australia does not currently have a
comprehensive legislative scheme, or set of guidelines, regulating all research
human embryonic and adult stem cells, whether conducted by
publicly-funded institutions or private
Regulation of the use of excess ART embryos
16.23 In December 2002, the
Australian Parliament passed the
Prohibition of Cloning Act 2002
Prohibition of Cloning Act
Research Involving Human Embryos
Research Involving Human Embryos
These Acts prohibit
certain unacceptable practices, including human
and regulate uses of
excess human embryos created through ART.
16.24 Pursuant to this legislation, human embryo research (and, therefore, the
use of embryos for the derivation of human embryonic
stem cells) is permitted
only in limited circumstances. First, the research may only involve embryos that
are ‘excess ART embryos’.
An excess ART embryo is one that has been
determined in writing by the couple for whom it was created to be excess to
their needs.
It is an offence to
use an embryo that is not an excess ART embryo for a purpose other than one
relating to the assisted reproductive
treatment of a woman—for example,
non-excess ART embryos could not be used to derive embryonic stem
16.25 Second, any use of excess ART embryos must either be conducted pursuant to
a licence granted in accordance with the procedures
set out in the
Involving Human Embryos Act
, or be subject to a statutory exemption, in
which case a licence is not
Activities that may be
conducted without a licence include the storage, removal and transport of excess
ART embryos, and the use
of such embryos by an ‘accredited ART
centre’ to achieve pregnancy for a woman other than the woman for whom the
was initially created.
Diagnostic investigations performed by an accredited ART centre on embryos that
are determined to be biologically unfit for implantation
are also exempt from
the requirement of a licence.
However, the purpose of such diagnostic investigations is limited to
investigations to identify the cause of abnormal development
of an embryo in
order to benefit the woman for whom the embryo was created in subsequent ART
16.26 Third, where research involving excess ART embryos requires a statutory
licence, the licence must be granted by the Embryo
Research Licensing Committee
of the NHMRC (the NHMRC Licensing Committee) in accordance with the procedures
set out in the
Research Involving Human Embryos
The NHMRC Licensing
Committee is a new principal committee of the NHMRC established by the
Research Involving Human Embryos
to consider applications
for licences to use excess ART embryos and to monitor compliance with the
relevant legislation.
16.27 The licence requirement in the
Research Involving Human Embryos Act
applies to all uses of excess ART embryos after 19 June
In addition, only embryos
created prior to 5 April 2002 may be used if the activities proposed under the
licence will involve the
damage or destruction of such
16.28 The NHMRC Licensing Committee has indicated that eight applications for
licences to use excess ART embryos had been received
by 30 September 2003, but
no licences have been granted by the Committee to
Regulation of other types of stem cell research
16.29 The regulatory scheme
established by the
Prohibition of Human Cloning Act
Involving Human Embryos Act
is relevant only to the
human embryonic stem cells from excess ART embryos, as defined in the latter
16.30 As noted above,
involving the use of human embryonic stem
cell lines, including human embryonic stem cell lines that have been imported
into Australia,
is not subject to specific legislation. It is, however, covered
by guidelines issued by the NHMRC and AHEC, which apply to all research
funded by the NHMRC. In 2001, AHEC issued an interim advice to human research
ethics committees (HRECs) relating to the
review of research protocols that
involve human stem cell research (the AHEC Interim
The AHEC Interim Advice
requires that, to obtain the approval of an HREC, the stem cell lines proposed
for use in the research should
have been derived in a manner that is consistent
with the NHMRC’s
Ethical Guidelines on Assisted Reproductive
National Statement
on Ethical Conduct in Research Involving
AHEC is in the
process of reviewing the
Ethical Guidelines on Assisted Reproductive
and related publications and intends to address the conduct of
stem cell research in the revised guidelines that will flow from this
16.31 Research involving tissue from which adult stem cells may be derived is
regulated by a mixture of legislation and guidelines,
state and territory Human Tissue Acts, which require consent for the
donation of blood, and regenerative and non-regenerative human
ethical guidelines and policy statements, including the
National Statement on Ethical Conduct in Research Involving
Patentability
of stem cell technologies
Existing patents and patent applications
16.32 Patent
applications claiming animal and human stem cells and stem cell technologies
have been filed in Australia and other
The EU Stem Cell
Report indicated that, by May 2002, over 2,000 patent applications involving
human and animal stem cells had been
filed worldwide, one quarter of which
related to embryonic stem cells.
Approximately one third of all stem cell patent applications have been
16.33 The types of products and processes claimed in filed patent applications
include stem cells, stem cell lines, and differentiated
and genetically modified
stem cells. They also include processes for: the creation of embryos by somatic
cell nuclear transfer and
parthenogenesis; isolating and culturing stem cells;
inducing stem cells to differentiate; and genetically modifying stem cells for
particular applications.
16.34 A number of granted stem cell patents have been identified as particularly
significant because of the scope of the patent claims
and the specific stem cell
technologies covered by the patents. These include certain patents over human
and primate embryonic stem
cell technology held by the Wisconsin Alumni Research
Foundation (WARF).
These patents
are often referred to as the ‘Thomson patents’, after Dr James
Thomson who led the team that first reported
the isolation and differentiation
of human embryonic stem cells.
The Thomson patents cover methods for isolating embryonic stem
and for transplanting them
into human beings.
Thomson patents also claims unmodified human embryonic stem cell lines per se,
regardless of their
16.35 In Australia, stem cell patents have been granted to a number of
companies, including:
BresaGen Limited, relating to methods of using a biological factor
to produce pluripotent stem cells having different
properties;
Geron Corporation, relating to a system for culturing human
pluripotent stem cells in the absence of feeder
ES Cell International Pte Ltd, relating to undifferentiated human
embryonic stem cells, and methods of cultivation, propagation and
production of
differentiated
preliminary search of IP Australia’s online patents databases also
revealed pending applications claiming inventions
involving human embryonic stem
cells, or processes involving such
16.37 Patents have also been granted over adult stem cell lines. For example,
Johns Hopkins University holds a patent on the processes
for isolating adult
bone marrow stem cells;
MorphoGen Pharmaceuticals Inc has obtained a patent claiming ‘purified
pluripotent mesenchymal stem cells’ obtained
from cultured muscle
Application of patent law to stem cell technologies
one view, the patenting of inventions involving stem cell technologies does not
raise issues different from those raised
by the patenting of other human
biological material, such as genetic sequences. From another perspective, the
patenting of inventions
involving stem cell technologies should be treated
differently from other inventions involving human biological material either
the human biological material at issue has been derived from a human
embryo, and embryos have a special status because of their potential
into a human being; or
the capacity of stem cells to develop into various tissue types
justifies the application of special rules.
16.39 As discussed in Chapters 6 and 7, s 18 of
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act
) provides that a
‘patentable invention’ under Australian law is one that is a
‘manner of manufacture’, is
novel, involves an inventive step, is
useful, and is not expressly excluded from patentability under the Act. As a
general matter,
inventions involving biological materials may be patented under
Australian law if they have been isolated from their natural
IP Australia has
indicated that human cell lines are patentable on this
16.40 However,
Patents Act
excludes ‘human beings
and the biological processes for their generation’ from patentability
under Australian law. It
has been suggested that this provision may prevent
patent protection being available for inventions involving human embryonic stem
The Act does not define
‘human beings’ or ‘biological processes for their
generation’ and, to date, there
has been no judicial consideration of this
Legislative history of s 18(2) of the Patents Act
16.41 Parliamentary debates surrounding the adoption of
s 18(2) provide little guidance as to whether inventions involving human
stem cells were intended to be covered by this provision. This is not
surprising because the ability to isolate human embryonic stem
cells was not
announced until 1998.
16.42 Section 18(2) was based on a proposal by Senator Brian Harradine during
consideration of the
Patents Bill 1990
(Cth) (Patents Bill). Foreshadowing the
amendment, Senator Harradine indicated that he was concerned that insufficient
consideration
was being given by Parliament to ‘the possibility of
patenting new forms of animal
and that the
Australian Patents Office (as it then was) might grant patents on a human, or a
genetically-modified human.
Australian Democrats also expressed concerns about deficiencies in the
for being ‘silent on the question of the patenting of biological
material’, in particular genetic
16.43 During consideration of the
Patents Bill
by the Senate Standing Committee
on Industry, Science and Technology (the Senate Standing Committee), Senator
Harradine proposed
an amendment that originally provided:
A patentable invention shall not include the following:
(a) human life forms;
(b) any genetic manipulations of the human species;
(c) any trans-species procedure involving human
16.44 A majority of the Senate Standing Committee supported Senator
Harradine’s proposal in principle, but was concerned about
its apparent
breadth and ambiguity. The proposal was amended during the Senate Standing
Committee’s debates as follows:
The words ‘human beings’ replaced ‘human life
forms’. The latter was deemed to be a ‘broader expression’
the Senate Standing Committee wished to limit the scope of any exception to
avoid uncertainty.
The phrase ‘biological processes for the generation of human
beings’ replaced subsections (b) and (c) of Senator Harradine’s
proposal. The Senate Standing Committee considered that subsections (b) and (c),
as originally drafted, were ‘fraught with
definitional problems and
[caught] up in their scope unintended
consequences’.
16.45 Little
consideration was given to the meaning of the term ‘human beings’
during the parliamentary debates surrounding
the adoption of
Patents Act
but the debates provide more assistance as to the
intended scope of the term ‘biological processes for the generation of
beings’. Senator Harradine indicated that ‘techniques for
cloning an embryo at the four-cell stage’—a reference
technique of ‘embryo splitting’—would be an example of the
The Opposition suggested
would preclude patenting of inventions involving ‘in-vitro
fertilisation and cloning for reproductive
The Government
did not elaborate on the intended scope of the provision, except to note that it
did not represent ‘a change
in policy in relation to the patentability of
life forms’.
IP Australia’s current practice
Section 18(2)
has been interpreted narrowly by IP
Australia. IP Australia’s
Manual of Practice and Procedure
) indicates that, while the precise scope of the provision is
unclear, certain inventions are ‘clearly
encompassed’
exception, including:
human beings, foetuses, embryos or fertilised ova;
fertilisation or cloning methods that
generate human beings; and
processes—beginning with fertilisation and ending with
birth—that are wholly biological and result in a human
also sets out the inventions that IP Australia regards as being
‘clearly outside’ the scope of
, namely ‘human genes,
tissues and cell lines’, which will be patentable if the requirements for
patentability set out
Patents Act
In its submission to
the Andrews Report, IP Australia explained why human genes, cell lines and
tissues are not covered by
This is premised on a widely accepted view that human genes, cell lines
and tissues are not regarded as human beings, as distinct
from foetuses and
embryos which are regarded as human beings and hence are not
patentable.
16.48 A human cell line may meet the statutory requirements for patentability
[it] is different from naturally occurring cells in the human body. It is
capable of continuous propagation in an artificial environment
by continual
division of the cells, unlike naturally occurring cells which die after a
limited number of divisions.
16.49 However, IP Australia has indicated that what constitutes a human being or
the biological processes for the generation of a
human being may be
As a matter of
practice, IP Australia has developed a policy by which patent applications that
might fall within this ‘grey
area’ must be referred to supervising
examiners, who then discuss the matter with a Deputy
Commissioner.
understands that inventions involving human embryonic stem cells are currently
covered by this policy.
United States
16.50 Other jurisdictions have also addressed the issue
of whether patent protection should be available for stem cell technologies,
though they have adopted different conclusions about this matter.
16.51 The United States has adopted arguably the most liberal approach to stem
cell patenting. As discussed above, United States
patents have been granted for
inventions involving purified and isolated embryonic and adult stem cell lines,
as well as those involving
methods for isolating and purifying stem cell
16.52 There is no express prohibition in United States law on patents claiming
human beings or the processes for their generation,
equivalent to
Patents Act
. However, it has been a long-standing policy of the United
States Patent and Trademark Office not to grant such
Until recently, little
substantive consideration appears to have been given to whether inventions
involving human embryonic stem
cells could fall within the scope of the policy
against issuing patents on human beings.
16.53 However, this issue was raised for consideration by the United States
Congress in July 2003. Representative Dave Weldon proposed
an amendment to an
appropriations Bill for the Commerce, Justice and State
Departments
that would prohibit
the use of any funds made available under that Bill in granting ‘patents
on claims directed to or encompassing
The amendment
attracted strong criticism and concern that research on stem cells may be
affected if the proposal were
In November 2003, the
House of Representatives and the Senate agreed on a compromise provision that
would ban patents on genetically
engineered human embryos, foetuses and human
beings, but would not affect patents on genes, cells, tissue and other
biological products.
research is also expressly excluded from the scope of the
The House of
Representatives and the Senate have not yet voted on the
European Union
16.54 The Directive of the European Parliament on the
legal protection of biotechnological inventions (the EU Biotechnology
Patent Convention
contain provisions that may affect the patentability of stem cell
technologies.
16.55 Article 5(1) of the EU Biotechnology Directive provides that ‘the
human body, at the various stages of its formation
and development’ does
not constitute patentable subject matter. However, art 5(2) states that
‘an element isolated from
the human body or otherwise produced by the
means of a technical process’ may be a patentable invention, even if the
is structurally identical to a natural element. The implementing
regulations of the EPC were amended in 1999 to ensure consistency
between the
EPC and the EU Biotechnology
Rule 23e of the EPC
implementing regulations contains provisions equivalent to art 5 of the
16.56 Article 6 of the EU Biotechnology Directive prohibits the grant of patents
that are contrary to ‘
ordre public
or morality’. The article
specifies particular inventions that presumptively fall within the scope of this
exclusion, such as
‘uses of embryos for industrial or commercial
Article 53a of
the EPC contains equivalent language to art 6 of the EU Biotechnology
16.57 The European Patent Office (EPO) and the European Group on Ethics in
Science and New Technologies appear to have adopted different
positions on the
patentability of technologies involving human embryonic stem cells under the EPC
and EU Biotechnology Directive.
Position of the European Patent Office
16.58 In 1999, the EPO granted a patent to Edinburgh
University that related to a method of using genetic engineering to isolate
stem cells—including embryonic stem cells—from more
differentiated cells in a cell culture (the Edinburgh
The patent was opposed
by fourteen parties—including the governments of Germany, the Netherlands
and Italy—primarily
on the basis that the patent did not comply with art
53(a) of the EPC.
argued that the claims encompassed human stem cells, including human embryonic
stem cells and the genetic modification
of such cells, because the term
‘animal’ in the claims could be interpreted as including
16.59 The Opposition Division of the EPO held that the patent did not comply
with art 53(a) of the EPC because it involved uses of
human embryos for
industrial and commercial
The Opposition
Division required the patent to be amended to exclude human and animal embryonic
cells from the scope of the claims.
Since 1999, no further patents relating to
human embryonic stem cells appear to have been granted by the
EU Stem Cell Report
16.60 In May 2002, the European Group on Ethics in
Science and New Technologies published a report that considered issues
surrounding
the patentability of inventions involving stem
Unlike the EPO, the EU
Stem Cell Report did not interpret the EU Biotechnology Directive (and the
corresponding provisions of the
EPC) as precluding all inventions involving
human embryonic stem cells lines from patentability. The report stated that art
the EU Biotechnology Directive leaves open the question of patentability of
cells obtained from donated embryos and does not indicate
which embryos, if any,
are subject to the
16.61 The opinions expressed in the EU Stem Cell Report were not, however,
limited to inventions involving human embryonic stem cells.
The position adopted
in the report as to the patentability of stem cell technologies under European
law is as follows.
Isolated stem cells that have not been modified do not fulfil the
legal requirements for patentability, particularly the requirement
of industrial
application. Further, unmodified stem cell lines should not be patentable
because the cell lines may have a large range
of undescribed uses, which could
result in the grant of overly broad
Stem cell lines that have been modified by
treatments, or genetically modified so that they have acquired characteristics
for a specific industrial application, may satisfy
the requirements for
patentability.
Patents on inventions involving stem cells should be granted only if
the application refers to a specific and sufficiently accurately
described stem
cell line and its industrial application.
Patenting processes involving human stem cells, regardless of the
source of the cells, does not raise any specific ethical obstacles
requirements for patentability are otherwise
EU Stem Cell Report also commented that the role of the European Group on Ethics
in Science and New Technologies was to
consider ethical aspects of biotechnology
in general,
but that patent
applications involving biotechnological inventions—including those
involving stem cell technologies—may
require specific ethical
evaluation.
In light of this,
the EU Stem Cell Report suggested that ethical evaluation of patent applications
should become part of the assessment
process of the EPO, or national patent
offices, and that ‘advisory panels of independent experts’ should be
established
United Kingdom
16.63 In April 2003, the United Kingdom Patent Office
(UK Patent Office) issued a Practice Note setting out its general approach to
patent applications claiming stem cells derived from human embryos and processes
involving human embryonic stem
The Practice Note
indicates that each patent application will be assessed on its merits, but goes
on to provide as follows:
processes for obtaining stem cells from human embryos are not
patentable because the
Patents Act 1977
(UK) provides that uses of
embryos for industrial or commercial purposes are not patentable
inventions;
‘human totipotent cells’ are not patentable because they
have the potential to develop into an entire human body, and
the human body at
its various stages of its formation and development is excluded from
patentability under the
Patents Act 1977
‘human embryonic pluripotent stem cells’ will be
patentable if such inventions satisfy the statutory criteria for patentability
because such stem cells do not have the potential to develop into an entire
human body.
16.64 In addition, the UK Patent Office has concluded that
the commercial exploitation of inventions involving human embryonic pluripotent
stem cells is not, as a general matter, contrary to public policy or morality in
the United Kingdom.
Practice Note states that, despite some opposition to embryo research in the
United Kingdom, a number of reports have noted the
enormous potential of stem
cell research.
16.65 The Practice Note does not address the patentability of inventions
involving foetal and adult stem cell lines. It appears,
therefore, that
inventions involving foetal and adult stem cell lines may be assessed for
patentability in the same manner as inventions
involving any other type of
technology.
16.66 The Practice Note has adopted an interpretation of the EPC and EU
Biotechnology Directive—as implemented in the
Patents Act 1977
(UK)—that differs from the opinions of both the EPO and the EU Stem Cell
Report in some respects. Unlike the EPO, the UK Patent
Office will grant patents
on inventions claiming certain types of embryonic stem cells. Further, in
determining which types of inventions
claiming human embryonic stem cells are
eligible for patent protection, the UK Patent Office has drawn a different
distinction to
that adopted in the EU Stem Cell Report: the UK Patent Office
distinguishes between types of cells on the basis of their potential
into an entire human being, rather than according to whether the cell lines are
modified or unmodified.
16.67 The Canadian Biotechnology Advisory Committee
Patenting of Higher Life Forms and Related Issues
Report), recommended that the
Patent Act 1985
(Can) be amended to include
a provision that: ‘No patent shall be granted on human bodies at any stage
of development’.
proposing this amendment, the CBAC Report made reference to Australian law and,
in particular, s 18(2) of the
16.68 The CBAC Report indicated that the proposed provision should be narrowly
construed and was not intended to prevent patent claims
being granted with
respect to stem cell lines, (adult) cell lines or DNA
CBAC commented
that it selected the plural term ‘human bodies’, rather than
‘human body’, to indicate that
only the entire human body was
encompassed by the exclusion, not its
Further, CBAC stated
that it proposed the term ‘human bodies’ rather than ‘human
beings’ (the term used in
s 18(2) of the
Patents Act
‘human beings’ is a metaphysical concept, not a biological
16.69 The CBAC Report also suggested that the phrase ‘at all stages of
development’ in the proposed amendment would cover
human bodies of
infants, children and adults, as well as precursors to human bodies from zygotes
to foetuses.
However, such a
provision would not prevent the patenting of stem cells or other cells
these are removed from a multi-cellular precursor of the human body
(except for the zygote) and thus do not comprise a human body
at any stage of
development.
16.70 The report of the Ontario Government,
Genetics, Testing and Gene
Patenting: Charting New Territory in Healthcare
(the Ontario Report),
adopted a different approach to the issue of stem cell patents to that proposed
in the CBAC Report. The Ontario
Report recommended that the Canadian Government
‘consider adopting an [
ordre public
]/ morality clause within the
The Ontario
Report was particularly concerned to provide a mechanism for assessing
‘contentious patent applications’,
such as those involving stem
The Ontario Report
regarded patenting stem cells as controversial because of the potential
applications of stem cell
but did comment on
the possible controversy arising from the fact that stem cell research may
involve the use and destruction of
Options for reform
ALRC has been considering whether the patentability of inventions involving stem
cell technologies under Australian law
needs to be clarified. It has been
suggested that governments should ‘learn from the experiences and social
controversies surrounding
human gene patents’ and formulate coherent
policies in relation to stem cell patenting to avoid such controversies
A clear approach
to this issue is certainly desirable. In formulating such an approach, however,
Stacy Kincaid has noted that:
isolated analysis and decision making of an issue, particularly a
biotechnology issue, often results in ‘laws that may be drafted
vaguely, broadly, or narrowly so as to inhibit the development of scientific
innovation.
16.72 There are a number of reform options available, including:
leaving determinations as to the patentability of inventions
involving stem cell technologies to IP Australia for case-by-case analysis
the basis of existing laws and policy;
amending the
Patents Act
to clarify which inventions
involving stem cell technologies (if any) constitute patentable subject matter;
requiring IP Australia to develop examination guidelines setting out
its examination practices with respect to inventions involving
technologies and to indicate clearly the types of inventions involving stem cell
technologies (if any) for which IP Australia
will grant patent protection if the
statutory criteria for patentability are satisfied.
Submissions and
consultations
issue of patentability of stem cell technologies was discussed only briefly in
However, the ALRC
received a number of submissions that addressed this issue, and consulted with a
number of organisations engaged
in stem cell research in Australia, including
16.74 A number of submissions suggested that patent protection should be
available under Australian law for stem cell technologies.
For example, the
NHMRC submitted:
The Council considers that it would be the clear expectation of
researchers currently working (in Australia) with human stem cells
therapeutic application, to attempt to commercialise the outcomes of their
research. Such researchers and the commercial
organisation they are associated
with, would in all likelihood seek patent protection of their
inventions.
16.75 Some submissions—primarily from companies in the pharmaceutical and
biotechnology industries—indicated that patents
on stem cell technologies
are important to encourage investment in this research and the development of
therapeutic applications
for stem cells. Genetic Technologies Limited
Gene-based and stem cell-based therapies hold enormous potential, but
developing proven reliable therapies will be a long, difficult
and expensive
exercise. Patent laws are likely to underpin any significant investment in
gene-based therapies and stem cell-based
therapies and, as such, are a necessary
part of realising the future potential of these areas of
16.76 Two submissions addressed the application of s 18(2) of the
to inventions involving stem cell technologies. The Australian Centre
for Intellectual Property in Agriculture (ACIPA) suggested
that s 18(2) should
be revised to ‘remove ambiguity and uncertainty as to whether stem cell
research is
patentable’.
The Government must act to provide a clear directive as to whether stem
cell research is patentable under the
Patents Act 1990
(Cth), and, if so, to
what extent protection should be granted. In particular, it must determine
whether unmodified and modified
stem cells will be patentable. Such reforms are
necessary to foster the commercialisation of stem cell
16.77 IP Australia also addressed the scope of
Patents Act
and indicated its approach when determining whether
is applicable to
a particular invention.
What constitutes a ‘human being’ according to
currently a very grey area, as no clear guidance on this has yet been provided
by the courts. Although IP Australia’s position
will no doubt change as
the technology evolves, the organisation’s current interpretation is that
anything which has an inherent
capability to mature and become a human being
should be excluded. According to this, the more complex the subject matter, the
likely it is to be excluded. Human genes, cells, tissues, ovum and sperm
are generally considered patentable. However, complexities
arise for subject
matter such as fertilised ovum, stem cells, foetuses, genetically modified
animals containing human genes, and
humans treated with animal
16.78 Submissions did not generally distinguish between patenting issues
relevant to embryonic stem cells, foetal stem cells or adult
stem cells. In
consultations, however, the NSCC commented that different issues arise for
different types of stem cells because of
the ethical concerns associated with
embryo research.
16.79 A few submissions considered that Australian patent law should take
ethical considerations into account. Dr Warwick Neville
of the Australian
Catholic Bishops Conference submitted:
It would be remarkable if, on the one hand, the Commonwealth Parliament
has so recently enacted legislation [the Research Involving
Embryos Act 2002 and
Prohibition of Human Cloning Act 2002
] which deals expressly with medical
research involving embryos and stem cells, and which includes reference to
ethical considerations,
and on the other hand, patent law and patent office
practice ... continue to exclude ethical
considerations.
16.80 Similarly, ACIPA considered that:
The government must also consider patent law and stem cell research
within the prism of the debate over the ethics of patenting life
should seek to include public policy considerations—such as ethical
considerations in an assessment of patent
applications.
16.81 One submission addressed the ethics of embryonic stem cell research
generally and considered that future research on embryos
should not be
ALRC’s views
is important to distinguish between concerns applicable to the
stem cell research and those directed to the
of inventions that
may be developed in the course of such research. In addition, issues that may
relate only to patenting inventions
involving embryonic stem cells need to be
distinguished from issues that may relate to other types of inventions involving
technologies.
16.83 Inventions involving embryonic stem cells may raise issues that are not
raised by inventions involving adult stem cells. Objections
to patenting
inventions involving embryonic stem cells are often founded on ethical concerns
embryos and embryonic stem cells per se.
As described above, regulation of embryo research is the subject of separate
federal, state
and territory laws, which themselves draw a delicate balance
between competing interests, taking ethical considerations into account.
ALRC’s view, amendments to the
Patents Act
to address ethical
concerns about the patenting of stem cells are not required at this stage as an
additional layer of ethical consideration.
16.84 Existing provisions in the
Patents Act
may be used in appropriate
circumstances to reject patent applications claiming human embryonic stem cells
or related processes. The
Commissioner of Patents has a discretion to refuse a
patent application claiming an invention whose use would be contrary to
Because it is an offence
Research Involving Human Embryos Act
to use an excess ART
embryo without a licence from the NHMRC Licensing Committee (unless the use
falls within a statutory
exemption),
involving human embryonic stem cells lines that are derived from the use of an
excess ART embryo without a licence, or
in breach of the conditions in any such
licence, could fall within the ‘contrary to law’ provision in the
Patents Act
. Similar considerations could apply to inventions involving
human embryonic stem cell lines derived from non-excess ART
Further, as
discussed in Chapter 7, the incorporation of the
Statute of Monopolies
into the definition of ‘invention’ in the
Patents Act
provide a basis for excluding inventions that are ‘generally
inconvenient’ from patentability under Australian
16.85 On the basis of information currently available, the ALRC is not inclined
to propose amendments to the
Patents Act
that would expressly address the
patentability of inventions involving stem cell technologies. As discussed in
Chapters 6 and 7,
the requirements for patentability in the
Patents Act
are nearly all technology-neutral and are therefore capable of adapting to new
technologies as they arise. Technology-specific exceptions
to the requirements
for patentability impact on the flexibility of the current statutory framework.
Further, such provisions may
conflict with Australia’s obligations under
the Agreement on Trade-Related Intellectual Property
The express exclusion
of inventions involving stem cell technologies is also likely to have an adverse
effect on research in this
Moreover, the emergent
state of stem cell science and the uncertainty about its potential applications
must be borne in mind. A specific
provision in the
Patents Act
to the patentability of inventions involving stem cell technologies is unlikely
to be sufficiently flexible to adapt to
future scientific developments.
16.86 However, the ALRC recognises that uncertainty currently exists about the
be patentable under Australian
law. The ALRC’s preliminary view is, therefore, that IP Australia should
develop clear examination
guidelines setting out the types of inventions
involving stem cell technologies that it regards as patentable and, to the
that any inventions involving stem cell technologies may not be
patentable, the basis on which patent protection may not be available.
remainder of this chapter, these are called the Stem Cell Examination
Guidelines.
16.87 Stem Cell Examination Guidelines are desirable for similar reasons to
those set out in Chapter 8 in support of the development
of guidelines for the
examination of biotechnological inventions
Currently, IP
Australia’s policy is to refer applications claiming stem cell
technologies to a supervising examiner and then
to a Deputy Commissioner. It is
unclear from IP Australia’s
or submissions made by
IP Australia to relevant government inquiries on this issue, exactly how
Australian patent law is applied to
inventions involving stem cells,
particularly human embryonic stem cells.
16.88 Patent applications claiming stem cell technologies have, however, been
filed with IP Australia, and in some cases patents
have been granted. It would
assist potential applicants in understanding the scope of patent protection
available under Australian
law if IP Australia’s approach with respect to
inventions resulting from stem cell research were more clearly articulated.
UK Patent Office’s Practice Note on the patentability of human embryonic
stem cell inventions provides a worthwhile model
in this regard.
16.89 Although the primary responsibility for developing the proposed Stem Cell
Examination Guidelines should lie with IP Australia,
that body should consult
with the NHMRC and other relevant stakeholders before adopting any guidelines in
final form. IP Australia
should also obtain the assistance and advice from the
panel of experts described in Proposal 8 - 2. Any guidelines should be
Patents Act
Patent Regulations
and existing
case law. However, it is recognised that the final interpretation of the Act and
the Regulations lies with the courts,
which may ultimately reject an
interpretation adopted by IP Australia.
16.90 In developing the proposed Stem Cell Examination Guidelines, the
distinctions drawn by the UK Patent Office between totipotent
and pluripotent
cells may provide a helpful way to approach the application of
Patents Act
to inventions involving embryonic stem cell technologies.
Distinguishing between types of cells on the basis of their potentiality
preferable to the approach adopted in the EU Stem Cell Report of distinguishing
between modified and unmodified stem cell lines.
The EU Stem Cell Report does
not explain why, as a general matter, isolated human biological material may
constitute a patentable
invention under European
but an isolated stem
cell line requires an additional step—that is, further
modification—in order to be patentable. It
appears that the distinction
between modified and unmodified stem cells lines is a response to concerns about
access to patented
stem cell technologies and the effect of broad claims in stem
cell patents. The ALRC considers that it is preferable to address issues
relating to the exploitation of stem cell technologies directly (see below).
Proposal 16 - 1
IP Australia should develop examination guidelines,
consistent with the
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations
(Cth) and existing case law, to explain how the criteria for
patentability apply to inventions involving stem cell technologies. The
examination guidelines should address, among other things, the patentability of
inventions involving:
(a) totipotent, pluripotent and multipotent cells; and
(b) processes involving stem cell technologies.
Exploiting patents over stem cell technologies
addition to concerns about the patentability of inventions involving stem cell
technologies, other issues have been raised
on the impact of stem cell patents on access to, and the licensing of, stem cell
lines and stem
cell technologies. The balance of this chapter examines the
issues that have been raised in this regard—including broad claims
cell patents, the licensing practices of stem cell patent holders, and
commercialisation of stem cell technologies—and
considers ways in which
these matters might be addressed.
Broad stem cell patents
EU Stem Cell Report expressed concern about the scope of the claims in stem cell
patents. The Report recommended that stem
cell patents should be granted only
where ‘the patent claim refers to a specific and sufficiently accurately
described stem
cell line and its industrial
application’.
the EU Stem Cell Report considered that stem cell patents may cover important
research tools and that broad claims in stem
cell patents might therefore have
adverse effects on further innovation that might be of benefit to
healthcare.
Similar concerns
have been expressed by the Nuffield Council on Bioethics and by a Select
Committee of the House of
16.93 Academic commentators have also identified broad stem cell patents as a
Professor Glenn
McGee and Elizabeth Banger reviewed a number of United States patents involving
stem cell technologies granted by
the end of 2001 and concluded:
The entire field of stem cell research (both in basic and clinical
science) is still very much emergent, and yet patent protection
is already in
place that could allow a tiny number of companies to exert enormous influence
over the conduct of stem cell research
16.94 In particular, it has been suggested that the broad claims in the Thomson
patents (described above) may be problematic. Indeed,
some people have indicated
that the majority of human embryonic stem cell research could fall within the
scope of the claims of these
As discussed in
Chapter 6, broad claims are characteristic of patents granted early in the
development of a new technological field.
However, broad claims in stem cell
patents may not be objectionable if access to stem cell technologies covered by
such claims is
not unduly restricted.
16.95 Concerns about the potential breadth of existing stem cell patents and the
likely impact of this on stem cell research in Australia
need to be carefully
evaluated. Dr Dianne Nicol and Jane Nielsen have indicated that some of the
Thomson patents have not been filed
researchers may therefore be free to conduct research that falls within the
scope of these patents without fear of infringement
of these patents, although
the activities may fall within and potentially infringe other issued
Stem cell patents
granted in other jurisdictions might, however, prevent the importation of a stem
cell product developed in Australia
using a process covered by the claims of
such patents. In addition, the NSCC commented in consultations that the prior
art against
which any subsequent patent applications claiming stem cell
technologies may be assessed may significantly limit the scope of the
any stem cell patents that may be granted by IP Australia in the
16.96 Despite the broad foundational stem cell patents owned by entities such as
WARF and Geron Corporation, other biotechnology
companies have derived stem cell
lines that may fall outside the scope of the Thomson patents. For example,
BresaGen Limited, an
Australian biotechnology company with facilities in
Georgia, USA, has indicated that it has developed four pluripotent embryonic
stem cell lines derived from embryos at a later stage of embryonic development
than that claimed in the Thomson
Licensing stem cell patents
16.97 Concerns
have also been expressed about how stem cell patents are exploited. It has been
suggested that stem cell patents may
impede further research and innovation in
relation to stem cell technologies, particularly if stem cell patent holders
license such
patents exclusively, or only on restricted terms. These concerns
are similar to those addressed elsewhere in this Discussion Paper
licensing of gene patents.
16.98 A few submissions to the Inquiry commented on restrictions on access to
patented stem cell technologies. For example, the Walter
and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research indicated that non-exclusive licensing of stem
cell patents should be
encouraged.
Similarly, ACIPA
commented that:
The government also needs to ensure that the granting of patents in
respect of stem cell research will not impair research and development
field or prevent equitable access to therapies and drugs derived from this
16.99 Concerns about the licensing of stem cell patents have been particularly
acute in the United States, largely as a result of
government policy relating to
funding embryonic stem cell
On 9 August 2001,
President George W Bush announced that human embryonic stem cell research using
federal funds could be conducted
only on the then-existing stem cell
This policy sought to
balance the potentially valuable therapies that stem cell research may produce
against concerns in different
sections of American society that research
involving human embryos should not be
16.100 President Bush indicated that there were more than 60 ‘genetically
diverse stem cell lines’ in existence, which
had been created from embryos
that had already been
However, concerns
have now been raised that an insufficient number of human embryonic stem cell
lines are available and that there
are deficiencies in existing cell
Further, many of these
human embryonic stem cell lines are covered by
It has been said
that President Bush’s policy has rendered existing embryonic stem cell
lines (and patents over such cell lines)
more significant, and arguably reduced
the possibility that United States scientists will derive and patent new
embryonic stem cell
Professor Rebecca Eisenberg has commented that:
What constrains the monopoly power of a patent holder is the prospect of
new technology being developed that will make it unnecessary
to deal with them
... [the] President’s decision limits that
16.101 Access to human embryonic stem cell lines that fall within President
Bush’s policy does not, however, appear to have
been unduly restricted to
date. The United States National Institutes of Health (NIH) have developed
Memoranda of Understanding with
a number of entities to ensure access to
proprietary embryonic stem cell lines for researchers funded by the
In particular, an
agreement between WiCell Research Institute Inc
and the United
States Department of Health and Human
permits NIH-funded
researchers to access human embryonic stem cell lines covered by the Thomson
patents for a fixed fee of US$5,000
for use for educational and non-commercial
Researchers are
permitted to retain any intellectual property rights that may arise from such
research without consultation with
but they require an
additional licence from WiCell to be able to commercialise any resulting
inventions.
16.102 Licences over stem cell patents and other collaborative arrangements
relating to the development of stem cell technologies
have also been reported in
connection with Australian commercial entities. For example, a 2003 report
published by Invest Australia
indicated that three Australian
entities—BresaGen, ES Cell International, and Stem Cell Sciences—had
entered into agreements
with organisations based in the United States and Japan
pursuant to which intellectual property rights would be licensed for use
human embryonic stem cell research and the development of human embryonic stem
cell therapies.
However, the
extent to which access to stem cell technologies is being restricted,
particularly outside Australia, is unclear.
Stem cell banks
16.103 Initiatives
have been implemented in other jurisdictions to facilitate access to existing
and newly-created stem cell lines.
In the United Kingdom, the National Institute
for Biological Standards and Controls has established a stem cell bank (the UK
Cell Bank). The UK Stem Cell Bank will be developed to supply stem cell
lines of all types for use in research in the United Kingdom
countries, as well as for direct use in the production of human therapeutic
16.104 The NIH has also established an on-line registry of human embryonic stem
cell lines that are available for use by researchers
funded by the
Access to human
embryonic stem cell lines is not available directly from the NIH, but relevant
information about the stem cell lines
and their availability is provided.
16.105 In Australia, the
Research Involving Human Embryos Act
Prohibition of Human Cloning Act
provide for an independent review of the
operation of this legislation, which will include consideration of a National
The review is
scheduled to be conducted as soon as possible after 19 December 2004—being
the second anniversary of the date
on which the Acts received Royal
Assent—and a report is to be submitted to the Council of Australian
Governments and both Houses
of Parliament upon
completion.
16.106 The EU Stem Cell Report also proposed the creation of an EU registry of
unmodified human stem cell lines, which would include
both embryonic stem cells
and embryonic germ cells.
action has been taken to implement this proposal to date.
16.107 In addition, in January 2003, the United Kingdom Medical Research Council
convened the International Stem Cell Forum for the
discussion of international
policy issues relating to stem
The Forum comprises
nine international research agencies, including the
One of the projects
under consideration by the Forum is opportunities for collaboration between
countries in connection with stem
cell banks covering all types of stem
Commercialisation of stem cell technologies in Australia
date, consideration of issues relating to stem cell technologies in Australia
has focused on the circumstances in which
stem cell research may be conducted
and whether it is appropriate for intellectual property rights to be granted in
relation to inventions
involving stem cell technologies. Regulation of the way
in which stem cell patents might be exploited and commercialised has not
addressed in any detail.
16.109 Proposals have been made to address specific aspects of the
commercialisation of stem cell technologies. For example, in 2003,
Therapeutic Goods Regulations 1991
were amended to include
provisions requiring manufacturers of prescription medicines to provide
consumers with information about whether
medicines have been manufactured or
tested using human embryonic stem
In addition, the
Andrews Report recommended that a licensing body be established to regulate any
research involving the isolation,
use and creation of embryonic stem cell
The Andrews Report
contemplated that this licensing body should have regard to ‘the potential
commercialisation of the products’
of such research and would ‘issue
guidelines to other Commonwealth
16.110 The functions of the licensing body contemplated by the Andrews Report
were more extensive than those ultimately conferred
upon the NHMRC Licensing
Committee pursuant to the
Research Involving Human Embryos Act
Prohibition of Human Cloning Act
and corresponding state and territory
legislation.
In addition, the
scope of activities that the Andrews Report considered that the proposed
licensing body would regulate applied to
human cloning and stem cell research
Research Involving Human Embryos Act
and corresponding state
legislation does not currently provide for the NHMRC Licensing Committee to
exercise this type of responsibility.
In issuing a licence to use excess ART
embryos, the NHMRC Licensing Committee is required to consider, among other
matters, whether
appropriate procedures are in place to obtain consent if a
licence to use excess ART embryos is granted, and whether the proposed
been approved by an HREC.
addition to certain licence conditions stipulated in the
legislation,
Licensing Committee may also impose licence conditions relating to: the persons
authorised to use the excess ART embryos;
the number of embryos authorised to be
used; reporting and monitoring requirements; and information to be provided by
the licence
holder to persons authorised to use the excess ART
16.112 There is no provision in the legislation that would allow the NHMRC
Licensing Committee to impose conditions on the way in
which the results of any
inventions arising from the use of excess ART embryos are exploited or
commercialised. Nor does the NHMRC
Licensing Committee have jurisdiction to
require the owner of any stem cell patents to grant access to such technology,
the rights exercisable by the NIH in relation to stem cell technology
developed using NIH funds.
Guidelines for access to stem cell technologies
16.113 One alternative to legislative provisions
regulating access to stem cell technologies would be to develop national
relating to patenting and exploiting stem cell technologies by
Australian entities. Such guidelines might apply to embryonic stem
well as to adult and foetal stem cells, to address issues that may arise from
time to time.
16.114 In Victoria, a draft code of practice for the propagation and use of
human stem cell lines has been developed by a working
group within the
Biotechnology Safety and Ethics Interdepartmental Committee (the Victorian Draft
Code of Practice). The Draft Code
gave some consideration to the issue of
proprietary rights in stem cell lines and the exploitation of such
inventions.
The Victorian
Draft Code of Practice is a set of voluntary guidelines, designed to apply to
the use of adult, foetal and embryonic
stem cell lines in both the public and
private sectors. The Draft Code of Practice indicated that:
the public good is best served by a situation in which private ownership
of unmodified stem cell lines does not inhibit or prevent
non-commercial research on stem
16.115 Further, the Draft Code commented that the biotechnology industry has a
responsibility to avoid developing proprietary interests
such that ‘the
potential for basic research outcomes is
and that the
government should ‘facilitate the availability of stem cell lines and
donated tissue in the public
neither the Draft Code of Practice, nor the discussion paper that was released
in conjunction with it, proposed a mechanism
by which such outcomes could be
16.116 In Chapter 13, the ALRC proposed that the ARC and NHMRC develop
guidelines for researchers to ensure that the public interest
in encouraging
commercial exploitation of inventions is balanced with the public interest in
wide dissemination of research
There is scope for
considering whether stem cell research funded by the ARC or the NHMRC should
also be covered by such guidelines,
or whether guidelines specifically relating
to stem cell technologies should also be developed.
ALRC’s views
ALRC has been considering whether mechanisms should be established to facilitate
the monitoring of commercial applications
of patented stem cell technologies and
access to associated inventions.
16.118 Proposals made elsewhere in this Discussion Paper to facilitate access to
genetic materials and technologies could also be
invoked to facilitate access to
stem cell technologies. These proposals include amendments to the existing
compulsory licensing regime
Patents Act
; use or acquisition of
patented technologies pursuant to the Crown use provisions in the
; and amendments to the
Patents Act
to incorporate a specific
experimental use defence.
16.119 Specific proposals may also be desirable to address concerns that have
been articulated about the way in which stem cell patents
are exploited. A range
of reform options are available, including:
establishing an Australian stem cell bank, or collaborative
agreements with existing stem cell banks in other countries, to facilitate
regulate access to stem cell lines by researchers;
conferring responsibility on some new or existing body (for example,
the NHMRC Licensing Committee), to consider the potential exercise
of any patent
rights that may arise from research involving human stem cell lines conducted by
Australian entities; or
requiring the ARC and NHMRC to develop guidelines and principles for
researchers that would ensure the public interest in the commercial
exploitation
of inventions involving stem cell technologies is balanced with the public
interest in dissemination of such technologies.
16.120 There are
limitations in each of the reform options outlined above, and a combination of
these options, or alternative approaches,
may be desirable. In particular, if
responsibility is to be conferred upon a new or existing body to consider the
potential exercise
of any patent rights that may arise from research involving
stem cell lines conducted in Australia, the issues that would need to
into account include the following:
the type of research that will be regulated;
the time at which an assessment of the exercise of patent rights
should be made;
the appropriate composition of a body that would assess and
determine how to manage the potential exercise of patent rights; and
the legislative or regulatory framework that would be required to
establish such a body or confer additional power on an existing
16.121 Given the limitations discussed in this chapter on the
functions conferred on the NHMRC Licensing Committee under the
Involving Human Embryos Act
Prohibition of Human Cloning Act
corresponding state and territory legislation, the NHMRC Licensing Committee may
not be the most appropriate body to exercise
such a role, even if regulation of
the potential exercise of stem cell patent rights is considered desirable. It
may be more appropriate
for the NHMRC and ARC to establish other mechanisms to
examine the potential impact of patents over stem cell technologies, such
through the issuing of guidelines.
16.122 The ALRC is interested in obtaining further information and comments on
these proposed options, and any other mechanisms by
which the exploitation of
stem cell technologies might be regulated.
Question 16 - 1
Should specific mechanisms be established to regulate
the exploitation of patented stem cell technologies? If so, would any of the
following initiatives be desirable:
(a) establishing an Australian stem cell bank or collaborating with
existing stem cell banks in other countries;
(b) conferring responsibility on a new or existing body to consider the
potential exercise of any patent rights that might arise from
research conducted
by Australian entities using human stem cell lines; or
(c) developing guidelines and principles by the National Health and Medical
Research Council and the Australian Research Council to
ensure that the public
interest in the commercial exploitation of inventions involving stem cell
technologies is balanced with the
public interest in dissemination of such
technologies?
As discussed below, certain types of
stem cells—in particular, embryonic stem cells—occur naturally only
for a short
period of time in the earliest stages of development. Such stem
cells do not exist naturally in an isolated
For further discussion of stem
cells, see House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
Human Cloning: Scientific, Ethical and Regulatory
Aspects of Human Cloning and Stem Cell Research
(2001), ch 2 - 4; Senate
Community Affairs Legislation Committee,
Provisions of the
Research Involving
Embryos and Prohibition of Human Cloning Bill 2002
(2002), ch 2; National
Institutes of Health,
Stem Cell Basics
http://stemcells.nih.gov/index.asp
at 28 August
The term ‘embryo’ is
generally used to refer to a developing foetus up to eight weeks after
fertilisation and the term
‘foetus’ is used for the period
commencing nine weeks after fertilisation until
Somatic cell nuclear transfer
involves a nucleus being removed from a mature (somatic) cell and inserted into
an egg cell (ovum)
from which the nucleus has previously been
The ethical and legal issues
surrounding cloning technologies have been comprehensively canvassed in
Australia and in other jurisdictions
in recent years. See, eg, House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Cloning: Scientific, Ethical and Regulatory Aspects of Human Cloning and Stem
Cell Research
(2001); Senate Community Affairs Legislation Committee,
Provisions of the
Research Involving Embryos and Prohibition of Human Cloning
(2002); National Health and Medical Research Council and
Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Scientific, Ethical and Regulatory
Considerations Relevant to Cloning Human Beings
(1998); President’s
Council on Bioethics,
Monitoring Stem Cell Research (Pre-publication
(2004); Royal Society,
Whither Cloning?
(1998); United Kingdom
Department of Health,
Stem Cell Research, Medical Progress With
Responsibility: A Report from the Chief Medical Officer’s Expert Group
Reviewing the
Potential of Developments in Stem Cell Research and Cell Nuclear
Replacement to Benefit Human Health
See, eg, W Rohn, ‘Seven Days
of Creation: The Inside Story of a Human Cloning Experiment’,
, January 2004, 122.
example, scientists worldwide have expressed doubts about claims by the company
Clonaid—which is linked to the Raelian
movement—to have cloned a
Some scientists classify stem cells
derived from umbilical cord blood as adult, rather than foetal, stem
It has been suggested that the term
‘adult stem cells’ is something of a misnomer since adult stem cells
can be found
in foetuses and newborns, as well as in adults. The more accurate
terms for this type of stem cells are ‘multipotent stem cells’
‘progenitor cells’. The term ‘adult stem cells’ is,
however, used in this Discussion Paper as it is the
most common term used in the
literature to refer to these types of stem cells.
National Institutes of Health,
Cell Basics
http://stemcells.nih.gov/index.asp
at 28 August
House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Human Cloning: Scientific,
Ethical and Regulatory Aspects of Human Cloning and Stem Cell Research
(2001), [2.48] - [2.51]; Senate Community Affairs Legislation Committee,
Provisions of the
Research Involving Embryos and Prohibition of Human Cloning
(2002), [2.16].
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Human Cloning: Scientific, Ethical and Regulatory Aspects of Human Cloning
and Stem Cell Research
(2001), ch 4; Senate Community Affairs Legislation
Provisions of the
Research Involving Embryos and Prohibition of
Human Cloning Bill 2002
(2002), [2.51] - [2.136]; National Institutes of
Stem Cell Basics
http://stemcells.nih.gov/index.asp
28 August 2003; President’s Council on Bioethics,
Monitoring Stem Cell
Research (Pre-publication Copy)
House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Human Cloning: Scientific,
Ethical and Regulatory Aspects of Human Cloning and Stem Cell Research
(2001), [4.14] - [4.17].
Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies,
Ethical Aspects of Patenting
Inventions Involving Human Stem Cells: Opinion to the European Commission
(2002), 13.
Senate Community Affairs
Legislation Committee,
Provisions of the
Research Involving Embryos and
Prohibition of Human Cloning Bill 2002
(2002), [4.56] - [4.61]; M
Rimmer, ‘The Attack of the Clones: Patent Law and Stem Cell
Research’ (2003) 10
Journal of Law and Medicine
House of Representatives
Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Human Cloning:
Scientific, Ethical and Regulatory Aspects of Human Cloning and Stem Cell
Senate Community
Affairs Legislation Committee,
Provisions of the
Research Involving Embryos
and Prohibition of Human Cloning Bill 2002
(2002). See also Council of
Australian Governments, ‘Human Cloning, Assisted Reproductive Technology
(ART) and Related Matters’,
, 5 April 2002,
<www.pm.gov.au/news/media_releases/2002>.
Prohibition
of Human Cloning Act 2002
Research Involving Human Embryos Act
Corresponding
legislation has been adopted by New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia and
Research Involving Human Embryos (New South Wales) Act 2003
Human Cloning and Other Prohibited Practices Act 2003
Research Involving Human Embryos and Prohibition of Human Cloning Act
Research Involving Human Embryos Act 2003
Prohibition of Human Cloning Act 2003
Health Legislation
(Research Involving Human Embryos and Prohibition of Human Cloning) Act 2003
(Vic). Bills addressing this issue are pending in the Australian Capital
Territory and Western Australia:
Human Cloning and Embryo Research Bill 2003
Human Reproductive Technology Amendment Bill 2003
Reproductive Technology Amendment (Prohibition of Human Cloning) Bill 2003
House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Human Cloning: Scientific,
Ethical and Regulatory Aspects of Human Cloning and Stem Cell Research
(2001), [4.8] - [4.10]; Invest Australia,
Australian Biotechnology
(2003), 9. According to estimates by the University of Adelaide, Australia
contributes about 25% of the world’s research on
stem cells, compared with
Australian Biotechnology
Australian Government,
Australia’s Ability: An Innovation Statement for the Future
The core scientific
participants in the NSCC are: Monash University; University of Melbourne; Peter
MacCallum Cancer Institute; Institute
of Molecular Bioscience, University of
Queensland; University of Adelaide; National Centre for Advanced Cell
Engineering; John Curtin
School of Medical Research; University of New South
Wales; Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute; and Murdoch Children’s
Research Institute. At the time of its establishment, the NSCC’s key
commercial partners were ES Cell International Pte Ltd
and BresaGen Ltd:
Biotechnology Australia, ‘Centre for Stem Cells and Tissue Repair’,
<www.biotechnology.gov.au>.
Australian Biotechnology
(2003), 9. ES Cell International is
incorporated in Singapore, but conducts a substantial part of its activities at
facilities in
Limited, ‘BresaGen Appoints Administrator’,
Press Release
January 2004,
<www.bresagen.com.au>.
of legislation was proposed in the Andrews Report, but not ultimately adopted by
the Council of Australian Governments:
Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs,
Human Cloning: Scientific, Ethical and Regulatory
Aspects of Human Cloning and Stem Cell Research
(2001), recs 1, 2,
6 - 8; Council of Australian Governments, ‘Human Cloning, Assisted
Reproductive Technology (ART) and Related
, 5 April 2002,
<www.pm.gov.au/news/media_releases/2002>.
Corresponding
state and territory legislation has been enacted in New South Wales, Queensland,
South Australia and Victoria and is
pending in Western Australia and the
Australian Capital Territory. The following discussion focuses on the federal
legislative provisions,
although corresponding requirements are contained in the
state and territory legislation adopted to
Prohibition of Human Cloning
, makes it an offence to create, implant in a
woman, import or export, among other matters, a human embryo clone, a human
embryo that
contains genetic material provided by more than two persons, and a
hybrid or chimeric embryo (that is, an embryo created using the
sperm or ovum of
an animal).
Research Involving Human
Embryos Act
Activities that
constitute exempt uses are set out in
Research Involving Human
Embryos Act
ss 10(2)(a)
(2)(e). An ‘accredited ART centre’ is defined as a
person or body accredited to carry out assisted reproductive technology
Reproductive Technology Accreditation Committee of the Fertility Society of
Australia, or such other body as may be prescribed
by regulation:
Involving Human Embryos Act
Research Involving Human Embryos
Health and Medical Research Council,
General Information About the
Prohibition of Human Cloning Act 2002
and the Research Involving Human Embryo
Act 2002 (Doc No 1/2003)
Research Involving Human Embryos
ss 10(1)(a)
Health and Medical Research Council Act 1992
Research Involving Human Embryos
See also Council of Australian Governments,
‘Human Cloning, Assisted Reproductive Technology (ART) and Related
, 5 April 2002,
<www.pm.gov.au/news/media_releases/2002>.
Health and Medical Research Council,
General Information About the
Prohibition of Human Cloning Act 2002
and the Research Involving Human Embryo
Act 2002 (Doc No 1/2003)
(2003), 15. The majority of the provisions in the
Acts came into effect on 16 January 2003. However,
Research Involving Human Embryos Act
(Cth) did not come into
effect until 19 June 2003:
Research Involving Human Embryos Act
Research Involving
Human Embryos Act
ss 21(3)(b)
limitation will, however, be repealed on 5 April 2005, or an earlier date
pursuant to a declaration by the Council of Australian
Governments:
Involving Human Embryos Act
National Health and Medical
Research Council Licensing Committee,
Report to the Parliament of Australia:
For the Period 1 April 2003 to 30 September 2003
(2003), 14; T Noble,
‘Cloning Police to Keep Watch as Scientists Begin Embryo
Experiments’,
Sydney Morning Herald
The Act does not however cover uses
of human embryos that have been imported in
Australian Health Ethics
Committee, ‘Information for HRECs: Stem Cell Research’,
Information Sheet
, 1 September 2001,
<www.nhmrc.gov.au/issues/hrec5.htm>.
Health and Medical Research Council,
Ethical Guidelines on Assisted
Reproductive Technology
(1996). See in particular ss 6 and
National Health and Medical
Research Council,
National Statement on Ethical Conduct in Research Involving
Australian Health
Ethics Committee, ‘Information for HRECs: Stem Cell Research’,
Information Sheet
, 1 September 2001,
<www.nhmrc.gov.au/issues/hrec5.htm>.
Tissue Act 1983
Transplantation and Anatomy Act 1979
Transplantation and Anatomy Act 1983
Human Tissue Act 1985
Human Tissue Act 1982
Human Tissue and Transplant
Transplantation and Anatomy Act 1978
Tissue Transplant Act 1979
(NT). Sperm, ova and foetal tissue are expressly
excluded from the operation of these
National Health and Medical
Research Council,
National Statement on Ethical Conduct in Research Involving
As of February 2000,
IP Australia had granted four patents for cloning processes applicable to
non-human mammals and ‘routinely
grants patents for both human and animal
cell lines’ that satisfy the statutory requirements for patentability: IP
Submission to House of Representative Standing Committee on Legal
and Constitutional Affairs Inquiry into the Scientific, Ethical
and Regulatory
Aspects of Human Cloning and Stem Cell Research
, Commonwealth of Australia,
<www.aph.gov.au/house/committee/laca/humancloning/sub274.pdf> at 22 August
European Group on Ethics in
Science and New Technologies,
Ethical Aspects of Patenting Inventions
Involving Human Stem Cells: Opinion to the European Commission
(2002), 11.
This figure does not take into account patent applications that may be filed in
a number of jurisdictions but relate
to the same
Ibid, 11. For a survey of
United States patents covering embryonic stem cells, see G McGee and E Banger,
‘Ethical Issues in
the Patenting and Control of Stem Cell Research’
in D Magnus, A Caplan and G McGee (eds),
Who Owns Life?
European Group on Ethics in
Science and New Technologies,
Ethical Aspects of Patenting Inventions
Involving Human Stem Cells: Opinion to the European Commission
WARF is an intellectual
property holding entity established by the University of
J Thomson and others,
‘Embryonic Stem Cell Lines Derived from Human Blastocysts’ (1998)
5,843,780 (granted 1 December 1998) relates to a purified preparation of primate
embryonic stem cells and a method of isolating
such cells. US Pat. No 6,200,806
(granted 13 March 2001) relates to a purified preparation of pluripotent primate
(including human)
embryonic stem cells and a method of isolating such
US Pat No 6,280,718 (granted 28
August 2001) cl 1, 4, 6, 9 - 10.
Pat No 6,200,806, cl 1.
See, eg, ‘Mesenchymal
cells and osteoblasts from human embryonic stem cell’ filed by Geron
Corporation on 3 July 2002
(AU App No 2002322379); ‘Isolation of Inner
Cell Mass for the Establishment of Human Embryonic Stem Cell (hESC) Lines’
filed by Reliance Life Sciences Pvt Ltd on 20 August 2002 (AU App No
2002334378); and ‘Characterization and Isolation of Subsets
Embryonic Cells (HES) and Cells Associated or Derived Therefrom’ filed by
ES Cell International Pte Ltd on 11 November
2002 (AU App No
2002340638).
IP Australia,
Patents for: Microorganisms; Cell Lines; Hybridomas; Related Biological
Materials and their Use; & Genetically Manipulated
<www.ipaustralia.gov.au/pdfs/patents/specific/biotech.pdf> at 31 March
IP Australia,
Patent Manual of
Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
See Standing Committee on
Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Human Cloning: Scientific, Ethical and
Regulatory Aspects of Human Cloning and Stem Cell Research
[8.70] - [8.75]; M Rimmer, ‘The Attack of the Clones: Patent Law and
Stem Cell Research’ (2003) 10
Journal of Law and Medicine
Commonwealth of Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 22 August 1990, 1917 (B
Harradine).
The Senator’s concern
arose from an Office Practice Note which stated that the Patents Office would
not reject a patent application
solely on the basis that a claimed product or
process contains or uses a living organism: Commonwealth of Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate (In Committee), 12 September 1990, 11 (B
Harradine).
Commonwealth of Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 22 August 1990, 1910 (J Coulter). The
amendments proposed by the Australian Democrats to address this deficiency are
Commonwealth
of Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate (In Committee), 12 September
1990, 17 (P Button).
Ibid, 10 (P
Ibid, 10 - 11, 16 - 17
(P Button).
Commonwealth of Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 20 September 1990, 2654 (B
Harradine).
Commonwealth of Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 16 October 1990, 2945 (G
Ibid, 2954 (S
IP Australia,
Patent Manual
of Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
Ibid, [8.5.1],
Ibid, [8.5.1]. See also D
Nicol, ‘Should Human Genes be Patentable Inventions under Australian
Patent Law?’
Journal of Law and Medicine
Submission to House of Representative Standing Committee on Legal
and Constitutional Affairs Inquiry into the Scientific, Ethical
and Regulatory
Aspects of Human Cloning and Stem Cell Research
, Commonwealth of Australia,
<www.aph.gov.au/house/committee/laca/humancloning/sub274.pdf> at 22 August
Submission P56
, 4 November 2003. See also IP Australia,
Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
[8.5.1]; House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional
Human Cloning: Scientific, Ethical and Regulatory Aspects of Human
Cloning and Stem Cell Research
IP Australia,
Manual of Practice and Procedure Volume 2: National
(2002), [8.5.1]. The
role of supervising examiners and Deputy Commissioners is discussed further in
Subcommittee on Labor Health and
Human Services Education and Related Agencies of the Senate Appropriations
Statement of Q Todd Dickinson, Acting Assistant Secretary of
Commerce and Acting Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks, 12 January
<www.uspto.gov/web/offices/ac/ahrpa/opa/bulletin/stemcell.pdf> at 18
September 2003.
United States Patent
and Trademark Office,
Manual of Patent Examining Procedure: 8th edition
<www.uspto.gov/web/offices/pac/mpep/index.htm> at 14 March 2003,
Departments of Commerce,
Justice, and State, the Judiciary, and Related Agencies Appropriations Bill 2004
(HR 2799) (US).
United States,
Congressional Debates, House of Representatives
, 22 July 2003, H7274 (D
Weldon); Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State, the Judiciary, and Related
Agencies Appropriations
Bill 2004 (HR 2799) (US) s
R Weiss, ‘Funding Bill Gets
Clause on Embryo Patents’,
Washington Post
(Washington DC), 17
November 2003, A04; Kaiser Network,
Sen Brownback Adds Clarifying Language to
Appropriations Bill Barring Patents on ’Human Organisms’, Kaiser
Daily Reproductive
Health Report, 18 November 2003
<www.kaisernetwork.org/daily_reports/rep_repro.cfm> at 18 November 2003;
Biotechnology Industry Organization,
New Patent Legislation Sets Dangerous
Precedent and Stifles Research, 2 September 2003
<www.bio.org/ip/cloningfactsheet.asp> at 23 December
United States,
Congressional
Debates, House of Representatives
, 5 November 2003, E2234 (D Weldon); United
Congressional Debates, House of Representatives
, 22 November
2003, E2471 (D Weldon). See also Kaiser Network,
House to Vote on Provision
Included in Omnibus Spending Bill that Would Ban Patents on ’Human
Organisms’, Kaiser Daily
Reproductive Health Report, 8 December 2003
<www.kaisernetwork.org/daily_reports/rep_repro.cfm> at 8 December
United States,
Congressional
Debates, House of Representatives
, 5 November 2003, E2234 (D Weldon); United
Congressional Debates, House of Representatives
, 22 November
2003, E2471 (D Weldon).
Even if the
provision were adopted, the fact that it is contained in an annual
appropriations Bill means that the provision must
continue to be adopted each
year to remain in effect.
98/44/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the Legal Protection
of Biotechnological Inventions
, (entered into force on 6 July
European Patent
, (entered into force on 7 October
The EPC applies to all member
states of the EU, as well as some non-EU member states; for example,
Switzerland. The EPC and its administrative
body, the EPO, fall outside the
legislative boundaries of the European Union (EU), but certain provisions of the
EU Biotechnology
Directive were adopted by the EPO for the purposes of
supplementary interpretation of the EPC: see Administrative Council,
Implementing Regulations to the Convention of the Grant of European Patents
of 5 October 1973
23(b) - 23(e).
Articles 5(1) and
5(2) are included in the EPC as rr 23e(1) and 23d(c)
respectively.
The other inventions
presumptively excluded from patentability pursuant to art 6 of the EU
Biotechnology Directive are processes
for cloning human beings, for modifying
the germ line identity of human beings, or for modifying the germ line identity
which is likely to cause them suffering without any substantial
medical benefit to humans or animals. See also
European Patent
, (entered into force on 7 October 1977) rr 23d(a),
European Patent Office,
Status of Patent
No EP0695351
, 5 January 2004.
Some opponents also asserted that
the patent claims encompassed human cloning and the creation of transgenic
humans. Edinburgh University
voluntarily amended the patent expressly to exclude
claims to the creation of transgenic humans and human germ-line intervention.
The Opposition Division of the European Patent Office determined that the patent
claims did not encompass the cloning of humans or
animals: European Patent
Office, ‘Opposition Hearing on Genetic Stem-Cell Patent at the European
Patent Office’,
Press Release
, 18 July 2002,
<www.european-patent-office.org/news/pressrel>; European Patent Office,
‘Background Information on the
“Edinburgh” Patent’,
Press Release
(July 2002),
<www.european-patent-office.org/news/pressrel/pdf/backgr_3.pdf>; Societa
Italiana Brevetti,
European Patent Decisions: ‘Edinburgh’ Patent
to be Maintained in Amended Form
<www.sib.it/engsib/novita/pat/270902.htm> at 21 January
Societa Italiana Brevetti,
European Patent Decisions: ‘Edinburgh’ Patent to be Maintained in
Amended Form
, <www.sib.it/engsib/novita/pat/270902.htm> at 21 January
National Health and Medical
Research Council,
International IP Laws in Relation to Stem Cells: An
Information Paper
European Group on
Ethics in Science and New Technologies,
Ethical Aspects of Patenting
Inventions Involving Human Stem Cells: Opinion to the European Commission
Ibid, 14. In particular, the
report commented that some people have considered that non-viable
embryos—such as those created
by parthenogenesis or even by somatic cell
nuclear transfer—may not be covered by this exclusion: European Group on
in Science and New Technologies,
Ethical Aspects of Patenting
Inventions Involving Human Stem Cells: Opinion to the European Commission
(2002), 14. However, the report recommended (at 17) that processes for creating
a human embryo by cloning for use in stem cell research
should not be
patentable.
European Group on Ethics
in Science and New Technologies,
Ethical Aspects of Patenting Inventions
Involving Human Stem Cells: Opinion to the European Commission
Directive 98/44/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the Legal Protection of
Biotechnological Inventions
, (entered into force on 6 July 1998) art
European Group on Ethics in
Science and New Technologies,
Ethical Aspects of Patenting Inventions
Involving Human Stem Cells: Opinion to the European Commission
Kingdom Patent Office, ‘Inventions Involving Human Embryonic Stem
Practice Notice
, April 2003,
<www.patent.gov.uk/patent/notices/index>.
(UK) sch A(2) para 3(d). This provision implemented art 6 of
the EU Biotechnology Directive.
sch A(2) para 3(a). This provision implemented art 5(1) of the EU Biotechnology
Ibid s 1(3),
Canadian Biotechnology
Advisory Committee,
Patenting of Higher Life Forms and Related Issues: Report
to the Government of Canada Biotechnology Ministerial Coordinating Committee
(2002), rec 1.
CBAC also noted that, in their view, the provision would not be interpreted to
include ova or sperm cells.
Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care,
Genetics, Testing & Gene
Patenting: Charting New Territory in Healthcare: Report to the Provinces and
Territories
(2002), rec
Ibid, rec 13(f),
Ibid, 38 - 39,
T Caulfield, ‘From Human
Genes to Stem Cells: New Challenges for Patent Law?’ (2003) 21
in Biotechnology
Kincaid, ‘Oh, the Places You’ll Go: The Implications of Current
Patent Law on Embryonic Stem Cell Research’
Pepperdine Law
, citing L Knowles, ‘Science Policy and the Law:
Reproductive and Therapeutic Cloning’
New York University
Journal of Legislation and Public Policy
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), [2.51],
[9.66], [12.72], Question
National Stem Cell
Consultation
, Melbourne, 4 September 2003; BresaGen Limited,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 15 September 2003. See also National Health and
Medical Research Council,
Consultation
, Canberra, 24 September
Health and Medical Research Council,
Submission P52
, 31 October
Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October 2003. See also
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003; National
Stem Cell Centre,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 4 September
Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September
Submission P56
, 4 November 2003 (emphasis
National Stem Cell Centre,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 4 September
Submission P50
, 29 October
Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
September 2003.
Submission P60
, 6 November
Patents Act 1990
s 50(1)(a).
The Commissioner may also revoke an innovation patent on equivalent
Patents Act 1990
s 101B(2)(d).
See further Ch
Research Involving Human
Embryos Act
However, research
involving human embryonic stem cell lines imported into Australia may not
currently be subject to the same
considerations.
Patents Act
Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into
force on 1 January 1995).
concern was articulated in the EU Stem Cell Report: European Group on Ethics in
Science and New Technologies,
Ethical Aspects of Patenting Inventions
Involving Human Stem Cells: Opinion to the European Commission
See Proposal
European Patent
, (entered into force on 7 October 1977), r 23e;
98/44/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the Legal Protection
of Biotechnological Inventions
, (entered into force on 6 July 1998) art
European Group on Ethics in
Science and New Technologies,
Ethical Aspects of Patenting Inventions
Involving Human Stem Cells: Opinion to the European Commission
Ibid, 18. Concerns about
patented genetic research tools are discussed in Ch
Nuffield Council on Bioethics,
Stem Cell Therapy: The Ethical Issues
(2001); House of Lords,
Cell Research: Report
See, eg, M Rimmer, ‘The
Attack of the Clones: Patent Law and Stem Cell Research’ (2003) 10
Journal of Law and Medicine
448; G McGee and E Banger, ‘Ethical
Issues in the Patenting and Control of Stem Cell Research’ in D Magnus, A
G McGee (eds),
Who Owns Life?
McGee and E Banger, ‘Ethical Issues in the Patenting and Control of Stem
Cell Research’ in D Magnus, A Caplan and G
McGee (eds),
(2002), 243, 257.
Shulman, ‘Owning the Future: The Morphing Patent Problem’ (2001)
Technology Review
33; G McGee and E Banger, ‘Ethical Issues in the
Patenting and Control of Stem Cell Research’ in D Magnus, A Caplan and
McGee (eds),
Who Owns Life?
(2002), 243, 259; J Lee, ‘The Ownership
and Patenting of Inventions Resulting from Stem Cell Research’
Santa Clara Law Review
, 626; M Rimmer, ‘The Attack of the
Clones: Patent Law and Stem Cell Research’ (2003) 10
Journal of Law and
D Nicol and J
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues
Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional
Paper No 6, 42 - 43. Nicol and Nielsen were unable to identify corresponding
patents or patent applications for US Pat Nos 6,200,806 and
Similar observations were
made by the NSCC in consultations: National Stem Cell Centre,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 4 September 2003. Freedom to conduct stem cell
research without infringing patent rights will, however, need to be determined
on a case-by-case
Kincaid, ‘Oh, the Places You’ll Go: The Implications of Current
Patent Law on Embryonic Stem Cell Research’
Pepperdine Law
, 581 - 582.
Ch 13 and 23.
Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
September 2003.
See, eg, S Kincaid,
‘Oh, the Places You’ll Go: The Implications of Current Patent Law on
Embryonic Stem Cell Research’
Pepperdine Law Review
C Carroll, ‘Selling the Stem Cell: The Licensing of the Stem Cell Patent
and Possible Antitrust Consequences’ (2002)
Journal of Law, Technology
435; J Lee, ‘The Ownership and Patenting of Inventions
Resulting from Stem Cell Research’
Santa Clara Law Review
President Bush and United
States Office of the Press Secretary, ‘Embryonic Stem Cell
, 9 August 2001,
<www.whitehouse.gov/news>. See also National Institutes of Health,
Notice of Criteria for Federal Funding of Research on Existing Human
Embryonic Stem Cells and Establishment of NIH Human Stem Cell
Registry, 7
November 2001
http://stemcells.nih.gov/fedPolicy/NIHFedPolicy.asp
at 16 September 2003 The NIH maintains a registry of all stem cell lines that
fall within the ambit of President Bush’s
policy: National Institutes of
NIH Human Embryonic Stem Cell Registry
http://stemcells.nih.gov/registry
at 21 January
President Bush and United
States Office of the Press Secretary, ‘Embryonic Stem Cell
, 9 August 2001,
<www.whitehouse.gov/news>.
Stem Cell Centre,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 4 September 2003. For example,
some are frozen inner cell masses that, upon thawing and culturing, have not
been viable
cell lines.
G McGee and
E Banger, ‘Ethical Issues in the Patenting and Control of Stem Cell
Research’ in D Magnus, A Caplan and G
McGee (eds),
Who Owns Life?
(2002), 243, 247, 258.
‘Oh, the Places You’ll Go: The Implications of Current Patent Law on
Embryonic Stem Cell Research’
Pepperdine Law Review
574; C Carroll, ‘Selling the Stem Cell: The Licensing of the Stem Cell
Patent and Possible Antitrust Consequences’ (2002)
Journal of Law,
Technology and Policy
Stolberg, ‘Patent Laws May Determine Shape of Stem Cell Research’,
New York Times
(New York), 17 August 2001,
Memoranda of Understanding have
also been entered into by: ES Cell International Pte Ltd, BresaGen Inc (a United
States affiliate
of the Australian company BresaGen Limited); and the University
of California: National Institutes of Health,
Stem Cell Transfer
http://stemcells.nih.gov
at 21 January
WiCell Research Institute is a
subsidiary of WARF, which has rights to license the Thomson
WiCell Research Institute
Inc and Public Health Service of the United States Department of Health and
Human Services,
Memorandum of Understanding
, 5 September 2001. See also J
Lee, ‘The Ownership and Patenting of Inventions Resulting from Stem Cell
Santa Clara Law Review
, 626; J Miller,
‘A Call to Legal Arms: Bringing Embryonic Stem Cell Therapies to
Market’ (2003) 13
Albany Law Journal of Science and Technology
A fee of US$5,000 is
charged to cover preparation and shipping
As discussed in Ch 13,
guidelines developed by the NIH prohibit licences to research tools developed
with NIH funds to include reach-through
claims: National Institutes of Health
Working Group on Research Tools,
Report of the National Institutes of Health
(NIH) Working Group on Research Tools
Invest Australia,
Australian Biotechnology
UK Stem Cell Bank,
, <www.ukstemcellbank.org.uk> at 23 January
National Institutes of Health,
NIH Human Embryonic Stem Cell Registry
http://stemcells.nih.gov/registry
at 21 January
Research Involving Human
Embryos Act
Prohibition of Human Cloning
(Cth) s 25(4)(d). One submission to the Senate Community Affairs
Legislation Committee considered that the establishment of a similar
registry in
Australia was desirable: Senate Community Affairs Legislation Committee,
Provisions of the
Research Involving Embryos and Prohibition of Human Cloning
[4.61] - [4.62].
Involving Human Embryos Act
Prohibition of Human Cloning Act 2002
(Cth) ss 25(1),
European Group on Ethics in
Science and New Technologies,
Ethical Aspects of Patenting Inventions
Involving Human Stem Cells: Opinion to the European Commission
United Kingdom Medical Research
International Stem Cell Forum
<www.mrc.ac.uk/index/strategy-strategy/strategy-science_strategy/strategy-index.htm>
at 9 February 2003; National Health and
Medical Research Council,
International IP Laws in Relation to Stem Cells: An Information Paper
(2003), 32.
The other participants
in the Forum include relevant bodies from Israel, Canada, the United States,
Singapore, Finland and Sweden:
United Kingdom Medical Research Council,
International Stem Cell Forum
<www.mrc.ac.uk/index/strategy-strategy/strategy-science_strategy/strategy-index.htm>
at 9 February 2003.
Therapeutic
Goods Amendment Regulations (No 3) 2003
(Cth); AusBiotech Ltd,
Amendments to Therapeutic Goods Regulations 2003
<www.ausbiotech.org/policy.php> at 23 January
Standing Committee on Legal
and Constitutional Affairs,
Human Cloning: Scientific, Ethical and Regulatory
Aspects of Human Cloning and Stem Cell Research
(2001), recs 6 and
House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Human Cloning: Scientific,
Ethical and Regulatory Aspects of Human Cloning and Stem Cell Research
(2001), [12.82].
Standing Committee
on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Human Cloning: Scientific, Ethical and
Regulatory Aspects of Human Cloning and Stem Cell Research
(2001), rec 8,
Ibid recs 1, 2, 5 - 8,
[12.41] - [12.55].
Involving Human Embryos Act
Conditions may
be imposed at the time a licence is granted by the NHMRC Licensing Committee or,
with notice, during the licence term,
either following an application by the
licence holder or upon the Committee’s own motion:
Research Involving
Human Embryos Act
See further Ch
The Draft Code of Practice was
released for public comment in February 2003. Further information about the
status of the Draft Code
of Practice has not been published to
of Human Services (Vic) Stem Cell Code of Practice Working Group,
Propagation
and Use of Approved Human Stem Cell Lines: Draft Code of Ethical Practice and
Discussion Paper
See Proposal
See Ch 14, 26 and
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
17. Overview of the Biotechnology Industry
Introduction
Global context
Australian biotechnology sector
Pharmaceutical industry
Biotechnology patents
Submissions and consultations
PART D: Patents and Commercialisation of Biotechnology
17. Overview of the Biotechnology Industry
Introduction
Terms of Reference require the ALRC to consider the impact of current patenting
laws and practices related to genes and genetic
and related technologies on the
Australian biotechnology sector. The biotechnology sector, including
pharmaceutical companies, is
heavily dependent on patents because of the large
costs involved in developing products and because many products are readily
17.2 This chapter describes the structure and features of the biotechnology
sector in Australia. It also describes the pharmaceutical
industry in Australia,
as the pharmaceutical industry is part of the biotechnology sector, and
biotechnology drug products form an
important output of the sector. However, the
pharmaceutical industry also operates in areas outside biotechnology and the
is often differentiated from other biotechnology companies in
statistics about the biotechnology sector.
17.3 The biotechnology sector also encompasses areas outside the scope of this
Inquiry, including agriculture, food processing, manufacturing
and environmental
management. The
Australian Biotechnology Report 2001
biotechnology as:
The application of all natural sciences and engineering in the direct or
indirect use of living organisms or parts of organisms, in
their natural or
modified forms, in an innovative manner in the production of goods and services
(including for example therapeutics,
foodstuffs, devices, diagnostics, etc)
and/or to improve existing industrial processes. The market application of
outputs is typically
in the general areas of human health, food production,
industrial bio-processing and other public good and environmental
17.4 As the Terms of Reference require the ALRC to focus on the human health
implications of gene patenting, this definition of biotechnology
encompasses
areas that fall outside the scope of this Inquiry. Consequently, much of the
description in this chapter is of the sector
as a whole as it is not always
possible to find statistics that differentiate between industries within the
Global context
17.5 Biotechnology is one of
the world’s fastest growing industrial
and is worth an estimated
US$296 billion.
The United States
Department of Commerce has described biotechnology as ‘the most
research-intensive industry in civilian
manufacturing’.
Young estimates that well over US$16 billion was spent on global research and
development (R&D) in biotechnology
from October 2000 to September
During the same period,
global biotechnology revenue accounted for almost US$39 billion, despite
generating a net loss of almost
US$6 billion for that
17.6 The United States dominates the biotechnology sector. In 2003, the
Biotechnology Industry Organization reported that the United
biotechnology industry comprised 1,475 companies, of which 342 were publicly
and generated 72% of global
revenue in biotechnology. In 2002, these revenues amounted to US$33.6
The United States sector
spends around three and a half times more on biotechnology than Europe and 25
times more than the Asia-Pacific
In 1999, the sector
invested US$11 billion in R&D growing to US$15.6 billion in
17.7 Most companies in the global biotechnology sector are privately owned.
According to Ernst & Young, from October 2000 to
September 2001, there were
3,662 private companies, compared with only 622 public companies operating
worldwide in the biotechnology
17.8 Globally, the sector has been characterised by a high attrition rate
especially among the start up firms whose only assets may
be patents or patent
applications. Capital-raising and cash flow may also present problems and many
companies have become insolvent
after a few years or have been absorbed by
larger companies.
A recent study
found that of the 24 companies that listed publicly on the Australian Stock
Exchange between 1998 and 2002, seven
had enough funding for only one year of
operation, and a further nine had funding for only two years. The study
suggested this problem
might be attributed to a lack of scale and financial
liquidity in the Australian
Australian biotechnology sector
17.9 There are four types of
companies or organisations within the Australian biotechnology sector:
core biotechnology
pharmaceutical companies;
genomic companies; and
public research
institutions.
sector comprises a mix of small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) together
with larger companies, including subsidiaries
of multinationals. Most major
international pharmaceutical companies have Australian subsidiaries. In 2003,
there were more than
300 core biotechnology companies, with an industry growth
rate of over 50% in the previous two
There were also around
450 ‘diversified’ biotechnology companies. The sector employs about
6,400 full-time equivalent
17.11 Total revenue generated by the core biotechnology companies is estimated
to be almost $1 billion
The biggest
contributors to revenue growth have been royalties, licensing and milestone
Biotechnology Report 2001
suggested that ‘one of the challenges for
most Australian biotechnology companies is generating sufficient funds to
their product development
objectives’.
It described
the sector as growing, but small in global
17.12 Internationally, Australia compares favourably with the United States in
terms of the number of biotechnology companies relative
to the size of the
labour force, and is well ahead of the European Union. Australia now ranks sixth
in the world for the number of
biotechnology companies, behind the United
States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Germany and
However, revenue as a
proportion of the labour force is well below the United States but ahead of the
European Union.
Australian Biotechnology Report 2001
described the Australian
biotechnology sector as being numerically ‘dominated by small to medium
geographic proximity to a large market, and therefore also lacking the
‘wealth of information’ provided through
conferences, workshops,
networking and industry
associations.
Larger companies
are frequently involved with the smaller ones through strategic alliances, in
particular licence agreements.
The Report noted that alliances are the main means by which Australian
biotechnology companies gain access to international markets:
The best Australian companies are now able to joint venture with, or even
acquire entities overseas ... Low and slow commercialisation
successes are
still, however, an ongoing issue for many Australian
17.14 Dr Dianne Nicol and Jane Nielsen suggest the strongest reason for the
alliance and merger activity within the sector:
is the high cost of research and development together with the increased
marketing power of the allied or merged entity ... Financing
is difficult for
most start-up biotechnology companies, and the high cost of research and
development force many companies to enter
either into strategic alliances with,
or be acquired by, larger biotechnology companies or pharmaceutical companies.
In addition,
the high technical and commercial risks of product development mean
that the companies need to share risk and have significant product
These agreements result in the sharing of IPRs [intellectual property rights]
over genomic information and bioinformatics
tools in return for funds for
research and development. Indeed, access to IPRs may be a major factor
influencing a company’s
decision to enter into an
17.15 In a 2002 survey, Kelvin Hopper and Lyndal Thorburn reported that 50% of
Australian core biotechnology companies aim to develop
new therapeutic or
diagnostic products directed at human
The survey also found
that human health and therapeutics dominated among the new companies, with a
significant increase in the number
of companies established to supply to the
sector in areas such as protein and gene
sequencing.
Australian Biotechnology Report 2001
found that most core
biotechnology companies in the field of human health intend to develop their
intellectual property, technology
or products to the pre-clinical stage (and
less frequently to a clinical stage) before licensing to an offshore
multinational company.
particularly likely to be the case for drug discovery companies. Interview data
from a recent study of the Australian medical
biotechnology sector by Nicol and
Nielsen suggests that this could be attributed to a lack of infrastructure and
resources to exploit
patents within the Australian
17.17 Companies that produce other downstream products (such as tests, therapies
or devices) or those that produce intermediate products
(such as reagents,
formulations and bioinformatics tools) may not necessarily seek to license
17.18 Spin-off companies are the preferred approach to commercial development of
biotechnology innovations in the Australian industry.
This approach may be
preferred in part because most Australian scientific research that results in
new technologies occurs in the
public sector. It may also be due to the support
for new companies available through the Biotechnology Innovation
Government grants are the
largest source of capital for the new companies, followed by funds from parent
organisations and venture
It has been suggested
that the Australian industry is overpopulated with small companies relying on a
single idea to be successful.
Australian Biotechnology Report 2001
described funding for
R&D as ‘an ongoing
for SMEs. It
suggested that a problem for the sector is the capacity to generate sufficient
funds to achieve its objectives, whether
in licensing or
manufacture.
R&D expenditure
by Australian companies is well below those in the United States and the
European Union.
Publicly listed
core biotechnology companies invest about $3.2 million a year each in R&D,
whereas unlisted and private core
biotechnology companies invest an average of
$1 million each.
17.20 However, the Report noted that government programs have caused a
‘sharp increase’ in
expenditure.
The Australian
Government currently contributes around $300 million in R&D funding to the
sector each year.
funding programs for the biotechnology industry are discussed in Chapter 11.
Pharmaceutical industry
17.21 As noted above, for the
purposes of this Inquiry, the biotechnology sector is taken to include
pharmaceutical companies. The
pharmaceutical industry undertakes the
development, production and supply of pharmaceutical products. The Australian
pharmaceutical
industry has been described as:
an integrated part of the global industry. Subsidiaries of MNEs
[multinational enterprises] undertake a significant proportion of
pharmaceutical
activity in Australia, although there are also some large Australian owned
companies within the industry (particularly
producers of out of patent
17.22 Globally, the pharmaceutical industry is dominated by horizontally and
vertically integrated multinational
Some of these are
engaged in joint ventures with universities, other research institutions, or
smaller biotechnology firms.
17.23 Australia’s population represents 0.3% of the world’s
population yet consumes around 1% of total global pharmaceuticals
2002, revenue of the Australian human-use pharmaceuticals manufacturing industry
was about $6.1 billion. There are around
143 separate firms listed as suppliers
to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, which employ up to 16,000
(See Chapter 20.)
17.24 The Productivity Commission has described R&D as the
‘lifeblood’ of the pharmaceutical industry, which relies
developing new products to maintain and sustain
Pharmaceutical research
and development involves drug discovery, pre-clinical testing and clinical
trials to test new drugs for their
effectiveness and safety. Total R&D
spending by pharmaceutical companies in Australia is around $300 million
17.25 The pharmaceutical industry is strongly dependent on patent protection.
The lead time and costs involved in research and clinical
trials are cited as
one of the strong arguments in support of patents in this area. It is estimated
that it can cost more than $900
million to bring a new pharmaceutical drug to
Biotechnology patents
17.26 Patents are highly
important to the biotechnology industry. The Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD)
Patents are especially important for biotechnology firms as many of them
have no activity other than R&D and therefore do not
directly exploit their
inventions: they sell them, or the right to exploit them, to other firms. A
legal property right is therefore
needed for the seller to be
17.27 Biotechnology products are often easily copied and regulatory requirements
mean the time required to develop technology into
a marketable product can be
long and costly. As one biotechnology sector analyst has commented, companies
need ‘tons of time
and buckets of money’ to bring products to
Intellectual property
rights afford producers protection during this period and the period of monopoly
gained as a result of a patent
allows for the high initial investment in
development to be recouped.
17.28 The majority of all biotechnology patents originate in the United States.
The United States’ share of biotechnology patents
accounts for 65.5% of
all biotechnology patents issued by the United States Patent and Trademark
Office (USPTO) and almost 50% of
those issued by the European Patent Office
The OECD reports that the
number of biotechnology patents issued in the United States and Europe has grown
substantially in comparison
with the total number of patents overall. In the
years 1990 - 2000, the USPTO recorded an increase of 15% in biotechnology
applications, compared with an increase of just 5% for patents overall.
Similarly, in Europe, the EPO recorded a 10.5% increase in
biotechnology patents
from 1990 - 1997, compared with a 5% increase
17.29 It is difficult to obtain reliable figures on the number of gene patents
granted, or the number of applications pending in
Australia or overseas. A
threshold complexity concerns the definition of gene patent. As outlined in
Chapter 1, this Discussion Paper
uses ‘gene patent’ to refer to
patents on genetic materials or technologies, and not just to patents on
isolated genetic
material. Others may use the term more narrowly to refer only
to patents that assert claims on isolated genetic materials and the
sequences they contain. Complexities also arise because of the way in which
patents and applications are classified under
the International Patent
Classification (IPC)
system, and
because of the limited amount of published patent information.
17.30 Biotechnology Australia is currently undertaking a detailed analysis of
gene patenting activity in Australia over the last
decade, with a view to
compiling reliable statistics on the number of gene patents granted in the
various IPC classes.
17.31 It appears clear, however, that most gene patents granted in Australia
relate to inventions that are developed overseas. One
research study, conducted
for the United States National Science
Foundation,
examined the source
of patent applications in relation to ‘international patent
families’ covering human DNA
The study assumed
that the priority application (the first application filed anywhere in the
world) was the country in which the
invention was developed. The study found
that, from 1995 - 1999, 736 applications related to inventions developed in
the United States,
compared with 150 in Japan, 107 in the United Kingdom, 42 in
Australia and 28 in Canada (see Figure
17.32 Of the 42 applications filed in Australia, 16 were filed by corporations,
16 by universities, six by other not-for-profit entities,
three by government
agencies and one by an individual (see Figure
Figure 17 - 1 Country of origin of patent applications on human DNA
sequences 1995 - 1999
Figure 17 - 2 Organisations filing Australian patent applications on
human DNA sequences 1995 - 1999
17.33 Studies relating to Australian biotechnology patents also indicate that
most such patents are foreign owned. Nielsen reports
that only about 2% of
biotechnology applications filed in Australia originate from Australian
She notes that
‘by far the greatest number of biotechnology patents are held by US
inventors, both in the US and in other jurisdictions
Australia’.
However, the
recent study conducted by Nicol and Nielsen indicates that the number of
biotechnology patents filed by Australian-based
inventors rose from 26 in 1988
to 46 in 1998.
17.34 Nielsen also notes that of the biotechnology patent applications in the
United States, around 2% originate from
A report by CHI
Research Inc found that of Australian patents granted in the United States,
Australia was ‘relatively strong
in pharmaceuticals and biotechnology and
quite weak in most other high-tech areas’. The report suggested that
pharmaceuticals and biotech AIUS patents [Australian-invented US
patents] ... may in fact represent an area of actual or potential
great strength
for Australia’.
17.35 Hopper and Thorburn report that 50 United States patents were granted to
Australian biotechnology firms in 2002. Of these,
less than 10 were gene
patents. Hopper and Thorburn suggest that one measure of the strength of the
Australian biotechnology sector
is the number of United States patents granted
because holding an Australian patent or having an Australian patent application
usually not sufficient for entry into international
They also note,
however, that many established Australian biotechnology firms hold no United
States patents and conclude that ‘many
Australian firms may not be serious
17.36 The number of patents
granted does not tell the whole story in relation to the biotechnology sector.
Licensing is the means
by which technology is made available to others, and is
discussed in Chapter 23. A patent holder, without the inclination or capacity
commercialise a product, may licence others to do so. Licences are also acquired
in order to gain access to patented inventions,
and are used for further
research or product development. It is difficult to obtain comprehensive
information in Australia about
the licensing of gene patents since the details
of such licences are often confidential. However, some information can be
from IP Australia
from company reports or stock exchange announcements.
17.37 Nicol and Nielsen report prolific licensing activity in the biotechnology
sector, noting that in 1999, 219 licences were issued
and 181 were
Of those acquired, 45%
were from overseas companies, and of those issued, 78% went to international
companies. Nicol and Nielsen
suggest the figures on international involvement
indicate that ‘Australian companies are compelled to seek alliances and
arrangements with overseas
companies’.
17.38 Chapter 23 discusses licensing practices and issues that have been
identified as impediments to licensing in the biotechnology
Submissions and consultations
17.39 In submissions and
consultations, the Australian biotechnology industry was generally regarded as
youthful, buoyant and undergoing
an expansionary
Only one submission
suggested that the current success of the biotechnology industry in Australia
was probably overrated.
also noted that many of the people involved in running biotechnology companies
in Australia are scientists, rather than business
professionals.
Biotechnology
Australia, Freehills and Ernst & Young,
Australian Biotechnology
(2001), 3. The Australian Bureau of Statistics is currently
considering the development of a formal definition for biotechnology
a generally accepted standard: Science and Innovation Mapping Taskforce,
Mapping Australian Science and Innovation
The Australian Bureau of Statistics
has recognised the lack of statistical information about biotechnology in
Australia, and has
indicated that it will undertake a survey of biotechnology in
2003 - 04. Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘Biotechnology’,
Science and Technology Statistics Update
, June 2003, [4],
Ernst & Young,
Borders: The Global Biotechnology Report 2002
Access Economics Australia,
Pharmaceuticals and Australia’s Knowledge Economy
Office of Technology Policy,
The US Biotechnology Industry
Ernst & Young,
Beyond Borders:
The Global Biotechnology Report 2002
Biotechnology
Industry Organization,
Editors’ and Reporters’ Guide to
Biotechnology
Resilience: Americas Biotechnology Report 2003
Ernst & Young,
Borders: The Global Biotechnology Report 2002
B Williams-Jones,
History of a
Gene Patent: Tracing the Development and Application of Commercial BRCA
http://genethics.ca/personal/HistoryPatent.pdf
at 17 April
Ernst & Young,
Borders: The Global Biotechnology Report 2002
B Williams-Jones,
History of a
Gene Patent: Tracing the Development and Application of Commercial BRCA
http://genethics.ca/personal/HistoryPatent.pdf
at 17 April
D Sparling and M Vitale,
Australian Biotechnology: Do Perceptions and Reality Meet?
Australian Graduate School of Management,
Australian Biotechnology
Report 2001
used the expression
‘core’ to describe
companies whose business depends on ‘exploiting intellectual property
embedded in molecular,
cellular and tissue biology’: Biotechnology
Australia, Freehills and Ernst & Young,
Australian Biotechnology
D Nicol and J
Nielsen, ‘The Australian Medical Biotechnology Industry and Access to
Intellectual Property: Issues for Patent
Law Development’
[2001] SydLawRw 16
Sydney Law Review
Invest Australia,
Biotechnology
A Snapshot of Biotech and Pharma in Australia
<www.investaustralia.gov.au> at 18 December
Biotechnology
Australia, Freehills and Ernst & Young,
Australian Biotechnology
(2001), 20. Milestone fees are lump sum payments that may be made by
a licensee upon reaching specified stages in the development
commercialisation of a
Invest Australia,
Biotechnology
(2003), 5; Ernst & Young,
Beyond Borders: The Global
Biotechnology Report 2002
Biotechnology Australia,
Freehills and Ernst & Young,
Australian Biotechnology Report
is also a feature of the industry in the United States and increasingly, the
European Union: Department of Industry Science
and Resources Business
Competitiveness Division,
Invisible Value: The Case for Measuring and
Reporting Intellectual Capital
Biotechnology
Australia, Freehills and Ernst & Young,
Australian Biotechnology
D Nicol and
J Nielsen, ‘The Australian Medical Biotechnology Industry and Access to
Intellectual Property: Issues for Patent
Law Development’
[2001] SydLawRw 16
Sydney Law Review
Hopper and L Thorburn,
2002 Bioindustry Review: Australia & New
(2002), 29.
Biotechnology Australia, Freehills
and Ernst & Young,
Australian Biotechnology Report
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
In one recent study of 24
biotechnology companies listed on the Australian Stock Exchange between 1998 and
2002, all but two were
developing technology originating from academic
institutions, medical research institutes or the Commonwealth Scientific and
Research Organisation: D Sparling and M Vitale,
Biotechnology: Do Perceptions and Reality Meet?
(2003) Australian Graduate
School of Management, 5.
K Hopper and L
2002 Bioindustry Review: Australia & New Zealand
D Crowe, ‘Testing Time for
Australian Financial Review
(Sydney), 7 October 2003,
Biotechnology Australia, Freehills
and Ernst & Young,
Australian Biotechnology Report
These programs are described
Invest Australia,
Biotechnology
Productivity
Commission,
Evaluation of the Pharmaceutical Industry Investment Program
(2003), [1.2]. For the purpose of the Productivity Commission’s report,
the pharmaceutical industry was defined as ‘all
those who contribute to
the discovery, development, manufacture and supply of human-use pharmaceutical
products and services in Australia,
including the biomedical
Department of Industry
Tourism and Resources,
Pharmaceuticals Industry Profile
<www.industry. gov.au> at 17 December
programs to support R&D in the pharmaceutical industry are discussed in Ch
Department of Industry Tourism and
Pharmaceuticals Industry Profile
, <www.industry.gov.au>
at 17 December 2003. Clinical trials comprise the largest component of such
Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development,
An Overview of Biotechnology
Statistics in Selected Countries
D Crowe, ‘Testing Time for
Australian Financial Review
(Sydney), 7 October 2003, 61,
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Biotechnology Statistics in OECD Member
Countries: Compendium of Existing National Statistics
See explanation about the IPC in
L Rausch, ‘International
Patenting of Human DNA Sequences: InfoBrief (NSF 02 - 333)’,
Dvision of Science Resource Statistics, National Science Foundation
September 2002, 1.
family’ was defined as consisting of all patent documents published in a
country and associated with a single
invention. An ‘international patent
family’ was defined as an invention for which patent protection has been
more than one country: see Ibid,
Ibid, Table
Ibid, Table
J Nielsen, ‘Biotechnology
Patent Licensing Agreements and Anti-competitive Conduct’ in Centre for
Law and Genetics (ed)
Regulating the New Frontiers: Legal Issues in
Biotechnology Symposium (Occasional Paper No 4)
(2002), 38,
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
J Nielsen, ‘Biotechnology
Patent Licensing Agreements and Anti-competitive Conduct’ in Centre for
Law and Genetics (ed)
Regulating the New Frontiers: Legal Issues in
Biotechnology Symposium (Occasional Paper No 4)
(2002), 38,
CHI Research Inc,
Inventing Our
Future: The Link between Australian Patenting and Basic Science
K Hopper and L Thorburn,
Bioindustry Review: Australia & New Zealand
Ibid. However, the number of patent
applications far exceed the number of United States patents granted. There is a
large backlog
in the United States Patent Office (see Ch 8). Patents granted
reflect previous applications not current
IP Australia is the
Commonwealth organisation that administers patent, trademark and design rights.
See IP Australia,
Annual Report
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
‘The Australian Medical Biotechnology Industry and Access to Intellectual
Property: Issues for Patent
Law Development’
[2001] SydLawRw 16
, 363 citing Ernst & Young,
Australian Biotechnology
(1999), 35.
D Nicol and J
Nielsen, ‘The Australian Medical Biotechnology Industry and Access to
Intellectual Property: Issues for Patent
Law Development’
[2001] SydLawRw 16
Sydney Law Review
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Consultation
, Canberra, 23 September 2003,
Queensland Department of Innovation and Information Economy,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 2 October
Confidential Submission P54
, 3 November 2003.
Department of Innovation and Information Economy,
Consultation
, Brisbane,
2 October 2003.
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
18. Technology Transfer from Publicly Funded Research Institutions
Introduction
Technology transfer and research commercialisation
Patent protection
Technology transfer offices
Facilitating transfer for commercialisation
Licensing-out
Spin-off companies
Other mechanisms
Potential impediments to transfer for commercialisation
Lack of commercial experience
Lack of institutional support
Institutional decision making structures and attitudes
Researcher attitudes and experience
Difficulty in finding industry receptors
Lack of resources
Other issues and concerns
Variability in practice between institutions
Lack of clear ownership of patents
Support programs
Submissions and consultations
Options for reform
Education and support programs
Best practice models
Clarifying ownership of patents
Addressing problems of scale
Other options
ALRC's views
Materials transfer agreements
Model materials transfer agreements
ALRC's view
18. Technology Transfer from Publicly Funded Research Institutions
Introduction
The ivory tower academy has had to learn the language of business
18.1 Most upstream genetic research undertaken in Australia occurs in publicly
funded research institutions. This chapter considers
the transfer of this
upstream research to the biotechnology sector for commercial development. It
focuses on the interface between
publicly funded research institutions and the
biotechnology industry.
18.2 Some of the potential impediments to transfer for commercialisation are
addressed in this chapter. These include lack of commercial
experience or
institutional support, researcher attitudes, difficulty in finding industry
receptors and lack of resources. Variability
in transfer practices and lack of
clear ownership of patented technology may also hamper effective transfer for
commercialisation.
A variety of options for addressing these issues are
18.3 This chapter also considers transfers that are not specifically aimed at
commercialisation and briefly discusses issues surrounding
materials transfer
agreements.
Technology transfer and research commercialisation
18.4 Basic research is only
the first stage in the development of genetic tests and therapies that will
eventually have healthcare
benefits for the community. Moving from idea to
product requires considerable investment to fund further research into the
applications of the technology; to undertake validation research and
clinical trials; and to develop and produce a marketable test
or therapy. The
cost of this developmental phase will usually be high and require specialised
skills and facilities.
18.5 Most publicly funded research institutions lack the financial capacity and
skill base to undertake this phase, and it is generally
considered that the
industry sector is better placed to take on this role to ensure that the
community receives the benefits of genetic
18.6 Technology transfer is the process of moving new technology from one person
or organisation to another, to enable sharing of
resources or to facilitate
further development and commercialisation. This may include transfers of
materials, information or the
details of new technologies.
18.7 In the past, the transfer of research results out of research institutions
to industry was generally conceived of as a linear
progression from basic
research to applied research, followed by commercial financing, manufacturing
and marketing.
The process of
knowledge creation and product development is now regarded as a more complex
interaction where market needs and commercialisation
possibilities inform and
modify the conduct of basic research and technology
development.
Interaction
between publicly funded research institutions and industry is a recent
development. Prior to the 1980s they had little
to do with one
18.8 As discussed in Chapter 11, it is government policy for public sector
institutions to work with industry to commercialise the
products of their
research. This policy is based on the view that patenting by public sector
institutions and licensing of technologies
to the private sector will increase
the rate of commercial application of
This is said to be
important because:
Effective research commercialisation, and more broadly the capture of
ownership and exploitation of intellectual property, has become
of paramount
importance in global competitiveness.
18.9 The 1999 Health and Medical Research Strategic Review Committee report,
The Virtuous Cycle: Working Together for Health and Medical Research
Wills Report),
emphasised the need
to promote technology transfer from the research sector to industry:
Australia has traditionally been very good at research, but deplorably
bad at capturing the value of its intellectual property. Australia
can no longer
accept this condition and must adjust its culture and mechanisms urgently before
the opportunities of the biotechnology
and pharmaceutical industries pass us
18.10 This view has also been endorsed by Australia’s peak research
funding bodies, the Australian Research Council (ARC) and
the National Health
and Medical Research Council (NHMRC). The NHMRC’s
Interim Guidelines on
Intellectual Property Management for Health and Medical Research
To ensure Australia captures the benefits of publicly funded health and
medical research, it is essential to have the skills and appropriate
to identify, value, protect, develop and commercialise these
18.11 Similarly, the ARC’s
National Principles of Intellectual Property
Management for Publicly Funded Research
National Principles
that, as part of ensuring the benefits of research are captured, ‘the good
management of intellectual property (IP)
becomes one of the most critical steps
in the translation of research into national
Patent protection
18.12 Chapter 17 noted the
importance of patent protection in attracting commercial interest in developing
technology to allow companies
to recoup financial outlays for the process of
product development.
particularly true for genetic research and the biotechnology industry because of
the time and expense required to develop
a product to a marketable
18.13 The link between intellectual property protection and the ability to
obtain investment funding was also noted in submissions
and consultations. As
the Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources pointed out:
Patents define the IP developed by researchers and constitute the
‘property’ that is exchanged to raise the capital needed
commercialisation of research results. Attracting venture capital for further
research or commercialisation of inventions
is not possible without an effective
and enforceable patent system.
18.14 As discussed in Chapter 12, since most publicly funded research
institutions claim ownership over intellectual property developed
within their
organisation, the capacity and the responsibility to obtain patent protection
and develop or transfer their intellectual
property therefore lies with the
institution.
18.15 As a result of government policy, institutions are now more inclined to
patent the results of research rather than simply allowing
them to be published
and placed in the public domain. A recent study by Dr Dianne Nicol and Jane
Nielsen (Nicol-Nielsen Study) reported
that the research sector considers that
obtaining patents promotes ongoing investment in research
and encourages the
development of scientific advances into useful
applications.
18.16 It was also observed in consultations that research institutions are
becoming more sophisticated in their approach to intellectual
property and are
often holding on to it longer to add value and get better returns by licensing
at a later stage.
Technology transfer offices
18.17 In recent years, most
research institutions have established dedicated units or companies to
facilitate technology transfer.
These units take a variety of forms and have
differing responsibilities, including obtaining patent protection, negotiating
and materials transfer agreements and, in some cases, establishing
spin-off companies. They are also referred to by a range of titles,
‘business liaison offices’, ‘technology transfer units’
or ‘commercialisation arms’.
They may be units within the
institution or companies wholly owned by the institution. They will be
collectively referred to as ‘technology
transfer offices’.
18.18 The overall functions of these units include:
identifying technology developed within the institution that may
have commercial application;
managing intellectual property issues, including facilitating patent
applications, licensing university innovations to the commercial
advising on the terms of research agreements;
co-ordinating industry access to research projects within the
university that require financial investment to develop the commercial
of innovative technologies and products; and
offering assistance with gaining government support for research and
development, including tax incentives and grant and loan schemes,
such as the
Federal Government R& D Start
18.19 Technology
transfer offices take different approaches to aiding technology identification
and transfer. One method is a decentralised
approach where managers of
innovation and commercial development are appointed to each faculty to assist
with identifying innovative
technology, to work with the faculty on business
development matters and to liaise with the technology transfer office’s
As discussed below, this
is regarded as preferable to a centralised approach because it allows for the
development of expertise around
particular areas of research and
commercialisation.
18.20 Some offices maintain a register of companies and consultants who are
willing to assist university researchers in the management
and commercial
development of intellectual
Others take an active
role in helping researchers through the process of transfer and
commercialisation, including through the provision
of educational
Facilitating transfer for commercialisation
18.21 Research
commercialisation begins with the identification of new technology and an
evaluation of its possible applications and
commercial potential. Patents may be
sought and, if obtained, the technology may be transferred to other researchers
or industry
for further
development.
There is a broad
range of approaches to transferring technology for commercialisation, which
include research-industry linkages,
creating spin-off companies to develop the
technology, licensing-out and assignment. Each of these approaches is discussed
18.22 The most appropriate approach will depend on the nature of the technology
and the capacity of the institution to develop it
There was some
difference of opinion in submissions and consultations about the capacity of
universities and publicly funded research
institutions to commercialise research
results effectively. Some suggested that universities and research institutions
are becoming
better at commercialisation, but doubts were expressed about
whether these organisations would develop the same level of skill and
as industry.
18.23 The Department of Education, Science and Training’s 2002 report,
Best Practice Processes for University Research Commercialisation
Report), noted that some research-focused universities are developing a new
approach to technology transfer and subsequent commercialisation
account of Australia’s strengths in basic research and lack of strong
industry capability to translate innovation
successfully into commercial
success. This new approach, according to DEST, features a more decentralised
process of intellectual
property identification and development; increased focus
on growing start-ups; direct equity investment by universities and selection
pursuit of strategic commercialisation
18.24 There is also evidence that the nature of business-university interactions
is undergoing a shift from ‘the traditional
donor-recipient
contracts’ to formalised joint projects between universities and
businesses.
The ARC has
suggested that this shift has resulted from changes in the business and economic
environment that have made the process
of developing new products for
commercialisation more costly and specialised. These changes have meant that:
the concept of the individual inventor or research laboratory achieving
commercial success on the basis of one activity, and without
expert management,
marketing and substantial ongoing financial support, is a misrepresentation of
the nature of innovation. Innovation
requires cooperation and collaboration
within an organisation as well as with organisations external to
18.25 As discussed above, transfer and commercialisation are also increasingly
understood as two-way processes, rather than as a
linear movement of technology
from the research sector to industry for development. The research and industry
sectors appear to be
working more closely together to shape research objectives
to fit economic objectives. This approach fosters research that is more
exploitable by industry.
18.26 The ARC has noted that
‘successful commercialisation of university research requires a champion
... a lot of hard work
is involved in finding and developing the initial partner
in the commercialisation of a new
discovery’.
well-developed linkages between publicly funded research institutions and the
industry sector facilitate identification of
such ‘champions’.
18.27 The Wills Report noted that the emergence of geographic clusters of
technology-based industries with research institutions
had provided a
‘well-recognised model for biotechnology success’. It recommended
that state development departments and
local government work with research and
biotechnology groups to remove barriers to the growth of such
18.28 Linkages can take the form of relationships between individual
institutions and commercial bodies, personal networks between
researchers and
entrepreneurs, or more formalised and broad-reaching relationships through
overarching arrangements supported by
institutions, industry or government.
18.29 An example of the latter type of relationship is the New South Wales
project, BioLink, a business initiative designed to improve
commercialisation of
medical research. BioLink’s stated aim is ‘to complete the
development chain by establishing [a]
platform for a
research-industry-government partnership providing world’s best practice
business development service for NSW
researchers’.
initiative involves linkages between research institutions, government and
industry partners.
18.30 There is a range of similar programs and initiatives across Australia
directed at facilitating and improving linkages between
the biotechnology
industry sector and research institutions. These include networking forums and
linkage initiatives. Nicol and Nielsen’s
results show that ‘one of
the dominant features of the biotechnology industry in Australia is widespread
alliance activity
between the public and private
The ARC has
commented that ‘the traditional boundaries between education and
commercialisation, basic research and applied
research, and universities and
industry are all
18.31 Government policy has also led to the development of Cooperative Research
Centres (CRCs) and other linkage programs between
the public and private sector.
A CRC for the Discovery of Genes for Common Human Diseases was established in
1997, linking the Murdoch
Children’s Research Institute, the Walter and
Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, the Menzies Centre for Population
Research and a number of other publicly funded research institutions with
Cerylid Biosciences Ltd as an industry partner.
Licensing-out
18.32 According to the DEST
Report, across the university sector generally, licensing-out patented
technology to established companies
is ‘the most common form of research
commercialisation and generates by far the most revenue’ for
universities.
Licensing-out
agreements may be exclusive or non-exclusive, and may include upfront payments,
milestone agreements, royalty payments
or a combination of
18.33 However, the Nicol-Nielsen Study reported a low level of licensing-out
activity in relation to gene patents. While 82% of responding
institutions indicated they owned biotechnology patents, only 52% reported they
licensed-out patented genetic technologies.
Of the eight who did not license,
only one had no patents.
and Nielsen suggest that this level of licensing-out activity can be explained
partially by the growth phase currently experienced
by the industry. A number of
respondents reported that they are in the process of finding parties to whom
they can license, while
institutions may still be developing technology to a
point where it is capable of being licensed. Nicol and Nielsen also suggest
institutions face difficulties in finding parties to license to, with some
respondents reporting that it was challenging to
attract commercial
18.34 Assignment of gene
patents is generally not the preferred approach to technology transfer by patent
holders. This may be because
patent owners do not wish to lose all control of
the technology and because assignment will reduce their patent portfolio.
Conversely,
industry recipients of technology may prefer assignment because it
involves complete transfer of all
Spin-off companies
18.35 Research institutions
create spin-off companies as a means of holding and developing patented
technology, generally either because
of a lack of industry receptors or because
large returns are expected from developing the technology. Spin-off companies
thought to ‘contribute to innovation, growth, employment and
revenues’ while ‘the prospects of winning big make
spin-offs an
attractive gamble’.
18.36 Spin-off companies may take one of a number of forms. Research
institutions may establish a new company to develop technology
arising out of
its research activities or may move technology into a company already
established by the institution for the purpose
of value-adding and subsequent
transfer. In other cases, staff or former staff of the institution may establish
their own company
if ownership of the technology has been assigned to them.
18.37 Research institutions may favour establishing spin-off companies over
other approaches to technology transfer because they
are capable of generating
revenues for the institution if it retains a share in the company. With this in
mind, institutions often
hold an equity interest.
18.38 In consultations, UniQuest emphasised that spin-off companies are more
effective than licensing for moving technology out of
universities and into
Kelvin Hopper and
Lyndal Thorburn have commented that ‘the continued fast growth in
start-ups is essential to capture the public
sector research outputs and ensure
there is a pipeline for the industry as a
Establishing
spin-off companies is a particularly important mechanism for transfer in
Australia due to the lack of industry receptors
for biotechnology innovations
coming out of the public research
Despite this, smaller
institutions appear to prefer licensing to establishing spin-off
18.39 A large proportion of Australian biotechnology companies were established
as spin-offs from universities and other research
institutions. The rate of
establishing spin-off companies is increasing. Figures from one survey show that
38 spin-off companies
were established by universities and CRCs in 2000, a 40%
increase on the previous year.
However, despite this growth in the actual number of spin-offs, such companies
are declining as a proportion of the biotechnology
sector as a whole. According
to the 2002 Bioindustry Review, in 2000 - 2001 these companies made up 55%
of the biotechnology sector
in Australia, dropping to 41% in the following
18.40 Although spin-offs may be effective in facilitating technology transfer,
they may not always be the best mechanism for generating
returns for the
research institution. The DEST Report stated that:
While a great deal of attention has been directed to spin-offs at least
partly driven by a small number of spectacular successes,
the major return to
universities remains through licensing to well-established
18.41 Spin-offs established around one patent or product face a high failure
rate, as the company stands or falls on the success
of that one product. If the
company fails, the institution that generated the technology will likely lose
all control of it as the
patent will be sold off during
liquidation.
Spin-offs are also
often staffed by researchers, as they lack the funds to employ professional
managers. There is consequently often
a lack of commercial expertise within the
Other mechanisms
18.42 Technology also moves
between publicly funded research institutions and industry through a range of
other mechanisms. These
include joint industry-institution research projects,
research contracts, public/private sector partnerships, shared infrastructure
and the movement of
Potential impediments to transfer for commercialisation
18.43 There is a danger of
repeating outdated perceptions of Australia’s ability to commercialise
research, including genetic
research, when considering potential impediments to
technology transfer. As noted above, many publicly funded research institutions
have substantially increased their skills in technology transfer and
commercialisation over the past five
18.44 Two years after the release of the Wills Report and a paper by the Prime
Minister’s Science, Engineering and Innovation
the NHMRC, the ARC and
the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) carried
out a study into the performance
of Australian public research institutions in
commercialising their research. The study suggested that Australia performed
than both Canada and the United States in commercialising its research,
measured in terms of income generated from licences and start-up
formation relative to research expenditure and the size of the national economy.
However, Australia lags behind both countries
in terms of the number of licences
executed and behind the United States in terms of the number of patents
18.45 The DEST Report commented that there has been a tendency in Australia to
perpetuate a view of Australian institutions as performing
behind their overseas
counterparts in research commercialisation. DEST referred to this view as a
‘myth’, pointing out
The data available demonstrate that the best-performing Australian
universities are achieving research commercialisation outcomes
comparable with the best in the US and Europe, and way above their average ...
Australian universities have significantly
strengthened their research
commercialisation capacities and performance in the past five
18.46 The ALRC is also aware that a number of programs are currently in place to
address some of the impediments considered below.
18.47 However, a number of potential impediments to transfer of genetic
technology for commercialisation remain. These include:
lack of commercial experience;
lack of institutional support for commercialisation;
institutional decision making structures and attitudes;
researcher attitudes and experience;
difficulty in finding industry receptors; and
lack of resources.
Lack of commercial experience
18.48 Effective
commercialisation is promoted where research groups have developed business
skills and experience with intellectual
property. These groups are then more
able to produce sound business plans, appreciate patenting laws, establish
workable commercial
structures for spin-off companies and negotiate
agreements.
18.49 Lack of experience in managing intellectual property and dealing with the
biotechnology industry may be an impediment to effective
transfer of technology
from publicly funded research institutions. The Wills Report suggested that:
professional business development management within the research
enterprise is crucial and generally lacking in Australia. Together
increased investment in fundamental research ... it is probably the most
important initiative for developing a dynamic industry
sector. Commercialisation
success depends on an intimate knowledge of the industry, intense commitment to
researchers and the research,
and high-level management skills that can match
the research to a commercialisation strategy and negotiate a favourable
18.50 This potential impediment was also highlighted in a number of submissions
and consultations.
18.51 Lack of experience may occur in part because technology transfer within an
institution is dealt with by one central office
covering all areas of research,
which may not have the experience to deal with issues particular to individual
areas of research
such as the commercialisation of genetic research. As might be
expected, it appears that smaller institutions are more likely to
lack transfer
and commercialisation expertise. The DEST Report noted that there is a
relationship between the productivity of technology
transfer offices and scale,
with large institutions generating greater
18.52 Inexperience in technology transfer offices might also stem from a failure
to employ people with adequate or appropriate skills.
For example, DEST reported
that employing staff with business and entrepreneurial skills, rather than legal
skills, appears to promote
new business
18.53 Lack of appropriate skills and experience with gene patenting and
technology transfer may result in a variety of problems,
including inefficient
management of patents, failure to add sufficient value to technology before
licensing and inappropriate business
strategies. The ALRC has also received
suggestions that institutional technology transfer offices can actually hinder
the process
of commercialisation where they lack the appropriate
18.54 As an example, AusBiotech Ltd commented in consultations on the need for
clear discussion of how intellectual property is to
be dealt with at the early
stage of licensing negotiations. It provided an example of an Australian
university that had licensed
its patented technology to an Australian
biotechnology company. The company sought to open an office in the United States
and obtained
investment from the United States. To open the overseas office, the
patent had to be relocated, however the original licence agreement
entitled the
university to retain ownership of the patent, and as a result the investors
dropped out. AusBiotech Ltd suggested that
situations of this kind could be
avoided by adequate early stage
discussion.
Awareness of these
issues and the ability to deal with them is more likely to exist in technology
transfer offices with adequate
skills and experience.
Lack of institutional support
18.55 Research may fail to
be commercialised where institutions choose not to pursue commercialisation but
do not assign the patented
technology elsewhere to enable others to do
This may also create a
disincentive for researchers in future to work with commercialisation offices if
the institutions are unreceptive
to potential commercialisation.
18.56 Effective technology transfer requires an integrated approach, with
transfer office staff working closely with researchers
to identify, protect and
develop technology. Lack of institutional support, either due to lack of funding
to provide sufficient staff
and facilities, or lack of support for integrative
programs may prevent this interaction from occurring. As the DEST Report has
What emerges strongly from experience is that if the research
commercialisation function is set up without strong links with, and
from, the institution, it will be marginalised and, in all probability, fail.
Research commercialisation is not simply an
‘add-on’ function; it
requires a reworking of strategy and resource allocation to make it an integral
part of the university’s
objectives and
operations.
Institutional decision making structures and attitudes
18.57 Negotiations for
technology transfer between research institutions and commercial organisations
may be slow due to the sometimes
complex decision making structures within
publicly funded research
institutions.
Publicly funded
research institutions may also be risk-averse, which may lead them to be overly
cautious in making decisions about
the transfer and commercialisation of
patented research.
Researcher attitudes and experience
18.58 The Wills Report
suggested that Australian researchers had a relatively low rate of involvement
in research commercialisation
in comparison with other
Consequently,
Australia’s failure to commercialise its intellectual property was in part
attributed to a lack of researcher
involvement in new business ventures to
exploit technology. Researchers may resist commercialisation and hence not
facilitate transfer
or work in co-operation with technology transfer offices.
18.59 The value of research is also sometimes lost when information about a new
technology is shared or published before patent protection
is obtained. This may
occur if researchers are unaware of the need to keep information confidential
until a patent application has
been made, or because they have not identified
the information as having potential commercial value that should be protected by
18.60 Informal sharing of materials and research results may pose further
problems where the technology was originally licensed-in,
by infringing the
terms of the licence. Reach-through claims to subsequent inventions based on the
original shared material may also
arise, which may be difficult to resolve in
the absence of a formal transfer arrangement. It was also suggested in
consultations
that a lack of researcher understanding about patents sometimes
leads to patents being licensed too
18.61 However, the Australian research community’s attitude to patenting
and commercialisation appears to be changing, with
researchers more receptive to
the need to patent and commercially develop the results of genetic research.
This perception was largely
supported in submissions and consultations, some of
which suggested that there are researchers with considerable experience and
in commercial development of
technology.
These issues, and
proposed reforms, are discussed further in Chapter 15.
Difficulty in finding industry receptors
18.62 As noted in Chapter
17, the Australian biotechnology industry is small, and consists largely of
upstream companies that license
their patented technology to larger
international companies for further development. The industry is also quite
fragmented and characterised
by relatively low research and development spending
by international standards.
18.63 DEST has concluded that consequently, Australian industry has a fairly
poor capacity to absorb technology generated within
universities.
As a result,
research institutions may sometimes face a lack of industry receptors to which
they can transfer technology.
This may make it difficult for publicly funded research institutions to
establish working partnerships with industry, and may require
them to negotiate
with overseas firms. The ARC has expressed concern about this shortage of
industry receptors for Australian research,
suggesting that some of the benefits
of Australia’s public investment in genetic research might consequently be
lost overseas.
18.64 Publicly funded research institutions also report difficulty in
identifying appropriate commercial
However, the ALRC is
aware that a variety of mechanisms to address this issue have been developed,
including state and federal government
initiatives and organisations, which are
discussed below.
Lack of resources
18.65 Some institutions may
lack the funds to support a patent
application.
The Nicol-Nielsen
Study reported that ‘although quality research may be performed in
Australian research institutions, there
are insufficient resources to support
large scale patenting’.
This may be generally attributed to the cost of applying for and maintaining a
patent, and in many cases research institutions may
choose not to support an
application beyond the provisional stage without external financial support. An
inability to obtain appropriate
patent protection may prevent institutions from
transferring technology.
18.66 As noted above, successful technology transfer rests in part on technology
transfer offices having staff with the appropriate
skills and experience to do
so. Lack of resources may prevent technology transfer offices from employing
staff with the specific
expertise to deal with gene patenting and negotiations
with the biotechnology
Other issues and concerns
18.67 The impediments
outlined above will, in some cases, inhibit technology transfer. This may have a
variety of consequences, such
as the inadequate capture and exploitation of
Australia’s research outputs. This in turn may prevent the Australian
from deriving maximum benefit from public spending on genetic research
in the form of tests and therapies and in economic growth.
18.68 Two other specific concerns arise in relation to technology transfer
practices—variability in practice across institutions,
and lack of clear
ownership of patents. These are discussed below.
Variability in practice between institutions
18.69 DEST and the ARC have
each suggested that skills and experience of technology transfer offices vary
between institutions. This
may leave technology transfer to what has been called
‘a lottery’ based on the skills and resources of each
institution.
18.70 This concern is more likely to arise in relation to universities rather
than other research institutions. Universities undertake
research across a broad
spectrum of activities in diverse fields, and may not build up sufficient
expertise in transferring genetic
research and dealing with the biotechnology
industry. Research institutions focusing specifically on scientific or
biotechnology
research may have greater experience with the particular features
of the biotechnology sector and therefore be better equipped to
manage gene
patents and transfer technology.
Lack of clear ownership of patents
18.71 It is not always clear
where ownership of intellectual property generated through public research lies.
This is largely due
to the cumulative nature of many breakthroughs in genetic
research, and the favouring of collaborative research efforts across a
research institutions. This section examines issues that may arise where
ownership of intellectual property is shared across
a number of institutions or
with industry partners.
18.72 The Nicol-Nielsen Study reported that 19 of the 23 research institutions
that responded to its survey were involved in collaborative
arrangements, of which, by far the greatest number were, with biotechnology and
pharmaceutical companies.
Thirteen institutions also reported collaborations with other research
institutions, of which five included at least one overseas
collaborator.
The problem of
unclear ownership may be exacerbated where researchers have joint appointments
to several organisations or research
is conducted by visiting researchers or
18.73 The Nicol-Nielsen Study reported that four institutions responded that the
only ownership arrangement they had with collaborators
was to give them sole
ownership. The remaining institutions reported a wide variety of arrangements,
including 11 institutions indicating
shared ownership
agreements.
18.74 These results suggest there may be instances in which ownership of gene
patents is either shared or unclear. Unencumbered ownership
of patents is of
considerable importance in attracting investment for further development.
Fragmented or unclear ownership of patents
may therefore deter potential
Also, as Bio
Innovation SA commented in consultations, difficulties in determining ownership
contribute to the frustratingly long
time it can take to move intellectual
property out of the public sphere into
Support programs
18.75 A variety of programs
to support transfer for commercialisation have been established, including a
number of dedicated organisations.
Some of these focus specifically on the
biotechnology industry and provide specialised expertise to aid transfer and
commercial development
of innovation in biotechnology research. These include
educational materials, industry initiatives, government incubator programs
funding support, and other organisations that provide specialised expertise.
18.76 Biotechnology Australia and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade,
among others, have released educational materials
to promote understanding of
intellectual property issues in
biotechnology.
For example, the
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
released by Biotechnology
Australia gives an overview of the types of intellectual property, the patent
procedure in Australia and
overseas and issues in patenting biotechnological
inventions. It also includes information on identifying inventive subject
strategic management of intellectual property resources and commercial
exploitation.
18.77 Examples of support organisations include:
Knowledge Commercialisation Australasia (KCA), an organisation
representing organisations and individuals associated with knowledge
from the public sector;
Aussie Opportunities, ‘a web enabled database which actively
matches Australian research and technology projects with potential
investors and
partners who can help in the project
development’;
AusBiotech Ltd, ‘the peak body for the Australian
Biotechnology industry’, which provides a “platform” to
together all the relevant players involved in the Australian biosciences
community. Its mission is to facilitate the commercialisation
of Australian
bioscience in the international
marketplace.
example of a state government organisation developed to provide particular
expertise on the development and exploitation
of biotechnology innovations is
Bio Innovation SA. Bio Innovation SA is a South Australian public corporation
established in 2001
with the task of creating 50 new bioscience companies over
ten years—it has established 18 to date. Bio Innovation SA has developed
strategies to identify research being produced by its public institutions. It
provides free advice on intellectual property protection
and commercial
development to researchers, and may guide them through the patent application
process, including helping them to meet
the requirements for experimental
support of the invention.
does not hold patents itself.
also works with research institution commercialisation offices where they lack
the necessary expertise to develop an invention.
Submissions and consultations
18.79 Submissions and
consultations generally acknowledged that publicly funded research institutions
are becoming more adept at protecting
and commercialising research. For example,
the Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia (RCPA) suggested that
universities are
adopting business-like practices toward the research results
they generate. It suggested this was partially the result of government
In one consultation it
was noted that, in the past, universities had tended to license technology too
early and before adding significant
value, but that this situation had begun to
Consultations also
confirmed that Australian scientists are becoming more aware of intellectual
property and commercialisation
18.80 Despite this continuing improvement, it appears from comments received
that there is still considerable variation in skill
and experience with
commercialisation across technology transfer offices. While some researchers and
technology transfer offices
have developed considerable expertise, others are
The Queensland
Biotechnology Advisory Council emphasised the need for technology transfer
offices to employ staff with appropriate
skills and experience to promote
effective commercialisation.
Council also noted that in some cases technology transfer offices lack the
funding needed for effective commercialisation of
intellectual
GlaxoSmithKline
suggested that governments could support commercialisation by ‘distinct
and separate funding for technology
transfer offices in academic
institutions’ and suggested there was a need for training programs for
technology transfer offices.
18.81 There were some suggestions that research institutions pursue
commercialisation largely because they are required to do so
as a condition of
research funding. As a result, they approach commercialisation in a
‘rhetorical manner’, rather than
because they are committed to the
In one consultation it
was suggested that commercialisation is not a mainstream activity within
research institutions and is given
18.82 Another problem raised in consultations was that publicly funded research
institutions and public sector organisations may
have different approaches to,
and policies for, intellectual property management. This can create problems for
technology transfer
and commercialisation where institutions cannot agree on how
to address transfer issues.
Similarly, researchers are sometimes employed at more than one institution, and
the diversity of approaches may cause confusion.
18.83 Some submissions supported the introduction of guidelines similar to the
United States National Institutes of Health (NIH)
commercialisation
guidelines.
The RCPA suggested
such guidelines could be supported by the
Options for reform
18.84 As noted above, some
of the impediments to technology transfer and commercialisation are caused by
the size of the Australian
biotechnology industry and potential reforms for
these issues fall outside the Inquiry’s Terms of Reference. Others arise
a lack of expertise, but as recent surveys demonstrate, this problem is
diminishing as research institutions increase their skills
and experience. Where
there are problems these might therefore best be addressed through facilitating
continued education. Similarly,
problems of weak linkages between industry and
research institutions can be addressed by continued promotion of the need to
linkages and opportunities for doing so.
Education and support programs
18.85 A wide variety of
education and support programs are already in place to promote the development
of expertise and it is likely
that improvements in technology transfer practices
over the past five years can be in part attributed to these programs. However,
from submissions and consultations, it appears that there is room for further
continuing education to improve skills across the research
sector. This includes
education and support programs for technology transfer offices to aid them in
improving the specific skills
needed to deal with transferring and
commercialising genetic research.
18.86 Such programs and materials should focus on building skills that will
enable technology transfer offices to overcome the impediments
outlined above,
the basics of intellectual property with specific reference to
genetic research;
techniques for identifying, protecting and managing technology with
commercial potential;
methods for encouraging researchers to identify and prevent
premature disclosure of such technology;
strategic management of intellectual property resources;
approaches to commercialisation of technology; and
aspects of good commercial practice, such as good licensing practice
and approaches to attracting commercial interest in new
technologies.
18.87 Programs might also include training in basic
science where appropriate. For example, the Wills Report recommended programs
cross-train managers in
18.88 One possible model for such a training website is the technology transfer
training website created by the NIH. The site provides
information about
patenting, co-operative research and development arrangements, materials
transfer agreements (MTAs), licensing,
royalties and ethics and includes links
to any relevant NIH policies. It also takes the participant through a series of
interactive
scenarios that apply the knowledge gained in the information
18.89 However, education programs alone may not provide sufficient skills.
PMSEIC has pointed out that it is difficult to instil
all the expertise required
for successful research commercialisation through education
Other programs
might therefore be directed at helping researchers and industry to draw on each
other’s experiences.
This might be achieved through developing fora for exchanging know-how and
improving institution-industry
interaction.
Best practice models
18.90 Best practice for
transfer and commercialisation involves researchers and technology transfer
offices working closely to identify,
protect and exploit research. Researchers
are better placed to understand what is new or unique about the research, while
office staff should have the appropriate skills in intellectual
property and commercialisation to obtain patents and undertake the
commercialisation process.
18.91 DEST has advised that potentially valuable intellectual property is best
identified ‘through decentralised processes
close to the researcher, but
with effective partnership with the research commercialisation office.
Researchers hence need to be
assisted to develop these
include practices such as the UniQuest model of placing a
‘commercialisation manager’ in each faculty to identify
and develop
potentially valuable intellectual
AusBiotech Ltd has
also suggested that researchers should be involved earlier in the planning
commercialisation.
18.92 Publication of guidelines for best practice in technology transfer and
commercialisation might aid the dissemination of knowledge
and expertise to less
experienced institutions.
Clarifying ownership of patents
18.93 One solution to the
issue of ‘dirty IP’, including patents that do not have a clearly
defined, single owner, is
to revise the
National Principles for IP Management
to provide guidance on negotiation of ownership where the research leading
to the patented invention was conducted jointly, or with
funds from overseas
bodies that have staked an ownership
Addressing problems of scale
18.94 DEST has suggested
that the problems of scale faced by smaller and regional research institutions
should be addressed by encouraging
networking to share their expertise. It
suggested that this might be facilitated by the KCA or the Australian Institute
for Commercialisation,
and by case managers involved in local
incubators.
Other options
18.95 The DEST Report
suggested some approaches that might encourage greater commercialisation of
research results. These were to:
give academics greater rights over the inventions they produce when
publicly funded; or
revert ownership of inventions to the government or the government
18.96 Commercialisation
might be promoted by assigning the intellectual property to the inventor where
the research institution has
chosen not to transfer or commercially develop it.
The inventor will have an incentive to pursue commercial development, as any
from exploitation will now flow to them directly. These options are
considered in Chapters 15 and 12 respectively.
18.97 Finally, there may be a need to conduct a study of technology transfer
office practice that focuses specifically on the commercialisation
biotechnology. Although a number of studies of technology transfer practice have
been carried out, these have been general in
scope. A more directed survey could
identify any particular difficulties faced by technology transfer offices when
commercialising
genetic research.
ALRC’s views
18.98 The ALRC acknowledges
that Australian publicly funded research institutions have markedly improved
their performance in capturing
the value of intellectual property and
commercialising research. Technology transfer practices within research
institutions appear
to be improving, particularly because institutions,
government and industry are recognising and acting on the need to build skills
and linkages.
18.99 However, it appears that there is still variability in practice between
institutions, and in skill levels between technology
transfer offices. During
consultations, the ALRC heard many comments suggesting that there is a need to
continue the process of skill-building
within technology transfer offices
especially, thereby improving institutional capacity for technology transfer.
18.100 The ALRC considers that patent management in relation to genetic research
and interaction with the biotechnology industry,
requires specialised knowledge.
This knowledge should encompass a basic understanding of genetics to enable
offices to recognise
potentially valuable technology and an understanding of the
commercial issues particular to the biotechnology industry. This may
understanding of the time frames for product development in biotechnology;
regulatory requirements such as clinical trial
requirements and regulation of
medical therapies; and awareness of industry structure. Technology transfer
offices may sometimes
lack this specialised knowledge because they are charged
with managing intellectual property and commercialisation across a broad
spectrum of research fields.
18.101 For these reasons, the ALRC is of the view that there is a need to
continue to improve awareness of, and skills for dealing
with, patent management
and technology transfer in relation to gene patents. To facilitate this, the
ALRC proposes that Biotechnology
Australia, in consultation with relevant
stakeholders, should continue to develop and implement programs to assist
technology transfer
offices in developing these skills.
18.102 Such programs should include the provision of educational seminars and
resource materials that focus on issues specific to
patenting and
commercialising genetic technologies. These could present models of best
practice for technology transfer and commercialisation,
including methods for
identifying innovative technology and developing business liaisons. These
programs should also encourage networking
and sharing of expertise between
institutions.
18.103 Potential lack of clear ownership of patents over technology developed
through collaborative research or funding arrangements
is regarded by the ALRC
as a significant impediment to the transfer and commercialisation of genetic
technologies. The ALRC considers
that these issues would best be dealt with
through requirements that ownership of intellectual property be clearly
delineated in
the early stages of research. Such requirements are best
incorporated into the
National Principles
, which should be revised to include clear guidance on the need to
negotiate ownership of patents where there is more than one potential
Proposal 18 - 1
Biotechnology Australia, in consultation with state
and territory governments and other relevant stakeholders, should:
(a) continue to develop and implement programs to assist technology
transfer offices in universities and publicly-funded research
institutions in
commercialising inventions involving genetic materials and technologies; and
(b) develop strategies to ensure widespread participation of technology
transfer offices in these programs. (See also Proposals 19
Proposal 18 - 2
The Australian Research Council and the National
Health and Medical Research Council should review their principles and
on intellectual property and research to emphasise the importance of
clear ownership of intellectual property resulting from collaborative
funded research. (See also Proposals 12 - 1 to 12 - 3.)
Proposal 18 - 3
Universities and other publicly funded research
organisations should ensure that their policies and practices address the
of ownership of intellectual property resulting from collaborative or
jointly funded research. (See also Proposals 12 - 4 and 18
Question 18 - 1
Are there any other measures that could be
implemented to improve technology transfer practice in relation to genetic
Materials transfer agreements
18.104 The sharing of
genetic materials within the research community is important for the progress of
research. Living organisms
are difficult to describe and often impossible to
duplicate from a written patent
description.
While some genes
may be isolated easily, cloning into vectors and generating transgenic cell
lines and animals can be costly and
time consuming. In fact, it may be
impossible to improve upon a biotechnology invention without a physical exchange
of genetic material.
18.105 In the past, this often occurred informally, however, the increased
commercialisation of research results has created a need
to develop more
formalised arrangements, often referred to as MTAs. An MTA is a written
agreement defining the terms and conditions
governing the transfer of biological
or other research materials from the owner or authorised licensee to a third
party for internal
research purposes only. The MTA defines the rights of the
provider and the recipient with respect to the materials and any derivatives
created during the course of the ensuing research.
18.106 For the provider, the advantages of having an MTA include the ability to
restrict the use of the material to non-commercial
research and reduce legal
liability for the recipient’s use of the
Importantly, the
terms of an MTA may enable the provider of material to gain access to the
results of research and to manage and
extend its intellectual property rights. A
provider may be entitled to outright ownership or to a licence in respect of
intellectual
property generated by the recipient’s
18.107 Most commercial organisations, and an increasing number of research
institutions, will only release genetic materials if there
is an MTA in place
between the provider and the
18.108 It was suggested in consultations that although Australian universities
sometimes negotiate MTAs, this is not always the
Informal transfers may
exacerbate problems involving patent ownership and reach-through claims to
subsequent inventions.
Model materials transfer agreements
18.109 One Australian
approach to streamlining processes for materials transfer for research purposes
is that initiated by the Garvan
Institute of Medical Research (Garvan). Garvan
uses an MTA based on the uniform agreement recommended by the United States
Association
of University Technology Managers and has created an automated,
web-based system to streamline processes for agreeing the terms of
researchers wishing to have access to Garvan’s research
ALRC’s view
18.110 The ALRC is of the
view that there is a need to encourage better practice in the transfer of
technology and materials between
research institutions. The ALRC considers that
some of the concerns surrounding materials transfer could be met by the
introduction
of model MTAs to reduce arbitrary variation across agreements and
to encourage institutions to formalise transfer arrangements. To
address this
concern, the ALRC proposes that Biotechnology Australia, in consultation with
relevant stakeholders, should develop
model MTAs by drawing on those developed
by the United States Association of University Technology Managers.
Proposal 18 - 4
Biotechnology Australia, in consultation with state
and territory governments and other relevant stakeholders, should develop model
materials transfer agreements for use by universities and other publicly funded
research institutions, along the lines of the models
developed by the United
States Association of University Technology Managers.
Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis
of Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6, 50.
‘Epistemic Capture: Industry and Government in the Setting of Medical
Research Priorities’ (Paper presented
at 28th International Congress on
Law and Mental Health, Sydney, 29 September
Australian Research Council,
University Research: Technology Transfer and Commercialisation Practices
(1999), 17.
Australian Research Council,
Mapping the Nature and Extent of Business-University Interaction in
(2001), 14.
Commonwealth of
Backing Australia’s Ability: An Innovation Action Plan for
Department of
Education Science and Training,
Best Practice Processes for University
Research Commercialisation
Health and Medical Research Strategic
Review Committee,
The Virtuous Cycle: Working Together for Health and Medical
Health and Medical Research Council,
Interim Guidelines: Intellectual
Property Management for Health and Medical Research
(2001), v. See also
Australian Research Council and others,
National Principles of Intellectual
Property Management for Publicly Funded Research
National Health and Medical
Research Council,
Interim Guidelines: Intellectual Property Management for
Health and Medical Research
Prime Minister’s Science
Engineering and Innovation Council,
Profiting from the Biotechnology
Biotechnology
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Consultation
, Canberra, 22 September
2003; Department of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
October 2003.
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
Queensland Biotechnology Advisory
Consultation
, Brisbane, 2 October 2003; UniQuest,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 3 October
See, eg, UniQuest,
Commercialising Your Research
, <www.uniquest.com.au/?id=15> at 16
December 2003. The R&D Start program is outlined in Ch
See, eg, UniQuest,
, <www.uniquest.com.au/?id=13> at 16 December
Melbourne Research and Innovation
Technology Transfer
, University of Melbourne,
<www.research.unimelb.edu.au/ridg/techtrans> at 16 December
For example, the Garvan Institute
of Medical Research’s Business Development Unit works closely with
researchers to keep abreast
of research progress and runs small, focused
educational seminars on intellectual property and commercialisation issues to
awareness and skills: Garvan Institute of Medical Research,
Consultation
, Sydney, 10 September 2003; Garvan Institute of Medical
Consultation
, Sydney, 10 September
Department of Education Science
and Training,
Best Practice Processes for University Research
Commercialisation
(2002), 15.
Queensland Biotechnology Advisory
Consultation
, Brisbane, 2 October
of Education Science and Training,
Best Practice Processes for University
Research Commercialisation
Australian Research Council,
Mapping the Nature and Extent of Business-University Interaction in
Department of Education Science and
Best Practice Processes for University Research
Commercialisation
Australian Research Council,
University Research: Technology Transfer and Commercialisation Practices
(1999), xxiii.
Health and Medical
Research Strategic Review Committee,
The Virtuous Cycle: Working Together for
Health and Medical Research
Garvan Institute of
Medical Research,
<www.garvan.org.au/garvan.asp?sectionid=48> at 16 December
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6, 75,
Australian Research Council,
Research in the National Interest: Commercialising University Research in
Department of
Education Science and Training,
Best Practice Processes for University
Research Commercialisation
(2002), vii.
See discussion of licensing practices
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
Department of Education
Science and Training,
Best Practice Processes for University Research
Commercialisation
Consultation
Brisbane, 3 October 2003.
K Hopper and
L Thorburn,
2002 Bioindustry Review: Australia & New Zealand
Department of Education Science and
Best Practice Processes for University Research
Commercialisation
(2002), 33.
K Hopper and L Thorburn,
Bioindustry Review: Australia & New Zealand
of Education Science and Training,
Best Practice Processes for University
Research Commercialisation
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
Prime Minister’s Science
Engineering and Innovation Council,
University - Industry Linked Research
in Australia
(1998), 4; Department of Education Science and Training,
Best Practice Processes for University Research Commercialisation
Department of Education Science and
Best Practice Processes for University Research
Commercialisation
Minister’s Science Engineering and Innovation Council,
University - Industry Linked Research in Australia
Australian Research Council,
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation and National Health
and Medical Research
National Survey of Research
Commercialisation
of Education Science and Training,
Best Practice Processes for University
Research Commercialisation
Prime Minister’s Science
Engineering and Innovation Council,
Profiting from the Biotechnology
Medical Research Strategic Review Committee,
The Virtuous Cycle: Working
Together for Health and Medical Research
Bio Innovation SA,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 16 September 2003; Western Australian Department
of Health and others (research issues),
Consultation
, Perth, 17 September
Department of Education Science
and Training,
Best Practice Processes for University Research
Commercialisation
(2002), 35.
Queensland Biotechnology Advisory
Consultation
, Brisbane, 2 October
AusBiotech Ltd,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 September
Bio Innovation SA,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 16 September
of Education Science and Training,
Best Practice Processes for University
Research Commercialisation
4 Garvan Institute of Medical
Consultation
, Sydney, 10 September
Consultation
Brisbane, 3 October 2003.
Medical Research Strategic Review Committee,
The Virtuous Cycle: Working
Together for Health and Medical Research
(1998), 121, 123. Lack of venture
capital to support new companies and low levels of industry investment in
research and development
were also cited as barriers to commercial development
of biotechnology research. These issues are discussed further in Ch 19 in the
context of the biotechnology
Consultation
Brisbane, 3 October 2003; Garvan Institute of Medical Research,
Consultation
, Sydney, 10 September
Consultation
Brisbane, 3 October 2003.
Innovation SA,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 16 September 2003; UniQuest,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 3 October 2003; Western Australian Department of
Health and others (research issues),
Consultation
, Perth, 17 September
Department of Education Science
and Training,
Best Practice Processes for University Research
Commercialisation
(2002), vii. See also Science and Innovation Mapping
Mapping Australian Science and Innovation
Department of Education Science
and Training,
Best Practice Processes for University Research
Commercialisation
Prime Minister’s Science
Engineering and Innovation Council,
Profiting from the Biotechnology
Research Council,
Research in the National Interest: Commercialising
University Research in Australia
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
Bio Innovation SA,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 16 September
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
Consultation
Brisbane, 3 October 2003.
Consultation
, Sydney, 21 October
Issues about ownership of
research within institutions, rather than ownership shared between institutions,
are considered in Chapter
and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of
Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6, 94.
Department of Education Science and
Best Practice Processes for University Research
Commercialisation
(2002), 51.
Innovation SA,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 16 September
Biotechnology Australia,
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
(2001); Department of Foreign
Affairs & Trade and AusAID,
Intellectual Property and Biotechnology: A
Training Handbook
(2001). IP Australia provides more general information on
intellectual property issues at its website: IP Australia,
Intellectual Property?
, <www.ipaustralia.gov.au/ip/index.shtml> at 23
December 2003.
Biotechnology Australia,
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
Knowledge Commercialisation
Australasia,
, <www.kca.asn.au> at 16 December
Aussie Opportunities,
, <www.aussieopportunities.com.au> at 16 December
AusBiotech Ltd,
AusBiotech?
, <www.ausbiotech.org/whataus.php> at 16 December
Bio Innovation SA,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 16 September
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
Commonwealth Government
Departments,
Consultation
, Canberra, 5 May
Biotechnology Advisory Council,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 2 October 2003;
Western Australian Department of Health and others (research issues),
Consultation
, Perth, 17 September
Queensland Biotechnology Advisory
Consultation
, Brisbane, 2 October
Consultation
Brisbane, 3 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003.
Consultation
, Brisbane, 3 October
Australian Department of Health and others (research issues),
Consultation
, Perth, 17 September
Royal College of Pathologists of
Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
and Medical Research Strategic Review Committee,
The Virtuous Cycle: Working
Together for Health and Medical Research
National Institutes of Health,
Welcome to the NIH On-line Technology Transfer Training
http://137. 187.206.145/cbttng_ott/cbts/tesweb/login.asp
at 23 December
Prime Minister’s Science
Engineering and Innovation Council,
Profiting from the Biotechnology
Department of Education
Science and Training,
Best Practice Processes for University Research
Commercialisation
AusBiotech Ltd,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 September
Department of Education
Science and Training,
Best Practice Processes for University Research
Commercialisation
Department of Education Science
and Training,
Analysis of the Legal Framework for Patent Ownership in
Publicly Funded Research Institutions
S Jong and R Cypress,
‘Managing Genetic Material to Protect Intellectual Property Rights’
Journal of Industrial Microbiology and Biotechnology
Technology Transfer Office,
Facts about Materials Transfer Agreements (MTAs)
, University of
Cambridge, <www.admin.cam.ac.uk/offices/tto/material/mta.html> at 26
Australian Department of Health and others (research issues),
Consultation
, Perth, 17 September
Garvan Institute of Medical
Consultation
, Sydney, 10 September 2003; see also Garvan
Institute of Medical Research,
Garvan Technology Transfer
Institute of Medical Research, <www.garvan.org.au/garvan.asp?sectionid=13>
at 16 September 2003.
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
19. Patents and the Biotechnology Industry
Introduction
Upstream and downstream issues
Importance of patents for industry
Barriers to commercialisation
Patent thickets
Royalty stacking
Broad patents
Reach-through provisions
Blocking patents
Dependency and uncertainty
Refusals to license
Lack of experience with commercialisation
Lack of investment and venture capital
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
19. Patents and the Biotechnology Industry
Introduction
19.1 Chapter
17 described the structure and features of the biotechnology industry in
Australia. As discussed in that chapter, the
biotechnology sector (including
pharmaceuticals) is heavily dependent on patents. Chapter 17 noted that the
Australian biotechnology
sector is primarily an upstream industry, with many
companies holding intellectual property is their only or main asset.
19.2 This chapter examines the impact of patents on the downstream section of
the biotechnology sector. It considers a number of
ways in which gene patents
may act as a barrier to commercial development of genetic research results,
including patent thickets,
royalty stacking, broad patents, reach-through
provisions, blocking and dependent patents. The chapter also considers licensing
investment issues and commercialisation expertise within the
Upstream and downstream issues
19.3 As discussed in Chapter
13, the process of moving new technology from the research stage through to
product development is sometimes
divided into ‘upstream’ and
‘downstream’ phases. However, this division does not form a bright
line between
genetic research and commercialisation. Upstream research takes
place across the entire biotechnology sector, in commercial ventures
research institutions. Hence, many of the issues discussed in Chapter 13 are
also relevant to the sector as a whole.
19.4 Some of the potential barriers to commercialisation considered in this
chapter may be more likely to affect downstream companies—royalty-stacking
and reach-through provisions are examples. Other concerns will however be
relevant to upstream genetic research. For example, blocking
patents and patent
thickets may prevent researchers from accessing technology for research
purposes, either for use in research (such
as research tools) or to improve upon
a particular technology. The cumulative nature of genetic research means that
reach-through
provisions in licences to foundational patents or patents on
research tools may affect further research. These issues are discussed
Chapter 13.
Importance of patents for industry
19.5 Gene patents play an
important part in enabling biotechnology companies to develop healthcare
products. As Biotechnology Australia
has pointed out:
a biotechnology company’s value is very dependent on its
intellectual property. Biotechnology companies rely heavily on strong
protection due to the high costs of research and commercialisation in this
19.6 The limited monopoly provided by patents gives biotechnology companies an
opportunity to recoup the investment in developing
the patented invention
further, including the creation of a marketable healthcare product. The
importance of gene patents in the
biotechnology industry is also recognised in
the Australian Government’s National Biotechnology Strategy, which states
The development of capabilities for the effective management of
Intellectual Property (IP) is an important element in securing the
benefits of
public and private sector research in biotechnology for the Australian
community, industry and the
environment.
19.7 However, it is important to bear in mind that gene patents will have
varying effects on companies depending on each company’s
structure and
commercial activities. Most biotechnology companies are both consumers and
producers of technology, as the biotechnology
industry is characterised by
companies using the inventions of others in their own research and as part of
the products they market,
such as tests or therapies. The gene patents of others
might therefore block a company’s activity if access to the patented
technology is necessary for its research or creation of products it seeks to
sell. However, at the same time it might also be motivated
by the possibility of
obtaining patent protection for its own products. As Professor Rebecca Eisenberg
has commented:
firms welcome the patents that allow them to charge higher prices, while
cursing the patents that require them to pay higher prices.
At any given point
in the stream, downstream patents motivate R&D, while upstream patents make
it more costly.
19.8 Eisenberg commented further:
In the absence of patents on DNA sequences, are we likely to lose out on
the development of new products? Or can firms be expected
to welcome free access
to DNA sequences generated with government funds as a subsidy for their own
research? There is no simple,
obvious answer to this question, but we can engage
in a bit of cautious speculation. In all likelihood the bottom line will be
favouring incentives to develop some types of products, while
diminishing others.
Barriers to commercialisation
Biotechnology Report 2001
includes the results of a survey of Chief
Executive Officers within the biotechnology sector regarding what they saw as
barriers and
impediments to commercialisation and success. Of the four main
issues identified, one was ‘effective protection of intellectual
19.10 Dr Dianne Nicol and Jane Nielsen have suggested that:
Australia has a number of strengths in medical biotechnology, including
world class expertise in research, geographical advantages
in terms of expanding
regional markets, appropriate structures to promote close cooperation between
the public and private sectors
and an internationally recognised clinical trial
system. Despite this, development and commercialisation of scientific discovery
is generally weak. One factor behind this is inadequate management and
understanding of intellectual
19.11 Nicol and Nielsen argued that ‘the regimes protecting IPRs
[intellectual property rights] may prove to be a significant
barrier for the
development of the Australian
They noted that
the patent system is:
crucial to the biotechnology industry in order to reward and encourage
innovation ... [but] it is becoming apparent that the same
regime may hinder the
research efforts of Australian companies by restricting access to research tools
and technologies.
19.12 As has been discussed elsewhere in this Discussion Paper, the purpose of
patent laws is to provide an incentive for innovation.
Intellectual property
rights generally, and patent rights in particular, are attractive to firms
because they create the prospect
of charging others monopoly prices for access
to their intellectual capital and prevent others (‘free riders’)
from taking
advantage of their investment.
19.13 However, as discussed in Chapter 13, patents may also act as a barrier to
research and a disincentive to commercialisation.
The problems cited in that
chapter are as relevant to product development as they are to further research.
Nicol and Nielsen suggested
that biotechnology companies ‘face unique
challenges’. They cited the following reasons:
• the research intensive nature of the industry;
• the massive increase in patent activity in the area of biotechnology;
• the preponderance of upstream patents with broad claims;
• the reliance of downstream companies on access to patented research
tools and techniques.
19.14 A report of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD Report) identified the following as issues relevant
commercialisation:
patent thickets and royalty stacking;
reach-through claims; and
dependence and
uncertainty.
19.15 Other
issues include:
refusals to licence;
blocking patents;
lack of commercial expertise in the biotechnology sector; and
lack of available investment funds.
19.16 The following
discussion addresses the issues raised by the OECD Report together with other
issues that have the potential to
impede the commercialisation of research in
the area of human genetics. The discussion also notes mechanisms that might
overcome these barriers.
Patent thickets
19.17 ‘Patent
thickets’ are a consequence of multiple upstream
A patent thicket has
been described as:
a dense web of overlapping intellectual property rights that a company
must hack its way through in order to actually commercialize
technology.
19.18 Such multiple patents have also been described as the ‘tragedy of
the anti-commons’, namely, the under-use of a
scarce resource where
multiple owners exclude others and no one has an effective privilege to use the
The OECD Report
suggested that:
The proliferation of gene patents, including multiple patents on research
tools, can necessitate negotiating multiple licences when
developing a single
product or process. Such patent thickets have the potential to raise the
transaction costs of doing research
and possibly the ultimate cost of products
owing to stacking of royalties ... for example, the development of a medicine
may require
licences to access genomics technologies, targets such as receptors,
assays and high-throughput technologies. Companies report that
royalty exposure
to net sales of a given product can in some cases exceed
19.19 Patent thickets may result in increased production costs, and affect
commercial incentives for pursuing downstream product
development and marketing.
However, the issue is not confined to gene patents and is an issue across a
number of fields.
19.20 The issue arises in relation to gene patenting because different patents
over the same gene may contain overlapping claims.
A gene contains coding DNA
sequences (exons), non-coding regulatory DNA sequences, and functionless
Separate patent claims
could be made on each of the exons as expressed gene fragments; another claim
could be made over the complete
expressed sequence; another on a promoter
sequence; and others over mutations known to have the potential to cause
diseases. Patent
thickets could present a problem in this area, for example in
the development of genetic diagnostic tests or therapeutic proteins,
access is required to genetic information covered by multiple patents.
19.21 A second potential consequence of a proliferation of upstream patents is
that it may impede downstream research and innovation
by adding to the cost and
time of biomedical invention. For example, in the United States, the National
Human Genome Research Institute
(NHGRI) stated that:
patent applications on large blocks of primary human genomic DNA sequence
could have a chilling effect on the development of future
inventions of useful
products. Companies are not likely to pursue projects where they believe it is
unlikely that effective patent
protection will be available. Patents on large
blocks of primary sequence will make it difficult to protect the fruit of
inventions resulting from real creative
19.22 Similarly, Nicol and Nielsen have suggested that:
The existence of an anti-commons in the medical biotechnology industry is
likely to be particularly problematic because of the important
role that this
industry has in providing innovative diagnoses, treatments and therapies to
alleviate human suffering caused by disease.
An anti-commons in this industry
has the capacity to slow the pace of innovation, which is most unlikely to be in
the public interest.
19.23 In extreme cases projects may even be abandoned.
If negotiations are required to be undertaken with a number of parties,
the risk of negotiation breakdown is increased. If negotiations
break down with
any one of these parties, the investment of time, effort and money in the
project will need to be reassessed. Depending
on the stage at which breakdown
occurs, this may mean that projects are either not commenced or are abandoned at
some stage into
the research process. The later projects are abandoned, the
greater the waste of resources. In other instances, considerable research
may need to be put into inventing around the area protected by intellectual
property rights in order to enable the project
to proceed. As the number of
relevant intellectual property rights increases, the task of inventing around
becomes more onerous,
and project abandonment may become
inevitable.
19.24 Professors Michael Heller and Eisenberg suggest that patent rights for
upstream discoveries may help attract private funds
for basic research and
‘may fortify incentives to undertake risky research projects and could
result in a more equitable distribution
of profits across all stages of
However, they
also argue that this can ‘go astray when too many owners hold rights in
previous discoveries that constitute
obstacles to future
Eisenberg suggest that such barriers could be ‘transitional
and the costs
may be worth incurring if ‘fragmented privatisation allows upstream
research to pay its own way and helps ensure
its long term
viability’.
They express
concern that ‘a patent anticommons could prove more intractable in
biomedical research than in other
19.25 One of the questions Nicol and Nielsen addressed in their empirical study
of patents and the medical biotechnology industry
was whether an anti-commons
had emerged in Australia.
reported that respondents to the Study did not describe significant problems
with the enforcement of multiple research tool
patents. They suggested that:
In part this is because a number of the most aggressively enforced
research tool patents do not exist in Australia, or, if they do
exist, they do
not appear to be enforced. However, we expect that these or other patents may
well be enforced in the future. Hence,
it would be premature to say that the
Australian industry is free from the rigors of research tool patent
enforcement.
19.26 Nicol and Nielsen also reported that although the Australian patent
landscape is becoming increasingly complex, the number
of problematic patents is
quite small. They suggested that:
in part the reason for this is that if there is a higher level of
encumbrance research will be redirected. We are unable to state
with any level
of precision the number of research projects that are abandoned because there
are too many problematic patents in
the area. However, we know that this problem
does exist.
19.27 On balance, Nicol and Nielsen concluded that their results did not provide
conclusive evidence of either the existence or absence
of an anti-commons in
Australia, although they did note the potential for one to develop:
In general the Australian industry seems to be avoiding an anti-commons
situation, but the potential still exists for its emergence.
Ongoing increases
in the number of patents, more vigilant enforcement and the increasing
complexity of research paths may result
in the development of an
anti-commons.
Royalty stacking
19.28 Royalty stacking is a
problem caused by a multiplicity of overlapping patents, especially over
upstream products. The need to
pay multiple licence fees and royalties may force
up prices and discourage innovation and product development. In the context of
pharmaceutical patents, Mr Phillip Grubb suggests royalty payments for the use
of research tools may be problematic because:
it will often be the case that a number of different tools or
technologies have contributed to the drug development, and whereas a
royalty of one or two per cent may be an acceptable burden, an accumulation of
such royalties soon adds up to an unacceptable
19.29 The OECD Report linked concerns about patents over research
with the problem of patent
thickets and royalty stacking and suggested that together these have the
potential to raise the costs
of conducting research and ultimately the costs of
products. As noted above, the OECD Report suggested that royalties could
up to 20% of the net price of some
19.30 Often, however, companies are able to address stacking problems by
contractual solutions. Industry representatives canvassed
in the OECD Report
identified provisions for:
Variable rates. Different rates apply depending on how much additional
work is done by the licensee (eg analogue development). The
smaller the role the
technology plays, the lower the rate the licensor receives.
Joint venture expense. This model deducts any third-party royalty rate
from gross revenues, prior to determination of net sales on
which royalties or
profit splits are made. A licensor with a 10% net sales royalty would only bear
one-tenth the cost of a third-party
payment under this structure.
Creditable percentage. The parties share the third-party royalty, down to
a floor rate.
Maximum royalty rate. The parties put a top limit on all combined
royalties. If a third-party royalty must be paid, previous rates
are adjusted
downwards to stay below the limit.
Royalty-free. The technology is licensed outright, with some combination
of up-front and/or interim payment, but no royalties are
owed downstream on
products sold.
19.31 The OECD Report noted that contractual solutions are generally pursued
because it is in the interests of companies to accommodate
reduced royalties to
enable agreements for patent use to be made. It suggested that biotechnology
industry projects that require
patented technology to be in-licensed rarely fail
due to royalty stacking
19.32 It is unclear whether royalty stacking is a serious problem for the
Australian biotechnology industry. However, given that
the industry is largely
comprised of upstream companies, it may be a lesser problem here than in
overseas industries with a more
significant downstream component. Of respondents
to the Nicol-Nielsen Study:
Most said that they were aware of the potential for royalty stacking to
arise and that they guarded against it. Indeed, one upstream
company respondent
said that this is one of the first issues that is
19.33 However, respondents’ experience of royalty stacking appeared to be
mixed. One intermediate company stated they had not
encountered royalty
stacking, while one upstream company ‘predicted that in the future, when
conducting licensing negotiations,
companies may well be exposed to licence
stacking and overlapping royalty structures’. In addition, mixed views
were expressed
royalty-stacking:
One respondent said that large pharmaceutical companies abhor royalty
stacking. However, a pharmaceutical company respondent noted
that although
reach-through royalties and divided ownership don’t help in the drug
development process, ‘they are not
showstoppers’.
19.34 The Nicol-Nielsen Study also reported that a number of respondents
commented that:
it is vital that intermediate companies have to keep an eye on their
capacity to on-license when agreeing to royalty rates. This has
to be factored
into the commercialisation process and it can be a significant impost on revenue
stream, because each one to two percent
adds up. If an intermediate-level
company has a number of obligations to pay royalties, this detracts both from
their capacity to
on-license and from the profits they are likely to get from
further downstream licensing.
19.35 Patent pools
mechanism for overcoming some of the difficulties of access to research tools
and technologies caused by a multiplicity of
Commercial products
such as therapeutic proteins or diagnostic genetic tests are likely to require
access to many gene fragments;
a bundle of licences collected in a single
licence arrangement can overcome the problem of dealing with multiple patent
19.36 Heller and Eisenberg suggest that:
Because patents matter more to the pharmaceutical and biotechnology
industries than to other industries, firms in these industries
may be less
willing to participate in patent pools that undermine gains from
exclusivity.
19.37 Patent pools also raise competition issues, which are discussed in Chapter
Broad patents
19.38 Chapter 13 described
broad patents as ‘patents that grant broad rights to the patent holder and
which may be seen as covering
applications invented later by someone
else’. As noted in that chapter, such patents may discourage further
research and innovation
because researchers may be concerned about infringing
them, or because of the cost of licence fees associated with the use of the
patented invention. These concerns are also relevant to industry, both as
constraints on further research, and more particularly,
because the cost of
licence fees or royalty payments may decrease the possible returns on products
developed using the patented technology.
Companies may then attempt to offset
this decrease through charging higher prices for products.
19.39 The flow on effect of these problems may include:
increases in the cost of healthcare products;
fewer products available if development of some products is
abandoned; and
inefficient use of resources due to paying licence fees or inventing
unnecessarily.
Nicol-Nielsen Study reported that 24% of respondents to the company survey
believed the grant of broad patents had an inhibitory
effect on research. Study
respondents also noted that, despite this, they continued to seek patents that
were as broad as possible.
19.41 However, some respondents commented that for some companies, inventing
around may be a workable strategy for dealing with broad
patents. In particular,
respondents from the pharmaceutical sector:
were generally of the view that it is not possible to obtain broad
patents that block research in the pharmaceutical industry because
ability of researchers to invent
Reach-through provisions
19.42 Chapter 13 discussed
the problem of reach-through provisions in licence agreements in the context of
research. This section
discusses the implications of reach-through licence
agreements for the biotechnology
19.43 Reach-through provisions are claims by patent holders to future
intellectual property in new products that might result from
the use of a
patented invention. Reach-through provisions may include rights to a licence to,
or ownership of, the intellectual property,
or rights to royalties from future
inventions. Reach-through provisions are usually included as licence conditions,
when the holder
of a patent over an upstream technology licenses it to other
companies further downstream. They may also be included in Materials
Agreements.
Reach-through
provisions in a licence agreement therefore effectively give the patent holder
what Heller and Eisenberg have described
as, ‘a continuing right to be
present at the bargaining table as a research project moves downstream toward
future product
development’.
19.44 The Human Genome Organisation (HUGO) has expressed concerns that:
reach-through patent claims and reach-through licenses, as partly
accepted in the current practice, will not only seriously affect
research and development but could, eventually, discredit the entire patent
system as an invaluable incentive to invent,
innovate and invest in new
technologies.
19.45 Reach-through provisions may present difficulties for companies
negotiating for access to gene patents, either to develop them
because they may form an input into the companies’ products. The
Nicol-Nielsen Study suggests that reach-through
provisions appear to be
problematic in a large number of negotiations:
Respondents from most industry sectors made some reference to these
provisions, a large number of respondents involved in licensing-out
stating that
they insisted on such rights, other respondents stating that they tried to avoid
them ... Most respondents who were
involved in a high volume of deals did
encounter these provisions regularly. A number of respondents specifically
stated that they
try to keep away from such terms when licensing-in because they
can be so problematic. In instances where they licensed-in, research
institution
respondents tried to avoid such terms because they would have the effect of
detracting from their exploitation of any
improvements or new technology
developed by them ... In a significant number of cases, however, provisions
giving reach-through rights
were still included, and one public sector
researcher we interviewed stated that in his experience there is a general trend
these sorts of agreements becoming more
restrictive.
19.46 One comment cited in the Study aptly summed up why reach-through
provisions can present problems during negotiations: ‘The
patentee wants
as much as possible whereas the licensee wants as little as
19.47 Reach-through provisions may deter future development by restricting the
rights of the licensee to exploit new technology that
results from working with
the patented technology. This may be particularly problematic if a number of
reach-through rights are stacked
on downstream technologies. Heller and
Eisenberg suggest that reach-through provisions may contribute to the emergence
of an anti-commons.
However, the
Nicol-Nielsen Study stated:
Despite this theoretical risk of accumulated reach-through rights, we did
not hear complaints of them from any of our respondents.
This does not mean they
do not exist in practice; as there were many complaints about provisions giving
reach-through rights in licences,
it may well be the case that some downstream
licensees are encountering stacking licences giving numerous parties rights to
inventions. It is also fair to assume given the comments from
respondents, that licensees are baulking at the inclusion of such terms
19.48 Some concern about reach-through provisions was expressed in submissions
and consultations, although this concern was also
extended to claims in patents
to reach-through rights. The Queensland Clinical Genetics Service suggested that
a patent on a genetic
sequence should not necessarily provide reach-through
rights to diagnostic or therapeutic applications of the
The Walter and Eliza
Hall Institute of Medical Research (WEHI) suggested that investment in
developing patented technology might
be deterred where it is unclear whether the
patent can be freely
19.49 AusBiotech Ltd commented in consultations that licences are most often
structured to give the licensor the first offer on the
commercialisation of any
new product resulting from the use of the patented
As an example,
Benitec Ltd, a Queensland biotechnology company, stated in consultations that it
would want reach-through rights to
drugs developed through its target validation
technology. However, Benitec Ltd typically agrees to waive reach-through rights
use of the technology for small molecular development, such as drug
development, on the understanding that it will have reach-through
rights to RNAi
therapies and be a partner in the development of these
By contrast, the
Australian Genome Research Facility stated in consultations that it has no
licence agreements that contain reach-through
Blocking patents
19.50 Broadly defined,
blocking patents are patents which stifle developments by others. They may occur
where one patent holder holds
a broad patent over an invention (a dominant
patent) and another patent holder holds a narrower patent over an improvement to
invention or a new invention that relies on access to the original
invention (a dependent patent).
The holder of a dependent patent will be precluded from practising the improved
invention unless they have obtained a licence from
the holder of the dominant
patent. The dominant patent holder may not exploit the improved invention
without a licence from the dependent
19.51 Blocking patents also include patents that cover a broad or fundamental
technology—a patent over a gene sequence is an
example—but are not
exploited or licensed, blocking others from using the technology. The effect of
a broad blocking patent
may be to block off whole areas of research,
particularly where the patent holder chooses not to practise the patent
themselves.
In such cases, or where the patent is foundational to other
research, the capacity for others to undertake further research may be
and the benefits from the technology may not flow to the
19.52 In submissions, WEHI commented that the value of a patent is highly
dependent on the patent holder’s ability to practise
Blocking patents that
prevent a patent holder from exploiting their patent may therefore also devalue
the patent, and consequently
affect the holder’s ability to attract
investment.
19.53 Nicol and Nielsen noted:
it has been estimated that over 90% of current US patents are never
exploited, suggesting that many of them are obtained for blocking
Given that most biotechnology patents in Australia are held by foreigners, it is
likely that a large number are obtained
for blocking purposes and will lie
dormant. Although there are many reasons why technology may not be exploited,
the result is clearly
detrimental to the industry and to the healthcare sector
as a whole.
19.54 The existence and effects of blocking patents were examined in the
Nicol-Nielsen Study. The Study found that a significant
number of respondents
regarded blocking patents as a real issue in the biotechnology industry,
although many commented that they
could not see the value of companies obtaining
patents purely for blocking or defensive
However, Nicol and
Nielsen commented:
Having said this, 21 respondents to the company survey had applied for a
patent for strategic reasons, that is, to allow them freedom
to operate (43
percent). In most cases, that patent had been granted. It was not clear whether
those particular patents were subsequently
exploited or licensed-out, however
many respondents who participated in interviews either had patents that they did
not currently
exploit, or knew of companies who did not currently exploit. In
many cases, these patents were not licensed or otherwise transferred,
this may have been due to a number of
19.55 The Nicol-Nielsen Study asked companies whether they had had to alter
their research program due to a patent blocking access
to research tools or
Nine respondents reported that they had changed their research program,
(18 percent) and as would be expected, several of these respondents
that existing patents heavily influenced their research programs, with one other
commenting that only slight changes in
the scope of their research were required
to avoid infringing patents. One indicated that they left the field completely
were unable to work with patent holders to enable them to access
necessary patents. Another four respondents provided comments that
they had come across patents that would potentially impact on their research
19.56 Some respondents commented that they avoided areas of research where they
did not think they would be able to get access to
necessary technology due to
the presence of blocking patents. Others changed the direction of research where
they found themselves
blocked, or invented around the patented
technology.
19.57 Despite the reported concerns, there were also responses suggesting that
participants in licensing negotiations were used to
deal with potentially
blocking patents:
In a considerable number of cases where a licence was required and the
researcher approached the patent holder, respondents indicated
that a successful
licensing outcome was eventually negotiated. One licensing manager contended
that 99.99 percent of licensing deals
within the industry run smoothly, and only
there is any blockage to research except in exceptional
19.58 However, Nicol and Nielsen commented that:
in many instances, respondents did not even try to negotiate a licence as
they were of the view that the patent holders would be unlikely
to enter into
negotiations with them.
19.59 A possible mechanism for dealing with blocking patents is compulsory
licensing, where the holder of the patent can be required
to license the
technology to allow others in the industry to exploit it or to practise their
own patents. The compulsory licensing
provisions in the
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act
) are discussed in Chapter 27. There may also be
competition issues, which are discussed in Chapter 24.
Dependency and uncertainty
19.60 A dependent patent is
a patent on an invention, the exploitation of which would encroach on an earlier
patent. The OECD Report
suggested that the rapid proliferation of gene patents
could cause commercial uncertainty and cited the example of different patents
for inventions claiming ‘a partial gene sequence (for example, an EST),
the full-length cDNA or gene, and the protein
uncertainty about which patent holder would be able to prevent the others from
using the later invention. The OECD Report
stated that:
While licensing under uncertainty about the extent of property rights is
not new to the pharmaceutical industry, too much litigation
could again slow
progress, raise end-product costs or discourage entry to certain fields of
19.61 The OECD Report also noted that:
While official statistics show that the number of patent applications and
grants is on the rise, little is known about who is licensing
what technologies
to whom and under what conditions. Firms claim that it is increasingly difficult
to assess whether they have ‘freedom
to use’ their own in-house or
licensed technologies as the web of patents becomes more complex and
overlapping.
19.62 However, the OECD Report also indicated difficulties in assessing whether
this was really an issue for
19.63 Compulsory licences can be a solution to the problem of dependent patents.
Chapter 27 discusses the provisions in the
Patents Act 1990
compulsory licences over dependent patents.
Refusals to license
19.64 As discussed in
Chapter 23, licensing is a means by which rights in patented technology may be
transferred.
There are two main
those where a researcher needs to acquire a licence in order to do
further research or development (licence-in); and
those where technology is transferred from a patent holder to
another to allow further research or the development of a new product
exploitation of a product (licence-out).
19.65 The development of a
product may require cross-licences, and the need for cross-licences may
encourage alliances and mergers.
Chapter 17 noted that the level of licensing in
the Australian biotechnology sector is ‘prolific’ but it also noted
finding by Ernst & Young that more than 20% of firms surveyed reported
abandoning a project because of an inability to obtain
19.66 Only 6 of the companies (12%) that responded to the Nicol-Nielsen Study
reported being refused licenses.
Interview responses reinforced the perception that refusals to licence are not a
pervasive problem.
for refusal was that exclusive licences had been granted to other companies.
Competition between the patent holder and
the company seeking to licence was
also cited. In some cases, refusals also occurred because of an inability to
agree on reasonable
Nicol and Nielsen
commented that:
One interpretation of this data is probably that refusals to license were
not encountered because often it did not get to the stage
that licences were
requested. This was acknowledged by many of our respondents. As reported
elsewhere, researchers and companies
stated that they avoided particular areas
of research if patents were held by competitors, or if it looked as though
obtaining a
licence might prove to be too problematic ... in line with the
survey results a few interview respondents expressed frustration at
difficulties
in licensing-in enabling technologies, but these were greatly outnumbered by the
number of respondents who had not experienced
any problems. Some respondents
complained that owners of research tool patents, while willing to license,
unreasonably demanded reach-through
19.67 The need to licence-in patented technology may be a barrier to
commercialisation if licences are not widely available. In particular,
licences have the potential to be anti-competitive either because they allow
prices above the market rate to be charged
or because they restrict access to
important genetic materials or research
Compulsory licensing,
discussed in Chapter 27, may provide some solutions to problems resulting from
refusals to license. That chapter
also proposes that an additional ground for
obtaining a compulsory licence based on a competition test be included in the
Patents Act
(Proposal 27 - 2).
Lack of experience with commercialisation
19.68 It has been suggested
that there is a lack of appropriate commercialisation experience related to
biotechnology within the Australian
In consultations,
AusBiotech Ltd suggested that investors need to be aware that there is a logic
to intellectual property protection
strategies.
19.69 Benitec Ltd refuted the view that Australia is not good at commercialising
its research, but suggested that the problems for
Australia lay in a lack of
people with the skills to manage intellectual property effectively. Benitec Ltd
stated that this is a
serious problem for the effective commercialisation of
biotechnology and in some cases leads to the failure of biotechnology companies.
It is suggested that this lack of managerial skill is particularly evident in
companies managed largely by academics, who may not
possess the skills to
commercialise adequately the technology they have
This concern was also
raised in the Australian Science and Innovation Mapping Taskforce report,
Mapping Australian Science and Innovation
stated that
scientists, when taking on the role of Chief Executive Officer, ‘often do
not have the specialist business skills
to enable the company to survive in
early-stage
commercialisation’.
19.70 Benitec Ltd noted, however, that Australia’s ability to
commercialise its research will improve as the country’s
improves as a result of
experience.
In its submission,
AusBiotech Ltd pointed out that it was attempting to educate the industry about
patents, but commented that, for
the most part, only listed companies and
companies that needed patents to protect their intellectual property were
currently obtaining
good patent
protection.
19.71 Benitec Ltd also suggested that Australia has, to date, regarded
biotechnology companies as essentially research institutions
commercial investment. It stated that part of the transition from being a
research institution to a company is the possession
of a strong commercial
focus. This is a crucial shift because investors are commercially focused,
rather than seeking to fund further
Lack of investment and venture capital
19.72 One possible barrier
to effective commercialisation of genetic research within the biotechnology
industry in Australia is the
lack of long term venture capital
It has been suggested
that it is very difficult to attract venture capital in Australia due to the
lack of a mature venture capital
base in this
It has also been
suggested that there is a need for venture capital with at least a five-year
19.73 Seed funding
also much lower in Australia compared with the United States. In Australia, the
usual level of seed funding is around $1,000,
while in the United States the
level is closer to $1 million.
In consultations, UniQuest suggested that higher funding at this stage enables
United States companies to establish effective management
structures, initially
staffed by professional
Lack of investment can
lead small, early stage companies to licence their intellectual property too
early in an effort to maintain
cash flow. This is sometimes done before the
company has undertaken sufficient value adding, and the original intellectual
is therefore
undervalued.
19.74 Insufficient early stage funding prevents new companies from establishing
effective management structures.
As a result, some biotechnology start-up companies in the Australian industry
are managed by the academic researchers who developed
the technology, instead of
by professional managers with experience in commercial negotiations and
intellectual property management.
19.75 Many Australian biotechnology inventions fail to be exploited effectively
because of a lack of funding at the proof-of-concept
stage. At this stage, an
invention has been created and its commercial potential must be demonstrated to
attract investment for its
development into a marketable product. Passing the
proof-of-concept stage involves demonstrating the commercial potential of an
to attract investment for development of a marketable product.
19.76 In some cases, an invention at this stage will not be exploited at all. In
others, the invention is licensed to an international
company prematurely and
its potential value to Australia is
Biotechnology Australia
has suggested that this commercialisation gap ‘is widely recognised as the
most critical barrier to
biotechnology development in
Australia’.
19.77 The range of funding programs designed to support the biotechnology
industry are outlined in Chapter 11.
Submissions and consultations
19.78 IP 27 asked what
effects Australia’s patent laws and licensing practices have on the
development of the Australian biotechnology
industry as it relates to human
19.79 Submissions generally recognised the importance of the biotechnology
industry in facilitating the delivery of healthcare benefits
from genetic
Some, such as the
Children’s Cancer Institute Australia for Medical Research, recognised the
role that the industry plays in
medical research and
innovation.
A South Australian
Member of Parliament, Dr Duncan McFetridge, stressed the need to ensure the
biotechnology industry does not deteriorate
19.80 Submissions and consultations also recognised that patents are vitally
important for the biotechnology
For example, one
submission referred to intellectual property as ‘essential for stimulating
technological innovation, whether
in industry or academic
institutions’.
Associate Professor Ross Barnard, co-ordinator of the Biotechnology Program at
the University of Queensland, submitted it was important
that genetic research
remain patentable for the prosperity of the biotechnology
In contrast, one
submission argued that Australian patent laws have only a neutral effect on the
local biotechnology industry, as
most patented products developed or supplied in
this country are foreign
19.81 Others highlighted the importance of patents for attracting
investment.
Intellectual
property is the main asset of some smaller biotechnology companies, particularly
in the predominantly upstream Australian
biotechnology sector. Without patent
protection, such companies have little on which to pin their value and nothing
As one submission
from Dr Amanda McBratney and others commented:
it would be impossible to obtain commercial funding and licensing of
products without IP protection. An investor requires a potential
monopoly to
warrant investment.
19.82 However, others raised concerns about gene patents and the biotechnology
industry. The Cancer Foundation of Western Australia
warned of the need for
controls to ensure that the profit motive driving industry does not override the
pursuit of affordable
healthcare.
The Royal College
of Pathologists of Australasia (RCPA) suggested that:
Holders of gene patents and licenses need to recognise that they have
ethical and social responsibilities and be responsive to government,
health care
provider and community concerns as well as their shareholders’ interests.
Socially responsible patent and license
holders strive to return a reasonable
profit without disrupting the existing healthcare framework and by maintaining
equitable and
affordable access to testing. Size appears to be an important
factor which seems to dictate how patent and license holders behave.
pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies and universities are able to balance
their patent portfolios to return a reasonable
and sustainable profit (eg Roche
PCR patent, Stanford University’s Cohen-Boyer patent on recombinant DNA)
without impeding
research or health care provision. Smaller biotechnology
companies (especially single patent holders) do not have this luxury and
economic reality and commercial aspirations sometimes force some to adopt more
aggressive practices (eg exclusive testing licenses,
monopoly laboratories,
higher license and royalty fees, and to threaten legal proceedings for alleged
patent infringement) that limit
choice and affect equitable and affordable
access to research tools and clinical
19.83 Professor John Mattick noted the potential conflict between the public
interest and the inappropriate exploitation of
Another submission
suggested that:
It is difficult to submit that such patent practices stifle innovation
although it is recognised that certain types of research in
‘crowded’ fields may be curtailed due to commercial
19.84 Dr Graeme Suthers suggested that the exclusive rights afforded by patents
created a strong incentive for patent holders to
establish and maintain monopoly
control over an invention.
commented that monopolies created by exclusive patent rights may lead to a loss
of price competition, stating:
Current patent practices have resulted in a flood of investment in
biotechnology companies, but the potential return from these investments
often related to the anti-competitive nature of gene patents. If a company holds
a patent on a gene, this effectively removes
the testing of this gene from the
marketplace because the patent-holder can have a testing
19.85 IP 27 also asked whether there is any evidence that broad patents, trivial
patents, defensive patents, dependent patents, multiple
patents or reach-through
claims may adversely affect the development of Australia’s biotechnology
industry as it relates to
19.86 In consultations, the Queensland Clinical Genetics Service expressed
concerns about ‘reach-through’ claims. The
service suggested that a
patent on a genetic sequence should not necessarily provide reach-through rights
to diagnostic or therapeutic
applications of the
19.87 The Australian Health Ministers’Advisory Council warned that broad
patents may stifle
innovation.
Similarly, the
Queensland Government submitted:
Broad, trivial and defensive patents tend to stifle innovation, lead to
royalty stacking and affects the ability of industry to freely
and successfully
commercialise their intellectual property. Broad patents create uncertainty and
a litigious environment. There
is a problem in relation to broad patents
particularly if holders of broad (gene) patents also follow restrictive
licensing practices.
19.88 However, AusBiotech Ltd stated that:
Overly-broad patents are unlikely to be enforceable, and there is
unlikely to be motivation or funding to enforce trivial patents.
There is no
evidence that the development of the industry in Australia is being adversely
19.89 Dr Amanda McBratney and others also commented:
Anecdotal evidence may suggest that broad patents, trivial patents,
defensive patents, dependent patents, multiple patents or reach-through
affect the scope of research being conducted in private companies but not so for
research within the University context. It
is difficult to submit that such
patent practices stifle innovation although it is recognised that certain types
of research in certain
‘crowded’ fields may be curtailed due to
commercial realities. Freedom to operate patent searches are frequently de
in patent prosecution strategies for many companies and University
commercialisation companies.
19.90 A variety of comments were received on the operation of the biotechnology
industry in Australia generally. It was suggested
that the Australian
biotechnology industry is somewhat risk averse in commercialising technology,
preferring to license its patents
to overseas firms rather than developing them
to product stage.
Ltd suggested in consultations that the Australian biotechnology industry
suffers from an inward looking
In addition, the
Department of Health and Ageing noted that the commercial sector is not good at
research into gene function, which
requires access to patient data and
longitudinal studies.
19.91 Submissions and consultations also highlighted a range of factors that may
impede commercial development of gene patents. Bio
Innovation SA commented that
state-based programs to develop critical mass in biotechnology in one state
would fragment the development
of the industry, but in time the stronger sectors
would develop, while other initiatives would
19.92 In consultations, AusBiotech Ltd identified a range of impediments to
commercialisation facing the Australian biotechnology
industry, including the
distance from large markets and having a small domestic
Australia’s
ability to be internationally competitive in this industry rests on its capacity
for inventiveness.
Ltd commented that Australia needs to have a stable regulatory framework
governing the industry, as regular change will
reduce overseas investor
confidence and the Australian industry’s credibility
19.93 Others commented that Australian biotechnology companies face difficulties
when attempting to move from proof-of-concept stage
to the commercialisation
stage. This may be due to the lack of a well-developed venture capital industry
in this country.
consultation it was suggested that companies need to be more aware that for the
value of technology to be increased, the risks
in commercially developing it
into a product need to be reduced by developing the technology to a more
advanced stage, at which point
venture capitalists will be inclined to pay more
19.94 One submission stated:
One of the reasons the development of new products is under pressure is
that intellectual property has a limited life (20 years) and
quite often several
years have already elapsed by the time the importance of new technology has been
realised. For similar reasons,
the injection of adequate capital into the
development of new biotech products is important. In under-funded projects, even
with considerable potential, the development time has to be stretched out
as funds become available, and thus the ultimate value
of the product for the
investors is shortened by the number of years the intellectual property has been
‘wasted’ during
development.
19.95 Submissions and consultations provided a number of suggested measures to
address some of the problems raised by gene patents
for the biotechnology
industry, while others made more general comments about how these problems might
be approached. For example,
the Department of Health and Ageing made the
overarching statement that concerns about gene patents have arisen from the way
holders behave, and that there needed to be policy solutions to control
‘rogue players’.
The Human Genetics Society of Australasia cited a need to collect data about the
impact of patents and licensing practices on the
biotechnology
19.96 Professor Alec Morley called for government to be cautious in intervening
in commercial transactions, and suggested that:
companies which exert too heavy a monopoly for their intellectual
property will, I suspect, prove to have counterproductive business
plans which
result in the driving away of their
19.97 One suggested solution to the problem of inadequate venture capital was
for government to provide investment-equity schemes,
like the Biotechnology
Innovation Program.
relation to patent thickets and overlapping licences, patent pools were also
suggested as a possible
The RCPA favoured
the creation of guidelines similar to the United States National Institutes of
Health commercialisation guidelines
that discourage restrictive and
anti-competitive practices. It suggested these could be supported by the
National Health and Medical
Research Council
The Department of
Health Western Australia also supported introducing guidelines of this
ALRC’s views
19.98 Many of the problems
facing the biotechnology industry, and possible reforms to address them, lie
beyond the scope of the Terms
of Reference. However, the ALRC considers that
continuing current education programs, and developing further programs to
particular issues faced by the Australian biotechnology sector, are the
most effective solutions to improving the ability of Australian
biotechnology
firms to compete in the world market.
19.99 The ALRC recognises that considerable efforts are being made at both the
federal and state levels to support the biotechnology
industry, including the
provision of information and training about intellectual property issues. These
programs should continue,
and should focus on providing companies with the
specific skills and knowledge to deal with the issues raised by gene patents.
Proposal 19 - 1.)
19.100 Solutions to some of the other concerns raised in this chapter are
discussed elsewhere in this Discussion Paper. Broader licensing
including support for skill development in relation to negotiation, are covered
in Chapter 23. Compulsory and statutory licensing,
as mechanisms for dealing
with other licensing issues are considered in Chapters 27 and 28
respectively.
19.101 Further, Proposals 12 - 1 to 12 - 3 suggest that the Australian
Research Council (ARC) and NHMRC should review their principles
and guidelines
to provide for conditions to be placed on research funding, in some
circumstances. These conditions may be used to
promote the dissemination of
research results by wide licensing or precluding patenting entirely.
19.102 Chapter 13 proposes that, as part of this review, the ARC and NHMRC
should include principles and guidelines that ensure the
public interest in
encouraging commercial exploitation of inventions is balanced with the public
interest in the wide dissemination
of important research
Some industry concerns
19.103 In addition, the role of competition law for addressing patenting issues
within the biotechnology sector is considered in
Chapter 24 and a number of
proposals are made. Proposal 24 - 1 suggests the Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission (ACCC)
should develop guidelines regarding the relationship
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) and intellectual
property, with particular regard to patented genetic materials and technologies.
The guidelines should extend
to patent pools and cross-licensing involving
patented genetic materials and technologies. Proposal 24 - 2 suggests the
ACCC should
review the conduct of firms dealing with patented genetic materials
and technologies, as the need arises, to determine whether their
anti-competitive. In doing so, the ACCC should liaise with Commonwealth, state
and territory health departments and other
stakeholders to identify and assess
any emerging competition concerns.
19.104 Taken together, this set of proposals addresses some of the issues raised
in submissions suggesting that commercialisation
guidelines about restrictive
and anti-competitive practices in the biotechnology industry are required.
Proposal 19 - 1
Biotechnology Australia, in consultation with State
and Territory governments and other relevant stakeholders, should:
(a) develop further programs to assist biotechnology companies in
commercialising inventions involving genetic materials and technologies;
(b) develop strategies to ensure widespread participation of biotechnology
companies in these programs. (See also Proposals 18 - 1
and 23 - 1.)
Biotechnology
IP Management
, <www.biotechnology.gov.au> at 20 January
Biotechnology
Australia and Commonwealth Biotechnology Ministerial Council,
Biotechnology: A National Strategy
R Eisenberg,
‘Genomic Patents and Product Development Incentives’ in B Knoppers,
C Laberge and M Hirtle (eds),
Human DNA: Law and Policy: International
Comparative Perspectives
(1997), 373,
Biotechnology Australia, Freehills
and Ernst & Young,
Australian Biotechnology Report
(2001), 49. The
others were access to capital, the availability of skilled human resources, and
the relatively small size of the
and J Nielsen, ‘The Australian Medical Biotechnology Industry and Access
to Intellectual Property: Issues for Patent
Law Development’
[2001] SydLawRw 16
Sydney Law Review
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual Property
Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
For example, patents over
isolated genetic materials that might be used to develop further inventions such
as diagnostic tests or
pharmaceutical products (downstream
Navigating the Patent Thicket: Cross Licenses, Patent Pools, and
Standard-Setting
M Heller and R Eisenberg,
‘Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons in Biomedical
Research’ (1998) 280
698, 698. See also Ch
Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual
Property Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
The majority of introns serve no
currently identifiable
Human Genome Research Institute,
NHGRI Policy Regarding Intellectual Property
of Human Genomic Sequence
and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of
Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6,
M Heller and R Eisenberg,
‘Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons in Biomedical
Research’ (1998) 280
Ibid, 700. See discussion of the
anti-commons in research in Ch 13.
Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis
of Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6,
Patents for Chemicals, Pharmaceuticals and Biotechnology: Fundamentals of
Global Law, Practice and Strategy
(3rd ed, 1999),
See also the discussion on
concerns raised by patents on research tools in Ch
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual Property
Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis
of Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6,
pools are cooperative arrangements that allow the owners of several patents, all
of which are necessary for the development
of a product, to license or assign
their rights at a single price. See Ch
See J Clark and others,
Pools: A Solution to the Problem of Access in Biotechnology Patents?
United States Patents and Trademarks
See further
and R Eisenberg, ‘Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons in
Biomedical Research’ (1998) 280
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
These provisions are to be
distinguished from reach-through patent claims which are discussed further in Ch
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
M Heller and R Eisenberg,
‘Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons in Biomedical
Research’ (1998) 280
Ethics Committee,
Statement on Patenting of DNA Sequences
Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis
of Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6,
Heller and R Eisenberg, ‘Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons in
Biomedical Research’ (1998) 280
and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of
Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6, 193.
Clinical Genetics Service,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 2 October
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute
of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
AusBiotech Ltd,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 September
Benitec Ltd,
Consultation
Brisbane, 3 October 2003.
Genome Research Facility,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 4 September
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
It should be noted that
‘blocking patents’ has a specific legal meaning in the United States
which refers to dominant
and subservient (dependent) patents, rather than the
broader definition, used in this chapter, as any patents that block access to
technology: see further Ibid,
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
and J Nielsen, ‘The Australian Medical Biotechnology Industry and Access
to Intellectual Property: Issues for Patent
Law Development’
[2001] SydLawRw 16
Sydney Law Review
Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis
of Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6,
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual Property
Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
Chapter 23 discusses licences and
Part E discusses the role of licensing in healthcare, particularly in relation
to genetic tests.
Ernst & Young,
Australian Biotechnology Report
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
Competition issues are addressed
AusBiotech Ltd,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 September
also D Sparling and M Vitale,
Australian Biotechnology: Do Perceptions and
Reality Meet?
(2003) Australian Graduate School of Management,
Science and Innovation
Mapping Taskforce,
Mapping Australian Science and Innovation
Benitec Ltd,
Consultation
Brisbane, 3 October 2003.
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 September
Benitec Ltd,
Consultation
Brisbane, 3 October 2003.
‘Venture capital funding’ is funding provided by investors to early
stage companies, generally after they have demonstrated
strong growth potential
and good management. Venture capital differs from seed funding (see below)
because it is often provided in
return for equity in the company and the
investor will expect greater control of the company and a quicker return on the
investment.
See: D Zahorsky,
Venture Capital
, What You Need to Know
http://sbinformation.about.com/library/glossary/bldef-venture.htm
February 2004.
Consultation
, Brisbane, 3 October
Medical Researchers,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 15 September
‘Seed funding’ is an
initial or early stage investment in a start up company or project, which is
usually used to develop
an idea to proof of concept stage, to conduct market
research or for initial product development. See: InvestorWords.com,
, <www.investorwords.com/4453/seed_capital.html> at 16 February
Consultation
Brisbane, 3 October
Researchers,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 15 September
Consultation
Brisbane, 3 October 2003.
Biotechnology
Australian Biotechnology: Progress and Achievements
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
D McFetridge,
, 30 September
Children’s Cancer Institute
Australia for Medical Research,
Submission P13
, 30 September
D McFetridge,
, 30 September 2003.
Department of Innovation and Information Economy,
Consultation
, Brisbane,
2 October 2003;
Confidential Submission P54 CON
, 3 November 2003; A
Submission P15
, 30 September 2003; Commonwealth Government
Departments,
Consultation
, Canberra, 5 May 2003; D Jackson,
, 20 October 2003; R Barnard,
Submission P32
, 7 October
Confidential Submission P54
, 3 November 2003.
Submission P32
, 7 October
A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Commonwealth Government
Departments,
Consultation
, Canberra, 5 May 2003; A Bankier,
, 30 September 2003; R Barnard,
Submission P32
, 7 October
South Australian Clinical
Genetics Service,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 16 September
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Cancer Foundation of Western
Australia Inc,
Submission P34
, 10 October
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
, 13 October
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
, 2 October
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
(2003), Question
Queensland Clinical
Genetics Service,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 2 October
Australian Health
Ministers’ Advisory Council,
Submission P49
, 23 October
Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
South Australian Clinical
Genetics Service,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 16 September
AusBiotech Ltd,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 September
Department of Health and
Consultation
, Canberra, 24 September
Bio Innovation SA,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 16 September
AusBiotech Ltd,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 September
Commonwealth
Government Departments,
Consultation
, Canberra, 5 May
Confidential
Submission P54 CON
, 3 November
Department of Health and
Consultation
, Canberra, 24 September
Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
Submission P18
, 30 September
Department of Industry Tourism
and Resources,
Consultation
, Canberra, 22 September
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
Department of Health Western
Submission P53
, 3 November
Proposal 13 - 1.
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
20. Gene Patents and the Healthcare System
Introduction
Overview of the Australian healthcare system
Healthcare funding
Funding decisions under the MBS and PBS
The challenge of new medical technology
Gene patents and healthcare
Patents and the cost of healthcare
Gene patents and the funding of healthcare
Submissions and consultations
Evaluating the economic and financial impact of gene patents
ALRC's views
Control through government funding and purchasing
ALRC's views
Role of health departments
ALRC's views
PART E: Patents and Human Health
20. Gene Patents and the Healthcare System
Introduction
Terms of Reference refer to the potential for rapid advances in human genome
research and genetic technologies to improve
human health. The ALRC is required
specifically to examine and report on the impact on ‘the cost-effective
provision of healthcare
in Australia’ of current patent laws and practices
related to genetic materials and technologies.
20.2 This chapter discusses the possible impact of gene patents on the
healthcare system and begins by presenting background information
Australian healthcare system, how it is funded, and how decisions are made about
funding medical services or pharmaceuticals
through the Medicare Benefits Scheme
(MBS) or the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).
20.3 The chapter discusses how gene patents may contribute to the cost of
healthcare, and the possible implications of gene patents
for healthcare
funding. Options are examined for ensuring that the healthcare system is able to
manage the introduction of new genetic
medical technologies and, in particular,
any problems of cost or access attributable to gene patents. In this context,
the chapter
the need for economic and financial evaluation of the impact of gene
patents on healthcare in Australia;
the possible role of government funding and purchasing power in
controlling the cost to the healthcare system of genetic materials
technologies; and
how Commonwealth, state and territory health departments, with
advice from the proposed Human Genetics Commission of Australia
may better manage legal and
other issues relating to gene patents.
Overview of the Australian
healthcare system
20.4 The healthcare system in
Australia is complex, involving many funders and healthcare
Responsibilities are
split between different levels of government, and between the government and
non-government sectors. As a generalisation,
the Australian Government is
primarily responsible for the funding of healthcare, through health insurance
arrangements and direct
payments to the States and Territories, while the States
and Territories are primarily responsible for the direct provision of
20.5 The Australian Government operates universal benefits schemes—the MBS
for private medical services and the PBS for pharmaceuticals.
contributes to the funding of public hospitals in the States and Territories
through the Australian Health Care Agreements.
20.6 Public hospital services, including outpatient clinics such as those that
are part of clinical genetics services, are usually
delivered by state and
territory governments. The private sector’s provision of healthcare
includes private medical practitioners,
private hospitals, pathology services
and pharmacies.
Healthcare funding
20.7 The Australian Institute
of Health and Welfare has estimated that total Australian health expenditure was
$66.6 billion in 2001
This represented 9.3% of gross domestic product
20.8 The healthcare system is largely government funded. In 2001 - 2002, an
estimated 68.4% of the total amount spent on health services
was funded by
governments. The Australian Government met 46.1%, and state, territory and local
governments met 22.3% of total
20.9 Most of the Australian Government’s healthcare funding was applied to
medical services, including those provided under
the MBS (30.7% of federal
funding), and public hospitals
A further 16% of federal
funding was directed to pharmaceuticals, including those provided under the PBS.
Most state, territory and
local government healthcare funding was applied to
public hospitals (64.4% of state, territory and local government
Funding decisions under the MBS and PBS
20.10 Decisions about
Australian Government funding under the MBS and PBS are made by applying
clinical and economic criteria to determine
whether, and in what circumstances,
the cost of new medical services or pharmaceuticals should be
subsidised.
These evaluation
processes apply, for example, if funding is sought under the MBS for the
provision of medical genetic tests or under
the PBS for drugs based on
therapeutic proteins.
20.11 The Medical Services Advisory Committee (MSAC) provides advice to the
federal Minister for Health and Ageing about the strength
of evidence relating
to the safety, effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of new and emerging medical
services and technologies and
under what circumstances public funding, including
listing on the MBS, should be supported. Applications for funding under the MBS
can be made to MSAC by the medical profession, medical industry or
including health
consumer interest groups.
20.12 Similarly, the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC) makes
recommendations on the suitability of drug products
for subsidy, after
considering the effectiveness, cost-effectiveness and clinical place of a
product compared with other products
already listed on the PBS, or with standard
medical care. PBAC considers submissions from industry sponsors of drug
products, but
also from medical bodies, health professionals and private
individuals. However, for new products or new clinical indications, it
normally the sponsor or manufacturer who will hold the necessary data required
for a submission.
20.13 Where items are recommended by PBAC for listing on the PBS, the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Pricing Authority makes recommendations
on the price to
be paid. In doing so, the Pricing Authority takes account of a range of factors,
including PBAC advice on clinical
and cost-effectiveness; prices of alternative
brands; comparative prices of drugs in the same therapeutic group; cost data
information;
prescription volume and economies of
The pricing methodology
does not provide any mechanism for the recognition of patent rights by way of a
price premium. As stated
by the Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources
The process of price determination under the PBS system in Australia is
based on price referencing using therapeutic and cost effectiveness
relativities. This process does not take into consideration the patent status of
20.14 Another perspective, expressed by Dr Dianne Nicol and Jane Nielsen, is
It is likely that many of the new products arising out of biotechnology
research and development will be considered by the PBAC to
be too expensive for
inclusion on the PBS, in which case the cost must be borne by the individual
consumer ... Without PBS listing,
it is only when patents expire and when
competing generic products become available that the Australian community as a
get the full benefit of new pharmaceutical
developments.
20.15 The Minister for Health and Ageing cannot list pharmaceuticals on the PBS
without a positive PBAC recommendation, but is not
obliged to comply with a
positive PBAC recommendation for
Although PBS listing is
determined on the basis of clinical and economic criteria, decisions about which
drugs are funded by government
‘political’.
example, Herceptin, a drug derived from monoclonal antibodies and used in
treatment for breast cancer, was rejected by PBAC on
cost grounds. The drug was
nevertheless made available to eligible patients through a program separate to
the PBS, following lobbying
by patient groups.
20.16 More recently there has been controversy about PBS listing of Glivec
(Imatinib), a drug that inhibits an enzyme responsible
for aberrant genetic
instructions. Glivec has been reported as costing about $50,000 for one
year’s treatment. While Glivec
has been listed as a treatment for chronic
myelogenous leukaemia (at a cost to patients of $36 per month), PBAC has refused
the drug as a treatment for gastrointestinal stromal tumour, a rare
stomach cancer.
The challenge of new medical technology
20.17 New medical
technologies have the potential to place strain on the capacity of the economy
to afford them. There are concerns
that new technology, in the context of fixed
budgets set by governments, may distort the balance of resources devoted to
aspects of the healthcare system.
20.18 Most experts believe that new technology is a driving force behind the
long-term rise of healthcare
The Australian
Government’s Intergenerational Report 2002 - 2003 states:
Technological change accounts for a significant proportion of
non-demographic growth in health spending per person. As the Commonwealth
exercises significant controls over whether to adopt new technology in the
health system, past increases in spending partly reflect
Commonwealth’s choice to fund new
technologies.
20.19 Costs attributable to recognition of patent rights are only one component
of the costs that may be involved when new medical
technologies are introduced.
For example, while it is sometimes claimed that patents are the predominant
cause of high prices for
new pharmaceuticals, the price of pharmaceuticals
depends on a wide variety of factors, including the cost of research and
development,
production, distribution and
States’ estimate is that patent protection for pharmaceuticals adds only
5 - 10% to the value of patent holders’
20.20 The effect of technological developments on the practice of medicine is
one of the most important problems facing health policy
makers in Australia.
New technologies offer new opportunities for treatment or raise the
quality or outcome of treatment, and thus increase the number
of people who may
benefit, even though particular items of new technology may be cost saving. New
technologies consequently tend
to create pressure to increase
20.21 Much of the debate about the cost implications of new medical technology
has focused on the high capital cost of technologies
such as computerised axial
tomography (CAT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). However, new medical
technology is not limited to
equipment. Genetic diagnostics and therapeutics are
also capable of creating cost pressures.
20.22 It has been asserted that genetic technologies will come to affect every
sector of healthcare provision.
If so, health expenditure attributable to genetic technology may
However, the extent of
any increase in expenditure, or compensating savings, in other areas is
20.23 The Ontario Government report,
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting:
Charting New Territory in Healthcare
(the Ontario Report), concluded
[m]any genetic technologies while offering promise of longer term savings
through better disease management will in the short-to-medium
term likely
contribute to the rising costs of
healthcare.
20.24 Whether new genetic diagnostics and therapeutics will be as costly to
bring to the market as the products of today, or whether
greater knowledge of
genetic sequences will shorten development times and reduce their costs is a
matter for debate. It is also uncertain
whether patients will demand new genetic
tests or new medicines that give only marginal health
Gene patents and healthcare
20.25 Gene patents are
relevant to the provision of healthcare in two broad categories:
medical genetic testing, including testing for pharmacogenetics;
novel therapies, such as gene therapy, the production of therapeutic
proteins, and the use of stem cells.
20.26 Medical genetic testing can
be categorised in various ways.
Relevant types of testing include diagnostic testing, predictive or
presymptomatic testing, genetic carrier testing, screening testing
pre-implantation or prenatal
The uses of genetic
testing in healthcare are likely to expand over time as testing processes become
easier to undertake and their
practical uses become clearer. For example,
pharmacogenetics—the study of how genetic characteristics affect the
response to drugs—may result in medical genetic testing in
order to prescribe ‘individualised’ drugs or dosages.
20.27 Gene therapy involves the use of a gene carrier or ‘vector’ to
carry a gene into somatic (non-reproductive) cells
to integrate the gene into
chromosomal DNA, with a view to its long-term
expression.
Currently, gene
therapy is an experimental
However, in the
future it may be used to treat ailments such as heart disease, inherited
diseases or cancers.
20.28 Gene patents are also relevant to the use of therapeutic proteins and stem
cells in medical treatment. Isolated genetic materials
and the sequences they
contain might be used to produce therapeutic proteins, namely, drugs based on
proteins produced by the body.
These drugs include beta interferon and Epo
(erythropoietin).
20.29 Stem cells are cells that have the potential to develop into different
derived from adult stem
cells, foetal stem cells, embryonic stem cells and umbilical cord
Stem cells may be useful
in the therapy of degenerative diseases or injuries, as well as for
toxicological testing and drug
They are discussed in
detail in Chapter 16.
Patents and the cost of healthcare
20.30 The existence of gene
patents may make the provision of healthcare more expensive. A patent grants
exclusive rights to exploit
the patented invention. This exclusivity may enable
the patent holder to charge higher prices and make greater profits than would
otherwise be possible. However, the extent to which this applies depends on
whether the patent holder has effective monopoly control
and, in particular, on
the availability of alternative and substitute products and
20.31 It will also depend on the nature of demand. In the case of healthcare,
demand is strongly influenced by government funding
decisions—for example,
decisions about whether a certain medical genetic test will be funded through
the MBS are likely to
influence consumer demand for the test. Demand may also be
influenced by the marketing and other activities of suppliers of healthcare
products and services.
20.32 As well as enabling a patent holder to charge a higher price for a
patented product, gene patents may increase healthcare costs
healthcare providers are obliged to pay licensing fees or royalties
in order to provide healthcare services—such as where a
state or territory
clinical genetics service is obliged to pay licence fees in order to provide
medical genetic testing;
recognition of gene patents on research tools contributes to the
time and expense involved in developing new healthcare products
or services and,
therefore, their ultimate cost; or
any additional cost of, or restriction on access to, medical genetic
testing means that preventable or treatable genetic diseases
are not identified
and, as a consequence, further healthcare costs are incurred.
patents and the funding of healthcare
20.33 Concerns about the
implications of gene patents for public healthcare funding have arisen primarily
in relation to medical genetic
testing (see Chapter 21). Most medical genetic
tests are ordered as part of healthcare services provided by state and territory
genetics services. Testing itself is most often carried out by public
sector laboratories, often attached to public hospitals or
significantly funded
by state or territory
governments.
20.34 As discussed in Chapter 21, there are presently around 220 medical genetic
tests available in
—but the scope of
MBS funding support is quite limited. The MBS funds medical genetic testing
under only six MBS items, which
concern testing for haemochromatosis, factor V
Leiden, protein C or S deficiencies, antithrombin 3 deficiency, and fragile X
Professor Ron Trent
has observed that most tests are funded:
ad hoc through cost recovery or public hospital laboratories. This is a
difficult situation particularly in relationship to patents
when DNA tests may
not be generating income but may actually lose money for the
20.35 This situation may change in future as genetic medicine develops. The
Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory Council (AHMAC)
A small number of genetic tests are delivered privately but the majority
are provided by States through their public hospital laboratories
with access to
testing through outpatient settings. As genetic technologies become more
mainstream it is likely that the private
sector will play a greater role in
provision, with rebates under the Medicare Benefits
20.36 Another element of funding for genetic healthcare services is private
health insurance. The extent to which private health
insurance covers the cost
of medical genetic testing will depend on the terms of particular insurance
policies and on conditions
of registration, which provide that health insurance
funds must offer some types of products and benefits, but cannot offer
In general, private
patients are charged for the small number of tests that are scheduled on the
MBS, with private insurance covering
the gap between the MBS rebate and the cost
of the service. Private insurance does not cover genetic tests that are not
on the MBS.
Submissions and consultations
20.37 IP 27 asked whether
gene patents pose any distinct problems of cost for the Australian healthcare
system beyond those applicable
to new technologies
In response, a number
of submissions suggested that cost problems are not unique to genetic
technologies.
For example,
AusBiotech Ltd submitted that there is no difference between therapeutic agents
or diagnostic tests based on gene patents
and those in other fields, such as
pharmaceuticals, and noted:
The cost of a patented therapeutic or diagnostic is far more dependent on
research and development, production, distribution and marketing
costs than it
is on whether or not the product or method is
20.38 Similarly, DITR stated:
As with most new technologies, the initial price for a genetic technology
is likely to reflect the cost of development. Experience
with the relatively
small number of genetic technologies that have been available over the last
several years indicates that prices
tend to decline over time due to normal
market forces and competition.
20.39 Submissions expressed different views on the extent to which recognition
of patent rights contribute to the cost of genetic
medical technologies, as
compared to other cost components. The Human Genetics Society of Australasia
(HGSA) submitted:
Gene patents are likely to inflate prices, though their precise impact is
not yet known. There is clearly a potential for patent holders
exorbitant prices for genetic testing kits or licences when the cost of gene
discovery and kit development is not that
great (certainly not as great as drug
and other treatment development).
20.40 In relation to genetic testing, Dr Graeme Suthers submitted that gene
patents did not pose problems provided there is ‘healthy
competition
between private sector companies and public sector organisations’. Such
competition will help ‘keep costs
manageable and access
reasonable’.
20.41 DITR submitted that any link between the patenting of genes and the
potential for health care cost increases has not been
established.
DITR observed:
Ideally, the price of patented health care technologies should be equal
to the benefit that it creates for the patient relative to
all alternative
technologies. This price may bear little or no relationship to production costs,
or to the costs of research and
development.
20.42 Genetic Technologies Limited (GTG) suggested that, while patents may
enable patent holders to charge higher prices than would
otherwise be possible,
the characteristics of the Australian market, including its small size, have an
important influence.
20.43 Some submissions highlighted concerns about the future costs of genetic
medical technologies given the growing importance of
genetics in healthcare. The
Department of Health and Ageing stated that the cost impacts of gene patenting
could affect the Commonwealth
and State health budgets, health insurance, and
health consumers. On the other hand, the Department accepted that
and technologies will change constantly and that our funding
systems and decision making processes need to adapt to those changes
associated costs’.
20.44 The South Australian Government expressed concern about future
inequalities in access to healthcare services, if costs due
to licence fees or
royalties have an impact on the capacity of state governments to fund services
currently provided free to
In this context, it
As genetic research provides information which identifies individuals,
groups and populations at risk of various conditions, demands
will be created
for a range of health services including predictive testing, counselling and
interventions ... Access to and uptake
of these services by individuals and
groups with differing interests and needs will be influenced by factors
including socio-economic
disadvantage.
20.45 IP 27 also asked what problems gene patents and future developments in
genetic technologies pose for the cost and funding of
clinical genetics services
specifically.
20.46 The mix of Commonwealth, state and territory healthcare funding may
present challenges for clinical genetics services in responding
to demands for
recognition of gene patent rights. Dr Suthers stated:
The Federal Government is shielded from the immediate financial impact of
decisions about the patentability of genes. The States will
feel the impact more
immediately but lack the responsibility for addressing the matter. The same
issue lies at the heart of difficulties
in developing a national familial cancer
program; the States pay for genetic testing but Medicare is a major beneficiary
of the reduction in unnecessary colonoscopies. There are no national
programs in clinical genetics.
20.47 The South Australian Government stated that, if patent holders charge
licence fees or royalties when ‘in-house’
genetic tests are
performed by state clinical genetics services without charge to
the extra cost will
need to be funded in one of three ways:
(i) increased State funding to cover licence fees, by redirecting funding
from some other area of health care (ii) reduced testing
to maintain laboratory
costs within budget, by redirecting funds used for provision of testing services
to families towards licence
fees for patent holders (iii) charging families
affected by genetic abnormalities an amount to cover the licence fees,
redirecting
family resources from caring for affected family members to licence
fees for patent holders.
20.48 Dr Duncan McFetridge MP, who has introduced a private member’s Bill
into the South Australian Parliament to stop companies
charging fees for genetic
testing in hospitals,
specific concern about maintaining public testing
On the other hand, GTG
submitted that, for existing state and territory clinical genetics services, the
cost of obtaining access
to patented inventions ‘pales into
insignificance’ when compared with other problems compromising the quality
and efficiency
of public testing
20.49 DITR noted that at least some genetic tests are likely to replace the use
of more expensive or inaccurate non-genetic tests,
giving rise to cost
reductions and improved health
The Department of
Health and Ageing stated that it expects:
increasing demand for genetic testing and screening in the future, with
potential for improvements in the quality of healthcare and,
in some instances,
for savings in healthcare costs.
Evaluating the economic and financial impact of gene patents
20.50 IP 27 asked what
steps, if any, should be taken to facilitate the economic evaluation of the
impact of gene patents on genetics
services and other healthcare in
‘economic evaluation’ is used to encompass a wide range of
techniques used for comparing the costs and benefits
of an activity. These
techniques are used to evaluate interventions in healthcare and other
20.51 The techniques applied in the economic evaluation of healthcare are
derived from the same theoretical base as in other contexts,
but differ in how
benefits are measured and valued. For example, the ‘benefits’ of
health services usually include both
the extension and the quality of life.
20.52 Costs, outcomes and quality of life measurements are usually included in
an economic evaluation.
cost-effectiveness analysis, and cost-utility
Cost-benefit analysis
requires the value of lives saved or quality of life enhanced by a medical
program to be measured in dollars.
To overcome this difficulty,
cost-effectiveness analysis measures benefits in natural units such as lives
saved or life years gained.
Cost-utility analysis is a form of
cost-effectiveness analysis that allows the value of life years to be weighted
by an index of
the quality of life or, more precisely, by an index of the
strength of people’s preferences (utility) for different health
20.53 Economic evaluation involves comparing costs and benefits for maximum
societal wellbeing. Therefore, anything that adds to
or subtracts from wellbeing
can be included in the framework. Professor Jeff Richardson has pointed out
that, in practice, as ethical,
distributional and other intangible
considerations are often difficult to quantify, economic evaluation, narrowly
defined, may deal
only with readily measurable costs and
Another characteristic
of economic evaluation of health services is that its validity depends on
clinical or epidemiological analysis
20.54 While the economic evaluation of health services is complex, there have
been developments in agreeing standard approaches to
the measurement of costs
and benefits, particularly where this has been linked to funding decisions, such
as those under the PBS.
However, as Professor Jane Hall has noted, the
application of economic evaluation to genetic services presents several
beyond those relevant to other health service interventions. These
include the following:
the health impact may not be immediate or related directly to the
intervention, such as when a test reveals a susceptibility to the
development of
a disease that will be manifest only if certain environmental conditions prevail
and, even then, only at some considerable
time in the future;
even if the condition cannot be prevented, more careful monitoring
may lead to earlier intervention and less severe cases of the
more careful monitoring will add to healthcare costs, even though
these may be offset by savings in future treatment; and
some genetic testing will not affect the health of the patient, but
rather the health of the patient’s children, so that there
inter-generational effect, which may make discounting for time preference
inapplicable.
submissions indicated that examining options for economic evaluation of the
impact of gene patents, or genetic health technologies
more generally, would be
However, there was no
common understanding about what economic evaluation would involve, the scope of
such evaluation, or who should
be responsible for it. Most submissions commented
on the need for economic evaluation of genetic medical technologies generally,
rather than evaluation of the impact of gene patents specifically.
20.56 The complexity of economic evaluation of health services was highlighted
by DITR, which noted there is no precise methodology
available to evaluate costs
and benefits of new healthcare technologies. In particular, DITR commented:
While the estimation of costs can be carried out with a relatively high
level of accuracy, the estimation of direct and indirect benefits
through health
gains to the community and reductions in ‘opportunity costs’ is more
difficult because they are diffuse.
20.57 DITR noted that genetic tests cannot be meaningfully evaluated as
‘one monolithic
technology’.
evaluation of the costs of genetic technologies needs to be carried out
‘on a case by case basis, taking into consideration
factors such as the
accuracy of the test and the potential population that might benefit from the
technology’.
highlighted the opportunity to improve current processes of assessment and
economic evaluation carried out by the Therapeutic
Goods Administration (TGA)
and PBAC. DITR added:
It may be appropriate to assign the proposed Human Genetics Commission
the task of commissioning such evaluations and assessment of
cost implications
in their role as an advisory body to government on genetic
technologies.
20.58 Dr Suthers suggested a new Commonwealth program to evaluate clinical
genetics services and programs:
There are no national programs in clinical genetics and hence no vehicle
for national evaluation of issues such as this. All of the
costing analyses in
clinical genetics services being done in Australia at present are done with
limited resources at the level of
individual States. Genetic testing is still
new and services vary greatly in different States and regions. Hence an
econometric evaluation
in one State will not necessarily provide an accurate
reflection of the situation nationally. There is an urgent need for a Federal
program addressing service delivery and evaluation in clinical genetics. This
program should include, but not be limited to, economic
evaluation of the impact
of gene patents on the delivery of clinical genetics
20.59 Dr Suthers provided an example of possible savings in future healthcare
costs attributable to testing for the BRCA genes associated
with breast and
ovarian cancer. Savings maybe derived from cancer prevention, earlier diagnosis
and better targeting of surveillance.
However, he observed:
Of course, this looks nicer on paper than in practice because we are
offsetting today’s costs against tomorrow’s savings.
For most policy
makers and their masters, the challenge is to avoid drowning today; a potential
lifeboat is not very useful ... If
the costs of these genetic tests were to
increase and testing had to be curtailed, there would be financial and social
costs associated
with late diagnoses of cancer in those who didn’t realise
they are at high genetic risk. There would also be costs associated
unnecessary cancer surveillance in those who didn’t realise they are not
at high risk.
20.60 In relation to medical genetic testing, the HGSA stated that government
needs to establish mechanisms for the ‘rigorous
evaluation’ of new
technology and indications for its use. The HGSA considered that the MSAC system
‘does not have the
capacity to undertake the task’ and that an
‘Office of Health Technology Assessment’ could be established within
20.61 The Department of Health Western Australia is undertaking an economic
evaluation of the Familial Cancer Program in Western
Australia, in collaboration
with Genetic Services of Western Australia. This study aims to measure the
cost-effectiveness of current
models of service delivery for colorectal, breast
and ovarian cancers, looking at costs of testing, counselling, surveillance,
intervention
and treatment.
Department highlighted the challenges involved in determining the economic
impact of such programs and submitted:
Economic evaluation of genetic services is in its infancy in Australia
... While additional funding would be required to expand the
[Familial Cancer
Program] study to include other genetic services, we believe that the familial
cancer model could be useful in assessing
the costs and benefits of other
genetic diseases. With an already financially stretched health system and a
consumer demand for genetic
tests that far exceeds supply, there is a clear need
for the economic evaluation of genetic testing services. Funding is desperately
required to enable effective
evaluation.
20.62 GlaxoSmithKline emphasised that assessing the benefit of gene patents
should be part of any such evaluation and should include
healthcare savings (for
example, from reduced hospitalisation) derived from the innovative therapeutic
and diagnostic products covered
20.63 The Queensland Government advised that Queensland Health favoured
evaluation by the Australian Government of the impact of
gene patents on the
cost of genetic services and other healthcare in Australia. It was suggested
that such evaluation be conducted
by or under the aegis of
The South Australian
government emphasised the need for a national approach to evaluation of the
impact of gene patents on healthcare
costs. Evaluation should identify the
different potential scenarios, in terms of licensing models and enforcement by
patent holders.
20.64 Some submissions opposed new processes for the economic evaluation of gene
patents and healthcare. GTG considered such evaluation
would be likely to be
‘hijacked by special interests which would lead to flawed or politicized
ALRC’s views
20.65 Gene patents have the
potential to create cost problems for particular health services—for
example, where state clinical
genetics services are obliged to pay licensing
fees or royalties for medical genetic testing from existing fixed budgets. In
circumstances, governments will either have to reduce service provision,
increase user charges, or obtain increases in their budget
allocations.
20.66 However, the extent to which increased expenditure on medical genetic
testing and novel therapies will pose a challenge to
overall healthcare funding
is not clear; nor is it clear what contribution gene patents may make to this
increased expenditure. Dealing
with additional expenditure attributable to the
recognition of gene patents is one component of a broader health policy
20.67 Economic evaluation may assist in planning and resource allocation
relating to genetic technologies. The Australian healthcare
system is regarded
by some as a world leader in carrying out detailed economic evaluation of the
costs and benefits of pharmaceuticals
and other medical technologies prior to
inclusion in the MBS and PBS,
and these skills may usefully be applied more broadly.
20.68 A need for economic evaluation of new genetic medical technologies has
been identified by inquiries
The Ontario Report
suggested that Canadian Health Ministers should establish a plan for better
economic evaluation of genetic technology
Similarly, a report for
the Nuffield Trust Genetics Scenario Project recommended that the use of health
economics should be encouraged
in assessing the impact of genetic science on
health services.
20.69 The impact of new genetic technologies on healthcare in Australia clearly
needs to be monitored closely by health policy makers.
The ALRC highlighted
aspects of the need for long term planning regarding genetics in the 2003
Essentially Yours: The Protection of Human Genetic Information in
(ALRC 96). ALRC 96 recommended the development of strategies to
assess and respond to the need for genetic counselling services throughout
Australia and approaches to ensure that medical practitioners are appropriately
trained and equipped in clinical genetics and in
the use of relevant genetic
counselling and genetic
20.70 It is also desirable to anticipate and plan for the impact of genetic
medicine on healthcare costs and funding. While the ALRC’s
Reference are directed to the impact of patent laws and practices, submissions
and consultations have highlighted a more
general need for economic evaluation
of genetic medical technologies. The ALRC proposes that Commonwealth, state and
territory health
departments should establish a process for economic evaluation
of medical genetic testing and other new genetic medical technologies
20.71 Separately assessing the impact of gene patents as part of an economic
evaluation of genetic medical technologies may be problematic
because of the
many intangibles including, for example, whether the benefit of a particular
genetic medical technology would have
become available, or become available when
it did, without the incentive of patent protection. A financial or budgetary
of the impact of gene patents specifically may, therefore, be more
practical. Such an analysis would estimate current and projected
providing genetic healthcare services, taking patent rights into account.
20.72 The ALRC proposes that Commonwealth, state and territory health
departments should also establish a process for examining the
financial impact
of gene patents on the delivery of healthcare services in Australia. A financial
analysis may assist decision making
attributable to patent licence fees or royalty payments. It may also assist
health departments
in decision making about whether to recognise or challenge
patent rights, and in developing strategies for negotiations with patent
holders, consistent with the more active role in managing patent issues proposed
by the ALRC.
20.73 The ALRC considers that AHMAC is the appropriate body to take this
proposal forward. AHMAC is a committee of the heads of the
Commonwealth, state
and territory health departments. It is the major policy making body on national
health matters, advising the
Australian Health Ministers’ Conference on
policy, resource and financial issues. In May 2002, AHMAC established an AHMAC
Group on Human Gene Patents and Genetic Testing. Its terms of reference
include advising and making recommendations to AHMAC on matters
relating to the
planning, management, regulation, provision and delivery of human genetic
testing and screening services. In addition,
AHMAC may be assisted by MSAC.
MSAC’s terms of reference include undertaking health technology assessment
work referred to
it by AHMAC, and reporting its findings to
Proposal 20 - 1
The Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory
Council (AHMAC) should establish processes for: (a) an economic evaluation of
genetic testing and other new genetic medical technologies; and (b) an
examination of the financial impact of gene patents on the
delivery of
healthcare services in Australia.
Control through government funding and purchasing
20.74 Government decisions
decisions about licensing and the
level of licence fees. IP 27 noted that
government funding and purchasing power may provide mechanisms to control the
availability
and cost of medical genetic testing and other aspects of
healthcare, including those costs that may be attributable to recognition
patent rights. It asked whether government funding and purchasing power should
be used to control the cost of medical genetic
testing that is subject to gene
patents and, if so, how this might best be
20.75 Government funding decisions can help determine the availability of
medical genetic testing. The HGSA has stated that the cost
of genetic testing to
individuals, including testing that is subject to gene patents, should be
minimised ‘through a national
funding program that is limited to tests of
proven clinical utility and cost-effectiveness’, with the price to be
by government.
20.76 The AHMAC Working Group on Human Gene Patents recommended in 2001 that
government funding for genetic testing should be restricted
initially to genetic
testing performed by publicly funded facilities, in part to assist in
controlling healthcare costs.
Restricting government funding of medical genetic testing to tests performed in
public sector laboratories is seen by some as necessary
to ensure ‘a
robust Australian genetic testing
infrastructure’.
20.77 The PBS has been cited as an example of how government purchasing power
may assist in controlling the cost of
healthcare.
There is evidence
that the PBS allows relatively low prices for drugs to be maintained through the
government being the single buyer
(a monopsony) in a market with a number of
pharmaceutical sellers.
in reviewing the Pharmaceutical Industry Investment Program, the Productivity
Commission concluded that bargaining power
arising from Australia’s PBS
arrangements almost certainly leads to lower prices, but the exact price effect
is unknown given
influences.
20.78 The ALRC received comments about possible adverse effects of the PBS on
biotechnology research and development. One submission
stated that, while the
PBS results in ‘excellent bargains in bulk purchase and pricing’:
it jeopardises the ability of Australian biotech to receive funding
within Australia since margins for Australian drug companies are
extremely tight
and they prefer to do most of their R&D overseas where they are more
appropriately funded.
20.79 The United States pharmaceutical industry pressed for changes to the PBS
scheme in the context of negotiations for an Australia
- United States Free
Trade Agreement
—in part on the
basis that United States consumers, who pay higher prices for drugs, support
drug research and development that
benefits consumers in the rest of the
20.80 Many submissions expressed approval for the use of government monopsony
purchasing power to control the cost of genetic medical
technologies.
Dr McBratney
and others noted that the MBS and PBS are already used to control the cost of
medical procedures and pharmaceuticals
and submitted that:
The burden of such systems therefore rests with society universally, at
least via distributive allocation across the tax
20.81 The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research stated that
government purchasing power should be used:
through a mixture of incentives (eg through a PBS and P3-like scheme) and
restrictions for use based on evidence and cost-effectiveness
in order to
qualify for the incentives.
20.82 DITR asserted that there are adequate mechanisms available through health
benefits administration and competition law to address
any concerns about the
potential for sharp rises in health care cost attributable to the exercise of
patent rights.
DITR stated
that the perception that the costs of clinical genetics services will escalate
appears to be based on ‘the potential
for broad uptake and inappropriate
use of genetic tests’. DITR submitted:
This problem can be managed through the adoption of appropriate policy
measures using criteria-based public coverage (referral protocols,
accredited test providers and by disallowing direct consumer marketing) to
ensure access for those in need and those who
are likely to benefit most while
limiting the potential for broad and inappropriate
ALRC’s views
20.83 Governments have
considerable control over healthcare expenditure in Australia through budget
appropriations,
fixing health
benefit levels, taxation arrangements, and setting the parameters for private
health insurance arrangements.
20.84 The MBS and PBS are relevant where funding is sought through federal
funding programs. There are also funding and other mechanisms
that may be used
by state and territory health departments. AHMAC noted:
resulting from new health technologies through the application
of appropriate
efficacy and cost effectiveness analysis, funding and targeting
mechanisms.
20.85 There may be other ways in which funding mechanisms might be used to
address concerns about the impact of gene patents on healthcare
including by placing conditions on the public funding of new medical services.
For example, Medicare funding of a medical
genetic test might be made
conditional on broad licensing of the test.
20.86 The ALRC proposes that options for using government funding and purchasing
power to control the cost of genetic medical technologies
subject to gene
patents should be examined by Commonwealth, state and territory health
departments.
Proposal 20 - 2
AHMAC should examine options for using government
funding and purchasing power to control the cost of goods and services that are
subject to gene patents and used in the provision of healthcare.
Role of health departments
20.87 Health departments and
other public health organisations are directly affected by the patenting of
genetic materials and technologies.
Health departments are the major funders and
users of these technologies and, therefore, have a major stake in the outcomes
patent system for healthcare provision and for medical research.
20.88 The ALRC has been examining whether health departments should take a more
active role in monitoring the application of patent
law to genetic materials and
technologies and, where appropriate, intervening in patent processes.
20.89 Recommendations made in 2003 to the United Kingdom Department of Health
provide an important lead. The report
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and
, by Professor William Cornish, Dr Margaret Llewelyn and Dr Michael
Adcock (the UK Report)
commissioned by the United Kingdom Department of Health because of its
‘serious concern’ about the impact of intellectual
property rights
upon ‘research and the use of novel developments in genetics affecting
health care’.
20.90 The remit of the project was to undertake a study into the impact and
management of intellectual property rights within the
healthcare sector. This
included looking at ways in which the Department of Health could manage
intellectual property rights and,
in particular, deal with the protection and
patentability of genetic
recommendations
Report were that the Department of Health should:
recognise its unique position with regard to healthcare related
intellectual property and take an active role in monitoring developments
relevant areas of intellectual property law (most notably patent
have in place a mechanism for assessing whether (a) to send
information to patents offices during the examination of a patent application
which would restrict the scope of any patent on the disclosed genetic invention;
(b) to challenge the validity of a genetic patent
once granted; and (c) to
challenge any abuse of monopoly rights using competition
instigate a policy for ‘licensing in’ designed to
moderate excessive demands by licensors by considering, as possible
options, the
use of compulsory licensing, competition law and Crown
make full use of existing monitoring and horizon scanning work being
undertaken by groups such as the Human Genetics Commission,
the Nuffield Council
on Bioethics, and the Intellectual Property Advisory Committee and make
representations to these groups where
20.91 While
IP 27 did not ask specific questions about health departments taking a more
active role in monitoring patent law and practices,
a number of submissions made
relevant comments.
20.92 The Cancer Council of Australia proposed that governments should have a
mechanism for challenging gene patents and suggested
that AHMAC may be the
appropriate body to assume responsibility for
20.93 In relation to scrutiny of applications for gene patents, the South
Australian Government referred to the UK Report and suggested
that IP Australia
should ‘make full use of the advice that would be available to it’
from the National Health and Medical
Research Council (NHMRC), the Australian
Health Ethics Committee (AHEC) and the HGCA, once it is established. The
submission also
noted that:
it would be difficult for Health Departments at every level to monitor
health-related patent applications in Australia. There may
be a role for the
HGCA in monitoring applications for gene-related patents, but that would work
most effectively if IP Australia
was required to advise the HGCA on receipt of
such an application ...
20.94 The establishment of the HGCA was recommended by the ALRC and AHEC in ALRC
The ALRC and AHEC
recommended that the HGCA should be established under federal legislation as an
independent statutory authority.
The role of the HGCA would be to provide, among
other things, on-going, high-level, technical and strategic advice to Australian
governments about current and emerging issues in human genetics, including on
the ethical, legal and social implications arising
from these developments.
ALRC’s views
20.95 The possibility of
Commonwealth, state and territory health departments undertaking new roles in
monitoring and challenging
gene patents was canvassed by the ALRC in
consultations. A common response was that health departments currently lack the
and resources to do so. In any case, it is often unclear at the time
of application or grant, even to experts, what the impact of
granting a patent
will ultimately be. The vast majority of patents are never exploited or
enforced—and therefore will be unlikely
ever to have adverse consequences
on the provision of healthcare.
20.96 It is often only many years after the grant of a patent that healthcare
providers become aware of its existence and its possible
implications. For
example, the patents on methods of using non-coding DNA polymorphisms (the
non-coding patents) held by GTG were
first granted in
It was eight or nine
years before the possible implications of these patents for the provision of
medical genetic testing became
a focus of health department
20.97 Notwithstanding the practical challenges, the ALRC considers that health
departments should develop the capacity to monitor
patent processes and
intervene where appropriate. Depending on the circumstances, health departments
may have an interest in monitoring
or intervening in patent processes at the
point of patent application, on examination, or during the term of the
Health departments
should be willing to challenge patents in the public interest because of
possible adverse effects on the conduct
of medical research or the cost or
quality of healthcare.
20.98 There are precedents overseas of governments intervening in patent
processes, motivated by public health policy considerations.
For example, the
Ontario provincial government recently intervened in a court case involving
genetically modified crops, in part
because of concern about the impact of gene
patents on healthcare and
In New Zealand, the
Pharmaceutical Management Agency—the Crown entity responsible for managing
New Zealand’s equivalent
of the PBS—has challenged the grant of
patent claims directed to methods of medical
20.99 The ALRC proposes that where particular gene patent applications, granted
patents or patent licensing practices are considered
to have an adverse impact
on the cost-effective provision of healthcare, Commonwealth, state and territory
health departments actively
consider whether to: request re-examination of a
patent; initiate proceedings to oppose a patent; make application for revocation
of a patent; apply for the grant of a compulsory licence; or exploit or acquire
a patent under the Crown use and acquisition provisions
Patents Act
(Cth) (Proposal 20 - 3).
20.100 As well as being skilled-up to monitor patent developments and intervene
where necessary, health departments need to be sophisticated
in their commercial
dealings with patent holders and need to ensure that they have appropriate
strategies in place to manage intellectual
property issues across the entire
health portfolio. The UK Report observed:
In understanding what options are available to the Department, it is
essential that, in addition to noting the problems which IP is
perceived as causing, the Department also appreciates the limits which the law
places upon patent rights (these take the
form of the requirements for validity
and disclosure, various exceptions, compulsory licences etc ... ). The single
most effective
option available to the Department is to take a central role in
ensuring that these are properly observed in those situations where
Department has an interest.
20.101 Health departments need to have the expertise and resources to play a
more active role in the patent system. This will be
more easily achievable for
the larger States. The ALRC proposes that the Commonwealth, States and
Territories establish specialist
offices within their health departments to
monitor and manage intellectual property issues relating to genetic materials
and technologies.
The offices should be staffed by qualified individuals who are
capable of giving specialist legal and policy advice to the departments
intellectual property, biotechnology and human health (Proposal 20 - 4). The
functions of the specialist office would be broad
ranging and could include, for
example, the negotiation of licences with patent holders. Health departments
should also be able to
draw on expertise in other government departments and
agencies to advise and assist them in dealing with intellectual property issues
arising from gene patents.
20.102 In practice, the implications of gene patents are likely to affect all
health departments in similar ways. To avoid duplication
of activities, some
initiatives should be coordinated at a national level. The ALRC proposes that
the HGCA should monitor the application
of intellectual property laws to genetic
materials and technologies, where these may have implications for human health,
both generally
and in specific cases (Proposal 20 - 5). For these purposes,
the HGCA could make use of the new searchable online database of patents
published patent applications proposed in Chapter 9.
20.103 The membership, structure and proposed functions of the HGCA, as
recommended by the ALRC and AHEC, make the HGCA potentially
well equipped to
perform the sort of monitoring and horizon-scanning work that is undertaken in
the United Kingdom by the UK Human
Genetics Commission and the Nuffield Council
on Bioethics. There would be a synergy with the HGCA functions recommended in
For example, one of the roles of the HGCA is to ‘identify genetic
tests that have particular concerns or sensitivities attached
to them, and thus
may require special
treatment’.
20.104 In addition, the HGCA should advise and liaise with Commonwealth, state
and territory health departments in relation to opposition
re-examination or revocation of, gene patents and obtaining access to patented
inventions under the compulsory licensing
or Crown use and acquisition
provisions. Pending the establishment of the HGCA, AHMAC should undertake these
roles, as the major
policy making body on national health issues (Proposal
20.105 Undertaking proceedings in respect to patent rights—whether it be
through challenging the patentability of specific
genetic materials or
technologies, making application for revocation of a patent, or invoking Crown
use—should be the province
of individual health departments or related
bodies. Health departments and other healthcare providers are the bodies most
to incur liability for patent infringement where patented inventions are
used in healthcare, or to take any financial advantage arising
from a successful
challenge to patent rights and, therefore, seem the most appropriate bodies to
undertake patent proceedings. Neither
the HGCA nor AHMAC (which have only
advisory and policy making roles) are appropriate bodies to initiate and
prosecute litigation
involving patents in their own right.
20.106 However, strategies for patent negotiations or proceedings, or for the
funding of proceedings, could usefully be coordinated
at a national level, for
example, through the Department of Health and Ageing or AHMAC, even though
proceedings are ultimately taken
by an individual health department or other
body, such as a hospital or medical research institute.
Proposal 20 - 3
Where particular gene patent applications, granted
patents or patent licensing practices are considered to have an adverse impact
on medical research or the cost-effective provision of healthcare, Commonwealth,
state and territory health departments should actively
consider whether to:
request re-examination of a patent; initiate proceedings to oppose a patent;
apply for revocation of a patent;
apply for the grant of a compulsory licence;
or exploit or acquire a patent under the Crown use and acquisition provisions of
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act
Proposal 20 - 4
Commonwealth, state and territory health departments
should establish specialist offices to monitor and manage intellectual property
issues relating to genetic materials and technologies. The offices should be
staffed by qualified individuals who are capable of
giving specialist legal and
policy advice about intellectual property, biotechnology and human health.
Health departments should
also establish mechanisms to enable them to draw on
expertise in other government departments and agencies to advise and assist them
in dealing with intellectual property issues arising from gene patents.
Proposal 20 - 5
The proposed Human Genetics Commission of Australia
(HGCA) should monitor the application of intellectual property laws to genetic
materials and technologies, where these may have implications for medical
research or human health, both generally and in specific
cases. In conducting
such monitoring, the HGCA should have the following functions:
(a) providing information to IP Australia during the examination of a
patent about the proper scope of the patent, in appropriate
(b) liaising with AHMAC, health departments, and other relevant stakeholders
or revocation of a patent
Patents Act
, and about who might take such action and in what
circumstances; and
(c) liaising with AHMAC, health departments, and other relevant stakeholders
be obtained under the
Crown use, Crown acquisition or compulsory licensing provisions of the
Patents Act
Proposal 20 - 6
Pending the establishment of the HGCA, AHMAC should
establish a mechanism for monitoring the application of intellectual property
laws to genetic materials and technologies, where these may have implications
for medical research or human health, both generally
and in specific cases.
See Australian Law Reform Commission
and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The Protection of
Human Genetic Information in Australia
, ALRC 96 (2003), rec
See Australian Institute of
Health and Welfare,
Australia’s Health 2002
See G Palmer and S Short,
Health Care and Public Policy in Australia: An Australian Analysis
ed, 2000), 10.
Australian Institute of
Health and Welfare,
Health Expenditure Australia 2001 - 02
See Medicare Services Advisory Committee,
Funding for New Medical Technologies and Procedures: Application and
Assessment Guidelines
, Department of Health and Ageing,
<www.health.gov.au/msac/pdfs/guidelines.pdf> at 1 April 2000;
Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory
1995 Guidelines for the
Pharmaceutical Industry on Preparation of Submissions to the Pharmaceutical
Benefits Advisory Committee: Including
Major Submissions Involving Economic
, Department of Health and Ageing,
<www.health.gov.au/pbs/general/pubs/pharmpac/gusubpac.htm> at 1 December
Medicare Services Advisory
Funding for New Medical Technologies and Procedures: Application
and Assessment Guidelines
, Department of Health and Ageing,
<www.health.gov.au/msac/pdfs/guidelines.pdf> at 1 April
Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory
Guidelines for the Pharmaceutical Industry on Preparation of
Submissions to the PBAC:
, Department of Health and Ageing,
<www.health.gov.au/pbs/general/pubs/pharmpac/part1.htm> at 1 December
Pharmaceutical Benefits Pricing
Procedures and Methods
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of
Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6, 60.
Health Act 1953
Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis
of Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6, 60.
Radio National, ‘Glivec (Imatinib)’,
The Health Report
July 2003, <www.abc.net.au/rn/talks/8.30/helthrpt/stories/s905390.htm>;
Novartis Oncology,
, <www.glivec.com/about> at 2
December 2003; J Walker, ‘Fight over Cancer Drug Price’,
(Sydney), 28 July 2003,
<www.theaustralian.news.com.au/common/story_page/0,5744,6823070%255E23289,00.ht>.
factors include population growth, demographic changes, increasing fees and
costs of delivering health care services, growth
in the medical workforce and
greater community expectations. See M Fett,
Technology, Health and Health
(2000) Department of Health and
Government,
Budget Paper No 5: Intergenerational Report 2002 - 03
Biotechnology
Consultation
, Sydney, 22 May
M Schankerman, ‘How
Valuable is Patent Protection? Estimates by Technology Field’ (1998) 29
RAND Journal of Economics
77: compared to 15% for mechanical and
electronic goods. AusBiotech Ltd observed that, as a result of the special
requirements for
Commonwealth funding under the MBS and PBS, the ‘cost
differential may well be lower’: AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
Technology, Health and Health Care
(2000) Department of Health and
Ontario Ministry of Health and
Long-Term Care,
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting: Charting New
Territory in Healthcare: Report to the Provinces and Territories
See Ibid, 61; R Zimmern and C Cook,
Genetics and Health: Policy Issues for Genetic Science and their Implications
for Health and Health Services
Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care,
Genetics, Testing & Gene
Patenting: Charting New Territory in Healthcare: Report to the Provinces and
Territories
(2002), 61. While certain medical genetic tests may allow
disease prevention to be practised, and consequent health care costs reduced,
the clinical benefits may not be observable for many
R Zimmern and C Cook,
Genetics and Health: Policy Issues for Genetic Science and their Implications
for Health and Health Services
(2000), 4. It has been said that
‘Pharmacogenetics could help to reduce costs in the provision of medicines
by enabling more
efficient treatment, allowing prescription only for those
patients who are like to be responsive to a particular treatment. Alternatively,
it may be that pharmacogenetics increases costs because of the additional
administrative burden’: Nuffield Council on Bioethics,
Pharmacogenetics: Ethical Issues
In this Discussion Paper, the term
‘medical genetic testing’ refers to molecular genetic testing that
directly analyses
DNA or RNA. Other biochemical tests of non-genetic substances,
as well as some medical imaging processes, may provide strong indicators
particular genetic disorders, particularly in combination with other tests or
clinical observations. However, these biochemical
tests are not covered by the
term ‘medical genetic testing’ because gene patents are unlikely to
have direct impact on
the availability or cost of such
For a full description of these
terms, see Australian Law Reform Commission and Australian Health Ethics
Essentially Yours: The Protection of Human Genetic Information in
, ALRC 96 (2003),
[10.7] - [10.8].
Gene therapy may
also refer to therapies, such as where DNA is introduced into somatic cells in
order to generate an immune response
to treat or prevent a chronic viral
infection such as HIV, or as part of a cancer treatment: National Health and
Medical Research
Panel (GTRAP)
, <www.nhmrc.gov.au/research/gtrap.htm> at 9 May
As at March 2003, the Gene and
Related Therapies Research Advisory Panel (GTRAP) of the National Health and
Medical Research Council
had approved 10 gene therapy studies, including studies
related to use of gene therapy to treat mesothelioma, melanoma and leukaemia:
National Health and Medical Research Council,
Australian Gene Therapy Studies
Approved by GTRAP
, <www.health.gov.au/nhmrc> at 9 May 2003. Regulatory
authorities in China have recently approved a form of gene therapy for
treatment of head and neck squamous tumours: See S Westphal, ‘Cancer Gene
Therapy is First to be Approved’,
New Scientist
, 28 November 2003,
<www.newscientist.com/news/news.jsp?id=ns99994420>.
Biotechnology Australia, ‘Gene Therapy’,
Fact Sheet 24
December 2001,
<www.biotechnology.gov.au/library/content_library/BA_24_Gene_therapy.pdf>.
interferon is used to treat multiple sclerosis. Epo is used as a treatment for
persons with certain types of
See Ontario Ministry of Health
and Long-Term Care,
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting: Charting New
Territory in Healthcare: Report to the Provinces and Territories
European Group on Ethics in Science
and New Technologies,
Ethical Aspects of Patenting Inventions Involving Human
Stem Cells: Opinion to the European Commission
See Intellectual Property and
Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation
under the Competition Principles Agreement
In turn, half of all public
hospital funding comes from the Commonwealth through the Australian Health Care
Agreements.
DNA Diagnosis
of Genetic Disorders in Australasia
, Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
<www.hgsa.com.au/labs.html> at 19 February 2003. Not all tests are
available from all
laboratories. The register does not include newborn screening
laboratories.
Department of Health and
Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS)
(2003). These tests are funded
by Medicare under two categories: diagnostic testing to confirm a clinical
observation (for example,
in the case of haemochromatosis the patient must have
raised iron levels); and screening of asymptomatic individuals where the patient
is a first-degree genetic relative of another individual who is known to have
Correspondence
, 23 September
Health Ministers’ Advisory Council,
Submission P49
, 23 October
National Health Act 1953
(Cth) ss 73BA, 73B(1), sch
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
Department of Industry
Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003; Queensland
Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January 2004; GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
November 2003; IP Australia,
Submission P56
, 4 November 2003; G Suthers,
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003; Queensland Government,
, 5 January 2004; A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
October 2003; Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory Council,
, 23 October 2003; Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
20 October 2003; Commonwealth Department of Health and Ageing,
, 28 January
Submission P58
, 7 November
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
IP Australia,
, 4 November 2003.
Department of
Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October
Commonwealth Department of Health
and Ageing,
Submission P65
, 28 January
South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003),
Submission P30
, 2 October
Where commercial test kits are
not financially viable: South Australian Government,
Submission P51
Testing Services (Public Availability) Bill 2003
D McFetridge,
, 30 September 2003.
stated to include ‘the hidden costs of duplication, organizational
fragmentation, and the fact that most existing
services are extensions of
research infrastructure rather than purpose designed service
organizations’: Genetic Technologies
Submission P45
October 2003.
Department of Industry
Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
Commonwealth
Department of Health and Ageing,
Submission P65
, 28 January
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question 7 - 3. It is
probably not practicable to conduct economic evaluation of the impact of gene
patents on healthcare,
as suggested by IP 27, separately from economic
evaluation of a genetic medical technology as a
J Richardson, ‘The
Economic Framework for Health Service Evaluation and the Role for
Discretion’ (Paper presented at
Health Outcomes Conference, Canberra, 21
July 1999), 1.
See J Hall, R Viney and M Haas,
‘Taking a Count: The Evaluation of Genetic Testing’ (1998) 22
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health
754; J Hall,
‘Evaluation of Genetic Testing: How are We Going to Assess the Costs,
Risks and Benefits of this New Technology?’
in G O’Sullivan, E
Sharman and S Short (eds),
Good-bye Normal Gene
(1999), 30. Genetic
testing also involves complex ethical, privacy and discrimination issues: see
Australian Law Reform Commission
and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The Protection of Human Genetic Information in
Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January 2004; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
November 2003; G Suthers,
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003; D McFetridge,
Submission P23
, 30 September 2003; Department of Industry Tourism and
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003; A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003; Department of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
These comments apply to all
evaluation of healthcare services since each service or program has to be
considered in relation to each
Department of Industry Tourism
and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003. See also F Miller and
Predictive Genetic Tests and Health Care Costs: Final Report Prepared
for the Ontario Ministry of Health and Long Term Care
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
Submission P30
, 2 October
Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
Department of Health Western
Submission P53
, 3 November
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October
Biotechnology Australia,
Consultation
, Sydney, 22 May
See Ontario Ministry of Health
and Long-Term Care,
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting: Charting New
Territory in Healthcare: Report to the Provinces and Territories
Zimmern and C Cook,
Genetics and Health: Policy Issues for Genetic Science
and their Implications for Health and Health Services
(2000). In relation to
pharmacogenetics, see Nuffield Council on Bioethics,
Pharmacogenetics:
Ethical Issues
(2002); P Lipton, ‘Pharmacogenetics: The Ethical
Issues’ (2003) 3
Pharmacogenomics Journal
See Ontario Ministry of
Health and Long-Term Care,
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting: Charting
New Territory in Healthcare: Report to the Provinces and Territories
R Zimmern and C Cook,
and Health: Policy Issues for Genetic Science and their Implications for Health
and Health Services
Australian Law Reform Commission
and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The Protection of
Human Genetic Information in Australia
, ALRC 96 (2003), rec 23 - 1;
23 - 4, 23 - 5.
See Proposal
Department of Health and
Medicare Services Advisory Committee Terms of Reference
<www.health.gov.au/msac/terms.htm> at 3 December
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
HGSA Position Paper on the Patenting of Genes
Australian Health
Ministers’ Advisory Council Working Group on Human Gene Patents,
Draft Report of the AHMAC Working Group on Human Gene Patents
(2001), 27,
P Dawkins and others,
Gene Patents: The Possible Impacts on Genetic Services Health Care
unpublished manuscript.
1999 - 2000 the Commonwealth Government contributed $3,522 million in
benefits under the PBS and the Repatriation Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme, out
of a total expenditure on all pharmaceuticals of $7,563 million: Australian
Institute of Health and Welfare,
Australia’s Health 2002
See M Rickard,
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme: Options for Cost Control: Current Issues Brief
No 12 2001 - 02 (28 May 2002)
, Parliament of Australia,
<www.aph.gov.au/library/pubs> at 6 April 2003; Productivity Commission,
International Pharmaceutical Price Differences: Research Report
Productivity Commission,
Evaluation of the Pharmaceutical Industry Investment Program
Confidential
Submission P54 CON
, 3 November
See E Becker, ‘Drug
Industry Seeks to Sway Prices Overseas’,
New York Times
(New York),
27 November 2003, A1. However, following the conclusion of negotiations for the
AUSFTA, it appears that the PBS will
be maintained: Department of Foreign
Affairs & Trade,
Australia - United States Free Trade Agreement: Key
<www.dfat.gov.au/trade/negotiations/us_fta/outcomes/02_key_outcomes.html>
at 9 February 2004.
Human Genetics
Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; Department of
Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003; Genetic
Support Council WA (Inc),
Submission P59
, 7 November 2003; Walter and
Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
2003. The Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia rejected the use of
government funding and purchasing power to
control the cost of medical genetic
testing: Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
Department of Industry Tourism
and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
the case of the Australian Government, appropriations include grants to the
States and Territories that are specifically targeted
to healthcare purposes,
payments of health benefits to individuals, subsidies paid to providers of
healthcare services, and reimbursements
to private health insurance
Health Ministers’ Advisory Council,
Submission P49
, 23 October
W Cornish, M Llewelyn and M
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and Genetics
Another significant focus of the
recommendations in the UK Report was on ‘licensing out’ and
commercialisation of genetic
materials and technologies by the
Department.
W Cornish, M Llewelyn
and M Adcock,
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and Genetics
Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September
Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
See Australian Law Reform
Commission and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The
Protection of Human Genetic Information in Australia
, ALRC 96 (2003), rec
of Health and Ageing,
Consultation
, Canberra, 24 September
Opportunities to challenge the
grant of patent rights exist at each stage of the patenting process—prior
to acceptance of a
standard patent application, after the Commissioner of
Patents has accepted an application, and after a patent has been sealed (see
C Freeze, ‘Ontario Seeks
to Intervene in Biofoods Court Case’,
The Globe and Mail
9 October 2003, A5.
Pharmaceutical Management Agency Limited v The Commissioner of Patents &
[1999] NZCA 330
[2000] 2 NZLR
Cornish, M Llewelyn and M Adcock,
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and
(2003), 46.
Law Reform Commission and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially
Yours: The Protection of Human Genetic Information in Australia
(2003), rec 5 - 3.
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
21. Gene Patents and Healthcare Provision
Introduction
Medical genetic testing
Availability of medical genetic testing
Cost of medical genetic testing
Patents and medical genetic testing
Enforcement of patents and medical genetic testing
The need for patents on medical genetic testing
Impact of gene patents on medical genetic testing
Monopoly control and competition
Cost of medical genetic testing
Access to public sector testing and related services
Access to genetic counselling
Quality of testing
Professional relationships
Further development of medical genetic testing
Impact of gene patents on novel genetic therapies
Reform and healthcare provision
ALRC's views
21. Gene Patents and Healthcare Provision
Introduction
patents may have an impact on the development and provision of healthcare
involving medical genetic testing and novel therapies
such as gene therapy, the
production of therapeutic proteins, and the use of stem cells. This chapter
focuses on the impact of patent
laws and practices on medical genetic testing.
In Australia and overseas, concerns about the impact of gene patents on
have most often been expressed in relation to this aspect of
healthcare.
This chapter also
presents background information on factors affecting the availability and cost
of medical genetic testing in Australia
and describes the nature and extent of
relevant patents.
21.2 IP 27 noted that there is a range of possible adverse consequences of
existing patent laws and practices, including: monopoly
control and the cost of
testing; the quality of testing and medical practice; and innovation in the
development of new or improved
testing techniques. This chapter discusses these
concerns and the ALRC’s preliminary views in relation to them.
21.3 IP 27 asked a number of questions about the impact of gene patents on
various aspects of healthcare provision and presented
a number of options for
reform. Submissions and consultations comprehensively addressed these issues.
This chapter discusses the
responses received by the Inquiry and the
implications for reform of patent law and practice.
Medical genetic testing
21.4 This section briefly
describes factors affecting the availability and cost of medical genetic testing
in Australia. This background
is necessary to understand the possible impact of
patent laws and practices on the provision of medical genetic testing in the
healthcare system.
Availability of medical genetic testing
21.5 Medical genetic tests are
generally ordered by medical practitioners. Some genetic testing may involve
referral of the patient
to a clinical geneticist as well as to a genetic
counsellor for pre-test and post-test counselling. Genetic testing for research
purposes may also be conducted in concert with medical practitioners, who liaise
with participating patients.
21.6 Individuals
generally cannot obtain direct access to medical genetic
testing by laboratories in Australia. At present, most medical genetic testing
is provided through state and territory clinical genetics services and the
public sector laboratories associated with these
and individuals must be
referred to them by a medical practitioner. However, the range of genetic
testing available to the public
is likely to expand in the
21.7 The Human Genetics Society of Australasia (HGSA) maintains a register of
medical genetic tests that are available in Australasia
and a list of the
laboratories that provide them. According to the HGSA, there are presently
around 220 medical genetic tests available
from 44 laboratories across
Some genetic tests
offered overseas are not available in Australia. Likewise, some types of tests
offered in Australia are not available,
or not widely performed, in other
21.8 A range of factors, other than patent laws and practices, affect the
availability of medical genetic testing. These include
cost, whether the test is
listed on the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS), the level of funding provided
for testing by state and
territory governments, technical and ethical standards,
laboratory protocols and accreditation, and regulation of testing provided
direct to the public (rather than through a medical
practitioner).
21.9 The availability of genetic testing in Australia may be dependent on
decisions about which tests are ethically
acceptable,
and on a cost-benefit
analysis of a particular test. Medical genetic testing is still a relatively
slow and expensive process. However,
the technology is advancing rapidly. The
development of automated ‘DNA chip’
may soon make it
technically possible and financially practicable to test for numerous genetic
mutations simultaneously in a single
21.10 The availability of a genetic test in a particular laboratory may also
reflect the research interests of that laboratory. For
example, a laboratory
that undertakes research into a particular genetic disease might also offer, as
part of its research work,
a diagnostic service for that disease.
Cost of medical genetic testing
21.11 As with other health
services, access to medical genetic testing depends on the cost to consumers of
testing procedures and
on the rebates provided by public and private health
21.12 The cost of genetic testing procedures varies, from less than $100 to more
than $1000, depending on a number of factors including
the complexity and
methodology of the testing
21.13 In 2002, a report by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual Property Rights and Licensing
Practices: Evidence and Policies
(the OECD Working Party on Biotechnology
Report) noted factors that may affect the cost of medical genetic tests:
Creating economies of scale may help reduce costs in the long term, but
... certain pressures are likely to increase prices. In particular,
the need for
more and higher-quality epidemiological and genetic population data, increasing
regulatory costs, including stricter
quality assessment and quality control
requirements, laboratory certification costs, increased needs for counselling,
and, potentially,
liability costs can push up the price of
21.14 In Australia, depending on the test and the laboratory, testing may be
free to the patient or fees may be
In some cases, genetic
testing is funded by Medicare. However, Medicare funding is limited in its
coverage. The MBS currently funds
medical genetic testing under only six MBS
items (see Chapter 20).
Patents and medical genetic testing
21.15 Patents may be granted
over isolated genetic material that has been separated from the human body or
manufactured synthetically,
provided the patent application satisfies the
threshold tests for
patentability.
Genetic sequences
in this material provide the basis for diagnostic tests—that is, mutations
in genes can be detected by testing
techniques based on knowledge of the genetic
21.16 Patents may be granted over isolated genetic material or over methods or
products used in testing for mutations in a gene or
genetic sequence. For
example, a United States company, Myriad Genetics Inc (Myriad), holds patents
internationally on isolated genetic
materials associated with breast and ovarian
Myriad’s patents
also cover methods for predictive
and products and
processes involved in its breast cancer predisposition test, which is called
‘BRACAnalysis’. Similarly,
another United States company, Bio-Rad
Laboratories, holds patents on isolated genetic materials associated with
hereditary haemochromatosis
covering isolated genetic materials and methods for
21.17 A patent that asserts rights to isolated genetic material
may cover all uses of that material. These uses often include diagnostic or
predictive testing for genetic conditions. For example,
Myriad is said to have a
dominant patent position covering the use of the BRCA1 genetic sequence for
predictive testing relating
to breast and ovarian
In other words, any
technique for BRCA1 testing is likely to require use of Myriad’s
21.18 Patents may be granted on general methods for identifying genetic
sequences, mutations or deletions in an individual’s
genetic sequence. For
example, United States patents for the process known as polymerase chain
reaction (PCR), which enables the
DNA from a genetic sample to be reproduced in
large quantities for testing, were granted to Cetus Corporation in 1989, and
in 1991 to Roche
Diagnostics.
21.19 Genetic testing that is protected by patents asserting rights over
isolated genetic material and the use of genetic sequences
in diagnostic or
predictive testing has been the subject of most concern. The possible adverse
effects of such patents on healthcare
provision are discussed in more detail
below. It has been stated that such patents may confer on the owner of the
not only a monopoly on their own diagnostic methods, but also the ability
to prevent others from competing with them through the development
improvements in the diagnostic methods, using the same DNA
21.20 As noted above, there are about 220 medical genetic tests available in
Many of these medical
genetic tests, particularly the common ones, are likely to be subject to patents
on isolated genetic materials.
Recent research conducted in the United States confirms that 12 common genetic
tests are subject to United States
Research conducted by
Dr Dianne Nicol and Jane Nielsen (the Nicol-Nielsen Study) confirms that most of
these United States patents
have equivalent Australian registered patents or
patent applications.
21.21 The ALRC understands that these patents generally include claims over
isolated genetic materials containing sequences that
code for proteins. However,
patents over methods for using so-called ‘junk’ or non-coding
genetic sequences are also
relevant to medical genetic testing. The use of
non-coding genetic sequences is integral to medical genetic testing because they
are used to design primers for PCR assays.
Enforcement of patents and medical genetic testing
21.22 The most publicised
instance of a patent holder seeking to enforce rights to isolated genetic
materials used in medical genetic
testing is that of Myriad and the BRCA1 and
BRCA2 patents associated with testing for pre-disposition to breast and ovarian
Myriad has sought to
enforce its patent rights against Canadian provincial health
authorities.
In the United
Kingdom, the Department of Health has entered into an agreement with Rosgen
Limited, the exclusive licensee of the
Myriad patents in the United Kingdom.
Rosgen went into liquidation and the Department of Health remains in negotiation
with Myriad.
patents are being opposed in
and have led to calls for
patent law reform in France and
21.23 In the United States, research indicates that gene patent holders are
actively enforcing their rights against
laboratories.
A national survey
of laboratory directors found that 65% of respondents had been contacted by a
patent or licence holder regarding
the laboratory’s potential infringement
of a patent through the performance of a genetic
Thirty laboratories (25%
of those surveyed) reported that they had been prevented by patent
considerations from performing a medical
genetic test that they had
21.24 In contrast, the results of a 2002 - 2003 survey of Australian
laboratories that perform medical genetic testing found that,
compared with the
United States, there was ‘little indication that holders of patents
related to disease genes were actively
enforcing their patents against
Australian genetic test
laboratories’.
21.25 Eleven respondent laboratories reported payments of licence fees or
royalties with respect to genetic testing. However, nine
of these payments were
royalties for the use of Taq polymerase in PCR and the other two involved the
use of another reagent and a
Only eight laboratories had
received notifications from patent holders (or licensees) about the existence of
patents, and almost
all of these were related to
21.26 Consultations confirmed that, while there is a high degree of concern
materials on public
sector laboratories, enforcement by patent holders has been
The ALRC understands
that Australian public sector laboratories currently do not pay licence fees for
the use of isolated genetic
materials in medical genetic testing, and generally
have not been approached by patent holders seeking to enforce their rights over
such materials. The situation is different with respect to gene patents over
genetic technologies, such as PCR, where royalties are
commonly paid, often as
part of the purchase price of equipment or
consumables.
21.27 There has been much conjecture about the future enforcement of gene
patents against public sector laboratories. Much of this
conjecture has
concerned patents held by Australian biotechnology company Genetic Technologies
Limited (GTG). There are two sets
of patents involved. The first set of patents
is the patents associated with testing for pre-disposition to breast and ovarian
(the BRCA patents). The second set of patents is patents on methods of
using non-coding DNA polymorphisms (the non-coding
21.28 In May 2003, Myriad granted GTG an exclusive licence in Australia, New
Zealand and South East Asia relating to predictive genetic
testing for breast
and ovarian cancer using the BRCA
21.29 GTG has stated publicly that the rights it has obtained from Myriad for
breast cancer testing ‘will not be enforced against
other health service
providers in Australia and New
In July 2003,
GTG reiterated that it did not intend to enforce the BRCA patents and confirmed
that it has allowed the existing public
hospital cancer genetics laboratories in
both Australia and New Zealand to continue to perform tests on the BRCA genes
unhindered.
21.30 The position is different with regard to enforcement of the non-coding
patents. In March 2003, GTG advised public sector laboratories
in Australia and
New Zealand that they would need to negotiate licences in relation to its
non-coding patents.
GTG claimed
that its non-coding patents may be infringed by medical genetic testing for a
range of genetic conditions, including
cystic fibrosis, Duchenne muscular
dystrophy, Friedreich’s ataxia, fragile X syndrome, haemophilia, myotonic
dystrophy and
prothrombin (Factor II). In the United States, a major
biotechnology company, Applera Corporation, is facing an infringement action
refusing to obtain a licence to use GTG’s non-coding patents for, among
other things, a diagnostic test for cystic
21.31 There is growing concern in Australia about the possibility that gene
patent holders and licensees might enforce their patents
against medical genetic
testing laboratories. However, actual enforcement activity remains more limited
than in the United States.
Nicol and Nielsen comment:
Could Australian testing laboratories face demands for licence fees from
a number of different patent holders in the future? The small
size of the
Australian market suggests that it may not be worthwhile for foreign companies
to pursue Australian laboratories. In
addition, most laboratories are in public
hospitals and many do not charge for their services, further suggesting that
be little financial incentive in targeting
The need for patents on medical genetic testing
21.32 An important
justification for patent law is to provide an incentive to invest in the
research and development of new products
by providing a limited monopoly on the
manufacture, use or sale of the patented invention. In the context of medical
genetic testing,
patent rights may be justified if they encourage investment in
research that leads to the development of new, clinically useful,
genetic tests.
21.33 An incentive, in the form of the patents, may be required for the
development of some medical genetic
IP 27 noted that even
some of the most outspoken critics of gene patents concede that, in some cases,
it may require significant
effort to convert a known genetic sequence into a
reliable and clinically useful medical genetic test. The Nicol-Nielsen Study
that some individuals who work in public sector laboratories have a
positive view of the impact of patents on medical genetic testing,
depending on
what the patents are and how they are
21.34 It has been suggested that patent law incentives may not be as necessary
to the development of genetic tests as they are to
the development of other
therapeutic goods, notably drugs. Professor Lori Andrews has argued that, while
proponents of gene patents
have tried to justify such patents by reference to
arguments in favour of patenting drugs, drug patenting is not the appropriate
The discovery of genes does not require the same incentives as drug
development. Molecular biologists were attempting to identify
genes long before
the [USPTO] made it clear that genes could be patented. Moreover, there are no
expensive clinical trials when a
gene is discovered and knowledge about the
sequence of the gene is used to identify whether a particular patient has a
mutation in
that gene. In some cases, a disease gene has been identified one day
and testing begun almost
immediately.
21.35 Andrews has also noted that gene patents may have negative effects, not
present in the case of patented drugs or medical devices.
While other
researchers can create alternatives to patented drugs or medical devices,
‘there are no alternatives to the patented
human genes in genetic
diagnosis and gene
21.36 A recent study of clinical laboratories in the United States found that
laboratories are able to translate published data into
clinical tests quickly,
without the incentive provided by
The study suggested
patents are not critical for the development of an invention into a
commercially viable service when the invention is the finding
of an association
between a genetic variant and a particular
21.37 One view is that gene patents on genetic sequences associated with disease
are unnecessary because such patents are ‘an
end in themselves’:
No further development is generally needed for dissemination among
medical practitioners, and broad adoption [of testing] often follows
publication by only a short time. Moreover, these patents are not necessary to
promote downstream development of therapeutics;
in fact they may stifle such
development by restraining
competition.
21.38 IP 27 asked whether gene patents are necessary to encourage investment in
research that leads to the development of new, clinically
useful, medical
genetic tests.
In response, the
HGSA noted that many genetic tests are not expensive to develop and, for some
tests, the costs involved in determining
the gene sequence ‘are not the
issue’. Instead, the real expense ‘relates to the cost of developing
the platform
that is used to perform the test eg sequencing or array technology
or meeting regulatory requirements prior to
marketing’.
The HGSA and
others doubted whether patents are necessary to the development of new genetic
The HGSA stated:
This has certainly not been the case in the past. Numerous gene
discoveries have been driven by the wish to find the cause of a disorder,
understand it and to improve treatment, rather than to profit financially from
the discovery. They have often been funded by the
public sector through the
standard funding channels. The possibility of patenting was not an issue and
indeed, many of the patents
taken out have never been enforced. Sometimes the
patent has been taken out to protect the innovation from
commercialisation.
21.39 In this context, the Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia (RCPA)
contrasted medical genetic tests with other medical
tests. As many tests can be
easily copied, patent protection allows companies to prevent
‘free-riding’ but, according
to the RCPA, this rationale for patent
protection does not necessarily apply to genetic tests:
The vast majority of diagnostic genetic laboratories develop tests
‘in house’ using genetic sequences freely available
form public
domain databases and publications as well as equipment and reagents obtained
from commercial suppliers ... Most clinically
useful genetic tests, therefore,
are presently based on discoveries made by public institutions and involve
payment of appropriate
royalties for use of patented reagents and
21.40 Other submissions were clear about the importance of patents to genetic
testing research and development, and focused on the
role of patents in
facilitating the development of research results into usable tests or
therapeutics.
For example,
GlaxoSmithKline observed that
if improved technologies and hardware, faster or less laboratory-bound
tests (e.g. tests which may be performed in the GP’s
surgery without [the]
sample being sent away) are to be developed, this will require significant
investment. If it is thought desirable
for the testing industry to advance,
rather than to continue using basic (home brew) tests only then patenting will
be essential.
21.41 Some submissions contested the idea that the time and cost needed to
develop new genetic tests may mean that the incentive
of patent protection may
not be as essential as in other fields of biotechnology. Dr Amanda McBratney and
others submitted:
just because a process is not costly does not mean it does not need, or
should be excluded from, the incentives provided by the patent
system. Monetary
rewards for costly activities are not the only incentive provided by the patent
system ... Other incentives provided
by the patent system are to encourage
others to participate in inventive activity and, importantly, to disseminate
full details of
the invention to the public for free use upon expiry of the
21.42 GlaxoSmithKline observed that limiting patent protection by reference to
the amount of effort, time or expenditure that is
incurred would be to
‘reward inefficiency’ and penalise the ‘flash of
inspiration’ that sometimes leads to
inventions.
Impact of gene patents on medical genetic testing
21.43 There has been
worldwide concern about the possible adverse consequences of existing patent
laws and practices on the provision
of healthcare. In Australia, concern about
the effect of gene patents on health and the healthcare system led to the
establishment
of an Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory Council (AHMAC)
Working Group on Human Gene Patents (AHMAC Working Group).
21.44 The AHMAC Working Group concluded that any attempt to enforce exclusive
control over BRCA1 testing raised issues including:
the financial impact of an
increase in testing costs; the effects on clinical priorities and resource
allocation for genetic testing;
the effects on compliance with best practice
guidelines for conducting genetic testing and genetic counselling; the provision
incomplete testing by patent holders while restricting others from providing
testing; and the potential to hinder innovation and
Similar concerns have
been expressed in position statements on gene patents prepared by the HGSA and
21.45 The following section describes concerns about the impact of patent laws
and practices on medical genetic testing and asks
these concerns apply to the Australian healthcare system. Many of these concerns
are traceable to concerns
thus begins by discussing monopoly control and then examines the effects of
the cost of medical genetic testing;
access to public sector testing and related services;
access to genetic counselling;
the quality of medical genetic testing;
the professional relationships between medical practitioners and
laboratory scientists; and
the further development of medical genetic
Monopoly control and competition
21.46 In the case of medical
genetic testing, any test for a gene or genetic sequence associated with a
genetic condition needs to
identify a mutation in the relevant sequence in the
individual being tested. This requires the use of the genetic sequence of the
normal gene, as well as that of the mutation. Where the genetic sequence is
contained in patented genetic material, the use of the
sequence in genetic
testing may constitute an infringement of patent rights, unless a licence is
obtained from the patent holder
or testing is conducted through another
21.47 The patent holder (or an exclusive licensee) may exercise monopoly control
over a particular genetic test by licensing a single
service provider.
Alternatively, a number of laboratories may be licensed to perform the test. The
factors that influence the market
structure for genetic testing have been said
to include the following.
The number of patents related to a test. One or few patents will
favour monopolisation. Several patents held by different patent
holders may lead
to limited cross-licensing, which can create an oligopoly.
The complexity of a test. Where any laboratory can quickly develop
and validate a clinically useful test, this will favour open competition
make it harder to enforce any patent rights.
The prevalence and penetrance of the genetic disease related to a
test. Larger demand by healthcare consumers will favour broader
However, providers may only be willing to develop a test for a rare condition if
enough testing volume can be generated
to make it commercially viable, including
by enforcing monopoly patent
21.48 Particular
concerns have been expressed about exclusive licensing of gene patents relating
to genetic testing.
chapter, ‘exclusive licensing arrangements’ refers to situations
where the patent holder grants exclusive rights
to one licensee to exploit the
patent for the purposes of medical genetic testing. The exclusive licensee may
require that all testing,
regardless of its geographical origin, be performed at
a single laboratory. At least in the United States, exclusive licensing of
patents for medical genetic testing is
—the BRCA patents
being a notable example, where all testing must be done by Myriad.
21.49 While a patent grants a patent holder the right to exclude or control the
exploitation of a patented invention by others for
the term of the patent,
patents do not inevitably lead to monopolies. Patents may promote competition if
the goods and services created
pursuant to a patent compete with other like
goods and services. The relationship and tension between patent and competition
is discussed in Chapter 24.
21.50 IP 27 asked whether existing patent laws and practices favour the
development of genetic testing monopolies in Australia and,
if so, whether
reforms are needed to address this
21.51 Some submissions stated that, even if patent and other intellectual
property laws favour the development of monopolies in medical
genetic testing,
this is not necessarily detrimental to
For example,
GlaxoSmithKline stated:
The time limited exclusive rights conferred by patents are justified
because of the advantages they bring in terms of dissemination
of knowledge and
the incentive to innovate. The fact that genes and genetic tests are patentable
incentivises investment in the development
and exploitation of such
21.52 Patent law is only one of many factors that may contribute to monopolistic
The OECD Working
Party on Biotechnology Report noted that:
licence exclusivity may be necessary to make a genetic testing service
economically viable, depending on the market and the rarity
of the disease ...
highly complex and specialised tests are more likely to be licensed exclusively.
Only high volumes and automation
allow genetic testing companies to achieve
economies of scale and reduce costs for such tests. Given the competition from
institutions and hospitals as well as other firms, genetic testing
companies may have difficulty creating economies of
21.53 In the Australian context, GTG stated that the size of markets in medical
genetic testing will be the most significant factor
in determining their
Associate Professor
Agnes Bankier observed that:
Whilst national/state reference laboratories for rare disorders are
highly desirable for cost-efficient service delivery this is not
the case for
more common conditions where the commercial concerns are the driver for high
throughput testing which may be detrimental
to the health care
21.54 IP 27 noted that one view is that commercial pressures are leading patent
holders to develop new strategies and business models
for the exploitation of
their inventions for the purpose of taking ‘maximum advantage of the very
broad claims often included
in patents relating to human genes and functional
genetic sequences’.
21.55 In this context, submissions highlighted particular characteristics of
genetic testing that favour monopolies. For example,
Dr Graeme Suthers stated
Current patent practices in Australia do favour the development of
genetic testing monopolies. If a patent-holder is granted an exclusive
analyse a gene, that decision provides a strong incentive to monopolise the
testing of that gene. The high cost of genetic
testing equipment necessitates
high throughput to keep the cost-per-test manageable. The natural consequence is
to centralise testing
at one facility. This is not a good move. Medical testing
by any means requires transparency and accountability, and this cannot
achieved with a monopoly.
21.56 The HGSA submitted that the ‘ease of developing genetic tests and
the ease with which substantial profits can be made
is an incentive to use the
monopoly rights that come with a patent’. The HGSA expressed concern that
patents may provide:
a monopoly over all uses of the gene, thus potentially affecting both
healthcare services and research. The nature of the monopoly
created is of
particular concern as it relates to totally new products entering the healthcare
market. This is not simply an improvement
to a device already in the medical
health market. Rather, we are talking about genetic tests that have not existed
before and have
great utility for healthcare. The potential of patents to create
20 year monopolies over all uses of a gene sequence is of great
concern in that
21.57 Many submissions focused on the possible adverse effects of monopoly
genetic testing on healthcare. For example, the Cancer
Council Australia
One of the key concerns with the use of gene patents is the risk of the
creation of monopolistic genetic health services which are
able to dictate the
costs of genetic tests to patients, the availability of such tests and timely
access to services. Such a situation
could occur where a gene patent limits
diagnostic testing to only specified licensed tests and no others are permitted
by the patent
21.58 While it was thought acceptable that patents ‘favour a time-limited
monopoly’, the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute
of Medical Research
submitted that:
The problem is with generic technology or tool patents with broad claims
that impinge on every genetic test so that the monopoly is
extended to multiple
applications each of which requires further innovative steps that are not fully
21.59 The South Australian Government stated that the ‘one-to-one’
relationship between gene patents and disease, which
is not the case for other
biotechnology patents, poses particular problems:
An in-house test which is an alternative to a patented test can be used
legally as it is not subject to licence or royalty fees provided
the method used
is different from any patented method. However, where a gene is subject to a
patent, low cost in-house tests cannot
be legally used without compensating the
patent holder.
21.60 The RCPA emphasised that the RCPA, the HGSA and the American College of
Medical Genetics all recommend that ‘diagnostic
genetic tests’ be
‘broadly and non-exclusively’
The RCPA submitted
that monopolistic genetic testing is ‘fundamentally wrong’ because
of its effects on equitable access
to healthcare and innovation in
21.61 Many other submissions expressed concerns about patents promoting medical
genetic testing monopolies and the consequences for
healthcare.
Specific concerns
derive from monopoly testing,
are discussed in more detail throughout this
Cost of medical genetic testing
21.62 If access to medical
genetic testing is severely restricted by patent laws and practices, the
implications for healthcare can
be serious. People may die if they are not
identified as susceptible to serious but preventable genetic diseases, such as
some breast,
ovarian or colon cancers. Children may be born with incurable
inherited diseases.
On the other
hand, if patent rights are a necessary incentive for the development of medical
genetic tests, the absence of patent
rights may also have serious implications
if important medical genetic tests are not developed and made available.
21.63 Once a test is available, the cost of medical genetic testing is an
important factor affecting access to testing. One consequence
of patent rights
is that genetic tests may be more expensive. The extent of any increased cost
will depend on many factors, including
the licensing model used by the patent
21.64 Submissions and consultations reflected concern about the impact of
monopoly control on the cost of genetic testing to patients
and the healthcare
system, and about cost limiting access to medical genetic
For example, the HGSA
stated that:
Gene patents are likely to inflate prices, though their precise impact is
not yet known. There is clearly a potential for patent holders
exorbitant prices for genetic testing kits or licences when the cost of gene
discovery and kit development is not that
great (certainly not as great as drug
and other treatment development) ... In contrast, when no patent is involved,
once a gene’s
sequence is known and published, it becomes possible for
laboratories around the world to develop the test quickly and cheaply and
improve on it over time. This results in rapid access to tests at minimum
21.65 The RCPA stated that royalties affect the cost and availability of
clinical diagnostic testing and noted:
These are often in addition to substantial up front payments for
permission to perform the test. Mostly the royalty fees are modest
(eg $US20 for
haemochromatosis testing). Of particular concern is the effect of multiple
royalty payments on a single gene or royalty
payments on multiple genes being
tested for in certain ethnic groups. Such ‘royalty stacking’ occurs
for laboratories
that offer a panel of tests such as those for the Ashkenazi
Jewish population, including testing for Tay-Sachs disease, Gaucher’s
disease, Niemann-Pick Disease and Canavan’s
21.66 The BRCA patents have often been used to illustrate concerns about the
future cost of genetic testing in Australia. IP 27 noted
that, in 2001, the
AHMAC Working Group estimated that if testing for the BRCA1 gene were to be
performed by Myriad rather than by
Australian public health system laboratories,
the cost of such testing would rise from between A$1.2 and A$2 million to A$4.5
Department of Health Western Australia stated that:
Myriad charges AUD$4800 for tests that are conducted in local
laboratories in Western Australia for AUD$1300-1800 (although, currently
Australia, costs are met by government
21.67 In the event, no such increase in the cost of providing BRCA1 and BRCA2
testing has eventuated. As discussed above, GTG—the
exclusive licensee of
the BRCA patents in Australia—has elected not to prevent public sector
laboratories from continuing to
provide testing.
21.68 There are reasons to doubt that cost increases of this scale would be
likely to eventuate, were patents on medical genetic
testing to be enforced. The
Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources (DITR) stated:
The assumption that patented medical tests will always be excessively
priced is not supported by available facts. Companies’
considerations are part of a long term business strategy and include
considerations such as market acceptance and market
21.69 One view expressed in consultations was that, given relevant differences
in markets for medical genetic testing, it was always
unlikely that Myriad would
have sought to charge a similar price in Australia as in the United States for
the use of BRCA1 and BRCA2
Further, the ALRC
understands that GTG is able to offer BRCA testing conducted in its Melbourne
laboratory for a lower price than
that charged by Myriad in the United States,
and anticipates that future costs will be reduced further through investment in
robotic technology.
21.70 A number of submissions expressed concern about increases in the cost of
medical genetic testing attributable to future enforcement
non-coding patents.
As discussed
above, the position with regard to the enforcement of these patents remains
Access to public sector testing and related services
21.71 Leaving aside issues
directly relating to cost, concerns have also been expressed about the
implications of patents for other
aspects of access to testing and related
healthcare services, such as clinical advice and genetic counselling. IP 27
asked about
implications.
21.72 In submissions and consultations, access issues were most often raised in
relation to the viability of public sector genetic
testing and related
For example, Breast
Cancer Action NSW stated that patent law should be amended to ensure that
existing public genetic testing facilities
are not adversely affected by the
establishment of private testing services:
The present system, which ensures access to best practice and
comprehensive genetic services must be protected in the public interest.
to private services should be an alternate
21.73 The Cancer Council Australia expressed concern that monopoly provision of
medical genetic testing would have adverse ramifications
for the public health
by enabling some health providers with sole control over testing for
several genetic conditions to dominate the market. Equally it
places the public
health system at a significant disadvantage in terms of providing genetic
testing as part of a subsidised health
21.74 The Department of Health Western Australia stated that, where genetic
testing monopolies exist:
Publicly funded genetic services will still be required to provide other
non-patented and thus not commercially attractive tests,
as well as counselling
and clinical services, compromising their budgetary capacity to maintain
viability and expertise.
21.75 A specific focus of concern was on the possible diversion of expertise
from public sector testing
facilities.
IP 27 noted
suggestions that access to public sector genetic testing may be affected
adversely if private laboratories are able to
‘cherry-pick’
profitable genetic tests or divert professional expertise away from public
sector laboratories.
Gene patents threaten to disrupt the public laboratory services in
Australia, by diverting selected commercially viable gene tests
from the public
sector to private laboratories and impacting the viability of public sector
testing of the other disease genes.
21.76 The HGSA’s 2001 position statement noted that exclusive licensing of
genetic testing could result in irreplaceable loss
from the public sector of a
large part of its genetic testing workload and, as a consequence, of its genetic
testing skills and molecular
Further, in the event
that a sole licensee for a genetic test were to cease to operate, this could
result in Australia being left
without an expert testing service, at least for a
21.77 The HGSA re-emphasised these concerns in its submission to the
Similarly, Dr Suthers
There is a limited number of genetic scientists in Australia who
currently provide genetic testing in public sector laboratories.
The scientists
provide both a diagnostic service and act as [an] expert resource for other
scientists and clinicians in the hospitals.
If genetic testing moves to private
sector laboratories, then these scientists will have to leave the public
laboratories. The indirect
impact in terms of genetic expertise in teaching
hospitals would be substantial but would take time to
21.78 Another perspective is that, in many other areas of medical and pathology
practice there is a mix of public and private sector
provision, and personnel
move freely from one sector to another. While there may be short term negative
effects, the development
of new services in the private sector may not in fact
reduce the expertise available in the public system, but deepen the
21.79 Further, it is clear that most concern about access is predicated on the
existence of private sector monopolies on genetic
tests, supported by patent
rights. The possibility of an expanded role for private medical genetic testing
services did not attract
criticism in itself.
21.80 There is wide acceptance that some level of private provision is
inevitable, and may even be desirable. For example, the Cancer
Council Australia
We consider that a dual health system where both public and private
providers support genetic services is the best outcome subject
interest requirements (such as equality of access, affordability, quality
assurance/validation procedures) being
21.81 In the future, there could be advantages in state clinical genetics
services sub-contracting genetic testing to private providers,
particularly if
there are benefits in cost or speed of
GTG observed that
as medical genetic testing evolves:
current providers need to make policy decisions as to whether the
performance of routine genetic testing is an essential component
of the services
delivered via the public health system or whether the more routine parts of it
better belong in the private sector
in the same way that other pathology
services do.
21.82 Further, there was no fundamental objection to the idea that individuals
who may not qualify for public testing services should
be able to seek private
testing, if they so wish.
However, private service provision should not be at the expense of accepted
standards, especially those relating to the interpretation
of test results and
the provision of genetic
counselling.
Access to genetic counselling
21.83 State and territory
genetics services provide comprehensive services in relation to diagnosis,
testing, counselling and the
ongoing management of genetic conditions, through
medical practitioners, genetic counsellors and social workers. Concerns have
expressed that ‘commercial testing might disassociate genetic testing
from proper screening and genetic
counselling’
consequences in relation to access to genetic
counselling.
In particular,
it has been suggested that exclusive licensing of genetic tests may disrupt
closely linked publicly funded testing,
clinical and counselling services by
requiring that the genetic testing component be performed
For example, the
Department of Health Western Australia expressed its opposition to
‘commercialisation strategies that serve
to disrupt the comprehensive
genetic testing services that have been developed over the past decades for
diagnostic and predictive
genetic testing’ and expressed concern about the
maintenance of best practice guidelines for testing and
counselling.
21.84 Breast Cancer Action NSW stated commercial testing does not ‘provide
for counselling, interpretation of data or advice
for clinical management’
and ‘would not require quality risk
assessment’.
Our members are at potential risk of not being able to access tests to
establish whether their breast cancer is familial, with the
appropriate range of
support and counselling that this requires for optimal
21.85 However, other commentators suggested that private sector testing will not
necessarily mean that individuals will face problems
in accessing related
medical and other services.
Rather, this will depend on the model of service delivery—for example, if
a private laboratory conducts the genetic testing
component of services provided
by a public clinical genetics service there is no reason why other elements of
healthcare delivery
need be affected.
21.86 The ALRC agrees there is no real basis for claims that private genetic
testing services will necessarily lead to substandard
service delivery. All
medical genetic testing, like other forms of health and pathology service, is
subject to regulation and standards,
including the national laboratory
accreditation scheme,
standards and guidelines issued by the National Pathology Accreditation Advisory
Council and ethical and other standards applying
professionals.
If there are
inadequacies in service delivery, mechanisms exist to deal with them.
Quality of testing
21.87 IP 27 noted concerns
testing and associated
medical practice. For example, the AHMAC Working Group
expressed concern that where testing is performed by a sole commercial entity,
it may ‘dictate testing practice, methodology and standards without regard
for best medical
21.88 IP 27 asked whether medical practice may be compromised by exclusive
licensing arrangements that limit the types of medical
genetic tests that can be
performed using a genetic sequence covered by a gene patent. Concerns about the
quality of testing and
medical practice include those relating to the technical
quality and quality assurance of genetic testing and communication and
information
transfer between medical practitioners and laboratory scientists.
21.89 It has been claimed that patent laws or practices may prevent the use of
more appropriate tests for the same genetic condition
and thereby prejudice
medical practice.
[D]isease gene patents have the very real ability to prescribe nationwide
medical practices and to dictate the medical standard of
care. Patents may grant
[patent holders or licensees] the ability to dictate what kinds of test may be
done ... or limiting the conditions
for which testing may be done ... Simply,
this is an unacceptable outcome of medical process patenting and again
highlights the fundamental
incompatibility between diagnostics process patents
and medical care.
21.90 Laboratories in Australia and elsewhere use a range of different
methodologies for medical genetic
There are concerns
that exclusive licensing of medical genetic testing may constrain laboratories
from choosing the most clinically
appropriate
The HGSA contended that
medical practice may be adversely affected where patents and licensing operate
to limit testing to technologies
that detect ‘only a proportion of
mutations in a gene’.
The RCPA submitted:
Ultimately, commercial considerations will dictate priorities and
products, not the public need. Patents grant companies the ability
what kind of test may be done (eg sequencing instead of less sensitive but
substantially less costly screening methods
such as dHPLC or protein truncation
tests) or limit the condition in which testing may be done (eg refusing to
perform prenatal testing
for late-onset
21.91 IP 27 noted that questions have been raised in France and elsewhere about
the technical quality of Myriad’s method of
BRCA1 testing. In 2001, the
Institut Curie claimed that the direct sequencing technology used by Myriad
failed to detect 10 - 20%
of all expected mutations in the BRCA1 gene (which
were detected by an alternative testing
technique).
It has been said
that this situation jeopardises the quality of test results. The Institut Curie
concluded that:
The Curie test for large scale deletions should be used at least as a
supplement, if not an alternative, to the full sequencing approach
Myriad. The broad nature of the European BRCA patents—which cover any
diagnostic or therapeutic use of the BRCA1 and
BRCA2 genes—means that
clinicians using this new technique would be infringing the patents and thus
open to legal suits, thereby
undermining their ability to provide patient
21.92 Submissions also noted quality assurance as a
IP 27 observed that
quality assurance in medical testing is often pursued through external quality
assessment schemes that allow
participating laboratories to test the reliability
and accuracy of their testing methods by testing, on a scheduled basis, material
of known or consensus-agreed
composition.
Such programs
may be difficult to establish where only one or a small number of laboratories
perform genetic testing.
21.93 The HGSA submitted that restricted licensing can ‘make independent
assessment of quality assurance more difficult, by
reducing relevant independent
expertise’.
stated that testing monopolies can result in the loss of quality assurance
A key component of the QA program in any laboratory is comparison of test
results between laboratories. This is particularly important
comparatively new area of genetic diagnostics. Over the last five years, two
NATA-accredited laboratories with HGSA-accredited
scientists have provided
genetic testing in familial cancer in South Australia. The two labs routinely
swap samples. Discrepancies
in test results are rare but revealing. A testing
monopoly precludes this form of
Professional relationships
21.94 Another issue related
to genetic test quality regards the relationships between medical practitioners
and laboratory scientists.
It has been claimed that monopoly control of genetic
testing may have adverse effects on medical practice by changing the interface
between medical practitioners, who order genetic testing for their patients, and
those who conduct the tests.
The HGSA has stated that genetic testing monopolies
will disrupt the professional relationships that exist within regional
genetic services between laboratory scientists, medical consumers
services and clinicians whose expertise covers both areas and, by doing so,
reduce the quality of medical
21.95 Communication between practitioners and scientists is said to develop
mutual expertise, particularly in interpreting scientific
information and this
is important in providing best practice medical
For example, clinicians
often provide relevant patient history and results from earlier investigations
to the testing laboratory,
and in many cases directly to the scientists
performing the testing.
interpretation of results may ‘suffer from lack of discussion regarding
abnormalities in testing the accuracy of the test
submission, the RCPA emphasised that genetic testing should be performed by
‘laboratories with close links to clinical
21.96 It may be that these comments overstate the extent of communication
between medical practitioners and laboratories. In any
case, there may be no
reason why good communication cannot be developed between medical practitioners
and private laboratories operating
under an exclusive licence to use a
particular genetic testing technology. GlaxoSmithKline noted that ‘public
laboratories
do not have a monopoly on good customer
Further development of medical genetic testing
21.97 IP 27 noted that where
patents contain claims to all or most conceivable diagnostic tests related to a
particular gene, there
may be less incentive to develop new or improved
Innovation in medical
genetic testing at the clinical and laboratory level may be
The RCPA submitted
there is little or no incentive to improve diagnostic testing by the
patent holder and the development of complementary or alternative
methods, by third parties, can be
21.98 Concerns about the development of new tests were highlighted in the OECD
Working Party on Biotechnology Report:
When clinical testing centres are also research laboratories
investigating the genetic basis of a disease, the inability to obtain
impedes research and can mean that higher-quality tests may not
21.99 One reason for this is that genetic sequences covered by gene patents are
typically the single most prevalent sequence carried
by healthy individuals.
Medical genetic testing is directed at identifying mutations in this sequence
that are associated with disease.
Medical practitioners with access to family
pedigrees discover many such mutations over time. It this way, medical genetic
is routinely subject to incremental improvement as more is learned about
the genetics of a disease.
has been suggested that ‘limiting the number of laboratories permitted to
do the testing could slow this incremental process
discovery’.
21.100 A recent study of clinical laboratories in the United States concluded
that the development of new genetic tests for clinical
use, based on published
data on disease-gene associations, and information sharing between laboratories,
has been inhibited by gene
patents and
21.101 Submissions confirmed negative views about the impact of gene patents on
the development of new or improved genetic
AHMAC submitted:
lack of competitive pressure in human genetic and related technologies
caused by the uniqueness of genes may limit the development
of alternative and
higher quality technologies. In turn this may affect the quality, accessibility
and cost of genetic tests and
technologies.
21.102 The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research stated that
medical best practice may be compromised by exclusive
licensing arrangements in
the sense that:
the patented or alternative test or procedure may not be optimal. In a
perfect world the patent system is meant to promote innovative
improvements to
that test or procedure (via publication followed by further research) and the
new improved test or procedure should
be patentable in its own right. In
practice very broad [patent] claims can prevent this
21.103 Submissions and consultations highlighted constraints on the conduct of
clinical research where a patent holder has exclusive
rights to test for a
genetic disease.
expressed concern about patent holders or exclusive licensees maintaining
private holdings of population genetic data
compiled from test results. This, it
is claimed, may constrain the further development of tests on the gene,
resulting in genetic
tests of limited utility and efficiency, and lack of data
populations.
21.104 Similarly, the HGSA stated that gene patents and restricted licensing
enable the licence holder to control details of the variations
detected in a given gene, enhancing the monopoly by controlling the
interpreting test results;
slow the accumulation of information about variations in genes and
the relationship of the variations to the disorder in question,
by reducing the
number of laboratories providing testing; and
restrict rapid publication of information about variations in the
gene and their relationship to the disorder in
Department of Health Western Australia expressed concern that licence terms for
testing laboratories where research and
development are undertaken may
‘exclude the development and use of complementary or alternative
technologies for mutation detection,
which may have a better sensitivity than
the current patented
21.106 In this context, the RCPA confirmed that European researchers have
discovered that deletions account for around 28% of all
BRCA1 mutations
associated with breast cancer risk in Dutch
The RCPA stated
In other nations, including Australia, such exon deletions may account
for 5-10% of all the mutations identified in the BRCA genes.
These mutations may
have remained undiscovered had Myriad successfully enforced its patents in
Europe because Myriad’s testing
methodology is unable to detect these
21.107 Another example cited by the RCPA involves haemochromatosis testing. The
RCPA stated that two mutations account for 99% of
cases of hereditary
haemochromatosis in Caucasians, but that different mutations are more prevalent
in other ethnic groups, who therefore
require different tests. However, the test
developed by Bio-Rad tests only for the presence of the Caucasian mutations and
detect the rarer
21.108 Particular concerns were expressed about the barriers gene patents may
pose for the development of new forms of comprehensive
genetic testing using DNA
microarrays, which are capable of testing thousands of genes on a single chip at
a time. The Medical Genetics
Elective Group of the University of Newcastle
stated that such testing will be a viable diagnostic tool in the near future but
need for multiple licences may make this development economically
impractical.
21.109 Other submissions contested the idea that gene patents adversely affect
the development of new or improved
GlaxoSmithKline noted
that concerns outlined in IP 27 were ‘founded on the assumption that the
existence of the patent necessarily
limits the numbers of
users’—which was not necessarily the
More recognition should
be given to the likelihood that gene patenting might ‘improve medical
practice by encouraging the investment
needed to develop improved medical
genetic tests’.
been suggested that those expressing concern about patents hindering innovation
in genetic testing disregard the incentive
that patents provide to new test
development. The likelihood that any single gene patent could be enforced over
all conceivable testing
methodologies relating to a gene may also be
overstated.
Impact of gene patents on novel genetic therapies
21.110 IP 27 noted that
patent laws and practices may have an impact on the development and provision of
other forms of healthcare,
including novel therapies such as gene therapy, the
production of therapeutic proteins, and the use of stem cells.
21.111 Any treatment based on gene therapy will require the use of a gene
carrier or ‘vector’ and a genetic sequence.
Patents on the use of
vectors may be a constraint on the development of gene therapy in Australia.
Further, if the gene is patented,
treatment for gene therapy will depend, at
least in part, on the availability of a licence from the patent holder. The
Nuffield Council
has stated:
Many patents which assert rights over human DNA sequences include claims
to the use of the sequence for gene therapy, even though
such applications have
almost never been demonstrated. This is because patents applicants have been
allowed to assert rights over
uses which are judged theoretically credible
without having evidence from research to show that they have made experimental
towards realising this theoretically obvious
possibility.
21.112 The use of therapeutic proteins in healthcare may be affected by gene
patents. Patents over therapeutic proteins generally
assert rights over the
genetic sequence as well as the protein itself because the genetic sequence is
crucial to the production of
21.113 Gene patents may also be relevant to the use of stem cells in medical
treatment (see Chapter 16). By 2002, there had been
over 2,000 patent
applications worldwide involving human and non-human stem cells, one quarter of
which referred to embryonic stem
cells. Over one third of the total applications
and one quarter of all embryonic stem cell applications have been
21.114 The Ontario Government report,
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting:
Charting New Territory in Healthcare
, has commented that:
Since stem cells have the potential to be developed into tissues and
organs, the potential use of them for curing and treating many
conditions and
diseases is enormous. The patenting of stem cells may well mean that exclusive
royalty fees will have to be paid in
the future for replacement organs and
tissues, developed in this manner, raising significant implications for publicly
funded healthcare
21.115 IP 27 asked what impact might patent laws and practices have on the
future provision of gene therapy, medicines based on therapeutic
proteins, and
medical treatment involving stem
21.116 The RCPA stated that gene patents have potential both to encourage and to
limit the development of genetic medicine. While
patent rights are essential in
encouraging investment in the development of novel genetic therapies, the RCPA
submitted that the
‘broad scope of many patents on genetic material’
is likely to discourage such
investment.
The RCPA referred
to the BRCA patents, in which Myriad claims rights in relation to both diagnosis
and potential therapies, and noted:
There is no obligation on Myriad to develop gene-based therapies based on
BRCA1 and BRCA2, while the threat of legal proceedings for
infringement or the
imposition of licence fees could discourage
21.117 Dr McBratney and others submitted that patenting these kinds of
therapeutics raises the same kind of issues as the patenting
of drugs or medical
methods generally and should be treated no
differently.
21.118 DITR observed that restricting gene patenting would be likely to have a
negative impact on capital inflows into Australia,
which may deny the community
the benefit of new gene based
GlaxoSmithKline referred to the major investment needed to develop new
treatments based on genetics. It stated:
We believe that patents are essential to the future provision of gene
therapy, medicines based on therapeutic proteins and medical
treatment involving
stem cells, all of which are essentially new medicines ... Treatments such as
these, based on genetics, will
need to go through the same development and
regulatory approval processes as more traditional drugs based on chemistry. Just
are essential to the pharmaceutical industry in relation to the
development of more traditional chemical drug treatments, they will
essential in relation to these new forms of
Reform and healthcare provision
21.119 The ALRC is required
to report on what changes may be required to address the adverse impact, if any,
of current patent laws
and practices on the cost-effective provision of
healthcare in Australia. If gene patents are found to have an adverse impact on
healthcare provision there are a number of possible reform options.
21.120 A range of reform options is discussed in detail elsewhere in this
Discussion Paper. The following material highlights some
of the other comments
made in submissions about reform to address concerns about gene patents and
healthcare specifically.
21.121 Many submissions focused on mechanisms to address the adverse
consequences of exclusive licensing of gene patents used in
medical genetic
testing. The RCPA submitted that legislation should be introduced that
‘prohibits the exclusive licensing of
diagnostic genetic
21.122 The Breast Cancer Network Australia suggested that ‘exclusions or
exemptions should be granted from patents for specific
public health
the Cancer Council Australia, Cancer Council Tasmania and Cancer Council South
stated that an
exemption from breach of patent should be granted in respect of ‘human
genetic sequences and the tests dependent
on them’ if testing is conducted
in a ‘public, not-for-profit institution’. Other organisations also
stated that
medical genetic testing in the public health system should be able
to continue ‘without
21.123 Some submissions suggested reform to address the cost of medical genetic
testing. For example, the Cancer Council Australia,
Cancer Council Tasmania and
Cancer Council South Australia recommended that the ALRC should ‘identify
law reform options to
prevent gene testing from becoming unaffordable for the
community’.
21.124 Two submissions focused specifically on measures to ‘cap’
licence fees. Associate Professor Bankier suggested
that, to ensure health
services to the public are not compromised, licence fees or royalties should be
capped to no more than 5 -
10% of the cost of providing the
The Medical Genetics
Elective Group of the University of Newcastle suggested licence caps for
multi-gene tests.
submission elaborated on the mechanism for enforcing such caps.
21.125 Other submissions opposed any reforms directed specifically to gene
patents and medical genetic
Instead, existing
mechanisms to address problems relating to access to medical genetic testing
were highlighted.
McBratney and others stated that if there are problems with the availability of
genetic tests on fair terms, the compulsory licensing
provisions of the
Patents Act
GlaxoSmithKline also
emphasised the possible role of compulsory
DITR noted that
means for dealing with the potential for increased cost and demand for genetic
testing include using the Australian
Government’s monopsony buying power,
public education about the value of genetic testing, and reviewing the operation
Trade Practices Act
DITR stated:
There is no evidence to suggest that gene patents are causing
unreasonable cost increases of genetic testing in Australia. Anti-competitive
practices may be addressed by the
Trade Practices Act 1974
. Using the patent
system to address this issue would be
ineffective.
ALRC’s views
21.126 The ALRC’s
preliminary view, based on submissions and its extensive consultation and
research program, is that there
is limited evidence to date that gene patents
and licensing practices with respect to genetic testing have had any significant
impact on the cost of healthcare provision in Australia. Similarly,
there is currently no firm evidence of any impact on access to
medical genetic
testing, the quality of such testing, or clinical research and development.
21.127 Expressions of concern about gene patents from health authorities, health
consumer groups, health professionals and others
have generally been based on
assumptions about the future development of the market in medical genetic
testing and about the intentions
of patent holders with regard to the
exploitation and enforcement of gene patents—in particular, the
assumptions that patent
holders will use exclusive licences as their business
model and that such licensees will charge monopoly prices. The extent to which
this business model will be adopted in Australia is unclear and it is
problematic to extrapolate from the experience in other countries
such as the
United States, which have very different healthcare systems.
21.128 The position with regard to GTG and the BRCA and non-coding patents has
been discussed above, and will continue to be monitored
during the course of the
Inquiry. How GTG will decide to exploit or enforce these patent rights in the
future is not known, particularly
with regard to the non-coding patents. In any
case, there are limits to what may be learnt from experience in relation to any
patent holder or set of patents. As GlaxoSmithKline stated:
rights-holders are free to establish their own licensing and enforcement
strategies and ... the activities of one company do not necessarily
trend within an industry.
21.129 IP 27 noted that one view on the impact of gene patents on medical
genetic testing is that the problem does not lie in the
patenting of isolated
genetic material but in the way in which such patents are commercially
exploited. While some individuals and
organisations involved in the healthcare
sector hold ‘in principle’ objections to the patentability of
isolated genetic
it is the level of future royalties or licence fees, and how these may be
funded, that provokes most anxiety within this sector.
21.130 It is clear that concerns about the cost of, and access to, medical
genetic testing are influenced by broader concerns about
Australian healthcare
policy, applicable to all new medical technologies. These concerns include the
future of Medicare, the respective
roles of tax-financed healthcare and private
health insurance, and the mix of public and private healthcare provision
For example, Dr Amanda McBratney and others observed, in relation to
the cost of genetic health technologies, that:
The issue is more about equity in welfare payment and in how the health
care burden should be distributed in Australia rather than
the price of an
individual ‘gene based’
technology.
21.131 The ALRC recognises that, while adverse effects of gene patents may not
yet be manifest, this position may change, particularly
if patent holders become
more active in enforcing patent rights. The nature of this change, and whether
existing legal mechanisms
such as those in patent law and competition law may be
used effectively to address problems for healthcare, is not entirely clear.
21.132 There are many existing mechanisms through which problems might be
addressed. These include use of the compulsory licensing
and Crown use
provisions of the
Patents Act
, laws dealing with anti-competitive
conduct, and prices
surveillance.
There are also
ways in which Commonwealth, state and territory governments, as funders and
purchasers of healthcare services, may
be able to influence the way in which
patent holders exploit or enforce patent rights (Chapter 20).
21.133 While there is limited evidence that gene patents are having any present
impact on the cost-effective provision of healthcare,
genuine concerns are held
testing, the quality of such
testing, and clinical research and development. As
a result, more detailed consideration of options to address the impact of gene
patents on healthcare is justified.
21.134 Elsewhere in this Discussion Paper, the ALRC has proposed reforms that
address the potential for future harm, including with
respect to healthcare
provision. Some of these reforms are intended to ensure that problems are
identified at an early stage, for
example, through monitoring of
anti-competitive conduct and informal prices surveillance by the Australian
Competition and Consumer
Commission (see Chapters 24 and 25). The ALRC also
proposes processes for examining the economic and financial impact of gene
on healthcare services and the monitoring of gene patents by specialist
offices within Commonwealth, state and territory health departments
21.135 Other proposed reforms, which are intended to address possible adverse
effects of gene patents on healthcare provision, are
addressed in other chapters
of this Discussion Paper. These include:
changes to Patent Office practice relevant to some gene patents
(Chapter 8);
enacting a new experimental use defence (Chapter 14);
encouraging health departments or other agencies to challenge
questionable gene patents that may impact adversely on healthcare (Chapter
establishing a role for the proposed Human Genetics Commission of
Australia in monitoring the application of intellectual property
laws to genetic
materials and technologies, where these may have implications for human health
(Chapter 20);
model licensing guidelines to encourage broad access to genetic
inventions (Chapter 23); and
clarification of Crown use and compulsory licensing provisions
(Chapters 26 and 27).
A particular focus has been on gene
patents over the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, mutations of which are implicated in the
development
of some forms of breast and ovarian
Of those laboratories listed on
the HGSA’s website as offering diagnosis of genetic disorders, 81% were
located in public hospitals
(as at November 2002): D Nicol, ‘The Impact of
Patents on the Delivery of Genetic Tests in Australia’ (2003) 15(5)
Today’s Life Science
See Australian Law Reform Commission
and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The Protection of
Human Genetic Information in Australia
, ALRC 96 (2003),
[11.50] - [11.63].
Diagnosis of Genetic Disorders in Australasia
, Human Genetics Society of
Australasia, <www.hgsa.com.au/labs.html> at 19 February 2003. Not all
tests are available from all
laboratories. The register does not include newborn
screening laboratories.
In ALRC 96, the
ALRC and the Australian Health Ethics Committee (AHEC) made a number of
recommendations with implications for the
future availability of medical genetic
testing. These included recommendations: for the enactment of new legislation to
require laboratories
that conduct genetic testing to be accredited; to amend the
Therapeutic Goods Act 1989
and regulations to enable the
Therapeutic Goods Administration to regulate more effectively genetic testing
products provided directly
to the public; and for the development of genetic
testing and counselling practice guidelines, which identify genetic tests, or
of genetic tests, requiring special treatment in relation to
procedures for ordering, testing and ensuring access to genetic counselling.
Australian Law Reform Commission and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The Protection of Human Genetic Information in
, ALRC 96 (2003), rec 11 - 1, 11 - 5,
For example, predictive
testing of minors for late onset disorders (such as Huntington’s disease)
may be considered unethical.
Also known as
‘gene chips’, ‘biochips’ and ‘DNA
microarrays’.
See Australian Law
Reform Commission and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours:
The Protection of Human Genetic Information in Australia
, ALRC 96 (2003),
[10.20] - [10.21].
Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual
Property Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
See D Nicol, ‘The Impact of
Patents on the Delivery of Genetic Tests in Australia’ (2003) 15(5)
Today’s Life Science
In the United States: US 5753441; in
Australia: AU 691958, AU 686004 and AU 691331. As discussed below, Myriad has
granted an exclusive
licence in Australia and New Zealand relating to predictive
genetic testing for breast and ovarian cancer to Australian biotech company
Genetic Technologies Limited.
Rimmer, ‘Myriad Genetics: Patent Law and Genetic Testing’
European Intellectual Property Review
In the United States: US
5705343; US 5712098; US 5753438; in Australia AU 733459. A list of United States
and equivalent Australian
patents associated with medical genetic testing can be
obtained from D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An
Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre
for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6, Table
Australian Health Ministers’
Advisory Council Working Group on Human Gene Patents,
Final Draft Report of
the AHMAC Working Group on Human Gene Patents
A division of F Hoffmann-La Roche
Ltd: Roche Diagnostics,
Roche Molecular Diagnostics Patents Portfolio
<www.roche-diagnostics.com/ba_rmd/patent_list.html> at 11 June
Council on Bioethics,
The Ethics of Patenting DNA
DNA Diagnosis of
Genetic Disorders in Australasia
, Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
<www.hgsa.com.au/labs.html> at 19 February
Research conducted by the Centre
for Law and Genetics reveals that over 40% of the diseases listed in the
HGSA-listed medical genetic
tests appear in the titles of patent applications
filed with the Australian Patent Office: D Nicol, ‘The Impact of Patents
on the Delivery of Genetic Tests in Australia’ (2003) 15(5)
Today’s Life Science
Including in relation to genes
associated with Alzheimer’s disease (Apo E); hereditary breast and ovarian
cancer (BRCA1, BRCA2);
Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy; hereditary
haemochromatosis; myotonic dystrophy; Canavan disease; spinocerebellar ataxia;
adenomatous
polyposis; Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease type 1A; Fragile X syndrome;
Huntington’s disease; and Factor V Leiden: M Cho and others,
‘Effects of Patents and Licenses on the Provision of Clinical Genetic
Testing Services’ (2003) 5
Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
See D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
6, Table 1.
In Australia, Cancer
Research Centre Technologies Limited and Duke University have filed for patent
protection on the BRCA2 genetic
sequence. This patent application has been
challenged by Myriad: M Rimmer, ‘Myriad Genetics: Patent Law and Genetic
European Intellectual Property Review
As of mid-2002, all but one
Canadian province (British Columbia) had decided to continue to provide genetic
testing that might infringe
on patents granted to Myriad: R Gold, ‘Gene
Patents and Medical Access’ (2000) 49
Intellectual Property Forum
20, 23. British Columbia resumed testing in February 2003: British Columbia
Government Decision to Ignore Myriad Patent’,
CanWest News Service
16 February 2003.
M Llewelyn,
Intellectual Property Rights on Public Healthcare: A UK Response
See Institut Curie and
Assistance Publique Hopitaux de Paris and Institut Gustav-Roussy,
Myriad Genetics’s Monopoly on Tests for Predisposition to Breast and
Ovarian Cancer Associated with the BRCA1 Gene
See R Gold, ‘Gene Patents
and Medical Access’ (2000) 49
Intellectual Property Forum
M Cho and others, ‘Effects of
Patents and Licenses on the Provision of Clinical Genetic Testing
Services’ (2003) 5
Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6, 201. The
survey was based on questionnaires sent to laboratories listed
on the HGSA
website in November 2002, and on a supplementary telephone survey conducted in
March - April 2003: See D Nicol and J
Patents and Medical
Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
Ibid, 201, Table
Department of Human Services (Vic),
Consultation
, Melbourne, 3 September 2003; New South Wales Genetics
Consultation
, Sydney, 9 September 2003; South Australian
Clinical Genetics Service,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 16 September 2003;
Western Australian Department of Health and others (healthcare issues),
Consultation
, Perth, 17 September
Issues relating to the
enforcement and licensing of gene patents are also discussed in Ch 9 and
Sometimes referred to as
GTG’s ‘intron sequence
Genetic Technologies
Limited, ‘Genetic Technologies and Myriad Genetics Announce Strategic
Licensing Agreement’,
Press Release
, 28 October 2002,
<www.gtg.com.au/Announcements2002.html>. As part of this arrangement GTG
granted Myriad a non-exclusive licence
for the use of GTG’s non-coding
Genetic Technologies Limited,
‘Genetic Susceptibility Testing: A Third Progress Report’,
, 22 May 2003, <www.gtg.com.au/Announcements.html>. See Ch 9
for a discussion of the possible effect of such a declaration in
creating an
Genetic Technologies Limited,
‘Letter from GTG to Medical and Scientific Colleagues’,
, 21 July 2003,
<www.gtg.com.au/Announcements.html>.
also Genetic Technologies Limited, ‘Licensing the “Non-Coding”
Patents: A Third Report to the ASX’,
Press Release
, 2 April 2003,
<www.gtg.com.au/Announcements.html>.
Moukheiber, ‘Junkyard Dogs’,
Forbes Magazine
, 29 September
and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of
Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6, 203.
Council on Bioethics,
The Ethics of Patenting DNA
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
L Andrews, ‘The Gene Patent
Dilemma: Balancing Commercial Incentives with Health Needs’
Houston Journal of Health Law & Policy
77 - 79. This was the case with testing for haemochromatosis. See J Merz and
others, ‘Diagnostic Testing Fails the Test’
577. However, medical genetic tests may require regulatory approval prior to
L Andrews, ‘The Gene
Patent Dilemma: Balancing Commercial Incentives with Health Needs’
Houston Journal of Health Law & Policy
M Cho and others,
‘Effects of Patents and Licenses on the Provision of Clinical Genetic
Testing Services’ (2003) 5
Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
See also D Leonard, ‘Medical Practice and Gene Patents: A Personal
Perspective’ (2002) 77
Academic Medicine
and others, ‘Effects of Patents and Licenses on the Provision of Clinical
Genetic Testing Services’ (2003) 5
Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
Merz, ‘Disease Gene Patents: Overcoming Unethical Constraints on Clinical
Laboratory Medicine’ (1999) 45
Clinical Chemistry
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
Royal College of Pathologists of
Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; G Suthers,
, 2 October
Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003; Department of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003; Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003; Genetic Technologies
Submission P45
, 20 October 2003; A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003; Queensland Government,
, 5 January 2004; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Health Ministers’ Advisory Council Working Group on Human Gene Patents,
Final Draft Report of the AHMAC Working Group on Human Gene Patents
(2001), 3. In accordance with the key recommendation of the AHMAC Working Group
report, an AHMAC Advisory Group on Human Gene Patents
and Genetic Testing was
established in May 2002. The AHMAC Advisory Group will advise and make
recommendations to AHMAC on matters
relating to the planning, management,
regulation, provision and delivery of human genetic testing and screening
services, for the
purposes of the diagnosis, prevention and treatment of human
disease and the improvement of human
Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
HGSA Position Paper on the Patenting of Genes
(2001); Royal
College of Pathologists of Australia,
Position Statement: Patenting of Human
‘Disease Gene Patents: Overcoming Unethical Constraints on Clinical
Laboratory Medicine’ (1999) 45
Clinical Chemistry
325 - 326. Because it is inefficient to send samples to different
laboratories in order to test for different mutations on the
same gene, gene
patents may help create an effective monopoly over genetic testing for
unpatented DNA sequences. Merz states that
this has occurred with testing for
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. He notes that a monopoly is also favoured because
malpractice to test for the most prevalent mutation without
testing for the patented
See the discussion of
patent licensing in Ch 23.
others, ‘Diagnostic Testing Fails the Test’ (2002) 415
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; A McBratney and others,
, 22 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003; Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual
Property Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October
Submission P19
, 30 September
I Walpole and others,
‘Human Gene Patents: The Possible Impacts on Genetic Services Health
Care’ (2003) 179
Medical Journal of Australia
Submission P30
, 2 October
Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003; Cancer Council
Submission P40
, 29 September 2003; Cancer Council South
Submission P41
, 9 October
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Royal College of Pathologists of
Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
Submission P9
, 23 September 2003; Children’s Cancer
Institute Australia for Medical Research,
Submission P13
, 30 September
2003; D McAndrew,
Submission P14
, 30 September 2003; Australian
Huntington’s Disease Association (NSW) Inc,
Submission P27
October 2003; Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia,
, 1 October 2003; Cancer Foundation of Western Australia Inc,
Submission P34
, 10 October 2003; A Bankier,
Submission P19
September 2003; Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September
2003; Cancer Council Tasmania,
Submission P40
, 29 September 2003; Cancer
Council South Australia,
Submission P41
, 9 October 2003; South Australian
Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003; Genetic Support Council WA
Submission P59
, 7 November
For example, in relation to
United States screening programs for Canavan disease, a serious and incurable
neurological disorder:
see L Andrews, ‘The Gene Patent Dilemma: Balancing
Commercial Incentives with Health Needs’
Houston Journal of
Health Law & Policy
Cancer Council of New
South Wales,
Submission P1
, 5 June 2003; Cancer Voices NSW Inc,
Submission P7
, 16 September 2003; Breast Cancer Action Group NSW Inc,
Submission P8
, 19 September 2003; Australian Association of Pathology
Practices Inc,
Submission P10
, 24 September 2003; D McFetridge,
Submission P23
, 30 September 2003; Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003; Australian Huntington’s Disease
Association (NSW) Inc,
Submission P27
, 1 October 2003; G Suthers,
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003; Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; Cancer Council Tasmania,
, 29 September 2003; Cancer Council South Australia,
, 9 October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
October 2003; National Health and Medical Research Council,
, 31 October 2003; Department of Health Western Australia,
, 3 November
Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003.
Improvements in testing may themselves be
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
Australian Health
Ministers’ Advisory Council Working Group on Human Gene Patents,
Draft Report of the AHMAC Working Group on Human Gene Patents
(2001), 11.
This estimate assumed that the cost of each test would rise from
A$1,200 - 2,000 to US$2,400. Similar estimates of the
potential increased
cost have been made elsewhere. For example, in 2002 the French Institut Curie
stated that tests performed by
Myriad cost €2,744 compared with an
estimated cost of €914 for testing in other laboratories, and that testing
patients through Myriad could cost an additional €5.5 million per
annum: Institut Curie and Assistance Publique Hopitaux de
Paris and Institut
Gustav-Roussy,
Against Myriad Genetics’s Monopoly on Tests for
Predisposition to Breast and Ovarian Cancer Associated with the BRCA1 Gene
(2002), 6. As at 30 June 2002, Myriad stated that the price of its BRCA1 and
BRCA2 test was $US2,760: Myriad Genetics Inc,
United States Security and
Exchange Commission Form 10-K
, United States Security and Exchange
Commission, <www.sec.gov> at 5 November
of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November 2003. The
Department also noted that, in the United States, the patent holder for
haemochromatosis testing was asking
US$2,500 and US$25,000 for licence fees from
academic laboratories and commercial laboratories, respectively. See J Merz and
‘Diagnostic Testing Fails the Test’ (2002) 415
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
Department of Industry Tourism
and Resources,
Consultation
, Canberra, 22 September
Genetic Technologies Limited,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 September
New South Wales Health
Department,
Submission P37
, 17 October 2003. Such concerns were
frequently raised in consultations: New South Wales Genetics Service,
Consultation
, Sydney, 9 September 2003; Department of Health and Ageing,
Consultation
, Canberra, 24 September
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
Breast Cancer Action Group
Submission P8
, 19 September 2003; Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003; Cancer Council Tasmania,
, 29 September 2003; Cancer Council South Australia,
, 9 October 2003; Australian Association of Pathology Practices Inc,
Submission P10
, 24 September 2003; Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; G Suthers,
Submission P30
October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
2003; Department of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November
Cancer Action Group NSW Inc,
Submission P8
, 19 September
Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003; Cancer Council
Submission P40
, 29 September 2003; Cancer Council South
Submission P41
, 9 October
of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November
Australian Association of
Pathology Practices Inc,
Submission P10
, 24 September 2003; Human
Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; G
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Health Ministers’ Advisory Council Working Group on Human Gene Patents,
Final Draft Report of the AHMAC Working Group on Human Gene Patents
Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
HGSA Position Paper on the Patenting of Genes
Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
Submission P30
, 2 October
Genetic Technologies Limited,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 September
Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003; Cancer Council
Submission P40
, 29 September 2003; Cancer Council South
Submission P41
, 9 October
Department of Human Services
Consultation
, Melbourne, 3 September 2003; New South Wales
Genetics Service,
Consultation
, Sydney, 9 September 2003; South
Australian Clinical Genetics Service,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 16
September 2003. GTG pointed to existing problems in some States with turnaround
times for BRCA1 and BRCA2 testing:
Genetic Technologies Limited,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 September 2003. The Queensland Government
noted that ‘Genetic testing monopolies already exist with State
laboratories
because of enterprise bargaining and funding arrangements. Due to
these constraints, state laboratories must do the test regardless
other laboratories are capable of doing the tests more efficiently or cost
effectively’: Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October
For reasons of funding and
testing capacity, public clinical genetics services may restrict access to
genetic testing to individuals
who fit certain criteria, for example, based on
family history or clinical
indications.
Cancer Councils of NSW
and Australia,
Consultation
, Sydney, 8 September 2003; New South Wales
Genetics Service,
Consultation
, Sydney, 9 September
See M Rimmer, ‘Myriad
Genetics: Patent Law and Genetic Testing’
Intellectual Property Review
The role and importance of
genetic counselling is described in Australian Law Reform Commission and
Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The Protection of
Human Genetic Information in Australia
, ALRC 96 (2003), Ch
Australian Health
Ministers’ Advisory Council Working Group on Human Gene Patents,
Draft Report of the AHMAC Working Group on Human Gene Patents
(2001), 11;
South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003; Department
of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November
Department of Health Western
Submission P53
, 3 November
Breast Cancer Action Group NSW
Submission P8
, 19 September
South Wales Genetics Service,
Consultation
, Sydney, 9 September
Administered by the National
Association of Testing Authorities Australia and the Royal College of
Pathologists of Australasia, and
based on policy guidance provided by the
National Pathology Accreditation Advisory Council: See Australian Law Reform
and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The
Protection of Human Genetic Information in Australia
, ALRC 96 (2003), Ch
In ALRC 96, the ALRC and AHEC
recommended a number of reforms to enhance laboratory accreditation standards to
promote high ethical
standards in genetic testing, to provide an enhanced level
of oversight for ordering genetic tests and ensure better access to genetic
counselling: See Ibid, Ch 11; Ch 23; rec 11 - 1 to 11 - 4; rec
23 - 1; rec 23 - 3.
Australian Health Ministers’
Advisory Council Working Group on Human Gene Patents,
Final Draft Report of
the AHMAC Working Group on Human Gene Patents
Merz, ‘Disease Gene Patents: Overcoming Unethical Constraints on Clinical
Laboratory Medicine’ (1999) 45
Clinical Chemistry
Department of Human Services
Consultation
, Melbourne, 3 September 2003; South Australian
Department of Human Services,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 15 September
Department of Health Western
Submission P53
, 3 November 2003; Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003; Cancer Council Tasmania,
, 29 September 2003; Cancer Council South Australia,
, 9 October 2003; Western Australian Department of Health and others
(healthcare issues),
Consultation
, Perth, 17 September 2003; Queensland
Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
Institut Curie and Assistance
Publique Hopitaux de Paris and Institut Gustav-Roussy,
Against Myriad
Genetics’s Monopoly on Tests for Predisposition to Breast and Ovarian
Cancer Associated with the BRCA1 Gene
Williams-Jones,
History of a Gene Patent: Tracing the Development and
Application of Commercial BRCA Testing
http://genethics.ca/personal/HistoryPatent.pdf
at 17 April 2003,
Royal College of Pathologists of
Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; G Suthers,
, 2 October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
October 2003; Department of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
November 2003.
National Coordinating
Committee for Therapeutic Goods In Vitro Diagnostic Device Working Group,
Proposal for a New Regulatory Framework for In Vitro Diagnostic Devices:
Discussion Paper
Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
Submission P30
, 2 October
Royal College of Pathologists
of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; South Australian Clinical
Genetics Service,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 16 September
Genetics Society of Australasia,
HGSA Position Paper on the Patenting of
Australian Health
Ministers’ Advisory Council Working Group on Human Gene Patents,
Draft Report of the AHMAC Working Group on Human Gene Patents
Royal College of Pathologists of
Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003.
Council on Bioethics,
The Ethics of Patenting DNA
The ways in which gene patents
may restrict the conduct of research more generally are discussed further in Ch
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual
Property Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
R Eisenberg, ‘Why the Gene
Patenting Controversy Persists’ (2002) 77
Academic Medicine
1382 - 1383.
M Cho and others,
‘Effects of Patents and Licenses on the Provision of Clinical Genetic
Testing Services’ (2003) 5
Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
Australian Health
Ministers’ Advisory Council,
Submission P49
, 23 October 2003;
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
October 2003; Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
October 2003; Breast Cancer Network Australia,
Submission P22
September 2003; Department of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
November 2003; Commonwealth Department of Health and Ageing,
, 28 January
Health Ministers’ Advisory Council,
Submission P49
, 23 October
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
, 2 October 2003; Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
, 3 October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
October 2003; Western Australian Department of Health and others (healthcare
Consultation
, Perth, 17 September
, 2 October 2003.
Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003. See also
Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
Department of Health Western
Submission P53
, 3 November
F Hogervorst and others,
‘Large Genomic Deletions and Duplications in the BRCA1 Gene Identified by
a Novel Quantitative Method’
Cancer Research
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
Milward and others,
Submission P46
, 20 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003; Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
20 October 2003.
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Council on Bioethics,
The Ethics of Patenting DNA
European Group on Ethics in
Science and New Technologies,
Ethical Aspects of Patenting Inventions
Involving Human Stem Cells: Opinion to the European Commission
Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care,
Genetics, Testing & Gene
Patenting: Charting New Territory in Healthcare: Report to the Provinces and
Territories
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
Royal College of
Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Department of Industry Tourism
and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Royal College of Pathologists
of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
Breast Cancer Network
Submission P22
, 30 September
Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003; Cancer Council Tasmania,
, 29 September 2003; Cancer Council South Australia,
, 9 October 2003.
Council of New South Wales,
Submission P1
, 5 June 2003; Cancer Voices NSW
Submission P7
, 16 September 2003; Breast Cancer Action Group NSW
Submission P8
, 19 September
Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003; Cancer Council Tasmania,
, 29 September 2003; Cancer Council South Australia,
, 9 October 2003.
Submission P19
, 30 September
E Milward and others,
Submission P46
, 20 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003; Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
20 October 2003; A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003;
Department of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003; Genetic Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
20 October 2003; A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003;
Department of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003.
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Royal College of Pathologists
of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; G Suthers,
, 2 October 2003; Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
, 3 October
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
See Ch 24 - 27.
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
22. Medical Treatment Defence
Introduction
A defence or an exclusion from patentability?
A medical treatment defence
Reform proposals in other jurisdictions
Framing a new defence
The TRIPS Agreement and medical treatment defences
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
22. Medical Treatment Defence
Introduction
22.1 Chapter
21 examined the impact of gene patents on the provision of healthcare. There is
some evidence that gene patents may,
in future, have some adverse effects on
healthcare. In particular, the exclusive licensing of patents relating to
medical genetic
testing may have adverse consequences for the cost of testing,
access to testing, the quality of testing, and innovation in the development
new or improved testing techniques.
22.2 This evidence justifies more detailed consideration of patent law reform.
This chapter examines the introduction of a medical
treatment defence—a
reform option directed specifically to healthcare provision. Other chapters
discuss reforms that might
on healthcare provision, as well as effects on the conduct of research, and
subsequent commercialisation.
22.3 This chapter describes the existing law in Australia and other
examines reforms
that have been proposed overseas. The chapter examines the issues involved in
framing any new medical treatment
defence and the implications of reform for
Australia’s compliance with its obligations under the Agreement on
Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS
Agreement).
A defence or an exclusion from patentability?
22.4 Some jurisdictions have
addressed concerns about the impact of patents on healthcare by excluding
certain diagnostic, therapeutic
or surgical methods of treatment from the scope
of patentable subject matter—that is, by treating methods of medical
as an exclusion from patentability. This is the case, for example, in
the United Kingdom
Canadian province of Ontario. Australia has not adopted this approach. As
discussed in Chapter 6, provided an invention
meets the requirements for
patentability set out in the
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act
the Patent Office will allow patents on diagnostic, therapeutic or surgical
methods of treatment.
22.5 As discussed in Chapter 7, the ALRC does not propose that a new exclusion
from patentability for methods of medical treatment
be introduced in Australia.
In particular, the ALRC is concerned that such an exclusion would have adverse
effects on investment
in biotechnology, medical research and innovation in
healthcare.
22.6 However, an exclusion from patentability differs from a defence to a claim
of infringement. Where an exclusion from patentability
exists, a patent cannot
be granted and no question can arise about infringement of patent rights. By
contrast, a defence does not
affect the existence of patent rights but
constrains the enforcement of these rights by providing protection against
actions for
infringement in specified circumstances. For this reason, a defence
may involve a less dramatic diminution in the rights of inventors:
exclusion from patentability means that the relevant subject matter is not
patentable at all, a defence may be drafted to
permit patents to be enforced in
some circumstances but not in others. Yet, if its scope is broad, a defence may
also have adverse
effects on investment and innovation.
22.7 One advantage of a defence, as opposed to an exclusion from patentability,
is that while art 27(3)(a) of the TRIPS Agreement
permits World Trade
Organization (WTO) member states to exclude ‘diagnostic, therapeutic and
surgical methods for the treatment
of humans or animals’ from
patentability, the permissible exclusion may be limited to methods performed on
or inside the body
procedures).
22.8 As discussed in Chapter 7, gene patents most often relate to products and
processes for use outside the human body, notably
in connection with genetic
sequencing and diagnostic genetic testing. Even in the case of gene therapy,
patents are most likely to
relate to processes carried out
—such as inserting genes into a gene carrier (or
‘vector’) and using the vector to carry the genes into somatic
cells. However, some procedures for introducing vectors, modified cells or stem
cells into the human body (for example, by injection)
are performed on the human
body and may be considered methods of medical treatment as understood by patent
22.9 The ALRC has concluded that if reform in relation to gene patents and
medical treatment is justified, the introduction of a
new defence—as
opposed to an exclusion from patentability—would be the preferable
approach. Such a defence could apply
procedures and be more targeted in its application. However, as discussed below,
there are many difficulties in introducing such
A medical treatment defence
22.10 The United States, like
Australia, allows patent protection to be obtained for diagnostic, therapeutic
or surgical methods of
treatment. However, United States law has sought to
address some of the objections that have been raised to such patents by
introducing
a limited statutory defence to infringement claims asserted against
a ‘medical practitioner’ or a ‘related health
entity’ in connection with their performance of a ‘medical
This provision is
referred to in this chapter as ‘the United States medical treatment
defence’, and it is the only defence
of its kind to be found in the patent
laws of developed nations.
22.11 The United States medical treatment defence covers any ‘medical
practitioner’, defined as any natural person who
is licensed by a State to
provide the medical activity and any person who is acting under the direction of
such a person.
The defence also
covers a related health care entity, namely, an entity with which a medical
practitioner has a professional affiliation
under which the medical practitioner
performs the medical activity ‘including but not limited to a nursing
university, medical school, health maintenance organization,
group medical practice, or a medical
22.12 The term ‘medical activity’ is defined as the performance of a
medical or surgical procedure on a body, including
a human body, organ or
cadaver, or an animal used in medical research directly relating to the
treatment of humans.
activities are expressly excluded from the ambit of the defence. These
the use of a patented machine, manufacture, or composition of matter
in violation of the patent;
the practice of a patented use of a composition of matter in
violation of the patent;
the practice of a process in violation of a biotechnology
clinical laboratory services (other than those provided in a
physician’s
22.13 While the
term ‘biotechnology patent’ in the third listed exclusion is not
defined, the use of isolated genetic
materials would generally be considered a
core element of biotechnology. The Congressional Record indicates that the term
a patent on a ‘biotechnological
as well as a patent
on a process of making or using biological materials, including treatment using
those materials, where those
materials have been manipulated
) at the cellular or molecular
22.14 In summary, the United States defence has been described as limited to
‘patents claiming “pure” medical,
diagnostic or surgical
methods—those which do not encompass the novel uses of drugs, chemicals or
biological reagents’.
limited ambit of the defence means that, in practice, it does not apply to most
medical applications of genetic materials and
technologies. As discussed above,
medical treatment involving gene patents can be expected to be conducted mostly
outside the body
and in a laboratory. Further, relevant gene patents cover
isolated genetic materials and genetic products and their uses, which are
patents on biotechnology.
22.15 The drafting of the United States medical treatment defence reflects its
legislative history. The defence was proposed in the
aftermath of the United
States District Court case of
in which it was
claimed that a physician had infringed certain patents in performing cataract
surgery. The claims were in respect
of a method for making self-sealing
incisions in the episclera of the eye—that is, a means of surgery that
eliminated the need
for sutures to close the
22.16 The case caused a great deal of controversy within the medical community
in the United States and provoked an immediate push
for legislation. Originally,
it was proposed that medical procedures should be an exclusion from
patentability. This was opposed
by the biotechnology and pharmaceutical
industries, resulting in compromise legislation that addressed the remedies
available to
patent holders.
22.17 There have been proposals to extend the scope of the United States medical
treatment defence, notably in the Genomic Research
and Diagnostic Accessibility
This Bill proposed to
extend the definition of medical activity covered by the defence to include
‘performance of a genetic
diagnostic, prognostic, or predictive
The co-sponsor of
the Bill, the Hon Lynn Rivers, stated that this provision would ‘exempt
medical practitioners utilizing genetic
diagnostic tests from patent
infringement remedies’.
She stated:
To those who argue that medical innovation will be stifled by this
approach, I would point out that surgeons have been refining their
for centuries without patent
protection.
Reform proposals in other jurisdictions
22.18 Other jurisdictions
have also examined the possible introduction of a medical treatment defence to
address concerns about the
impact of gene patents on the provision of
healthcare.
22.19 Methods of medical treatment are currently excluded from patentability
under Canadian law.
Ontario Government report,
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting: Charting
New Territory in Healthcare
(the Ontario Report), recommended that this
exclusion be replaced with a medical treatment defence.
22.20 The Ontario Report stated that adopting the United States approach, with
an extension to cover diagnostic procedures, could
address concerns about access
to patented genetic technologies. It recommended an amendment preventing patent
holders from bringing
an action for infringement against a medical practitioner
for providing medical services (including treatment and diagnosis) to
The Ontario Report
noted that such an approach ‘while providing protection would still allow
the full patenting of genetic
technologies’.
observed that given the realities of contemporary biotechnology, the distinction
procedures was theoretical and
difficult to maintain.
22.21 In 2002, a report by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (the OECD Working Party on Biotechnology
noted suggestions that
‘clinical use’ exceptions should be enacted into national laws. The
report observed that a difficulty
with such an approach would be to
‘distinguish clinical use from commercial
22.22 A 2003 report for the United Kingdom Department of Health referred to a
‘groundswell of opinion’ in countries that
exclude methods of
medical treatment from patentability that the exemption should be
It concluded that, if
this were done in the United Kingdom, clinicians would require the benefit of a
defence against infringement.
The report recommended:
The Department should consider whether the exclusion [from patentability]
should be lifted only upon the condition that the activities
of clinicians
should not constitute infringement of any patent claim. This would put the EPO
member countries in broadly the same
position as now prevails in the
22.23 The report did not provide any formulation for such a defence, but it did
observe that:
Whether in practice the American approach does anything more than impose
financial responsibility on the health authority alone, rather
than the medical
staff in person, must remain a controversial
Framing a new defence
22.24 If a new medical
treatment defence were introduced, it would need to be carefully framed to
remedy specific problems resulting
from the enforcement, or potential
enforcement, of gene patents against healthcare providers. There are many
difficulties involved
in framing the scope of a new medical treatment
22.25 What medical activities should be covered by the defence? For the defence
to be of practical application to the infringement
of gene patents in the
provision of healthcare, it seems clear that it would need to apply to
testing and other procedures, and not just to procedures performed on
or inside the body. Yet, the implications of exempting a broad
diagnostic or therapeutic methods from claims of patent infringement would be
significant, especially in relation to effects
on investment and innovation in
healthcare technology. These implications would have to be the subject of
specific investigation
and consultation. On the other hand, as discussed below,
enactment of a new medical treatment defence specific to gene patents would
to be carefully justified in order to be consistent with Australia’s
obligations under the TRIPS Agreement, which provides
that patent rights shall
be enjoyable without discrimination as to field of
technology.
22.26 The second major question in framing a new medical treatment defence is
how to define the class of persons or organisations
who should be able to invoke
the defence. As discussed above, the United States medical treatment defence
applies to medical practitioners,
their assistants, and ‘related
healthcare entities’—entities with which a medical practitioner has
a professional
affiliation under which the medical practitioner performs a
medical activity
example, a hospital or clinic.
22.27 An important consideration in defining the class of persons protected from
infringement proceedings is that most genetic testing
is conducted by
laboratories, rather than by medical practitioners. In Australia, most medical
genetic tests are ordered by a clinical
geneticist or other medical practitioner
as part of healthcare services provided by state and territory public clinical
services. The testing itself is usually, but not always, carried out by
public sector laboratories attached to public
If the intention of
the defence is to protect the delivery of healthcare services—rather than
to protect only medical practitioners
from liability—laboratories should
also be covered by the defence.
22.28 Whether medical practitioners need special protection in relation to gene
patent infringement is an open question. It may be
argued that medical
practitioners should be entitled to refer patients for medical genetic testing
as they see fit, without having
to concern themselves with the existence or
otherwise of relevant patent rights. It is not clear whether a medical
practitioner would
infringe a patent simply by referring a patient to a
laboratory for testing. A medical practitioner can be liable for indirect
infringement
of a patent where he or she has:
procured the infringement through inducement, incitement or
persuasion (that is, contributory or indirect infringement);
joined in a common design with someone else to engage in acts that
infringe a patent (that is, as a joint tortfeasor); or
authorised the
infringement.
liability to be established, the medical practitioner must have done something
more than merely facilitate the infringement
of the patent by another. He or she
must have made himself or herself a party to the act of infringement by taking
part in it, such
as by taking some positive step designed to produce the
infringement, even though further action by others (that is, the laboratory)
also required.
Referral of a
patient to a testing laboratory may be regarded as contributory infringement,
but this may depend on the exact relationship
between a referring medical
practitioner and the testing
laboratory.
22.30 It is possible that patent holders may protect patents by seeking
injunctions or other remedies against medical practitioners
who refer patients
for unauthorised testing, as well as by taking action directly against the
offending laboratory. However, the
ALRC has received no evidence that patent
holders have adopted such an approach to patent enforcement in Australia.
Indeed, it is
uncertain whether it would serve any useful purpose for a patent
holder to do so, given the remedies available against laboratories.
The TRIPS Agreement and medical treatment defences
22.31 Any proposed new
medical treatment defence needs to be consistent with Australia’s
obligations under the TRIPS Agreement,
and in particular with art 27 and 30. The
TRIPS Agreement places significant constraints on the permitted scope of
exceptions to
the exclusive rights conferred by patents.
22.32 Article 27.1 of the TRIPS Agreement provides that patent rights shall be
enjoyable without discrimination as to the field of
technology. This
non-discrimination provision places constraints on the extent to which gene
patents may be singled out for special
treatment, including through new defences
to claims of patent
infringement.
22.33 As discussed in Chapter 14, art 27 of the TRIPS Agreement does not
‘prohibit bona fide exceptions to deal with problems
that may exist only
in certain product areas’.
As with an experimental or research use defence, it may be possible to craft a
medical treatment defence that is specific to some
defined subset of gene
patents, such that the provision does not discriminate by field of technology
within the terms of art 27.
However, there would need to be strong arguments to
justify differentiating a relevant category of gene patents from patents in
fields of technology.
22.34 Article 30 of the TRIPS Agreement provides that there may be limited
exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred by a patent.
Such exceptions must
not unreasonably conflict with the normal exploitation of the patent and must
not unreasonably prejudice the
legitimate interests of the patent owner, taking
into account the legitimate interests of third
22.35 Unlike experimental use exceptions, which are found in the laws of most
members of the WTO, only the United States has enacted
a medical treatment
defence to claims of patent infringement. This provision is quite different in
scope from the kind of defence
that would be necessary to address infringement
of gene patents in healthcare provision because it is limited to medical
‘on a body’.
22.36 The Office of the United States Trade Representative opposed the
legislation that eventually became the United States medical
Although TRIPS Article 27.3 permits Members to exclude diagnostic,
therapeutic and surgical techniques from patentability, we believe
member makes patents available in this field of technology, a member must accord
full rights under the TRIPS
22.37 The United States medical treatment defence has come under scrutiny as
part of review of the implementation of the TRIPS Agreement.
The European
Communities and their member states asked the United States to explain how this
provision complies with the TRIPS
The United States
responded that the provisions fell within the limited exceptions authorised by
art 30 of the TRIPS Agreement and
The effect of the provision ... is very limited, and is designed to
ensure that doctors performing life saving or health enhancing
surgical procedures are not inhibited by fear of lawsuits for patent
infringement.
22.38 The TRIPS Agreement allows member States to exclude ‘diagnostic,
therapeutic and surgical methods for the treatment of
humans or animals’
from patentability.
It might be
argued that, as an exclusion from patentability is permissible, a defence cast
in similar terms should also be permissible,
as it is less prejudicial to patent
rights than an exclusion. However, as discussed in Chapter 7, it is not not
clear whether the
TRIPS Agreement permits exceptions for
procedures.
Submissions and consultations
22.39 IP 27 asked whether the
Patents Act
should be amended to include a defence to allow the use of a
patented genetic material or technology by a medical practitioner for
purposes of medical treatment of
22.40 Many submissions favoured the introduction of some form of medical
treatment defence.
The scope of
the desirable defence was expressed in varying ways. The Australian Association
of Pathology Practices Inc advocated
the ‘exemption of diagnostic testing
from patent compliance’.
The Caroline Chisholm Centre for Health Ethics Inc considered that
‘diagnostic tests, like surgical procedures, should be exempt
from patent
The Cancer Council
Australia recommended that ‘an exemption from breach of patent should be
granted in respect of human genetic
sequences and the tests dependent on
them’ if genetic testing is conducted ‘in a public, not-for-profit
institution’.
College of Pathologists of Australasia (RCPA) recommended new legislation to
exempt laboratories from patent infringement
for ‘performing
non-commercial genetic testing on patients for private
22.41 The submission from the South Australian Government stated that
‘genetic testing for diagnosis, prognosis and predictive
should be expressly excluded from claims of patent
infringement.
It also suggested
that other specific medical activities appropriate for exclusion should be
identified by peak medical bodies, in
collaboration with the proposed new Human
Genetics Commission of Australia
and ethics committees. The Breast Cancer Network Australia stated that
‘exclusions or exemptions should be granted from patents
for specific
public health
22.42 In addition to these broad prescriptions for reform, which tended to focus
on ensuring that medical genetic testing conducted
by public sector laboratories
was covered by the defence, submissions suggested a range of ways in which the
defence should be framed.
These submissions sometimes referred to the United
States medical treatment defence.
22.43 The Human Genetics Society of Australasia (HGSA) emphasised that any
defence under Australian law should include diagnosis,
as well as treatment, in
its definition of protected medical activity. In the HGSA’s view, the
definition of ‘medical
practitioner’ should be at least as broad as
that in the United States and needs to encompass medical practitioners who
genetic tests from any
laboratory.
22.44 GlaxoSmithKline also supported a medical treatment defence covering
medical practitioners carrying out treatment and
GlaxoSmithKline
stated that the defence should apply to registered health professionals (medical
practitioners and registered nurses)
and their assistants and the healthcare
organisations for whom they work when providing the relevant healthcare
the supply, manufacture, sale and importation of patented items required
to carry out patented methods of treatment should not be
exempt from
infringement. Australian law should though continue to provide that contributory
infringement is itself an infringing
act to ensure that method of treatment and
diagnostic claims can be effectively enforced against the manufacturers and
22.45 The Australian Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture recommended
Patents Act
should be amended to include
a defence to allow for the use of a patented genetic material or
technology by a medical practitioner for the purposes of medical
treatment of
humans. The definition of a medical practitioner should be broad for the
purposes of the legislation, and the activities
protected would include medical
procedures as well as the administration of genetic
22.46 Similarly, AusBiotech Ltd stated:
If any such exemption is introduced it should apply only to medical
practitioners who are registered to practice by state medical
practice boards,
and to para-medical staff such as nurses acting under their direction, as well
as bodies with which such medical
practitioners are professionally affiliated,
such as hospitals or area health services. This would be analogous to the
in the United States.
22.47 Other submissions considered there was no need for a medical treatment
defence because the problems that it would be intended
to address are able to be
dealt with more appropriately using other mechanisms. The Queensland Government
stated that further evidence
would be required to justify any new defence and
that, in any case, such a defence may not be necessary as compulsory licensing
crown use provisions may be able to achieve the same
22.48 A number of submissions were opposed outright to the idea of a new medical
treatment defence.
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research was concerned that such a reform
might unjustifiably undermine patents on
genetic technologies:
Delivery of most therapeutics will always be by a medical practitioner
for the purposes of medical treatment of humans. The only exceptions
think of would be medical procedures that do not involve a novel product but
rather a series of surgical or other
22.49 Dr Amanda McBratney and others stated that such a provision would be
discriminatory and permit ‘free-riding in relation
to these inventions to
the detriment of patentees, especially if their main target market is the
medical use market’.
Davies Collison Cave considered there to be no justification for introducing a
medical treatment defence. Such a defence had never
been considered necessary to
protect the use of pharmaceuticals by medical practitioners and was unlikely to
be needed in respect
to genetic materials and
technologies.
ALRC’s views
22.50 The ALRC acknowledges
the strong support in submissions for the introduction of some form of medical
treatment defence. Not
surprisingly, much of this support was from organisations
involved in providing healthcare or representing the interests of healthcare
consumers. However, even within this group of stakeholders, support for the idea
was not universal: some submissions presented reasons
for rejecting a medical
treatment defence because of concerns about the effect of such a defence on
investment and innovation in
genetic medical technologies, or medical
technologies generally.
22.51 It has not been established that gene patents have had any significant
adverse impact, to date, on healthcare provision in
Australia. Patent holders
have not been active in enforcing gene patents against healthcare providers.
While this situation may change,
the ALRC considers that it would be premature
to propose a significant diminution of patent rights where there is no
demonstrated
22.52 If gene patents are found to have an adverse impact on healthcare
provision, a number of reforms are available to address the
problem, other than
the enactment of a new medical treatment defence. These include: changes to
Patent Office practices relevant
to gene patents (Chapter 8); encouraging health
departments to challenge questionable gene patents that may impact adversely on
(Chapter 20); model licensing agreements to encourage broad access to
genetic inventions (Chapter 23); and clarification of the Crown
compulsory licensing provisions in the
Patents Act
(Chapters 26 and 27). Many of
these options appear to present fewer practical difficulties than the
introduction of a medical treatment
22.53 As discussed in this chapter, there are genuine difficulties in framing
the scope of any new medical treatment defence. These
include defining what
medical activities should be covered by the defence, and the persons or
organisations who should be able to
invoke it. There may also be problems in
framing the defence in a way that is consistent with Australia’s
obligations under
the TRIPS Agreement.
22.54 At present, the United States is the only country to have enacted a
medical treatment defence. There is little experience in
the practical
application of the provision and, in any case, the limited ambit of the United
States defence means that it probably
does not apply to any medical treatment
involving gene patents.
22.55 There may be sound arguments for a United States-style medical treatment
defence in order to protect medical practitioners
who engage in medical or
surgical procedures on the human body from patent infringement actions. However,
this is not an appropriate
matter for this Inquiry, with its limited focus on
patents over genetic materials and technologies. Gene patents most often relate
to products and processes for use outside the human body, notably in connection
with genetic sequencing and diagnostic genetic testing.
While gene patents are
sometimes used in procedures on the human body, for example in connection with
gene therapy, such use is rare
and still largely experimental.
22.56 The ALRC is currently not inclined to propose a new medical treatment
defence to claims of patent infringement. However, it
remains interested in
further submissions and comment on whether the enactment of such a defence may
be justified and, if so, how
such a defence should be framed.
Question 22 - 1
In the absence of a general defence relating to
medical treatment, should the
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) be amended to enact
a new defence to claims of patent infringement based on the use of genetic
materials and technologies in
diagnostic or therapeutic treatment?
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects
of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into
force on 1 January 1995).
(UK) s 4(2).
§ 287(c). This defence was introduced in 1996 and does not apply to any
patent with an effective filing date before 30
September 1996: 35 USC §
§287(c)(2)(B).
§287(c)(2)(C).
§287(c)(2)(A), (E), (F).
§287(c)(2)(A)(i) - (iii).
§287(c)(3).
As defined in 35 USC
E Lee, ‘35 USC
§287(c): The Physician Immunity Statute’ (1997) 79
Journal of the
Patent and Trademark Office Society
Limitation on
Patents Claiming Medical or Surgical Procedures
, Myers Bigel,
<www.myersbigel.com/pat_articles/pat_article3.htm> at 14 November
Pallin v Singer
E Lee, ‘35 USC
§287(c): The Physician Immunity Statute’ (1997) 79
Journal of the
Patent and Trademark Office Society
See Ibid, 702 - 709. The
legislation was eventually enacted late at night as part of a complex
appropriations Bill: A McBratney and
Submission P47
, 22 October
The Bill was referred to the
House Subcommittee on the Courts, the Internet, and Intellectual Property on 5
May 2002, but lapsed
at the end of the 107th Congress. See also S Minwalla,
‘A Modest Proposal to Amend the Patent Code 35 USC §287(c) to Allow
Health Care Providers to Examine their Patients’ “DNA”’
Southern Illinois University Law Journal
471. Minwalla proposed
that ‘genetic diagnostic’ should be added to the definition of
medical activity and that the medical
treatment defence should apply to
procedures on ‘parts of the body’, including tissue and other
genetic materials: 503.
Research and Diagnostic Accessibility Bill 2002 (HR 3967) (US) s
United States,
Congressional
Debates, House of Representatives
, 14 March 2002, E353 (L Rivers),
See further Ch
Ontario Ministry of Health and
Long-Term Care,
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting: Charting New
Territory in Healthcare: Report to the Provinces and Territories
(2002), rec
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual Property
Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
W Cornish, M Llewelyn and M Adcock,
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and Genetics
Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into
force on 1 January 1995) art 27.1.
USC § 287(c)(2)(C).
cases, the medical practitioner and the laboratory will often be part of the
same public health organisation (eg in New
South Wales, the same area health
service or statutory health corporation). See
Health Services Act 1997
(NSW) ch 2.
See J Lahore,
Trade Marks & Related Rights: Looseleaf Service
Another consideration in such
circumstances is the concept of innocent infringement. If a defendant has
infringed a patent, it does
not matter whether he or she knows of the existence
of the patent, or whether he or she intended to infringe. However, a court will
take account of the defendant’s innocence in determining the nature of the
relief to be awarded. The extent to which a medical
practitioner knows about the
existence of patent rights may therefore be relevant to the remedies available
against him or her: See
Ibid, [18,345];
Patents Act 1990
Canada: Patent Protection of
Pharmaceutical Products: Complaint by the European Communities and their Member
, 17 March 2000, WT/DS114/R,
Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh
Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
into force on 1 January
Duffy, ‘Harmony and Diversity in Global Patent Law’ (2002) 17
Berkley Technology Law Journal
685, 722, fn
Council for Trade-Related Aspects
of Intellectual Property Rights,
Review of Legislation in the Fields of
Patents, Layout-designs (Topographies) of Integrated Circuits, Protection of
Undisclosed Information
and Control of Anti-competitive Practices in Contractual
Licences: United States, 1 May 1998
, World Trade Organization,
<www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/intel8_e.htm> at 17 November
Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into
force on 1 January 1995) art
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
Australian Association of
Pathology Practices Inc,
Submission P10
, 24 September 2003; Australian
Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
September 2003; Breast Cancer Network Australia,
Submission P22
September 2003; Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September
2003; Cancer Council Tasmania,
Submission P40
, 29 September 2003; Cancer
Council South Australia,
Submission P41
, 9 October 2003; Royal College of
Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; Human
Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003;
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; Caroline Chisholm
Centre for Health Ethics Inc,
Submission P38
, 17 October 2003; South
Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Australian Association of
Pathology Practices Inc,
Submission P10
, 24 September
Caroline Chisholm Centre for
Health Ethics Inc,
Submission P38
, 17 October
Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003; Cancer Council Tasmania,
, 29 September 2003; Cancer Council South Australia,
, 9 October 2003.
Royal College
of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003. The
exemption should apply to the approved pathology authority, pathology laboratory
and pathology practitioner.
Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
See Australian Law Reform
Commission and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The
Protection of Human Genetic Information in Australia
, ALRC 96 (2003), rec
Breast Cancer Network
Submission P22
, 30 September
Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October
The application of the concepts of indirect liability for infringement of a
patent and contributory infringement to medical
practitioners using patented
genetic technologies is discussed
Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
Submission P58
, 7 November 2003.
Queensland Government,
, 5 January 2004. See Ch
Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003; A
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003; Davies Collison
Submission P48
, 24 October
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003.
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
23. Licensing of Patent Rights
Introduction
Licensing patent rights
Common terms in patent licences
Licensing of gene patents in Australia
Nicol-Nielsen Study
Submissions and consultations
Impediments to gene patent licensing in Australia
Facilitating gene patent licensing
Education programs about licensing practices
Licensing guidelines and model agreements
Patent pools and other industry initiatives
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
PART F: Licensing and Commercial Arrangements
23. Licensing of Patent Rights
Introduction
of the concern about the potential adverse impact of gene patents has entailed
criticism of the way in which gene patent
rights are exploited and the
possibility that licences for gene patents may be granted only on a restrictive
basis. Chapters 13 and
21 considered the way in which these concerns apply in
the context of licences to genetic research tools and gene patents used in
diagnostic genetic tests.
23.2 This chapter provides a more general consideration of issues relating to
the licensing of gene patents. The various types of
patent licences and the
typical terms of such agreements are outlined. The chapter then examines
available evidence about licensing
practices relating to genetic materials and
technologies in Australia. It concludes with a discussion of particular issues
been identified as impediments to the licensing of gene patents in the
Australian biotechnology sector, and considers whether reform
is necessary in
23.3 Other chapters of this Discussion Paper address specific aspects of gene
patent licensing practices are also addressed in other
chapters of this
Discussion Paper. Chapter 18 outlines the licensing practices of Australian
publicly funded research institutions.
Chapters 24 and 27 consider the remedies
that may be available if patent holders unreasonably restrict access to patented
inventions or engage in anti-competitive conduct. Finally, Chapter 28
examines whether introducing a statutory licensing scheme for
certain types of
gene patents would be beneficial.
Licensing patent rights
23.4 As discussed in Chapter
9, the grant of a patent confers upon a patent holder the exclusive right to
exploit an invention, or
to authorise another person to exploit an invention,
during the patent term.
holder may license any or all of its patent rights to a third party. A licence
of a patent does not transfer ownership of
the patent rights, as is the case if
a patent is assigned; rather it establishes terms upon which a third party (the
‘licensee’)
may exercise specified patent rights without such use
constituting infringement.
23.5 A licence to exploit one or more gene patents may be a stand-alone
transaction or part of a larger commercial arrangement. Patent
licences are
frequently an aspect of the establishment of a spin-off company, a joint venture
or a strategic alliance. Patent licences
are also typical in collaboration and
consortium arrangements, sponsored research agreements, and manufacture and
supply agreements.
23.6 Patent licence agreements may be divided into two categories: in-licences
and out-licences. An ‘in-licence’ is an
agreement by which a party
acquires the rights to use a patent. An ‘out-licence’ is an
agreement by which a patent holder
grants the right to use a patent to a third
23.7 The decision to license gene patents may be based on a number of
Licensing arrangements
allow companies to exchange resources and information, thereby reducing research
and development expenditure
and time delays in bringing a product to market.
Licensing of patent rights may also be necessary to gain access to domestic or
markets, by providing access to manufacturing facilities or distribution
networks without additional expense, or lowering the cost
and risk associated
with entry into a market through partnership with a more experienced entity. A
company’s strategic patent
licensing may also result in the establishment
of profitable, long-term alliances leading to future research collaborations.
a patent licence may provide a company with access to significant third
party intellectual property, or provide a means of avoiding
or settling patent
litigation—particularly where an agreement involves cross-licences of
patent rights among competitors.
23.8 A licensee may be
granted exclusive, sole or non-exclusive rights to a gene patent. An exclusive
licence provides that only the
licensee (and, where permitted, persons
authorised by the licensee) may exploit the rights licensed under the
agreement—even
the patent holder is prevented from exploiting such rights.
Exclusive licences may be limited to a territory (for example, a particular
country or group of countries), to a particular field of use, or to a specified
period of time. Therefore, a patent holder may retain
the right to exploit the
invention in other territories or fields of use, or to license patent rights to
a different entity, perhaps
also on an exclusive basis.
23.9 A sole licence permits the patent holder and a licensee to exploit a
patented invention, but prevents the patent holder from
licensing the rights to
any other entity. A non-exclusive licence allows the patent holder to license
some or all of the rights under
a patent to an unlimited number of third
parties, and also to retain the right to exploit a patented invention itself.
Like exclusive
licences, licences that authorise the use of gene patent rights
on a sole or non-exclusive basis may be restricted to a particular
field of use, or period of time.
Common terms in patent licences
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act
) does not specify any formalities that must be
satisfied for a patent licence to be valid and enforceable. However, as a matter
commercial practice, the terms of a patent licence are typically set out in a
written document executed by the parties to the agreement.
23.11 Patent licences usually address the following
licensed property—identifying the particular patents and
patent applications subject to the licence;
territory within which the licensee may exercise its rights;
scope of rights granted—whether exclusive, sole, or
non-exclusive, as well as any restrictions on the use of the licensed patent
rights (for example, restrictions on the right to sub-license, or rights
retained by the licensor);
duration of the licence;
financial terms—such as licence
payment terms and liability
termination of the licence;
obligations of the licensor—for example, maintenance and
enforcement of the licensed patent rights, continued prosecution of
patent applications, and provision of technical assistance and know-how related
to the inventions covered by the licensed
patent rights;
obligations of the licensee—such as performance obligations to
exercise best efforts to develop and exploit the technology
covered by the
licensed patents;
ownership of (and the right to use) any intellectual property that
may arise from activities conducted under the licence—for
improvements on, or new applications for, inventions covered by the licensed
patent rights, as well as new inventions that
may be developed;
reversion of rights in the licensed patents—for example, upon
termination of the licence, or upon failure of the licensee to
performance obligations stipulated in the agreement;
reporting and record keeping requirements—including the
ability of the licensor to conduct periodic audits of the licensee’s
confidentiality obligations; and
responsibility for liability claims—typically addressed in the
form of indemnification provisions covering issues such as patent
infringement
and product liability claims.
23.12 While most patent licences address
the issues identified in the preceding paragraph, parties to a licence typically
the precise terms of the arrangement, including the scope of the
licence granted, the obligations and liabilities of each of the
parties, and the
quantum and terms of payment. These negotiations will be influenced by a number
of factors such as the nature of
the technology being licensed, the identity and
business of the patent holder and potential licensee, the proposed use of the
technology, and revenue considerations. The way in which these factors
affect licences of Australian gene patents is considered in
the following
Licensing of gene patents in Australia
23.13 The size and character
of the Australian biotechnology industry (which is discussed in Chapter 17)
means that patent licensing
is particularly important to facilitate further
research and to allow the development and commercialisation of products. The
limited size of the Australian market means that it is unlikely that
companies will be able to sustain long-term growth or profitability
based solely
on activities in the domestic
In addition, the primary
expertise of many Australian biotechnology companies is in the area of research.
The resources and expertise
of more established—and frequently
foreign-owned—companies are typically required to commercialise the
results of research
and produce a diagnostic or therapeutic
Australian biotechnology
entities are, therefore, unlikely to raise substantial revenue from the sale of
genetic products or processes
and are often dependent upon licence fees as a
primary source of revenue.
23.14 A recent empirical study of patenting and technology transfer practices in
the Australian medical biotechnology industry conducted
by Dr Dianne Nicol and
Jane Nielsen (the Nicol-Nielsen Study) concluded that the majority of
participants in the Australian medical
biotechnology industry—particularly
in the drug discovery sector—need to transfer their technology
‘downstream’
to develop a commercial
The Nicol-Nielsen Study
found, however, that participants in the medical device and non-human research
sectors of the Australian
medical biotechnology industry are more likely to have
the capacity to bring a product to
23.15 Apart from the Nicol-Nielsen Study, publicly available information about
gene patent licensing practices in Australia is limited
and, to date, has been
largely anecdotal.
therefore, been difficult to obtain a clear picture of what patented genetic
materials and technologies are being licensed
in Australia, which entities are
acquiring such rights, and on what
23.16 While there is no comprehensive source of information about gene patent
licensing, some information about patent licence agreements
may be gleaned from
the following sources:
the records of IP Australia—including, patent licences that
are filed with the Patent
disclosures made by publicly-listed Australian companies pursuant to
the Australian Stock Exchange listing
(and equivalent disclosure
requirements imposed by securities exchanges in other jurisdictions); and
an individual company’s press releases.
sources will, however, reveal only a portion of concluded transactions.
Moreover, public sources of information about patent
licences generally exclude
details of the commercial terms of such agreements to preserve
confidentiality.
Nicol-Nielsen Study
23.18 The Nicol-Nielsen Study
examined licensing practices relating to biotechnological inventions, including
genetic materials and
technologies, among publicly-listed and private companies,
research organisations and genetic testing laboratories within the Australian
medical biotechnology sector.
While the focus of the Study was broader than gene patents, its findings in
relation to licensing practices are instructive.
23.19 The Nicol-Nielsen Study reported significant levels of collaborative and
licensing activity on the part of each of the types
of entities
Respondents to the
survey from the ‘research institute’ and ‘company’
sectors reported lower levels of licensing-out
of patent rights than might be
However, Nicol and
Nielsen commented that this result was ‘reflective of an industry in a
growth phase’.
entities are still developing their technology and are not yet in a position to
enter into licence agreements. Others favour
assignment or co-ownership of
patents, or the establishment of a spin-off entity, as a means of providing
access to patented technology.
Nicol and Nielsen concluded that:
most patent holders are able to find ways to license-out their technology
or to find other means of transferring their technology
to other sectors of the
23.20 In addition, Nicol and Nielsen concluded that ‘licensing on an
exclusive basis is commonplace’ within the Australian
biotechnology sector,
there is some evidence of restricted access to patented biotechnological
inventions. However, their Study found that Australian
entities currently have
little difficulty accessing broadly applicable research tools and technologies
because there is liberal licensing
of foundational biotechnological
inventions.
To the extent that
access to biotechnological inventions is being restricted, Nicol and Nielsen
suggested that it typically occurs
where providing a third party with access to
patented technology could result in a competing
23.21 Responses to the survey and interview data collected by Nicol and Nielsen
suggest that a variety of factors affect the terms
on which a biotechnology
patent will be licensed. The principal considerations are as
The nature of the technology—non-exclusive licences are more
common for patents on research tools and gene sequences than for
invention that might result in a drug based therapy; and patent holders are
likely to be more willing to license technology
that is not critical or central
to their business plan.
Identity and business of the patent holder—academic
institutions and biotechnology start-ups appear to be more likely to license
patented technology to a third party on an exclusive basis.
Identity and number of potential
licensees—‘downstream’ entities such as pharmaceutical
companies often insist
on exclusive licences to justify investment in the
research and development of a drug target or therapeutic product, but favour
non-exclusive
licensing of research tools; universities and research
institutions are likely to enter into exclusive licences in order to find
partner for the commercial development of the
and the scope of
rights granted under a licence and the fees payable may differ if the licensee
is an academic institution rather
than a commercial enterprise.
Payment considerations—the larger the licence fees sought by a
patent holder, the more likely a potential licensee is to require
rights to the patented technology. In the case of research tool patents,
requiring a modest fee from multiple licensees
may be the best means to maximise
profits derived from such a
23.22 Respondents
to the Nicol-Nielsen Study indicated that refusals to license gene patents are
relatively low.
In the small
number of cases in which a licence had been refused, respondents suggested that
a justifiable commercial explanation
might exist. These include that: a licence
would conflict with a patent holder’s own business strategy or an
agreement already
in place with another party; the potential licensee was
problematic (in terms of their financial position or reputation in the market
place); the proposed terms of the licence (for example, financial terms) were
unsatisfactory; or the proposed application of the
patented technology by the
potential licensee was
However, Nicol and
Nielsen noted that statistics relating to the frequency with which licences are
refused in the Australian medical
biotechnology sector do not take into account
instances in which an entity chooses not to request a licence because it expects
licence to be refused or offered on unreasonable
Submissions and consultations
23.23 In IP 27, the ALRC
sought information about licensing practices relating to Australian gene
patents, including the type of entities
that are seeking and granting such
licences, the purpose for which licences are being obtained, and whether the
terms on which gene
patents are being licensed are perceived to be fair and
reasonable.
23.24 In conformity with responses to the Nicol-Nielsen Study, a number of
submissions and consultations indicated that licences
are being granted to a
broad range of gene patents and that the inventions claimed in these patents are
being further developed.
example, Davies Collison Cave, submitted:
Based on anecdotal evidence available to us, we believe that licences are
regularly being sought and granted, and the associated inventions
exploited, across the full spectrum of patented technologies, including all
‘gene patent’
technology.
23.25 Submissions also supported Nicol and Nielsen’s conclusion that
refusals to license gene patents do not appear to be a
significant issue in the
Australian biotechnology market at this
Submissions suggested
that failures to negotiate a licence generally reflected the normal operation of
the market, rather than concerted
efforts by Australian patent holders to limit
access to gene patents.
23.26 A few submissions suggested that Australian entities might be using
patented genetic technologies without a licence from the
relevant patent holder.
In particular, comments indicated that Australian universities may operate on
the understanding that any
research conducted by them involving a patented
genetic material or technology does not require a
In addition, diagnostic
testing laboratories in Australia may make use of patented genetic inventions in
performing diagnostic tests
without obtaining a licence. The Royal College of
Pathologists of Australasia (RCPA) stated that, as a matter of practice,
to patents covering genetic materials are ‘rarely requested by
the testing laboratory or demanded by the patent
observations are consistent with the conclusions of the Nicol-Nielsen Study:
[One] option when a particular area of research is discovered to be
infringing a patent is to ignore it. Many respondents in research
institutions
rely on the argument that their research is exempt. There is also some evidence
of patents being ignored in the company
sector. Similarly, in the diagnostics
area, it appears that most patents are
23.27 Although available evidence suggests that licensing practices in Australia
are not unduly restrictive, a few submissions nonetheless
encouraged the ALRC to
address the potential adverse effects if patent holders refused to license gene
patents or offered licences
on unreasonable
Dr Graeme Suthers
There may be limited evidence of problems relating to gene patenting as
yet, but the ALRC must evaluate not only the previous or current
problems but
also the potential problems.
Impediments to gene patent licensing in Australia
23.28 The Nicol-Nielsen
Study suggests that, in addition to the financial factors that might have an
impact on an entity’s ability
to commercialise its gene patents,
impediments continue to exist in the licensing of genetic
inventions.
Respondents to the
Nicol-Nielsen Study commented that Australian gene patent holders and potential
licensees of gene patents in Australia
face difficulties in negotiating licence
agreements, particularly if the other party is a more experienced commercial
One of the big problems identified for Australian companies is lack of
the ruthlessness that many of their international counterparts
have developed.
Hence they tend to cave in too easily when negotiations become difficult. In
part this may be because they don’t
appreciate the value of what they are
acquiring and giving.
23.29 In interviews conducted in connection with the Nicol-Nielsen Study, many
respondents made reference to ‘difficulties
in negotiating’ patent
licences and that ‘often these difficulties stemmed from the fact that
they held an inferior bargaining
Nielsen also concluded that Australian entities ‘lack deal
precedents’ and that ‘one of the biggest problems
is naivety in
bargaining’.
also found that a relatively standard set of licence terms are at issue in most
negotiations,
and certain terms
are consistently matters of substantial disagreement and negotiation—in
particular, payment provisions, field
of use restrictions, and provisions
claiming reach-through
23.30 Australian entities may also have difficulties in identifying the patents
for which a licence is needed. Respondents to the
Nicol-Nielsen Study indicated
that identifying patents that may need to be licensed is an onerous and
expensive exercise, and is
becoming more so as the gene patent landscape becomes
more complex.
In Chapter 9, the
ALRC proposed reforms to IP Australia’s on-line databases for the purpose
of assisting patent holders and
users of patent rights in conducting preliminary
prior art searches.
following section also considers the desirability of establishing mechanisms to
assist patent holders and patent users in identifying
relevant patents and
licensing them as a bundled package.
Facilitating gene patent licensing
23.31 The ALRC has been
considering ways to facilitate access to genetic materials and technologies by
participants in the Australian
biotechnology sector. Later chapters in this
Discussion Paper address the use of the compulsory licensing provisions in the
Patents Act
and consider whether introducing a statutory licensing scheme
(comparable to schemes under the
(Cth)) for certain
beneficial.
23.32 In addition, the ALRC has been considering other government and industry
initiatives that might facilitate gene patent licensing
in Australia and reduce
associated transaction costs, including:
the development of education programs for biotechnology companies
and research institutions relating to the licensing of gene patents;
the development of model licence agreements; and
encouraging industry-based initiatives, such as patent pools and
patent clearinghouses, to facilitate gene patent licensing and technology
Education programs about licensing practices
23.33 Chapters 15 and 18
outlined the variety of programs that exist to support commercialisation of
research by Australian entities,
including programs directed specifically to the
Australian biotechnology sector. To date, the focus of these programs has been
provide support (including funding) to aid the commercial development of
innovation in biotechnology research.
23.34 Biotechnology Australia and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
(DFAT), among others, have also published educational
materials to promote an
understanding of intellectual property issues in biotechnology, including how
intellectual property rights
in biotechnological inventions can be used and
managed most effectively.
involvement of these government agencies in intellectual property issues is an
indication of the importance of intellectual property
in fostering economic
growth and international trade.
23.35 DFAT has published the
Intellectual Property & Biotechnology: A
Training Handbook
Its purpose is to
provide an introduction to key intellectual property concepts, as well as an
understanding of how they apply in
practice. The DFAT IP Handbook comprises ten
self-contained modules, nine of which focus on particular issues in intellectual
law relevant to the biotechnology sector and on managing intellectual
property rights. The tenth module contains case studies that
illustrate the way
in which particular issues may arise in
23.36 The DFAT IP Handbook contains a separate module on licensing and enforcing
intellectual property rights, which provides an
overview of issues that
Australian organisations may encounter in negotiating licences to gene patent
The module outlines
factors relevant to the decision to commercialise an invention and the various
ways in which patent rights can
be exploited. It also includes information
relating to negotiating biotechnology licences—from conducting due
diligence on
a potential licence partner, to the type of provisions that
commonly appear in patent licence agreements and the purpose of these
provisions.
23.37 Biotechnology Australia has also released a manual providing a practical
guide to the identification, protection and management
of biotechnology-related
intellectual property (Biotechnology IP
The manual is a
resource for research institutions, companies and entities funding biotechnology
research, to be used in conjunction
with such entities’ existing
intellectual property management policies and practices. The Biotechnology IP
Manual includes
a separate chapter on commercial exploitation of intellectual
property, which addresses topics such as conducting due diligence,
valuation of
intellectual property, factors relevant to a decision whether to license patent
rights, as well as common terms in patent
licences and their
significance.
23.38 Organisations have also been established to develop the commercial skill
base of Australian entities, including those in the
biotechnology sector. These
organisations and the type of programs offered include the following.
The Australian Institute for Commercialisation is a not-for-profit
company that ‘delivers programs to improve commercialisation
Australia’s research
investment’;
courses on technology commercialisation for managers in public and private
sector organisations; and conducts a ‘commercialisation
for doctoral students and early career
researchers.
AusBiotech Ltd is a national industry body whose membership includes
entities from all aspects of the Australian biotechnology
AusBiotech is aimed at
facilitating the commercialisation of Australian bioscience in the international
marketplace and provides
its members with access to training and information
resources, as well as opportunities to network with other
guidelines and model agreements
23.39 A 2002 report of the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (the OECD Report)
concluded that concerns about
gene patents are often about access to patents
through licensing arrangements, rather than about the grant of gene patents
. In light of this, the report proposed that:
governments [should] consider the development of good practice guidelines
or codes of conduct. Good licensing practices are already
being developed by
public-sector research organisations for internal use (e.g. MTAs [Materials
Transfer Agreements], policies on
research tools and licensing clauses).
Guidelines could also be developed in consultation with industry to determine
the limits of
acceptable licensing
23.40 Similarly, in a report released in 2004, the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD) commented that:
Licensing guidelines or model contracts are self-regulatory solutions to
some of the perceived problems associated with the patenting
biotechnology.
23.41 The OECD’s Working Party on Biotechnology is currently developing
best practice guidelines for the licensing of genetic
inventions.
It is anticipated
that the guidelines will be voluntary, non-binding recommendations and serve as
examples of good practices.
November 2003, a steering group of experts met to discuss this issue, and a
draft of the licensing guidelines is scheduled to
be released in mid-2004.
23.42 Best practice guidelines and model agreements are already an aspect of
technology transfer in the United States. As discussed
in Chapter 13, the United
States National Institutes of Health (NIH) have developed
Principles and
Guidelines for Recipients of NIH Research Grants and Contracts on Obtaining and
Disseminating Biomedical Research Resources
(NIH Principles and
Guidelines).
While the NIH
Principles and Guidelines apply specifically to the recipients of NIH research
grants and contracts, the NIH has expressed
its hope that ‘these
Principles and Guidelines will be adopted by the wider research
community’.
The NIH has
also developed a ‘Simple Letter Agreement for the Transfer of
Materials’ in conjunction with the NIH Principles
and Guidelines. In
addition, a model Materials Transfer Agreement developed by the United
States’ Association of University
Technology Managers (AUTM) is widely
used by entities in the United States and other
organisations—such as the Licensing Executives Society—and industry
publications may also be a source of examples
of standard form licence
agreements.
Patent pools and other industry initiatives
23.43 Patent pools, patent
clearinghouses, or collective rights organisations have also been proposed as a
self-regulatory solution
to address difficulties in obtaining access to patented
genetic materials and technologies. The OECD Report has suggested that:
Novel solutions, such as patent pools, clearinghouses and collective
licensing organisations, should be further explored to understand
potential utility and their real impact on the biopharmaceutical
Patent pools
23.44 A ‘patent pool’ is an agreement
between two or more patent holders to license their respective patents to one
or to third parties, on a non-exclusive
Participants in a patent
pool typically retain ownership of their respective patent rights, and license
the pooled patents directly,
or through an administrative intermediary
established for the purpose.
23.45 Patent pools have been created in relation to other technologies,
including in connection with sewing machines, aircraft and
radio parts,
semiconductors and DVD
technology.
However, there is
limited precedent for patent pools in
bioscience.
23.46 The purpose of a patent pool is to facilitate the use of other
entities’ intellectual property. In principle, patent
pools could be
employed by patent holders to facilitate access to complementary, blocking or
other patented tools for use in genetic
research and development, or to
facilitate access to various medical genetic tests or other genetic
23.47 A number of benefits may flow from the pooling of patent rights. The OECD
Report has suggested that patent pools may:
(i) help integrate complementary technologies; (ii) reduce transaction
costs; (iii) clear blocking positions; (iv) avoid costly infringement
litigation; and (v) promote the dissemination of
technology.
23.48 However, patent pools have also been criticised on the basis of the
perceived anti-competitive effects of such arrangements.
It has been suggested
that patent pools may inflate the costs of competitively priced technologies and
encourage collusion and price
These issues are
discussed in Chapter 24. In addition, some critics have suggested that patent
pools may shield invalid
23.49 Questions have been raised about the feasibility of establishing patent
pools in the biotechnology sector. The OECD Report
has commented that, while
there appears to be a growing interdependence among gene patents, and while
licensing transaction costs
may be burdensome, the biotechnology industry is
unlike the electronics sector. In the latter sector, defining standards and
interoperability
of technologies is important and may act as an incentive to the
development of patent pools.
23.50 Professor Arti Rai has argued that patent pools are most likely to arise
when horizontal competitors, who share similar values
and are engaged in
repeat-play transactions, each hold similar portfolios of blocking patents.
Where the relevant parties have disparate
patent positions and consequently
differing attitudes towards patents, patents pools are less likely to arise. Rai
has commented
the relevant players in the biotechnology industry include institutions
ranging from federal agencies and academic institutions to
various types of
private companies, each of which has a different agenda. In the context of a
patent pool, these heterogeneous parties
would probably have difficulty reaching
agreement on the licensing policy the pool should
23.51 However, Rai considered that a patent pool might be formed in the
biotechnology context where multiple patents are absolutely
necessary to conduct
basic research on a gene or a particular
The OECD Report also
commented that some of the impediments to patent pools in the biotechnology
sector may be overcome if limited
fields of application and essential patents
can be defined.
Patent clearinghouses
23.52 Patent clearinghouses—or collective rights
organisations—are, in effect, a more formalised patent
Clearinghouses may cover a
broader range of technologies than a particular patent pool and are more likely
to rely on a single entity
to coordinate the administrative functions associated
with the licensing of patent rights.
23.53 Patent clearinghouses are analogous to collecting societies that
administer licences over certain types of copyright
Professor Robert Merges
has identified a number of distinctive features of such arrangements,
the establishment of the clearinghouse by knowledgeable industry
participants;
the division of intellectual property rights into categories based
on the participants’ knowledge and experience; and
the establishment of a price for the rights within each category
(either individually or as a package), which applies equally to
similarly-situated licensees.
23.54 In addressing the
benefits of patent clearinghouses in the agricultural biotechnology industry,
Gregory Graff and David Zilberman
have suggested that an effective clearinghouse
mechanism would provide the following
identification of all relevant intellectual property, together with
an indication of whether such rights are available for licensing;
establishment of a pricing scheme, contractual terms, and royalty
distribution arrangements; and
an arbitration mechanism for monitoring and enforcing
23.55 The advantages of patent clearinghouses are similar to
those identified in the case of patent pools, namely:
the consolidation of intellectual property rights by intellectual
property holders so that negotiating contracts with numerous rights
streamlined and transaction costs are consequently
23.56 Nicol and Nielsen have suggested that the use of patent clearinghouses in
the Australian biotechnology industry warrants further
consideration. They
considered that patents clearinghouses—perhaps in conjunction with a
statutory licensing scheme—might
address problems caused by licensing
transaction costs and the need to obtain authorisation to use an increasing
number of patent
rights in order to pursue a particular line of
They commented that,
while a clearinghouse arrangement may not be suitable for patent licences
relating to drug development, it may
be useful in the context of patented
genetic sequences and genetic research
Submissions and consultations
23.57 IP 27 asked whether
patent pools or clearinghouses should be created to make it easier for
laboratories to obtain licences for
patented genetic inventions, and how this
might best be achieved.
23.58 Several submissions expressed support for the creation of patent pools or
clearinghouses in this context.
For example, the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research commented
this would help both the patent holders (increased attractiveness to
users) and the users (increased ease of dealing with all existing
patents and
licences). This would be most important for generic tools, technologies and
procedures where specific packages could
be put together for different
applications. This might best be achieved by creating a commercial opportunity
for patent and licence
packaging companies who would investigate the most
attractive packages somewhat like insurance brokers and negotiate the best
because they can deal in
23.59 Addressing the desirability of patent pools and clearinghouses in relation
to diagnostic genetic testing, the Human Genetics
Society of Australasia
submitted that:
Where a licence is necessary and royalties are payable on a ‘number
of tests done’ basis, patent pools and clearinghouses
could reduce the
difficulties for laboratories. For Australia, one could envisage a single
‘entity’ that would act for
all patent holders. Laboratories would
deal with that ‘entity’ in relation to all patent issues.
‘Bundled licences’
that meet the needs of the laboratory could be
provided, with responsibility for dividing up the revenue generated and
it to patent holders resting with the
23.60 Several submissions, while supporting voluntary arrangements, expressed
concern or opposition to the creation of compulsory
patent pools or
clearinghouses.
For example,
GlaxoSmithKline submitted that:
Voluntary patent pools can help reduce patent thickets and transaction
costs, although patentees unwilling to license their patents
widely may well be
unwilling to add their patents to the pool. Compulsory patent pools should not
be created as this would serve
to reduce the incentive to
23.61 McBratney and others submitted that patent pools could ‘fall
foul’ of competition law. They suggested that the
compulsory licensing
regime may be just as effective, and with less risk of competition law
complications.
addresses these issues further.
ALRC’s views
23.62 The results of the
Nicol-Nielsen Study, as well as submissions and consultations to the
ALRC’s Inquiry, suggest that restrictive
licensing of gene patents is not
currently pervasive in the Australian biotechnology industry. Further, as
outlined in other chapters
of this Discussion Paper, no significant adverse
impact on genetic research, commercialisation, or the healthcare system in
has been demonstrated at this stage. In light of this, the ALRC is not
inclined to make proposals aimed specifically at regulating
gene patent
licensing practices, or prohibiting certain types of licensing arrangements.
23.63 However, available evidence does suggest that some participants in the
Australian biotechnology sector may find the negotiation
of patent licences to
be problematic. These difficulties stem from a variety of causes, including lack
of commercial experience in
licensing patents generally, the unequal bargaining
power of the parties, and inadequate resources to commit to extended licence
negotiations.
In addition, the
increasing complexity of the Australian patent landscape may create difficulties
for entities in identifying relevant
patents and in negotiating licences.
Education programs
23.64 The ALRC considers that an effective way to
address these matters is to assist Australian entities in developing commercial
and negotiation skills by enhancing education programs about licensing
inventions involving genetic materials and technologies. Biotechnology
would be an appropriate body to co-ordinate the development of such programs, in
consultation with state and territory
governments and other relevant
stakeholders.
23.65 Education programs about patent licensing would expand upon projects
already undertaken by Biotechnology Australia and other
federal, state and
territory departments to assist Australian entities in commercialising the
results of biotechnology research.
In Chapter 18, the ALRC proposed that
Biotechnology Australia continue to develop and implement programs to assist
technology transfer
offices in commercialising inventions involving genetic
materials and technologies (see Proposal 18 - 1). Education programs about
patent licensing directed to Australian research institutions and biotechnology
companies would complement these initiatives.
23.66 The education programs should address issues such as structuring deals
aimed at the licensing of inventions involving genetic
materials and
technologies; alternative mechanisms by which rights to a patent may be obtained
by a third party (such as a patent
assignment) and when these mechanisms might
be preferable to licensing patent rights; common terms in gene patent licences;
licensing practices; and negotiation strategies for gene patent holders
and licensees of gene patent rights. The programs should
also address other
issues relevant to the licensing and enforcement of patent rights, including
patent litigation insurance.
Model licence agreements
23.67 Transaction costs in negotiating licences to gene
patents have also been identified as an issue for Australian entities. The
Nicol-Nielsen Study suggested that licence negotiations often follow a
well-trodden path in which certain types of terms generate
controversy. The ALRC agrees in principle with the solutions proposed by the
OECD and considers that these problems would
be minimised by the development of
model agreements for the licensing of inventions involving genetic materials and
technologies.
Model licence agreements would reduce the financial costs and time
involved in negotiating licences to gene patents, and would be
particularly
useful for small and medium sized Australian entities, which have limited
23.68 The ALRC considers that AusBiotech Ltd would be an appropriate body to
coordinate the development of such model agreements.
As the peak industry body
in the Australian biotechnology sector, AusBiotech’s membership includes
entities whose businesses
involve diverse aspects of the research, development
and commercialisation of genetic materials and technologies. AusBiotech appears,
therefore, to be well-placed to seek opinions about the issues that model
agreements should address and to balance the interests
of patent holders and
licensees in developing these agreements. Government involvement in this process
(at federal, state and territory
levels) would also be desirable to ensure that
the public interest in maintaining access to genetic materials and
technologies—for
example, to genetic research tools—is taken into
account in developing model agreements.
23.69 The ALRC envisages that a number of model agreements could be developed to
address the particular issues raised by different
various purposes for which a licence may be required. Entities that choose to
use the model agreements
would be able to adopt the terms of an appropriate
agreement in full, or to modify an agreement by negotiation in a manner that
suits the needs of the parties. Some terms of the model
agreements—for example, financial provisions—are more likely
others to require adaptation to meet the particular needs of the parties.
However, model agreements could nonetheless offer
useful examples of the way in
which financial terms might be structured, as a starting point in
negotiations.
23.70 Uniform agreements developed by bodies such as the NIH and AUTM in the
United States, as well as the licensing guidelines currently
being developed by
the Biotechnology Working Group of the OECD, may be useful resources in
developing the proposed model
agreements.
The ALRC considers
that model agreements would include provisions relating to: definitions of
particular types of genetic materials
and technologies; the scope of rights
granted under a licence (including both exclusive and non-exclusive licences);
restrictions
on the exercise of licence rights (such as reservations of rights
for research use); and payment terms (including desirable royalty
structures,
fixed fee and milestone payment provisions). The agreements might also include
model provisions relating to more controversial
licensing issues, such as
reach-through terms. Interpretative guidelines should be developed in
conjunction with the model agreements
to assist users in understanding the
circumstances in which each of the agreements could be used and the scope and
purpose of particular
terms in the agreements.
Industry initiatives
23.71 The ALRC considers that the development of
education programs and the creation of model licence agreements will address
of the issues faced by Australian biotechnology companies and research
institutions in licensing gene patent rights. However, these
reforms are
unlikely to address all the difficulties that Australian entities face in
identifying relevant gene patents to which
a licence may be required, and in
meeting the high transaction costs of negotiating multiple licences. Additional
mechanisms may
be required to facilitate licensing in relation to genetic
materials and technologies within the Australian biotechnology sector.
23.72 The ALRC believes that a representative industry body should consider the
feasibility of establishing patent pools or patent
clearinghouses over
particular types of patented genetic materials or technologies. As noted above,
AusBiotech Ltd is the peak biotechnology
industry body in Australia, with a
diverse membership base. It would be an appropriate body to encourage and
coordinate the consideration
of industry-based initiatives to facilitate the
licensing of genetic materials and technologies.
Proposal 23 - 1
Biotechnology Australia, in consultation with state
and territory governments and other relevant stakeholders, should continue to
develop and implement education programs to assist research institutions and
biotechnology companies in licensing and commercialising
inventions involving
genetic materials and technologies. (See also Proposals 18 - 1 and
Proposal 23 - 2
AusBiotech Ltd should develop model agreements and
interpretative guidelines for patent licences involving genetic materials and
technologies. The model agreements should be developed in consultation with
Biotechnology Australia, state and territory governments,
and other relevant
stakeholders as a non-binding model of desirable licensing practices. (See also
Proposals 13 - 1 and 18 - 4.)
Proposal 23 - 3
AusBiotech Ltd should consider ways in which industry
initiatives can facilitate the licensing of patent rights over genetic materials
and technologies, for example through the establishment of patent pools or
patent clearinghouses.
Patents Act 1990
The right to exploit an invention is subject to earlier patents not owned by the
patent holder, as well as any necessary government
‘Licence’ is
defined in the
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) as ‘a licence to exploit, or
to authorise the exploitation of, a patented invention’: Ibid sch 1. The
an exclusive licence may carry with it some of the indicia of
ownership, for example the right to enforce the licensed patent rights.
holder must also seek a licensee’s consent to amend a patent specification
(unless this requirement is waived by the
Commissioner of Patents):
express or implied licence to use a patented product may also be included with
the purchase of any such product.
general discussion of the relevant factors, see Biotechnology Australia,
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
(2001), Ch 8; Department of
Foreign Affairs & Trade and AusAID,
Intellectual Property and
Biotechnology: A Training Handbook
(2001), Module 9; D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
6, 97 - 99.
This list is not
comprehensive and is intended only as a guide to issues that a patent holder may
wish to regulate by the licence.
fees may be structured in a number of ways and may include payments in one or
more of the following forms: royalty payments,
fixed fees, minimum guaranteed
payments, and milestone payments.
agreement may also provide that a licensee is responsible for matters that are
typically the obligation of the licensor—such
as maintenance and
enforcement of the licensed patent rights—particularly if patent rights
are licensed on an exclusive
Biotechnology Australia,
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
D Nicol and J Nielsen, ‘The
Australian Medical Biotechnology Industry and Access to Intellectual Property:
Issues for Patent
Law Development’
[2001] SydLawRw 16
Sydney Law Review
358 - 360; J Nielsen, ‘Biotechnology Patent Licensing Agreements and
Anti-competitive Conduct’ in Centre for Law and
Genetics (ed)
Regulating The New Frontiers: Legal Issues in Biotechnology Symposium
(Occasional Paper No 4)
(2002), 38, 39, 43; D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
6, 93. See further Ch 17.
D Nicol and J
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues
Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional
Paper No 6, 110.
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
October 2003.
Limitations on the
availability of information about gene patent licensing practices have also been
noted by the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development:
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions,
Intellectual Property Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
(2002), 45.
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations 1991
Subject to certain exceptions,
the listing rules of the Australian Stock Exchange require disclosure of
information that may have
a material effect on the price or value of an
entity’s securities: see ASX Listing Rules, ch
Department of Industry Tourism and
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
, 7 November 2003.
responses were received from 49 companies, 23 research institutions and 18
diagnostic testing facilities. Forty interviews
were also conducted with
representatives from research institutes, companies, and diagnostic testing
facilities: D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An
Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre
for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
Ibid, 95 - 97, 104,
Ibid, 109 - 122,
Similarly, a United
States study of entities operating in the biotechnology field has suggested that
non-profit entities (including
universities) are more likely to rely on
exclusive licensing arrangements than private companies: M Henry and others,
Patenting and Licensing’ (2002) 297
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
6, 151 - 152.
Six out of 49
companies and two out of 23 research institutes surveyed by Nicol and Nielsen
indicated that their request for a patent
licence had been refused; no
diagnostic facilities that responded to the survey had been refused a licence:
Ibid, 145 - 146. Information
provided in interviews conducted by Nicol and
Nielsen reinforce the survey data: D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical
Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
6, 145, 148 - 149.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Questions 10 - 1,
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003; A McBratney and
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
, 7 November
Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003. See also GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Royal College of Pathologists of
Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; Department of Industry Tourism and
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003; Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003; Genetic
Technologies Limited,
Submission P45
, 20 October 2003; A McBratney and
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003; Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
November 2003.
Department of Industry
Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003; Walter and Eliza
Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003;
AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November
A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003. The impact of patents on genetic
research is addressed in Ch 13. In addition, Ch 14 considers whether the
Patents Act
should be amended to include an ‘experimental
use’ defence to patent infringement
Royal College of Pathologists
of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003. The RCPA indicated that
approximately 40 out of the approximately 200 tests that are listed on the
website of the
Human Genetics Society of Australasia are covered by patents.
However, the RCPA was not aware of any Australian company seeking licences
or granting licences to, Australian diagnostic
laboratories.
Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis
of Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6, 257.
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; G
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003; Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003. See also Human Genetics Society
of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
See further Ch
and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of
Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6, 114.
Ibid, 115 - 119,
Ibid, 160, 162 - 163.
Reach-through claims in patent licences may provide for the licensor to obtain
ownership, licence rights or
royalty payments to inventions arising as a result
of activities conducted under a licence: see further Ch
See Ch 27 and
Biotechnology Australia,
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
(2001); Department of Foreign
Affairs & Trade and AusAID,
Intellectual Property and Biotechnology: A
Training Handbook
Department of Foreign Affairs
& Trade and AusAID,
Intellectual Property and Biotechnology: A Training
The DFAT IP
Handbook indicates that it is intended for use as a resource in connection with
a training course, either in a group
or on an individual basis: Ibid,
Ibid, Module
Biotechnology Australia,
Biotechnology Intellectual Property Manual
Australian Institute for
Commercialisation Ltd,
, <www.ausicom.com> at 12
January 2004.
Australian Institute for
Commercialisation Ltd,
AIC Professional Development
<www.ausicom.com/02_service_centre> at 12 January
AusBiotech Ltd,
AusBiotech?
, <www.ausbiotech.org> at 21 January 2004; AusBiotech Ltd,
AusBiotech’s Corporate Members
, <www.ausbiotech.org> at 21
January 2004.
AusBiotech Ltd,
Membership Benefits
, <www.ausbiotech.org> at 21 January
Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual
Property Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,
Patents and
Innovation: Trends and Policy Challenges
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Guidelines for Good Licensing Practices
<www.oecd.org> at 22 October
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Brief Explanation of the Working Party on
Biotechnology’s Project on Best Practice Guidelines for the Licensing of
Genetic Inventions
, <www.oecd.org/dataoecd/2/39/9230380.PDF> at 29
August 2003.
National Institutes of
Health, ‘Principles and Guidelines for Recipients of NIH Research Grants
and Contracts on Obtaining
and Disseminating Biomedical Research
Resources’ (1999) 64
Materials Transfer Agreements
are discussed in Ch
Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual
Property Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
(2002), 82.
See also Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,
Patents and
Innovation: Trends and Policy Challenges
J Clark and others,
Pools: A Solution to the Problem of Access in Biotechnology Patents?
United States Patents and Trademarks Office, 4; Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual Property
Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
(2002), 66. See also
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission,
Submission P64
December 2003.
J Clark and others,
Patent Pools: A Solution to the Problem of Access in Biotechnology
(2000) United States Patents and Trademarks Office,
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual Property
Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
66 - 67. See also J Clark and others,
Patent Pools: A Solution to the
Problem of Access in Biotechnology Patents?
(2000) United States Patents and
Trademarks Office, 8 - 10.
and others,
Patent Pools: A Solution to the Problem of Access in
Biotechnology Patents?
(2000) United States Patents and Trademarks Office,
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual Property
Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
‘Intellectual Property Rights in Biotechnology: Addressing New
Technology’
Wake Forest Law Review
, 840 - 841.
See also F Scherer, ‘The Economics of Human Gene Patents’ (2002) 77
Academic Medicine
1363 - 1364.
‘Fostering Cumulative Innovation in the Biopharmaceutical Industry: The
Role of Patents and Antitrust’
Berkeley Technology Law
Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development,
Genetic Inventions, Intellectual
Property Rights and Licensing Practices: Evidence and Policies
The terms ‘collective rights
organisations’ and ‘clearinghouses’ are sometimes used
interchangeably and at
other times in conjunction. For the purposes of this
Discussion Paper, the term ‘clearinghouses’ is used to refer to
arrangements with the features identified in this section: see, eg, G Graff and
D Zilberman, ‘Towards an Intellectual Property
Clearinghouse for
Agricultural Biotechnology’ (2001) 3
IP Strategy Today
R Merges, ‘Contracting Into
Liability Rules: Intellectual Property Rights and Collective Rights
Organizations’
California Law Review
G Graff and D Zilberman,
‘Towards an Intellectual Property Clearinghouse for Agricultural
Biotechnology’ (2001) 3
IP Strategy Today
1, 9. See also D Nicol
and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of
Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6,
D Nicol and J
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues
Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional
Paper No 6, 242.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
For example, South
Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003; Walter and Eliza
Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003; G
Submission P30
, 2 October
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003; G Suthers,
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003; A
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Other difficulties faced by
Australian research institutions and biotechnology companies in patenting and
commercialising research
results are considered in Ch 15, 18 and
Patent litigation insurance is
discussed in Ch 9.
Aspects of these
agreements that address particular requirements of United States law would,
however, need to be appropriately adapted
for the Australian context.
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
24. Patents and Competition Law
Introduction
Competition and patent law
Intellectual property laws and competition laws
Submissions and consultations
Patent or competition law?
Trade Practices Act
Anti-competitive conduct
Misuse of market power
Access to services
Patents Act
Other jurisdictions
United States
European Union
The TRIPS Agreement
Competition law and gene patents
Anti-competitive conduct
Misuse of market power
Mergers and acquisitions
Patent pools and cross-licensing
Options for reform
ALRC's views
Monitoring and enforcement
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
24. Patents and Competition Law
Introduction
chapter discusses the relationship between patent law and competition law, and
considers to what extent competition law
can be used to prevent or remedy
anti-competitive conduct in relation to patented genetic materials and
technologies.
24.2 The two key pieces of legislation in this area are Part IV of the
Practices Act 1974
(Cth) (TPA), which proscribes a range of anti-competitive
conduct; and the
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act
limits the inclusion of certain anti-competitive conditions in contracts, leases
or licences to exploit a patent,
and provides remedies for unjustified threats of infringement
proceedings.
Competition and patent law
Intellectual property laws and competition laws
24.3 Competition
law seeks ‘to enhance the welfare of Australians through the promotion of
competition and fair trading and
provision for consumer
protection’.
The promotion of
competition and fair trading can enhance dynamic efficiency and motivate
technological innovation, which in turn
promotes competition between market
participants. Intellectual property laws seek to encourage innovation by
granting exclusive statutory
property rights to certain creative and inventive
24.4 One commentator has noted that although competition law and intellectual
property law both seek to increase competition and
efficiency within markets to
the benefit of consumers, their modes of achieving this goal differ:
competition law strives to maintain a consistently competitive market
whilst intellectual property law is content to allow mild distortions
conditions to realise long term benefits. Thus, despite the common goal,
intellectual property law’s mode of achieving
market efficiencies is
antithetical to competition law’s view of acceptable behaviour. It is this
ideological impasse that
24.5 According to the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission’s
(ACCC) submission to this Inquiry:
The interaction between competition laws and intellectual property laws
raises a crucial question about the types of incentives that
are required to
encourage innovation efforts to the level that is best for society. Another
question is whether society benefits
most if it rewards initial innovation
efforts through broad intellectual property protection, or if it fosters
successive innovation
by requiring access to the intellectual property of the
initial innovator. The answers to such questions help to define the appropriate
scope of statutory IP rights. The scope of IP rights can have a significant
bearing on the structure of markets.
24.6 The Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee (IPCRC)
considered the interaction between competition and patent
law in its report,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation under the Competition Principles
(IPCRC Report). The IPCRC commented that:
The major concerns of competition policy in regard to intellectual
property rights are the market power that may result from granting
such rights,
and the detrimental effects caused by the anti-competitive exercise of IP
rights. At its simplest, market power can
harm consumers by setting prices which
are higher than those needed to secure cost-effective production. Moreover, the
harm caused
by market power may extend beyond this, when the protection granted
to firms allows them to slow or distort innovation. Under these
circumstances,
market power will limit the growth of productivity over time, and reduce the
scope for sustainable increases in living
24.7 The IPCRC considered that there are genuine grounds for concern when
intellectual property rights are used to slow the process
of innovation, thereby
hindering future competition. In its opinion, mechanisms were needed to prevent
firms from using intellectual
property rights to camouflage conduct involving
price fixing, dividing markets or monopolising supply in other ways. The IPCRC
that, overall:
the system of intellectual property laws acts to promote competition by
maintaining the incentives to innovate, while striving to
balance—through the nature and content of the rights it
grants—between those incentives and society’s
interest in the
widespread diffusion of ideas. [The Committee] believes that the terms of the
balance are properly specified in the
intellectual property laws themselves ...
However, the Committee recognises that the rights granted by the intellectual
laws can be used to anti-competitive ends. This occurs when the rights
are used to claim for the creator not merely a share of the
gains society
obtains from the creation, but also rents that arise from market power
Submissions and consultations
24.8 IP 27 asked whether,
following the IPCRC Report and the Australian Government’s response to it,
there were any competition
issues specifically relevant to gene patents that
needed to be dealt with in the course of this
24.9 Several submissions suggested that the ALRC should consider the competition
issues that may arise from conduct relating to patented
genetic materials and
technologies.
The Walter and
Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research submitted that there is a natural
antagonism between patent law, which grants
potential time-restricted monopoly
rights, and competition policy:
For single products (eg therapeutic goods or specific diagnostic tests)
exclusive licensing is required for commercial viability of
the R&D program
(ie you only get one bite of the cherry). For generic technologies, tools and
methods of doing something one
could argue that exclusive licensing is not
necessary for commercial viability, is anti-competitive and not in the public
24.10 The ACCC submitted that, to the extent possible, it would prefer solutions
that are capable of general application across all
patents and sectors of the
economy. It commented that:
the licensing or assignment of IP rights is often pro-competitive as it
enables IP to be exploited to a greater extent than would
occur if the rights
are not licensed or assigned at all. In these instances, licensing or assigning
IP rights can increase production,
geographic distribution and the rate of new
product introduction. The licensing or assignment of IP rights can also be
pro-competitive
if it enables the licensee to engage in commercial activity that
would otherwise be closed to it, or which could only be engaged
duplicating or ‘inventing around’ the existing IP rights.
In some instances, however, a condition of an IP license or assignment
may have a detrimental impact on competition. A key concern
for the ACCC with
intellectual property licensing and assignment conditions is that they are not
used to inappropriately constrain
competition.
24.11 The Australian Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture (ACIPA)
submitted that the potential for gene patents to be
anti-competitive is a real
concern. ACIPA commented that the IPCRC and the National Competition Council
had both failed to address
these concerns in any detail:
In the past most pharmaceutical products were chemical entities, while
future products promise to be based on genetic materials (for
the diagnosis and
treatment of genetic conditions). This makes gene and gene sequence patents a
key factor in sustaining pharmaceutical
prices and ensuring the financial return
to the pharmaceutical industry, and [is] a significant issue in considering the
likely impact
of patenting on competition. [The] failure of the Intellectual
Property and Competition Review Committee to examine the role of patenting
different industries was a significant oversight. The inability to substitute or
imitate broadly claimed genetic material patents
and the concentration of the
exclusive rights in large vertically integrated corporations can be expected to
extract high social
costs in Australia through a prolonged period of higher
prices, restricted access and curtailed innovation
24.12 The Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory Council submitted that:
If research institutions find their capacity to engage in research and
development affected by gene patents, this could reduce the
pressure to improve
genetic tests and pharmaceuticals based on an understanding of gene structure.
This has the potential to perpetuate
patent-based monopolies by limiting
competition in the development of new knowledge based on existing gene patents.
This may add
unnecessarily to the costs of these services and products.
These issues do not automatically arise and many early genetic and
related technology patents have been subject to broad licensing
arrangements.
The human genetic and related technology industry, however, relies more heavily
on patents in their strategic business
planning than most other industries. The
industry is currently diverse, with a large number of small to medium
enterprises. As a
result many companies are dependent on a small number of
patents to maintain commercial viability. In such circumstances there are
commercial reasons to vigorously protect their broad
24.13 Several submissions contended that gene patents do not raise any
competition issues that are not relevant to patents in other
technology.
AusBiotech Ltd
submitted that:
Any changes in the light of the Intellectual Property and Competition
Review Committee’s report of 2000 and the Federal Government’s
response thereto should apply to all fields of technology. If anything,
restrictions should be less rigorous in view of the small
numbers of companies
in the biotechnology field.
Patent or competition law?
24.14 The ALRC received
several submissions suggesting that the primary focus of concern should be on
the breadth of gene patents,
rather than the potentially anti-competitive use of
them. They commented that the granting of narrower patents over upstream genetic
inventions would minimise both the patent holder’s monopoly, and the
impact on competition in downstream research and healthcare
24.15 Several commentators have discussed the interaction between competition
and patent law in relation to broad patents. Jane Nielsen
of the University of
Tasmania’s Centre for Law and Genetics, has suggested that:
Biotechnology raises new hopes in terms of public health, improved
economy and consumer welfare. Much upstream research is now being
conducted, but
downstream research and production may be hindered if the patent laws are given
too free a rein. This is due to the
breadth of patents being granted, and the
fact that courts are more likely at the present time to enforce patent laws over
competition
24.16 Dr Charles Lawson of ACIPA has expressed concern that:
an analysis of gene and gene sequence patenting in Australia has
illustrated the potential for very broad claims to both sequences
and sequence
applications to effectively confound competitors using the basic patented
genetic materials at all or inventing around
the patents ... This brings the
effectiveness of competition law into focus and poses the question whether
Australian patent and
competition law will be effective in delivering to the
Australian economy reasonably priced access to, and use of, the basic patented
genetic materials, on which a competitive domestic pharmaceutical and
agricultural industry, and further economically useful innovations
24.17 Patent law has several mechanisms that may be used to address competition
concerns. For example, Chapter 6 discusses the criteria
for patentability in
relation to genetic materials and technologies, and Chapter 26 discusses the
potential for compulsory licensing.
This chapter focuses on the use of
competition law, rather than patent law, to address competition concerns.
Trade Practices Act
Anti-competitive conduct
of the TPA deals with restrictive trade
It prohibits
anti-competitive agreements between competing firms, such as price fixing
(‘horizontal
agreements’);
anti-competitive agreements between firms at different stages of the production
chain, such as exclusive dealing and resale price
maintenance (‘vertical
agreements’);
market power;
and mergers or
acquisitions that are anti-competitive in
Certain conduct is
prohibited if it has the purpose or effect of ‘substantially lessening
competition’ in a market, while
other conduct is prohibited on a
‘per se’ basis.
of the TPA prohibits contracts, arrangements or understandings
that have the purpose, effect, or likely effect of substantially lessening
competition; or which contain an ‘exclusionary
prohibited on a ‘per se’ basis. Sections 45A - 45EB regulate
specific types of conduct, including price-fixing
and secondary
24.20 Section 46 provides that a firm with a substantial degree of power in a
market must not take advantage of that power for the
purpose of eliminating or
substantially damaging a competitor, preventing entry into that market or into
any other market, or deterring
or preventing a person from engaging in
competitive conduct in that or any other
24.21 Section 47 prohibits exclusive dealing in relation to a number of vertical
restraint practices, where this has the purpose
or effect of substantially
lessening competition in a market.
24.22 Section 48 prohibits resale price maintenance, for example where a
supplier sets the minimum price at which its goods or services
are resold to a
third person. Maximum price limits are not prohibited by this
prohibits mergers or acquisitions that would have the effect or
likely effect of substantially lessening competition in a substantial
Intellectual property exemption
Section 51(3)
of the TPA provides a limited
exemption from some of the
prohibitions for certain conditions in
intellectual property licences and assignments. This section exempts conditions
that relate
to the subject matter of the intellectual property, which might
otherwise constitute collusive conduct or price fixing (ss 4D,
exclusive dealing (s 47) or an acquisition which would result in a substantial
lessening of competition in a market
24.25 The exemption does not extend to the misuse of market power (ss 46, 46A)
or resale price maintenance (s 48). As the exemption
applies only to conditions
in licences and agreements, it also does not cover refusals to license
intellectual property, or infringement
or enforcement actions.
Authorisation and notification
24.26 The ACCC may authorise conduct that might
otherwise breach particular provisions of
, 47, 48 and
The ACCC applies different
tests when determining authorisations, depending on the nature of the conduct in
question. Generally,
the ACCC may authorise conduct if it is satisfied that the
proposed agreement or arrangement would be likely to result in a public
that outweighs the detriment to the public caused by any lessening of
competition. The ACCC may authorise certain conduct
that is per se illegal if
the public benefit resulting from the conduct justifies the grant of the
authorisation.
24.27 A firm may notify the ACCC of proposed conduct constituting exclusive
dealing (s 47). Generally, the notified conduct is taken
not to have the
purpose, effect or likely effect of substantially lessening competition until
the notification is cancelled.
The ACCC may issue a notice to the firm withdrawing such protection if it is
satisfied that the conduct has the purpose or effect
of substantially lessening
competition and that no public benefit will result from the conduct, or that
such public benefit would
not outweigh the public detriment constituted by the
lessening of competition.
Misuse of market power
24.28 As noted above, s 46 of
the TPA provides that a firm with a substantial degree of power in a market must
not take advantage
of that power for the purpose of eliminating or substantially
damaging a competitor, preventing entry into that market or into any
market, or deterring or preventing a person from engaging in competitive conduct
in that or any other market.
purpose of this section is to protect competition in the market, rather than
individual competitors.
The relevant market
24.29 To determine the degree of power a corporation has
in a market, it is necessary to define the relevant market within which it
operating. The Trade Practices Tribunal articulated the principles on which
markets are identified and defined in
Queensland Co-op Milling Association
Ltd v Defiance Holdings Ltd
A market is the area of close competition between firms, or putting it a
little differently, the field of rivalry between them ...
Within the bounds of
the market there is substitution between one product and another, in response to
changing prices. So a market
is the field of actual and potential transactions
between buyers and sellers amongst whom there can be strong substitution, at
in the long run, if given sufficient price incentive ... Whether such
substitution is feasible depends ultimately on customer attitudes,
technology,
distance and cost and price incentives
24.30 This formulation is reflected in s 4E of the TPA, which defines a
‘market’ as:
a market in Australia and, when used in relation to any goods or
services, includes a market for those goods or services and other
services that are substitutable for, or otherwise competitive with, the
first-mentioned goods or services.
24.31 Substitutability within a market has four
dimensions: product differentiation; geographic; functional market level; and
and temporal
dimensions.
24.32 Substitutability is determined by reference to the ‘price elevation
test’ or the ‘price incentive test’.
This involves considering
the likely responsiveness of both buyers and sellers to a small percentage
increase in price for the relevant
product. If users would shift to other
products or if other producers could quickly and easily alter their product mix
an alternative supply, these products and the suppliers should be
included in the same market as the products of the producer under
investigation.
Market power
24.33 To determine whether a corporation has a
substantial degree of power in the relevant market, the court must consider the
to which the conduct of the corporation is constrained by the conduct of
competitors (or potential competitors), suppliers or
24.34 The traditional test of market power was formulated by Mason CJ and Wilson
Queensland Wire Industries v BHP
the ability of a firm to raise prices above supply cost without rivals
taking away customers in due time, supply cost being the minimum
efficient firm would incur in producing the
24.35 The Trade Practices Commission’s background paper,
Market Power
, defined ‘market power’ as:
the ability of a corporation to make decisions with some degree of
independence from the discipline of the market place, ie the ability
to act with some degree of freedom from the competitive constraints, exerted by
its actual or potential competitors, suppliers
Boral Besser Masonry Limited v ACCC
, Gleeson CJ and Callinan J
stated that market power is the capacity to act without constraint. While
pricing is usually regarded
as the critical test of market power, the capacity
to withhold supply or to decide the terms and conditions (apart from price) upon
which to supply, also manifests market power. Their Honours commented that:
Power, that is, the capacity to act without constraint, may result from a
variety of circumstances. A large market share may, or may
not, give power. The
presence or absence of barriers to entry into a market will ordinarily be vital.
Vertical integration may be
Universal Music Australia Pty Ltd v ACCC
, the Full Federal Court
held that a corporation’s conduct in a market refers to its conduct in the
market generally, rather
than in relation to a particular market participant.
However, the latter may be of evidentiary value in establishing the former.
addition, market power is determined by reference to persistent rather than
temporary conditions.
Taking advantage
24.38 A firm with a substantial degree of market power
may breach s 46 if it ‘takes advantage of’ that power for a
purpose. Section 46 requires not merely the co-existence of market
power, conduct and proscribed purpose, but a connection such that
the firm whose
conduct is in question can be said to be taking advantage of its
24.39 The term ‘take advantage of’ means ‘use’, and does
not require conduct that is predatory or morally
blameworthy.
Publishing Pty Ltd v Robert Hicks Pty Ltd
, the High Court held that where a
firm acts in a manner that is consistent with the way it could have acted in a
competitive market,
its conduct is unlikely to constitute a taking advantage of
market power.
Proscribed purpose
24.40 A ‘proscribed purpose’ under s 46
means eliminating or substantially damaging a competitor, preventing or
a person from entering, or engaging in competitive conduct in that or
any other market.
24.41 A firm’s purpose may be inferred from its—or any other
relevant person’s—conduct or from other relevant
circumstances.
It must be a
‘substantial’ purpose, but need not be the sole or dominant
In its submission to
this Inquiry, the ACCC commented that:
in an IP context, the ACCC believes that proof of a proscribed purpose
(in the absence of a ‘smoking gun’) would be particularly
Trade Practices Act
Review, which was chaired by Sir Daryl Dawson
(Dawson Committee), considered that proving purpose is generally not an
unnecessarily
onerous hurdle.
The Dawson Committee considered several proposals for reform of
, including
the ACCC’s proposal that an ‘effects’ test be added in
addition to the ‘purpose’ test. It
recommended that
retained without amendment, and that the ACCC should give consideration to
issuing guidelines on the application of
to intellectual
The Australian
Government has expressed support for these
recommendations.
Access to services
provides a legislative regime to facilitate third party access to the services
of essential facilities of national
significance.
not, however, apply to a service that is the use of intellectual property except
to the extent that this is an integral, but
subsidiary part of the
The ACCC submitted
that, as a result of this exception, court-enforced access to intellectual
property that may be essential for
competition can currently only be achieved
under the TPA where a breach of
Patents Act
Section 144
Patents Act
makes void contracts that have ‘tie-in’
conditions that require the buyer, lessee or licensee to acquire a product from
the patent holder which is not covered by the patent, or that prohibits or
restricts him or her from using a product or process supplied
or owned by a
third party.
It is a defence to
patent infringement proceedings that the patent agreement contains such a void
condition, provided the patent
holder inserted the
Section 146
permits certain behaviour that might be considered
anti-competitive. For example,
provides that a patent holder may
stipulate that a person selling his or her product cannot sell competing
products supplied by a
24.46 The IPCRC considered these provisions in its review. It commented that
although ‘tie-in’ conditions were once considered
automatically anti-competitive, economists now recognise that they may have
certain benefits—including enhancing efficiency
and reducing the social
costs arising from a patent grant. The IPCRC recommended that these provisions
be repealed and that such
conduct be dealt with through its suggested amendments
of the TPA.
Australian Government has accepted this recommendation, but has not yet
implemented legislation to effect
Section 128
Patents Act
provides that where a person
threatens another person with infringement or other similar proceedings, an
aggrieved person may apply
to a court for a declaration that the threats are
unjustifiable, an injunction against the continuance of the threats, and the
of any damages sustained by that person as a result of the threat.
Other jurisdictions
United States
United States’ antitrust laws are set out in several statutes. The
Sherman Act
prohibits contracts, combinations and conspiracies in
restraint of trade, which affect United States commerce. The
Clayton Act
prohibits acquisitions of stock or assets where the effect may be to lessen
competition substantially, or to create a monopoly in
any line of commerce. The
Federal Trade Commission Act
deals with unfair methods of competition,
and unfair or deceptive acts or practices in, or affecting,
Guidelines for licensing intellectual property
24.49 The United States’ Department of Justice
and the Federal Trade Commission (the Agencies) enforce the federal antitrust
laws. The Agencies have issued
Antitrust Guidelines for the Licensing of
Intellectual Property
Licensing Guidelines
), to assist those
involved in intellectual property
embody three principles: (a) for
the purpose of antitrust analysis, the Agencies regard intellectual property as
being essentially
comparable to any other form of property; (b) the Agencies do
not presume that intellectual property creates market power in the
context; and (c) the Agencies recognise that intellectual property licensing
allows firms to combine complementary factors
of production and is generally
pro-competitive.
provide that licensing arrangements
raise antitrust concerns if they are likely to adversely affect the prices,
quantities, qualities,
or varieties of goods and services either currently or
potentially available.
restraints in intellectual property licensing arrangements are evaluated under
the ‘rule of reason’. The Agencies
consider whether the restraint is
likely to have anticompetitive effects and, if so, whether the restraint is
reasonably necessary
to achieve pro-competitive benefits that outweigh these
anti-competitive effects.
contrast, some licensing arrangements are so anti-competitive that they are
treated as unlawful ‘per se’. These include
naked price fixing,
output restraints, market division among horizontal competitors, and certain
group boycotts and resale price
maintenance.
also establish antitrust
‘safety zones’ in which the Agencies generally will not challenge a
licence arrangement. In
the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the Agencies
will not challenge a restraint in an intellectual property licensing arrangement
if: (a) the restraint is not facially
anti-competitive;
and (b) the
licensor and its licensees collectively account for no more than 20% of each
relevant market significantly affected by
Licensing Guidelines
refer to technology and innovation
markets. A ‘technology market’ consists of the intellectual property
that is licensed
and its close
substitutes.
‘innovation market’ consists of the research and development
directed to particular new or improved goods or processes,
and the close
substitutes for that research and
development.
24.54 Generally, in the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the Agencies
will not challenge a restraint that may affect competition
in a technology
market if: (a) the restraint is not ‘facially’ anti-competitive; and
(b) there are four or more independently
controlled technologies, in addition to
the technologies controlled by the parties to the arrangement, that may be
substitutable
for the licensed technology at a comparable cost to the
Guidelines for collaborations
24.55 In 2000, the Agencies issued the
Guidelines for Collaborations Among Competitors
to complement the
Licensing Guidelines
. These guidelines apply to agreements, other than
merger agreements, between or among competitors to engage in economic activity,
and the economic activity resulting from such
agreements.
24.56 Agreements that always or almost always tend to raise price or reduce
output are per se
illegal. These include agreements for price fixing,
output fixing, bid rigging, sharing or dividing markets by allocating customers,
suppliers, territories, or lines of commerce. Other agreements are assessed
under the ‘rule of reason’ to determine their
overall competitive
24.57 The guidelines also include two ‘safety zones’ in which the
anti-competitive effects are so unlikely that the Agencies
presume the
arrangements are lawful without further inquiry. This includes a safety zone for
research and development.
European Union
24.58 The European
Community’s Rules of Competition are set out in Title VI of the
European Community Treaty
(EC Treaty). Articles 81 and 82 are the primary
Treaty provisions dealing with competition law. The European Commission is in
process of instituting major reforms to its competition policy, which are
due to commence operation on 1 May
Anti-competitive agreements and practices
24.59 Article 81 prohibits restrictive agreements and
concerted practices between firms that may affect trade between the Member
States and which have anti-competitive objects or
Article 81(3) provides
a mechanism for authorising certain prohibited
agreements.
24.60 The technology transfer block exemption provides a block exemption for
certain categories of intellectual property licensing
conditions.
The European
Commission has released a new draft block exemption for technology transfer,
which provides a short list of restrictive
provisions that generally will be
prohibited; a ‘safe harbour’ below certain market share
thresholds—20% for licensing
agreements between competitors and 30% for
agreements between non-competitors—and a new set of guidelines to explain
81 applies to agreements that fall outside the safe harbour. The
Commission aims to finalise the revised exemption before a modernised
competition regime commences in May
Abuse of dominant position
24.61 Article 82 prohibits any abuse by one or more
firm of a dominant position within the common market or in a substantial part
it to the extent that it may affect trade between Member
A firm abuses its
dominant position if, for example, it imposes unfair prices or other unfair
trading conditions; limits production,
markets or technical development to the
prejudice of consumers; applies dissimilar conditions to equivalent transactions
trading parties; or uses ‘tying’ conditions in
24.62 European Community law traditionally applied an
‘existence/exercise’ dichotomy in relation to the interface between
intellectual property and competition laws. This provided that aspects of an
intellectual property right’s existence generally
could not be challenged
by competition law, while the way in which the right was exercised could be
challenged. The exercise of a
right that fell within the specific subject matter
of an intellectual property right was deemed to relate to the existence of the
24.63 Several recent cases suggest that the courts’ focus has shifted to
considering whether ‘exceptional circumstances’
exist for regarding
behaviour as anti-competitive.
Radio Telefis Eireann v EC Commission
), the European
Court of Justice held that a copyright holder’s refusal to license its
market constituted exceptional
circumstances, as the refusal had prevented the emergence of a new product and
monopolised a derivative
market. Exceptional circumstances existed because the
and the refusal to
license the information eliminated competition in that
Therefore, the refusal
to license constituted an abuse of the copyright holder’s dominant
position in the market.
24.64 In October 2003, Advocate General Tizzano of the Court of First Instance
delivered a preliminary opinion on several questions
of law referred by a German
court in copyright infringement litigation between IMS Health, and its
competitor, NDC Health. The Advocate
General concluded that a refusal to license
an intellectual property right could breach art 82 where there is no
justification’ for the refusal, and the use of the right
is essential for development of a derivative market, with the consequence
all competition would be eliminated in that market. However, the licensee cannot
merely reproduce goods or services already
produced by the right holder, but
must seek to market products with different characteristics that—while
they may compete with
the right holder’s goods—meet other discrete
demands by consumers who are not satisfied by the right holder’s
24.65 The European Commission is currently examining the operation of art 82 of
the EC Treaty to evaluate the existing policy and
possible means to make it more
effective and transparent.
The TRIPS Agreement
24.66 Article 31 of the
TRIPS Agreement provides Members with a limited right to grant compulsory
licences over patents.
Agreement also contains two specific provisions dealing with the interaction
between intellectual property law and competition
24.67 Article 40(1) provides that Members agree that some licensing practices or
conditions relating to intellectual property rights
which restrain competition
may have adverse effects on trade, and may impede the transfer and dissemination
of technology. Under
art 40(2), Members may specify in legislation those
licensing practices or conditions that may constitute an abuse of intellectual
property rights due to their anti-competition nature. Members may adopt
appropriate measures to prevent or control such practices,
provided these are
consistent with other provisions in the TRIPS Agreement.
Competition law and gene patents
24.68 The grant of a patent
effectively gives the patent holder a monopoly over the exploitation of the
patented invention. Chapter
21 noted examples of patents creating monopolies
over the provision of medical genetic
Healthcare providers
and other sectors of the community have expressed concern about the implications
of granting monopoly rights
over patented medical genetic tests and other
genetic technologies.
contrast, some submissions suggested that monopolies in medical genetic testing
are not necessarily of
24.69 The way in which a patent holder exploits the patent may affect
competition within the relevant market for that product or
process, or within a
related downstream market.
Generally, a patent holder might engage in the following types of conduct in
relation to a gene patent:
refusal to license, or a constructive refusal to license by charging
an unreasonably high licence fee;
exclusive licensing—by licensing the research tool to only one
restrictive licensing—by including certain restrictive
conditions in the licence agreement.
24.70 While such dealings may not
necessarily be anti-competitive, a patent holder could engage in conduct that
may, in some circumstances,
breach competition law. Dr Dianne Nicol and Jane
Nielsen have suggested that there are two particular concerns regarding the
potentially
anti-competitive nature of biotechnology licensing:
firstly that the patent monopoly may effectively be extended through
these post-grant contractual arrangements, and secondly that
the patent holder
may restrict the ability of the licensee to practise the invention as fully as
the patent holder was entitled to
24.71 Nielsen has commented that certain terms in both licensing-in and
licensing-out agreements for biotechnology inventions may
give rise to
competition implications. The terms commonly found in licensing-out agreements
that may have competition implications
are exclusivity provisions; future
assignment provisions;
provisions; and restrictive termination
provisions.
The terms commonly
found in licensing-in agreements that may have competition implications are
sub-licence restrictions; post-termination
restrictions; grant-back
provisions;
no challenge
restrictions; leveraging
arrangements;
quantity and territorial
restrictions.
Anti-competitive conduct
24.72 Where a licence
agreement for a patented research tool or medical genetic test includes an
exclusive or restrictive condition
that is prohibited per se; or that has the
purpose, effect or likely effect of substantially lessening competition within
the relevant
market, this may constitute a breach of Part IV of the TPA.
24.73 But for the exemption under s 51(3), an exclusive licence to exploit a
genetic research tool or medical genetic test could
constitute an
anti-competitive agreement under s 45 of the TPA if it prevents the grant of
further licences, thereby limiting the
number of competitors in a market in
respect of the licensed product.
24.74 Similarly, where a licence agreement for a research tool includes
‘reach-through’ provisions this could discourage
potential licensees
from entering into an agreement, which could have a detrimental effect on
competition.
Intellectual property exemption
24.75 As noted above, s 51(3) of the TPA exempts
certain restrictive licence conditions from the operation of Part IV of the
However, the scope of
this exemption is uncertain due to ambiguity regarding the meaning of the term
‘relates to’. Nicol
and Nielsen have commented that:
it is far from clear which terms are likely to be caught by s 51(3), and
it is likely that the widespread use of potentially anti-competitive
commonplace. Policing the use of these terms would involve considerable
resources, and there are a number of other reasons
why monitoring the use of
particular terms in licence agreements is difficult, not least of which is that
many agreements are entered
into on a confidential
24.76 The High Court made some brief observations on the section in
Transfield Pty Ltd
Arlo International Ltd.
commented that:
In bridging the different policies of the
Patents Act
Practices Act
section 51(3)
recognises that a patentee is justly entitled to
impose conditions on the granting of a licence or assignment of a patent in
to protect the patentee’s legal monopoly ... conditions which seek
to gain advantages collateral to the patent are not covered
24.77 The Trade Practices Commission’s background paper,
Application of the
Trade Practices Act
to Intellectual Property
, stated that
where there is any doubt about whether a condition ‘relates to’ the
subject matter of a licence, the Commission
would consider the purpose and scope
of the exclusive rights granted by the patent to determine whether the licence
condition has
obtained an advantage outside the scope of these
24.78 The exemption has been subject to review by several
The IPCRC concluded
that the exemption is inappropriate due to the uncertainty surrounding its
scope, and the possibility that it
may exempt virtually all agreements that
touch on intellectual
It recommended that
the section be reframed to achieve an appropriate balance between the needs of
the intellectual property system
and the wider goals of competition
24.79 The Australian Government has announced its intention to narrow the
exemption so that it will apply only if the relevant licensing
or assignment
arrangement does not have the effect or likely effect of substantially lessening
competition.
At the time of
writing, legislation has not yet been introduced into Parliament to implement
this reform. The ACCC has commented
that the proposed amendment means that:
IP licensing and assignment conditions will be subject to
TPA to a greater extent than is currently the case. In particular, licensing and
assignment conditions which constitute anti-competitive
agreements, including
price fixing, exclusionary provisions or exclusive dealing, will breach
if they substantially lessen
competition.
24.80 The IPCRC also recommended that the ACCC be required by legislation to
issue guidelines as to the manner in which it will implement
any enforcement
activities relating to these
provisions.
The ACCC has
stated that it will release guidelines on the application of
to intellectual property once
24.81 Nicol and Nielsen have commented that, although an amended
provide more certainty to intellectual property owners when entering into
contracts, it ‘will not be without its problems’.
In their opinion,
it is important to avoid dampening the incentive to innovate or enter into
pro-competitive licence
agreements.
24.82 Dr Amanda McBratney and others also submitted that even after the proposed
amendments,
will remain unclear and unworkable. They suggested that the
section should be substantially redrafted to make it more clear and
Authorisation process
24.83 Where a contract or arrangement for a patented
genetic invention falls outside the intellectual property exemption, those
could apply to the ACCC for authorisation of the conduct.
24.84 For example, in 2003 the New South Wales Department of Health applied for
authorisation in respect of its policy that public
pathologists exclusively
provide pathology services to private inpatients in New South Wales public
hospitals. The ACCC concluded
that the public benefit resulting from the policy
would outweigh the public detriment (provided certain conditions were imposed)
and granted the authorisation for a period of five years, subject to the
specified conditions.
Misuse of market power
24.85 In certain limited
circumstances, the refusal to grant a licence or other conduct in relation to a
patented genetic research
tool or medical genetic test could constitute a misuse
of market power under
of the TPA.
24.86 For example, where an organisation holds the patent over an upstream
research tool such as a particular genetic sequence (and
all its known
applications), and refuses to license the tool to third parties involved in
downstream research and development, depending
on the circumstances, this might
constitute a misuse of market
24.87 In order to determine whether a patent holder has misused its market power
it is necessary to define the market within which
it is operating. Depending on
factors such as substitutability, a biotechnology invention might exist in its
own market or within
a broader market. The grant of a patent will not
necessarily confer market power because substitutes may be readily available
the relevant market. The Trade Practices Commission’s background
paper stated that:
A patented process may constitute such an improvement or advance that
competitors will be forced to discover alternative technological
achieve the same or similar result in order to compete successfully. In advanced
technologies, the cost involved may limit
the number of potentially competitive
corporations engaging in such
24.88 Where market power is established, the court must determine whether the
firm has taken advantage of its power for a proscribed
The court will
determine whether a firm has taken advantage of its market power by considering
whether it could have engaged in the
conduct if it lacked market power and were
operating under competitive
conditions.
24.89 According to the Trade Practices Commission’s background paper,
conduct that may amount to a misuse of market power includes
the refusal to
license intellectual property rights, the imposition of restrictive conditions
on a licence and abusive infringement
suits. While a firm with a substantial
degree of market power has no general duty to license an intellectual property
right to existing
or potential competitors:
this is not to say that a proprietor of intellectual property rights can
never be guilty of conduct that infringes
This is most likely to occur
where a corporation with a substantial degree of market power seeks to obtain an
advantage greater than
that conferred by the relevant statute or seeks to extend
the monopoly conferred by the relevant statute into markets other than
protected by the statutory
24.90 Accordingly, where a patent holder with substantial market power refuses
to license in a secondary market, for the purpose
of extending the scope of its
right beyond that granted, this is likely to constitute a misuse of its market
power. However, it is
doubtful that a refusal to license in the primary market
would generally amount to a misuse of market power.
24.91 Nicol and Nielsen have suggested that a refusal to license or exploit a
biotechnology patent would rarely constitute a breach
Nielsen has stated
The only circumstance in which the grant of [intellectual property] will
give rise to market power is in the rare instance where there
is no effective
substitute for the patented product. Markets ... are defined in fairly broad
terms, for example, in the pharmaceutical
sector a patented headache tablet will
compete in the same market as alternative and herbal therapies. There has, as
yet, been no
consideration of the market into which upstream genomic
information, including gene sequences,
24.92 Even if a patent holder has a substantial degree of market power, a court
generally will not find that it has misused its power
if there is evidence that
it could have refused to license or exploit the patent even if it lacked the
market power and was operating
under competitive conditions.
24.93 According to Nielsen,
generally would apply only where a patent
holder stifles competition by refusing to license its patent to a competitor in
a downstream
or secondary market, preventing that competitor from preventing a
new product.
applies where patent holders misuse their market power in relation to their gene
patents, it appears to have only a narrow application.
Mergers and acquisitions
24.94 Organisations involved
in genetic research and development could engage in anti-competitive conduct by
forming alliances, entering
into agreements, or obtaining assignments or
exclusive licences of all the patent rights in a particular market in order to
their market dominance.
24.95 As noted above,
of the TPA prohibits mergers or acquisitions that
would have the effect, or likely effect, of substantially lessening competition
in a substantial market for goods and
To determine
whether an acquisition has this effect, courts must take into account a number
of matters, including: actual or potential
import competition; the ease with
which other businesses may enter the market; the availability of substitute
products in the market;
and the dynamic characteristics of the market, including
growth, innovation and product
differentiation.
24.96 Accordingly, where a firm seeks to acquire assignments or exclusive
licences of all the patent rights in a substantial market,
it may breach
its acquisition has the effect, or is likely to have the effect, of
substantially lessening competition in that
However, such conduct
is subject to the operation of the
exemption applying to intellectual
property. According to Nicol and Nielsen:
companies entering into mergers should be wary of the effect of bundling
their IP rights. Although it is difficult to conceive of
a situation where a
merger between an upstream company or intermediate biotechnology company and a
downstream or pharmaceutical company
has the effect of dominating a particular
market, each case should be individually
Patent pools and cross-licensing
24.97 Chapter 23 discussed
the use of patent pools and cross-licensing arrangements in relation to patented
genetic materials and
technologies.
The purpose of
both patent pooling and cross-licensing is to facilitate each party’s use
of the others’ intellectual
Depending on their
nature, patent pools and cross-licensing arrangements could have either positive
or negative implications for
competition within a market.
24.98 The United States’
Licensing Guidelines
state that pooling
may be pro-competitive when it integrates complementary technologies, reduces
transaction costs, clears blocking
positions, avoids costly infringement
litigation, and promotes the dissemination of technology. For example, granting
patents over
gene and protein sequences can create blocking patents. By creating
a patent pool over these basic patents, third parties can obtain
necessary licences required to use the particular technology from a single
entity. This can facilitate the rapid development
of new technology by saving
the time and resources required to negotiate individual
24.99 Several commentators have discussed the potentially anti-competitive
nature of patent pools and cross-licensing
arrangements.
Licensing Guidelines
state that pooling may be anti-competitive if: the
excluded firms cannot compete effectively in the relevant market for the good
incorporates the licensed technologies; the pool participants collectively
possess market power in the relevant market; the limitations
on participation
are not reasonably related to the efficient development and exploitation of the
pooled technologies; or the patent
pool deters participants from engaging in
research and development, thus retarding
innovation.
24.100 Nicol and Nielsen have suggested that a collaborative arrangement may
potentially be anti-competitive if it involves collusion
and has the effect of
substantially lessening
competition.
William Cornish, Dr Margaret Llewelyn and Dr Michael Adcock have commented
It may be that, as patents on proteins, receptors and related procedures
build towards effective forms of diagnostics and gene therapy,
collaborations
between the different right owners arise which amount to a pool of patents
against users which has a cumulative monopoly
effect. Conduct of this kind could
well amount to an unlawful restrictive practice between firms, which could not
be justified and
therefore exempted for the countervailing benefits which could
be said to stem from that
24.101 Patent pools and cross-licensing agreements are subject to
TPA. Professor Warren Pengilley has identified several factors that may be
relevant to determining whether a patent pool breaches
the TPA, including
the pool contains price fixing agreements;
there are territorial or customer restraints;
any agreement contains clauses that would be illegal if practised by
a single owner—for example, attempts to control commerce
in goods outside
the patent;
the arrangement attempts to exclude others and the nature of any
access arrangements for competitors or future competitors;
the pool encourages innovation or seeks to stifle it; or
the arrangement constitutes a misuse of substantial market
24.102 However,
where a cross-licensing arrangement breaches
of the TPA (with the
exception of
, it could fall within the scope of the
exemption for
intellectual property or be subject to an application to the ACCC for
authorisation of the
Submissions and consultations
24.103 IP 27 asked how competition law and policy
should deal with patent pools relating to gene
Several submissions
suggested that such patent pools should be regulated in the same way as patent
pools are regulated
The Department of
Industry, Tourism and Resources submitted that patent pools for gene patents do
not raise any specific issues when
compared with other
technologies.
GlaxoSmithKline
submitted that:
Competition law should not deal with patent pools relating to gene
patents in a manner that is any different to patent pools that
may exist in
other areas of technology. Although a patent pool may result in increased market
power by the pool members in relation
to a particular technology, it is also
important to remember that in many instances important technologies would not
reach the market
if it is not possible for a web of licensing or cross-licensing
arrangements to be put into
24.104 AusBiotech Ltd submitted that, if anything, restrictions on patent
pooling should be less rigorous in relation to gene patents
due to the small
number of companies in the biotechnology
24.105 Some submissions highlighted the potential benefits of patent pools and
cross-licensing arrangements. For example, the Department
of Health and Ageing
considered that:
any arrangements that facilitate easier cross licensing of gene patents
in order to reduce transaction costs, avoid costly infringement
litigation and
promote dissemination of gene technologies should be encouraged. To the extent
that patent pools promote these objectives
they should be carefully
considered.
Health considers that competition law and policy could make provision for
patent pools on a case-by-case basis, with a view to approval
where they have
the effect of creating efficiency and competition in the application of human
gene technology. However, it notes
that there has been little if any action in
respect of the formation of patent pools, and little private sector coordination
of information
other than the Single Nucleotide Polymorphism
Consortium.
24.106 By contrast, several submissions were cautious about the use of patent
pools and cross-licensing arrangements in this context.
McBratney and others
submitted that there are preferable, less complicated solutions to restrictive
patent commercialisation practices
than patent
ACIPA submitted that
it had serious concerns about whether patent pools are appropriate to gene
there is ongoing debate about whether patent pools have anti-competitive
effects in the marketplace. Therefore it is necessary that
patent pools are
subject to proper scrutiny by the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission.
24.107 A number of submissions suggested the need for guidelines to deal with
patent pool arrangements.
Queensland Government commented that the United States’
have merit, and suggested that Australian legislation should be
clarified to enable access to patent pools subject to guidelines
issued by the
24.108 The ACCC’s submission contained a detailed discussion of this
issue. It noted that arrangements which combine complementary
technologies can
reduce transaction costs for potential licensees, clear bocking positions in
downstream markets and avoid costly
infringement litigation. However, potential
competition may be foregone in technology markets, if the parties to the pool
would likely
compete in the absence of pooling arrangements.
While pooling and cross-licensing can be pro-competitive, there is also
the potential for arrangements to be used for blatant price
fixing, or market
sharing, agreements among competitors without any possible pro-competitive
justification. If these arrangements
raised prices for products and/or services
that use the licensed intellectual property, or restrict output in those
downstream markets
then the ACCC is likely to consider that they have the effect
of substantially lessening competition in breach of
Patent pools can be anti-competitive by foreclosing competition in
related markets or raising entry barriers to competitors of the
license holders.
This may occur if the licensing arrangements contain exclusionary provisions
that restrict licensing to the pool’s
members or the nominated parties.
Such arrangements may breach
of the TPA ... if the parties to the
arrangements collectively possess market power then in some circumstances the
exclusion of third
parties from the arrangements may have anti-competitive
effects ...
Patent pools may also raise competition concerns, if they provide the
opportunity for licensors to share competitively sensitive information
gain access to the competitively sensitive information of actual or potential
competitors in downstream markets.
24.109 The ACCC suggested that patent pools would be less likely to raise
competition concerns if:
they combine complementary patents;
licensing arrangements do not restrict access to the pool’s
technology by competitors, potential entrants or third parties;
pooling arrangements do not facilitate sharing or access to
competitors commercially sensitive information in the relevant or downstream
ACCC submitted that it sees no need to distinguish patent pool arrangements
relating to gene patents from other patent
pool arrangements. It noted that any
gene related patent pool arrangements that may give rise to potential breaches
of the TPA would be assessed on a case-by-case
Options for reform
24.111 There are several
options for reforming the application of competition law to patented genetic
materials and technologies.
These include:
adopting an ‘essential facilities’ doctrine;
amending the TPA; and
developing new guidelines to clarify the application of
the TPA to intellectual property dealings.
24.112 One option is to broaden the
the TPA to include patented genetic materials and technologies within the
definition of essential
facilities.
As noted above,
of the TPA provides a framework for facilitating third party access to
the services of essential national facilities. A third party
can seek access to
eligible services in several ways, and the ACCC has the power to require the
service provider to give access to
the third party. This regime does not,
however, apply to the use of intellectual property, except to the extent that it
is an integral
but subsidiary part of the service provided by the facility.
24.113 European Community law has recognised an ‘essential
facilities’ doctrine under art 82 of the EC Treaty, which
deals with abuse
of a dominant position within a market. Unlike the Australian position,
intellectual property rights have been recognised
as an essential facility
within EC law.
Professor John
Temple Lang has stated that where a dominant company operates in only one
market, it does not have a duty to use its
intellectual property right in that
market. However, the firm has a duty to contract on non-discriminatory grounds
the firm is dominant in the market for the supply of a product or
service that is essential for competitors operating in the second
there is no other actual or possible source of the essential product
or service;
competitors cannot operate in the second market without access to
the product or service;
the company is also dominant in the second market and a refusal to
supply the product or service would confirm or strengthen its
there is scope for substantial competition in the second market;
there is no objective justification for the refusal to
24.114 Under
the essential facilities doctrine, a compulsory licence could be granted as a
remedy where a gene patent holder seeks
to use its patent rights in a secondary,
downstream market for anti-competitive purposes.
24.115 The IPCRC considered whether the
regime under the TPA should be
expanded to apply to intellectual property. It considered there was a case for
the existing exception
in relation to intellectual property on the basis that
the intellectual property statutes already provide for third party access
example, through compulsory licensing of patented inventions); and the design of
seemed poorly suited to handle intellectual property rights, as they
do not fit easily into the ‘facility’ and ‘service’
concepts that underpin the regime.
24.116 Accordingly, the IPCRC considered that the best approach was to review
and, where appropriate, amend the relevant provisions
in the intellectual
property statutes. It also recommended reforms to the compulsory licensing
provisions of the
Patents Act
to include a competition-based
The ACCC submitted that
it considers that:
the introduction of a competitive effects test is likely to assist in
addressing some of the specific concerns that have been expressed
patents - including the need to enure access to patents on reasonable
Amend the TPA
24.117 Another option is to amend
of the TPA to
clarify its application to the patented genetic materials and technologies. The
exemption could be amended to clarify its application to conditions in
licence agreements and assignments. As noted above, the Australian
has announced its intention to amend this exemption so that it will apply only
if the relevant licensing or assignment
arrangement does not have the effect, or
likely effect, of substantially lessening competition. Once amended, it appears
would effectively provide a ‘safety zone’ or
‘safe harbour’ for certain licence conditions that relate to
intellectual property, but only to the extent that they do not substantially
lessen competition within the market. The ACCC has commented
In general terms, the proposed amendment to
means that IP
licensing and assignment conditions will be subject to
of the TPA to a
greater extent than is currently the case. In particular, licensing and
assignment conditions which constitute anti-competitive
agreements, including
price fixing, exclusionary provisions or exclusive dealing, will breach
if they substantially lessen competition ... The ACCC considers that the
proposed amendments to
of the TPA will significantly enhance the ability
of the ACCC to deal with anti-competitive conduct resulting from licensing and
assignment of patent rights. The ACCC encourages the Government to expedite the
introduction of amending
legislation.
24.118 It has been suggested that the Australian Government’s proposal may
not adequately address the concerns raised in relation
The ALRC considers
that legislative clarification of the exemption is desirable, and that the
proposed amendment, combined with guidelines
on its application, may be
sufficient to address these concerns.
Intellectual property guidelines
24.119 Several review bodies, including the IPCRC and
the Dawson Committee, have recommended the development of guidelines to clarify
the application of
of the TPA to intellectual property. The Australian
Government has asked the ACCC to issue such
guidelines,
and the ACCC has
advised this Inquiry that it intends to do so after
of the TPA has been
24.120 McBratney and others submitted that:
A more in-depth comparative analysis of other jurisdictions’
approaches would assist the proper formulation of an effective
intellectual
property exception in the
Trade Practices Act
and a clear set of guidelines. The
much-anticipated release of the draft guidelines on
for public comment
will at least be a step in the right
24.121 As noted above, both the United States and the European Union have
released policy guidelines on the application of antitrust
and competition laws
to licensing agreements and other collaborations involving intellectual
property. These guidelines advise intellectual
property rights holders and other
market participants about the possible competition implications of certain
licence arrangements.
As a result, they may provide greater certainty to the
parties to these agreements that their arrangements are likely to comply with
competition law. While the approaches in these two jurisdictions have differed,
the European Union’s new draft guidelines now
appear more closely aligned
with the United States’ approach.
ALRC’s views
24.122 At this stage, it is
difficult to evaluate whether
of the TPA adequately addresses the
anti-competitive concerns arising from the patenting and licensing of genetic
materials and technologies.
24.123 On the face of it, but for the effect of the
intellectual
property exemption, certain anti-competitive licence conditions (or other
arrangements) could be prohibited either per
se, or due to their effect on
competition. However, the uncertain scope of the exemption makes it difficult to
predict which conditions
are exempt. If the exemption is interpreted broadly,
certain otherwise anti-competitive conditions will be exempt. Further, although
a patent holder’s refusal to license its patent (or certain other
anti-competitive conduct) might amount to a misuse of market
only apply to such conduct in very limited circumstances.
24.124 As noted above, the Australian Government has asked the ACCC to issue
guidelines on the application of
of the TPA to intellectual property,
and the ACCC has advised the Inquiry that it will do so after
amended. The ALRC proposes that, in drafting these guidelines, the ACCC should
address the application of
of the TPA to patented genetic materials and
technologies, including in relation to patent pools and cross-licensing
arrangements.
The guidelines should also provide guidance about the type of
conduct that might be authorised under
of the TPA.
24.125 The ALRC has considered the option of proposing an amendment to
of the TPA to include intellectual property. This does not appear necessary
since an amended
, new guidelines on its application, and the insertion
of a competition test into the compulsory licensing provisions of the
may adequately address the competition concerns arising from dealings in
gene patents.
24.126 However, if in future there is evidence that
of the TPA and a
competition test for a compulsory licence in the
Patents Act
address concerns adequately, the ALRC considers that the essential facilities
approach may warrant further consideration.
24.127 Accordingly, the ALRC proposes that the ACCC should develop guidelines
regarding the relationship between
of the TPA and intellectual property,
with particular regard to patented genetic materials and technologies. The
guidelines should
extend to patent pools and cross-licensing.
Proposal 24 - 1
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
(ACCC) should develop guidelines regarding the relationship between
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) and intellectual property, with
particular regard to patented genetic materials and technologies. The guidelines
should extend
to patent pools and cross-licensing involving patented genetic
materials and technologies.
Monitoring and enforcement
24.128 The ACCC is the
statutory authority responsible for enforcing the TPA. Generally, it deals with
complaints and inquiries about
possible breaches of the Act; proposed mergers;
applications for authorisation and notifications; determinations and
undertakings
under the access regime; inquiries made on its own initiative; and
government directions and
references.
24.129 The Australian Competition Tribunal is the appeal body for the
ACCC’s determinations in relation to authorisations and
notifications, and
the Federal Court has exclusive jurisdiction in relation to all matters arising
under Part IV of the TPA.
24.130 Nielsen has commented that although various forms of conduct in relation
to gene patents could contravene Part IV of the TPA,
very few of these dealings
are ever queried or litigated. She suggested several possible reasons for this,
the resources necessary to monitor the licensing practices of
the confidential nature of most patent licence agreements;
the resources necessary to challenge the terms on which a patent
licence is granted, or a refusal to licence a patent; and
the uncertain outcome of any proposed litigation, which may deter
potential litigants from bringing
proceedings.
Submissions
and consultations
24.131 IP 27 asked whether
there is a role for the ACCC in monitoring the impact on competition of gene
patents and licences.
the submissions addressing this question supported such a role for the
McBratney and others
commented that the information collected through such monitoring:
would be useful provided that the scope of any such enquiry, terms of
reference and the appropriate skills and resources are provided
complex, emotive and difficult area of
24.132 The Queensland Government submitted that:
in conjunction with its price-monitoring role, the ACCC could also
monitor the impact of competition on gene patents and licences
patents and licences over biomedical products and services generally. In a
rapidly changing environment, this monitoring
would be useful in keeping
guidelines current and addressing any new issues that may
24.133 Adam Johnston submitted that the ALRC should request the ACCC to conduct
an inquiry into the emerging market in gene technology
and the desirability of
one firm holding such a dominant position within that
Luigi Palombi
submitted that a new Part should be inserted into the TPA directing the ACCC to
scrutinise and challenge granted patents
because of the negative impact of
invalid patents on the economic wellbeing of Australia, and because the
existence of invalid patents
‘creates pockets of anti-competitive
activities which are likely to be illegal under the existing provisions’
24.134 Several submissions suggested that it is not necessary to monitor the
impact of gene patents and licences on
competition.
submitted that it has developed a series of enforcement priorities to address
trends in the economy and strategically targeted
areas that it identifies as
important, including new areas of the law or industries resulting in
technological change. It also has
specific objectives and priorities for
anti-competitive conduct in developing and innovative markets.
24.135 The ACCC commented that it has not specifically targeted intellectual
property as an enforcement priority but, in the light
of the proposed amendments
to s 51(3) of the TPA, it is possible that it will expand its activities in this
area in the future. It
submitted that this would enable the ACCC to assess the
impact of intellectual property licensing on competition and the adequacy
TPA to deal with these concerns. If the ACCC identifies inadequacies in the
legislation it will bring these concerns to the
Australian Government’s
ALRC’s views
24.136 Chapter 25 discusses
the regulatory framework, and proposals for reform, regarding prices
surveillance of patented genetic
materials and technologies. In addition to
prices oversight, the ALRC also considers that there would be merit in some form
of independent
oversight of dealings involving patented genetic inventions.
24.137 While long-term monitoring may not be necessary, the ALRC considers that
at this early stage in the development of genetic
technologies (and dealings
with them), there is a public interest in ensuring that patent or licence
holders with a concentration
of market power in relation to their gene patents
or licences do not abuse this power for anti-competitive purposes, where this
adversely affect healthcare provision or further research and
development.
24.138 The ACCC, as the competition regulator, is the most appropriate body to
conduct such oversight. The ALRC proposes that the
ACCC should liaise with
Commonwealth, state and territory health departments and other stakeholders to
identify and assess any emerging
competition concerns in this field. Should it
be apparent that problems are emerging, the ACCC should review the conduct of
dealing with patented genetic materials and technologies, to determine
whether their conduct is anti-competitive within the meaning
of Part IV of the
Trade Practices Act
. Most of the submissions received by this Inquiry
supported a role for the ACCC in this context.
24.139 While the ACCC does not consider such monitoring necessary in relation to
gene patents and licensing, in light of the proposed
amendment to
TPA, the ALRC considers it would be appropriate, at least in the short term, for
the ACCC to adopt this role but that it should
be guided by information from
health authorities.
24.140 Accordingly, the ALRC proposes that the ACCC should review the conduct of
firms dealing with patented genetic materials and
technologies, as the need
arises, to determine whether their conduct is anti-competitive within the
The ACCC should liaise, on an ongoing
basis, with Commonwealth, state and territory health departments and other
stakeholders to
identify and assess any emerging competition concerns in this
Proposal 24 - 2
The ACCC should review the conduct of firms dealing
with patented genetic materials and technologies, as the need arises, to
whether their conduct is anti-competitive within the meaning of
Trade Practices Act
The ACCC should liaise, on an ongoing
basis, with Commonwealth, state and territory health departments and other
stakeholders to
identify and assess any emerging competition concerns in this
Patents Act 1990
Trade Practices Act
Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission,
Submission P64
, 12 December
‘Refusal to Licence Intellectual Property Rights and Misuse of Market
Power: Where is the Line in the Sand?’
Intellectual Property Journal
Competition and Consumer Commission,
Submission P64
, 12 December
Intellectual
Property and Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property
Legislation under the Competition Principles Agreement
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
For example, Human Genetics
Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; Walter and Eliza
Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003;
Australian Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
, 29 September
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission,
Submission P64
December 2003.
See National Competition
Sections 51(2)
Trade Practices Act 1974
Final Report
Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
Health Ministers’ Advisory Council,
Submission P49
, 23 October
See, eg, GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; A McBratney and others,
, 22 October 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November
Submission P58
, 7 November
See, eg, L Palombi,
, 1 October 2003; G Suthers,
Submission P30
, 2 October
Nielsen, ‘Biotechnology Patent Licensing Agreements and Anti-competitive
Conduct’ in Centre for Law and Genetics (ed)
Regulating The New
Frontiers: Legal Issues in Biotechnology Symposium (Occasional Paper No 4)
(2002), 38,
‘Patenting Genes and Gene Sequences and Competition: Patenting at the
Expense of Competition’
[2002] FedLawRw 4
Federal Law Review
of the TPA has
been the subject of several reviews, including the National Competition Council,
Sections 51(2)
Trade Practices Act 1974
(1999); Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation under the Competition Principles
Trade Practices Act
Review of the Competition
Provisions of the
Trade Practices Act
(2003); and the Senate Economics
References Committee’s current inquiry into the effectiveness of the TPA
in protecting small
Practices Act 1974
‘Per se’ breaches do
not involve an analysis of the impact of the conduct on competition because the
conduct is presumed,
by its nature, to have the effect of substantially
lessening competition.
Practices Act 1974
(Cth) s 4D.
generally R Steinwall,
Butterworths Australian Competition Law
See below for more
Trade Practices
Section 50A
prohibits the acquisition outside Australia of a controlling interest in a
corporation that would lead to a substantial
lessening of competition in a
See Intellectual Property and
Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation
under the Competition Principles Agreement
(2000), 202 - 203; National
Competition Council,
Sections 51(2)
Practices Act 1974
: Final Report
directly subject to the authorisation and notification provisions. However,
provides that the section does not prevent a corporation from engaging in
conduct that does not constitute a breach of
of the TPA by
reason of a current authorisation; or which is lawful under
notification to the ACCC. Accordingly, if conduct is lawful pursuant to an
authorisation or notification,
does not render it
Trade Practices Act
With the exception
of third line forcing, in which case other notification provisions
Trade Practices Act 1974
Queensland Wire Industries
Pty Ltd v The Broken Hill Proprietary Co Ltd
[1989] HCA 6
(1989) 167 CLR 177
Melway Publishing Pty Ltd v Robert Hicks Pty Ltd
(2003) 178 ALR 253
Boral Besser Masonry Limited v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2003] HCA 5
(2003) 195 ALR 609
, 625, 639 - 640, 647, 663;
Rural Press
Limited v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2003] HCA 75
(2003) 203 ALR
Co-op Milling Association v Defiance Holdings Ltd
(1976) 8 ALR 481
, Gleeson CJ and Callinan J stated that a market is ‘an area
of close competition; a field of rivalry’:
Boral Besser Masonry Limited
v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2003] HCA 5
(2003) 195 ALR 609
National Competition Council,
Sections 51(2)
Trade Practices Act 1974
(1999), 171.
R Steinwall,
Butterworths Australian Competition Law
Trade Practices Act 1974
Wire Industries Pty Ltd v The Broken Hill Proprietary Co Ltd
[1989] HCA 6
(1989) 167 CLR
Practices Commission,
Misuse of Market Power:
Practices Act 1974
(Background Paper)
(1990) Commonwealth of Australia, 16.
The Trade Practices Commission is now known as the Australian Competition and
Commission.
Besser Masonry Limited v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2003] HCA 5
(2003) 195 ALR 609
Music Australia Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
(2003) 201 ALR 636, 667,
Melway Publishing Pty
Ltd v Robert Hicks Pty Ltd
(2003) 178 ALR 253
, 264 (Gleeson CJ; Gummow,
Hayne and Callinan JJ).
Wire Industries Pty Ltd v The Broken Hill Proprietary Co Ltd
[1989] HCA 6
(1989) 167 CLR
Melway Publishing Pty Ltd v
Robert Hicks Pty Ltd
(2003) 178 ALR 253
, 269. See also
Boral Besser
Masonry Limited v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2003] HCA 5
Rural Press Limited v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2003] HCA 75
(2003) 203 ALR
Trade Practices Act 1974
Competition and Consumer Commission,
Submission P64
, 12 December
Trade Practices Act
Review of the Competition Provisions of the
Trade Practices Act
Ibid, recs 3.1, 3.3. In March 2003,
the Dawson Committee reaffirmed its recommendations in light of the High Court
decision in
, maintaining that no amendment should be made to
although the position could be reviewed after a number of other cases are
determined: Australian Government,
Commonwealth Government Response to the
Review of the Competition Provisions of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
Australian Government,
Commonwealth Government Response to the Review of the Competition Provisions
Trade Practices Act 1974
The provisions apply where the third
party fails to secure access to the services through commercial negotiations, or
where the parties
cannot reach agreement regarding the terms and conditions of
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth), s 44B.
Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission,
Submission P64
, 12 December
Patents Act 1990
, subject to the exceptions specified in
See Intellectual
Property and Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property
Legislation under the Competition Principles Agreement
Patents Act 1990
In addition,
that the patent holder may insert a condition in a contract for the lease of, or
a licence to exploit a patented product
that reserves to the lessor or licensor
the right to supply new parts of the patented product required to be put into
it, or to keep
Intellectual Property and
Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation
under the Competition Principles Agreement
(2000), 161 - 162. The
Industrial Property Advisory Committee made a similar recommendation in relation
to a similar provision of
Patents Act 1952
(Cth): Industrial Property
Advisory Committee,
Patents, Innovation and Competition in Australia
(1984), 27.
IP Australia,
Response to Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee
Recommendations
, <www.ipaustralia.gov.au/pdfs/general/response1.pdf>
at 2 May 2003.
See generally A
Innovation and Competition Policy
United States Department
of Justice and Federal Trade Commission,
Antitrust Guidelines for the
Licensing of Intellectual Property
See Ibid, 16; C Carroll,
‘Selling the Stem Cell: The Licensing of the Stem Cell Patent and Possible
Antitrust Consequences’
Journal of Law, Technology and Policy
anti-competitive’ means restraints that normally warrant per se treatment,
and other restraints of a kind that
would always, or almost always, tend to
reduce output or increase
United States Department of
Justice and Federal Trade Commission,
Antitrust Guidelines for the Licensing
of Intellectual Property
(1995), 22. This ‘safety zone’ does not
apply to those transfers of intellectual property rights to which a merger
is applied.
When rights to
intellectual property are marketed separately from the products in which they
are used, the Agencies may rely on technology
markets to analyse the competitive
effects of a licensing arrangement.
a licensing arrangement may adversely affect competition in developing new or
improved goods or processes, the Agencies will analyse
this impact either as a
separate competitive effect in relevant goods or technology markets, or as a
competitive effect in a separate
United States Department of
Justice and Federal Trade Commission,
Antitrust Guidelines for the Licensing
of Intellectual Property
‘Competitors’ includes
both actual and potential competitors. Competitor collaborations involve one or
more business
activities, such as research and development; production;
marketing; distribution; sales or purchasing; information sharing; and
trade association activities: United States Department of Justice and Federal
Trade Commission,
Antitrust Guidelines for Collaborations
These reforms include the
modernisation of competition enforcement framework, the review of the system of
merger control, and various
internal reforms: M Monti, ‘EU Competition
Policy after May 2004’ (Paper presented at Fordham Annual Conference on
International
Antitrust Law and Policy, New York, 24 October 2003),
A ‘restrictive
agreement’ is an agreement between two or more firms that requires one or
more of the parties to adopt
a specific type of conduct. A ‘concerted
practice’ involves co-ordination among firms that falls short of a formal
Council Regulation
(EC) No 1/2003 of 16 December 2002 on the Implementation of the Rules of
Competition Laid down in Articles 81 and
82 of the Treaty
Commission Regulation (EC)
No 240/96 of 31 January 1996 on the Application of Article 85(3) of the Treaty
to Certain Categories of
Technology Transfer Agreements
M Monti, ‘EU Competition
Policy after May 2004’ (Paper presented at Fordham Annual Conference on
International Antitrust
Law and Policy, New York, 24 October 2003), 4 - 5.
Draft Commission Regulation (EC) No .../ 2004 of [...2004] on the
Application of Article 81(3) of the Treaty to Categories of Technology
In EC law, a
‘dominant position’ is a situation of economic power held by a firm
that allows it to hinder effective competition
in the relevant
A van Melle, ‘Refusals to
License Intellectual Property Rights: The Impact of RTE v EC Commission (Magill)
on Australian and
New Zealand Competition Law’
Business Law Review
National Competition
Sections 51(2)
Trade Practices Act 1974
Final Report
(1999), 269.
‘essential facilities’ doctrine provides that if a facility supplied
in one market is an essential input for the
production of goods or services in a
downstream market, a competitor which has or obtains control of that facility
would not be legitimately
competing in the downstream market if it restricts
access to the facility, or cuts off access to its competitors in that market:
Temple Lang,
Compulsory Licensing of Intellectual Property in European
Community Antitrust Law: Paper prepared for the Department of Justice/Federal
Trade Commission Hearings, Washington DC
(2002), 11. See below for more
F Fine, ‘NDC/IMS: A
Logical Application of the Essential Facilities Doctrine’ (Paper presented
at Intellectual Property
Antitrust 2002, New York, June 2002),
C Lawson, ‘Patenting Genes
and Gene Sequences and Competition: Patenting at the Expense of
Competition’
[2002] FedLawRw 4
Federal Law Review
, 118. See also A van
Melle, ‘Refusals to License Intellectual Property Rights: The Impact of
RTE v EC Commission (Magill) on
Australian and New Zealand Competition
Australian Business Law Review
IMS Health GmbH v OHG/NDC
Health GmbH,
Case C-418/01, Court of First Instance, Opinion of
Advocate-General Tizzano, October 2, 2003. See the discussion in F Fine,
A Logical Application of the Essential Facilities
Doctrine’ (Paper presented at Intellectual Property Antitrust 2002, New
June 2002), 11.
‘EU Competition Policy after May 2004’ (Paper presented at Fordham
Annual Conference on International Antitrust
Law and Policy, New York, 24
October 2003), 2.
See Ch 27 for more
For example, Myriad Genetics
Inc (Myriad) holds patents internationally on isolated genetic materials
associated with breast and
ovarian cancer. Myriad’s patents also cover
methods for predictive testing and products and processes involved in its breast
cancer predisposition test. Any technique for BRCA1 testing is likely to require
use of Myriad’s patents.
example, Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003;
Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003; A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
October 2003.
See Ch 23 for a
discussion of the licensing arrangements commonly employed in relation to
patented genetic inventions, and the terms
that such agreements commonly
Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis
of Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6, 246.
require the patent holder to continue research on the invention, and include all
future intellectual property relating to the
invention in the original patent
Restrictive termination
provisions may provide that there is no effective termination date for the
licence, or may include an obligation
to provide confidential information
relating to the patent beyond the duration of its term. See J Nielsen,
‘Biotechnology Patent
Licensing Agreements and Anti-competitive
Conduct’ in Centre for Law and Genetics (ed)
Regulating The New
Frontiers: Legal Issues in Biotechnology Symposium (Occasional Paper No 4)
(2002), 38, 43 - 44.
These are a
form of ‘reach-through’ provision, which oblige the licensee to
license back improvements that it makes to
the invention as a result of using
the intellectual property
These include bundling
together patented and non-patented products into licences, extending the licence
territories in which no intellectual
property rights exist, and requiring the
payment of royalties until the last intellectual property right in a composite
licence expires.
These restrict the
price that the licensee may charge for goods, the quantity that may be sold, and
the territories in which they
may be sold. See J Nielsen, ‘Biotechnology
Patent Licensing Agreements and Anti-competitive Conduct’ in Centre for
and Genetics (ed)
Regulating The New Frontiers: Legal Issues in
Biotechnology Symposium (Occasional Paper No 4)
(2002), 38,
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
6, 246. See Ch 19 for more detail about ‘reach-through’
provisions.
The Trade Practices
Commission suggested that, generally, territorial restraints, price, quota and
quality restrictions, and minimum
royalty requirements are likely to be exempt
because they relate to the licensed product. In contrast,
post-termination restrictions, sub-licence restrictions, licence-back
provisions,
‘non competition’ provisions, and full or third line
forcing are unlikely to be exempt because these conditions generally
relate to the licensed product: Trade Practices Commission,
Application of
Trade Practices Act
to Intellectual Property: Background Paper
Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis
of Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6,
Pty Ltd v Arlo International Ltd
(1980) 144 CLR
Trade Practices Commission,
Application of the
Trade Practices Act
to Intellectual Property: Background
(1991), 13.
Competition Council,
Sections 51(2)
Practices Act 1974
: Final Report
(1999); Intellectual Property and
Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation
under the Competition Principles Agreement
Intellectual Property and
Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation
under the Competition Principles Agreement
Ibid, 213, 215. The IPCRC
recommended that:
and related sections be repealed;
s 51(1)(a)(i)
amended to list all the relevant intellectual property statutes; and that the
TPA be amended to provide that conditions in a licence,
contract, arrangement or
understanding that relate to the subject matter of an intellectual property
statute should not constitute
a breach of
or s 4D of the
TPA—provided those conditions do not result, or are not likely to result,
in a substantial lessening of
competition.
IP Australia,
Government Response to Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee
Recommendations
, <www.ipaustralia.gov.au/pdfs/general/response1.pdf>
Competition and Consumer Commission,
Submission P64
, 12 December
Intellectual Property and
Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation
under the Competition Principles Agreement
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Submission P64
, 12 December 2003. The ACCC also
suggested that these amendments be reviewed after a period of three years, and
that such review
could canvass any concerns arising specifically in relation to
gene patents.
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission, ‘Final Determination: Application for Authorisation
Lodged by the NSW Department
of Health (Public Register No C20000/1680), 27 June
2003’ (2003).
For example, in
October 2003, the South African Competition Commission found that two
pharmaceutical firms had abused their dominant
position in the market when they
refused to license their patents over anti-retroviral drugs to generic
manufacturers in return for
a reasonable royalty. The Commission found that
these firms had engaged in denying a competitor access to an essential facility;
excessive pricing; and an exclusionary act. The Commission referred the matter
to the Competition Tribunal for determination: Competition
Commission of South
Africa, ‘Competition Commission Finds Pharmaceutical Firms in
Contravention of the Competition Act’,
Media Release
, 16 October
Practices Commission,
Application of the
Trade Practices Act
to Intellectual
Property: Background Paper
In one case a Full Federal Court
found that a firm’s use of an intellectual property right could breach
if undertaken for a proscribed purpose:
Australasian Performing Right
Association Limited v Ceridale Pty Ltd
(1991) ATPR 41; see also R Steinwall,
Butterworths Australian Competition Law
Melway Publishing Pty
Ltd v Robert Hicks Pty Ltd
(2003) 178 ALR 253
Boral Besser Masonry
Limited v Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2003] HCA 5
(2003) 195 ALR
Practices Commission,
Application of the
Trade Practices Act
to Intellectual
Property: Background Paper
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
Nielsen, ‘Biotechnology Patent Licensing Agreements and Anti-competitive
Conduct’ in Centre for Law and Genetics (ed)
Regulating The New
Frontiers: Legal Issues in Biotechnology Symposium (Occasional Paper No 4)
(2002), 38, 45.
In addition, s 50A prohibits the
acquisition outside Australia of a controlling interest in a firm that would
lead to a substantial
lessening of competition in a
Trade Practices Act
See National
Competition Council,
Sections 51(2)
Practices Act 1974
: Final Report
Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis
of Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6, 247.
‘patent pool’ is an aggregation of patent rights held by an
individual or organisation for the purpose of licensing
the patents as a joint
package. ‘Cross-licences’ are mutual arrangements between rights
holders granting rights to use
the intellectual property owned by each party to
the other parties.
Competition and Consumer Commission,
Submission P64
, 12 December
United States Department of
Justice and Federal Trade Commission,
Antitrust Guidelines for the Licensing
of Intellectual Property
(1995). See also J Clark and others,
Pools: A Solution to the Problem of Access in Biotechnology Patents?
United States Patents and Trademarks
See, eg, D Nicol and J
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues
Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional
Paper No 6, 247; W Cornish, M Llewelyn and M Adcock,
Intellectual Property
Rights (IPRs) and Genetics
United States Department of
Justice and Federal Trade Commission,
Antitrust Guidelines for the Licensing
of Intellectual Property
(1995), 28 - 29. These have been
‘collapsed’ into two overarching questions: whether the proposed
licensing program is
likely to integrate complementary patent rights; and if so,
whether the resulting competitive benefits are likely to be outweighed
competitive harm posed by other aspects of the program.
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
Cornish, M Llewelyn and M Adcock,
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and
W Pengilley,
‘Patents and Trade Practices: Competition Policies in Conflict?’
Australian Business Law Review
Trade Practices
Alternatively, the patent pool participants could
notify the ACCC of proposed conduct that might breach the prohibition against
dealing under
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
For example, Department
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003;
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Department of Industry Tourism
and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
AusBiotech Ltd,
, 7 November
Commonwealth
Department of Health and Ageing,
Submission P65
, 28 January
A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
September 2003.
For example, Human
Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003;
Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
Competition and Consumer Commission,
Submission P64
, 12 December
See Ch 27 for more discussion.
Bronner v Mediaset
[1998] EUECJ C-7/97
[1998] ECR I-7791
, 7806 - 7807 (Advocate General Jacobs), cited in J Temple
Compulsory Licensing of Intellectual Property in European Community
Antitrust Law: Paper prepared for the Department of Justice/Federal
Commission Hearings, Washington DC
Intellectual Property and
Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation
under the Competition Principles Agreement
(2000), 215. See Ch 27 for more
Competition and Consumer Commission,
Submission P64
, 12 December
A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003; D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and
Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6,
Trade Practices Act
Review of the Competition Provisions of the
Trade Practices Act
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Submission P64
, 12 December
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
R Baxt, R Blunt and A Tonking,
Australian Trade Practices Reporter: Looseleaf Service
(1980) Vol 1,
[800], [910]. Remedies that may be sought by the ACCC in the event of a
contravention of
of the TPA include injunctions, declarations,
enforceable undertakings and pecuniary
‘Biotechnology Patent Licensing Agreements and Anti-competitive
Conduct’ in Centre for Law and Genetics (ed)
Regulating The New
Frontiers: Legal Issues in Biotechnology Symposium (Occasional Paper No 4)
(2002), 38, 48 - 49.
Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003),
Question 17 - 4.
For example,
Australian Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
, 29 September 2003; A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
October 2003; Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January 2004;
Commonwealth Department of Health and Ageing,
Submission P65
, 28 January
2004; A Johnston,
Submission P15
, 30 September
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
A Johnston,
, 30 September 2003.
Submission P28
, 1 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
, 10 October 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November
2003; Australian Competition and Consumer Commission,
Submission P64
December 2003.
Competition and Consumer Commission,
Submission P64
, 12 December
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
25. Prices Surveillance
Introduction
Prices surveillance
Current law and practice
Prices Surveillance Act
Trade Practices Act
Issues and problems
Submissions and consultations
Options for reform
Price surveillance
Role of government and health departments
ALRC's views
25. Prices Surveillance
Introduction
Discussion Paper has outlined the various concerns arising from the grant of
gene patents. One of these concerns is the
potential for patent and licence
holders to charge prices for these patented inventions that are above market
rates, and the potential
impact that this may have on equitable access to
healthcare services.
25.2 This chapter discusses the existing regulatory framework for prices
surveillance in Australia, and considers what reforms may
be necessary to ensure
reasonably priced access to medical genetic tests and other genetic inventions
involved in the provision of
healthcare services.
Prices surveillance
25.3 Prices surveillance is a
regulatory tool of government that may take several forms.
Price control involves requiring nominated businesses to provide a
range of financial information to a regulator, who then determines
the permitted
prices or the rate of permitted price increases or decreases. Compliance with
price control is generally mandatory.
Price notification involves requiring nominated businesses to notify
a regulator of proposed price increases. The regulator examines
these proposals
and makes determinations as to whether the price increases are acceptable or
not. Compliance with the regulator’s
determinations is generally
Price monitoring involves requiring nominated businesses to provide
price, cost and profit information to a regulator periodically.
The regulator
may report on the performance of firms, but it does not have the authority to
make price determinations.
Pricing inquiries may investigate market situations to determine the
nature, significance and causes of alleged pricing problems.
The inquiry body
makes recommendations to government as to the appropriate
Current law
and practice
Prices Surveillance Act
Prices Surveillance Act 1983
(Cth) (PSA) currently provides the
regulatory framework in Australia for prices surveillance, monitoring and
inquiry in relation
to selected goods and services. The Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission (ACCC) is the regulatory body for prices surveillance
Australia. The PSA provides for three forms of prices oversight.
Monitoring and reporting
. The Minister directs the ACCC to
monitor the prices, costs and profits relating to the supply of goods or
services in any industry
or business and to report the results to the
Prices notification
. The Minister, or the ACCC with the
Minister’s approval, declares that specified companies must notify the
ACCC of a proposed
price increase for specified goods and
The ACCC must make a
determination about the notified price increase within 21 days (unless the
company agrees to an extension).
The determination is not enforceable, but there
is a penalty for increasing prices during the 21-day period without
Public inquiries
. The Minister directs the ACCC to conduct a
public inquiry into matters relating to the prices for the supply of goods and
and to report the results of the inquiry to the Minister.
Alternatively, the ACCC may conduct an inquiry on its own initiative with
Minister’s approval. Those who increase prices during the period without
the ACCC’s approval may be
25.5 The PSA
provides that, in performing its functions, the ACCC must have particular regard
to the need to:
maintain investment and employment, including the influence of
profitability on investment and employment;
discourage a firm, which is in a position to substantially influence
a market for goods or services, from taking advantage of that
power in setting
prices; and
discourage cost increases arising from increases in wages and
changes in conditions of employment inconsistent with principles established
relevant industrial
25.6 The ACCC
also conducts informal monitoring as part of its general objective to promote
greater transparency of pricing and price
competition. The areas subject to
informal monitoring include public liability, professional indemnity and medical
indemnity insurance;
bank fees and charges; and petrol prices. This informal
monitoring relies on publicly available information, and the co-operation
monitored organisations.
Trade Practices Act
25.7 The Productivity
Commission conducted a review of the PSA during 2000 - 01. The Commission
recommended that the PSA be repealed,
and that a new Part be inserted into the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) (TPA) to provide for inquiries and prices
monitoring in nationally significant markets where there may be concern about
monopolistic
Trade Practices Legislation Amendment Bill 2003
(Cth) was the
Australian Government’s response to the Productivity Commission’s
report. The Explanatory Memorandum to
the Bill states that:
The PSA was introduced in 1983 to promote price restraint as part of the
prices and incomes policy. An object was to reduce inflation
and inflationary
expectations. Since then, the economic environment has changed considerably.
Transferring prices surveillance to
the TPA recognises that it has become part
of Australia’s competition policy, rather than a tool to reduce general
price inflation.
Trade Practices Legislation Amendment
received Royal Assent on 17 December 2003 and is due to commence operation in
Upon commencement, the Act
will repeal the PSA and insert a new Part VIIA into the TPA. The new Part VIIA
essentially replicates
the PSA, with some
differences.
25.10 Like the PSA, the new Part provides for selected surveillance of the
prices of certain goods and services at the Minister’s
discretion.
Declared companies and authorities must notify the ACCC before increasing the
prices of notified goods or services, and
must wait a statutory period before
implementing an increase. At the Minister’s direction, the inquiry body
may inquire into
prices charged and conduct certain other price
25.11 In addition to the new Part VIIA, the TPA contains a number of provisions
that directly and indirectly provide for prices oversight.
Part IV of the TPA
seeks to protect competition by prohibiting certain anti-competitive agreements,
the misuse of substantial market
power, and certain mergers and acquisitions.
(See Chapter 24.)
25.12 Part IIIA of the TPA establishes a legislative regime to facilitate third
party access to the services of essential facilities
of national significance.
Part IIIA applies to the services provided by essential facilities, but not the
facilities themselves.
It does not extend to the supply of goods, the use of
intellectual property or the use of the production process, except to the extent
that these are an integral but subsidiary part of the service. This Part
provides some scope for price control, for example through
arbitration powers.
(See Chapter
Issues and problems
25.13 Chapter 21 discussed
the potential impact of gene patenting on the cost of medical genetic tests and
other healthcare services.
The grant of exclusive rights over patented genetic
inventions could result in prices higher than market value being charged for
these inventions. This could have implications both for the conduct of medical
research and development within Australia, and for
equitable access to medical
genetic tests and related healthcare services.
25.14 Submissions and consultations reflected concern about the impact that
monopoly control might have on the cost of genetic testing
to patients and the
healthcare system.
For example,
the Human Genetics Society of Australasia (HGSA) commented that:
Gene patents are likely to inflate prices, though their precise impact is
not yet known. There is clearly a potential for patent holders
exorbitant prices for genetic testing kits or licences when the cost of gene
discovery and kit development is not that
great (certainly not as great as drug
and other treatment development)
25.15 The Queensland Government submitted that:
Major concerns relating to gene patents are that the patent holder may
engage in restrictive licensing practices, such as charging
excessive licence
fees ... These actions may increase costs of genetic tests or other products or
services to the extent that some
citizens on low incomes may be unable to
receive the benefit of the technology. The burden of some of these charges may
the health benefits system or on social
25.16 Concerns about cost limiting access to medical genetic testing were also
commonly expressed in submissions and
consultations.
25.17 Chapter 21 noted that the BRCA patent has been used as an example of
concerns about the potential impact of gene patents on
the cost of genetic
testing in Australia. Concerns were initially expressed that if Myriad Genetics
Inc, rather than the public health
system laboratories, conducted testing for
the BRCA1 gene in Australia, the cost of such testing would rise
dramatically.
Submissions and consultations
25.18 IP 27 asked whether
there is a role for the ACCC in monitoring the prices charged for medical
genetic tests or any other products
or services arising from the grant of gene
patents or licences.
25.19 Several submissions commented that the ACCC should engage in such price
monitoring.
The HGSA submitted
that the ACCC
may have a role in monitoring the prices charged for tests, products and
services arising from the grant of gene patents or licences.
In addition the
ACCC may have a role in monitoring the impact on competition of gene patents and
licences. It would be important
for the ACCC to consult with interested parties
(for example expert health professionals and consumers) if it takes on these
25.20 The Queensland Government submitted that:
While governments should be wary of setting charges, the rapidly changing
nature of the industry is such that there is a need for
ongoing monitoring of
prices in the industry. The ACCC, through its normal inquiry and monitoring
process, could be asked to monitor
prices of medical tests and any other
products or services arising from the grant of gene patents (along with other
biomedical products
and services) and report on a regular basis to the relevant
federal Minister. This may have the effect of restricting excessive prices
if not, the Minister will have evidence that remedial action is
Consumers need to be informed of their rights concerning the use of their
genetic material and it is suggested that a consumer education
program could be
undertaken by the ACCC.
25.21 Dr Graeme Suthers submitted that there should be mechanisms to vet patent
applications and to monitor subsequent licensing
to ensure that the patenting
process does not harm society. While he considered that societal evaluation and
monitoring is essential,
he did not suggest what organisation should have the
responsibility and authority for fulfilling this
25.22 Several submissions did not support a role for the ACCC in price
monitoring. The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research submitted
the ACCC is about competition and should focus on pricing behaviour
between suppliers. The ACCC should not be able to force an exclusive
licensee to
modify prices since they have the right to get a reasonable return on the
investment. The licensee could then elect not
to market in Australia.
Alternative schemes comparable to the PBS could be considered to address this
25.23 AusBiotech Ltd and GlaxoSmithKline both suggested that the position in
relation to patented genetic products and services is
no different from the
position for other patents in terms of price
monitoring.
GlaxoSmithKline
further submitted that:
Even in situations where there is limited competition in a specific
technology area, the market will dictate that prices are at an
appropriate level
... The ACCC does not have a price monitoring role across any other area of
commercial life (other than in exceptional
circumstances), and certainly not in
relation to other patent areas. There is no need for the ACCC to have such a
role in relation
to gene patents.
25.24 The ACCC provided a detailed submission noting the difficulties with price
regulation. These include that if the price is set
too low or too high this can
either stifle innovation or reduce a firm’s incentive to increase
efficiency. Price regulation
also imposes costs on both the regulated firms and
on the regulator. Despite these difficulties, the ACCC submitted that in certain
limited circumstances price regulation may be appropriate to constrain excessive
pricing and its consequent effects. It stated that:
the role of price regulation should be limited to very specific
circumstances where the industry is characterised by high market power,
benefits of regulation exceed the costs, and when no other appropriate policy
measures can be taken.
25.25 The ACCC recognised that in some circumstances the grant of a patent over
a genetic invention will give the holder the ability
to charge very high prices
for the use of that invention. It also noted that from time to time there are
likely to be areas of the
economy where there is considerable public concern
genetic materials and technologies may be an example of
25.26 However, the ACCC submitted that price regulation should be a measure of
last resort for two reasons: the ACCC cannot compel
a regulated firm to reduce
its prices; and price regulation can stifle innovation. It argued that price
monitoring is not a suitable
alternative to finding an appropriate balance
within intellectual property legislation between the conflicting needs of
and users of patented genetic products. However, it noted that where
legislators are uncertain whether the balance is correct, price
monitoring may
be an option.
25.27 The ACCC concluded that:
At this stage, the ACCC sees no reason to advocate a role for itself in
specifically monitoring prices that are charged for medical
genetic tests or any
other products or services arising from the grant of gene patents or licences.
Nor does the ACCC consider there
is a need for it to specifically monitor the
impact of competition on gene patents and licences. Ultimately, however, these
are matters
for the Australian
Government.
Options for reform
25.28 There is limited
evidence to date that gene patents or exclusive licensing of genetic testing
have had any significant adverse
impact on the cost of healthcare in Australia.
Similarly, there is no firm evidence as yet of any current impact on access to
genetic testing, the quality of such testing, or clinical research and
development.
25.29 While the ACCC has submitted that it does not consider that price
monitoring is necessary in relation to patented genetic inventions,
other submissions favoured some form of independent prices surveillance in this
area. Due to community concern about the
potential impact of gene patenting on
access to healthcare services, the ALRC considers that it is desirable to
propose some form
of surveillance or monitoring of prices in this area but only
if there is evidence of problems.
Price surveillance
Price control
option is to grant the ACCC price control powers in relation to patented genetic
inventions generally, or specific categories
of these inventions such as genetic
research tools and medical genetic tests. This would permit the ACCC to set the
price of certain
patented genetic inventions, such as medical genetic tests.
25.31 The Productivity Commission considered the use of price control powers in
its review of the PSA. The Commission stated that
in markets where competition
is not strong
regulators attempt to set prices at the levels they estimate would occur
if there were more active competition. Yet this is a complex
task requiring
information that typically is not available. So, in practice, regulators are
likely to end up setting prices above
or below the efficient
25.32 The Productivity Commission noted the trend to pro-competitive reform and
the increasingly diminishing role that price control
has played over the last
two decades in Australia. It found that price control generally should be
applied only to markets that display
substantial market power and that are
significant to the national economy. In other markets where competition is not
strong, the
long-running costs of regulatory failure are likely to outweigh the
cost of the market failure.
concluded that:
Given the limitations and potential costs of price control, it should be
considered the remedy of last resort, applied only in important
markets, after
careful evaluation of the options.
Price notification
25.33 Price increase notifications are another possible
option for monitoring the prices of patented genetic inventions generally,
specific categories such as medical genetic tests.
25.34 The Minister could declare companies or authorities holding patents over
certain genetic products and services. These companies
would be required to
notify the ACCC of proposed price increases for their goods and services.
However, while a declared company
is required to observe the procedures of the
PSA, it is not required to comply with the ACCC’s decisions in response to
notifications.
25.35 The Productivity Commission considered the role and effectiveness of price
notifications in its review of the PSA. The Commission
concluded that price
notification is an indirect form of price control and should be removed from the
legislation.
Despite this
recommendation, these provisions were retained in the new Part VIIA of the
Price monitoring
25.36 Price monitoring involves the formal and informal
monitoring of prices, costs and profits relating to the supply of goods or
services in any industry or business. The ACCC conducts such monitoring and
reports the results to the Minister.
25.37 The Productivity Commission considered the role of price monitoring in its
review of the PSA. It noted that in imperfectly
or potentially competitive
markets, the publication of key information about prices and market performance
can enable customers,
the community, policy makers and regulators to monitor
market outcomes and gain a better understanding of the market’s operation.
Monitoring can enhance market transparency; assist the competitive process; and
ease public concerns about the exercise of market
power in some
industries.
25.38 The ACCC indicated that if price monitoring of patented genetic inventions
were to be considered, it should be borne in mind
expected benefits from monitoring should be greater than expected
costs, including the administrative and compliance costs for monitored
monitoring may induce monitored firms or industries to price in a
particular, desirable way. However, once monitoring ceases and
public scrutiny
is eased, there may be no incentive for them to continue to price appropriately,
where competition is
25.39 The Minister could direct the ACCC, or another
body, to hold an inquiry into the pricing of patented genetic inventions
or medical genetic tests or other specified inventions. The inquiry
body would report its findings to the Minister who would then
make decisions on
these recommendations.
25.40 The Productivity Commission has noted that public inquiries have been used
for several purposes, including: to determine whether
pricing outcomes reflect
competitive market forces; to advise the Minister on what types of prices
oversight, if any, should be applied
to the company or companies under inquiry;
to assess price notifications in greater depth; to encourage compliance with
determinations
by bringing information into the public domain, facilitating public
understanding of the pricing matters at
There have not been any
public inquiries under the PSA since
Role of government and health departments
25.41 Chapter 20 discussed
the potential for controlling pricing through government funding and purchasing.
It noted that governments
have considerable control over healthcare expenditure
in Australia, and proposed that the Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory
Council (AHMAC) should examine options for using government funding and
purchasing power to control the cost of genetic medical technologies
gene patents (Proposal 20 - 2).
25.42 Chapter 20 also discussed the role of health departments in monitoring the
application of patent law to genetic materials and
technologies. As health
departments are the major funding providers and users of these technologies,
they are directly affected by
such patenting. The ALRC proposed that AHMAC
should establish a process for examining the financial impact of gene patents on
delivery of healthcare services in Australia (Proposal 20 - 1).
ALRC’s views
25.43 As noted above, the
ALRC’s preliminary view is that there is limited evidence to date that
gene patents or exclusive licensing
of genetic testing have had any significant
adverse impact on the cost of healthcare provision in Australia. Similarly,
no firm evidence of any current impact on access to medical genetic
testing, the quality of such testing, or clinical research and
development.
However, there appears to be considerable concern amongst both the Australian
community and the healthcare sector that
prices might adversely affect these
areas in the future.
25.44 The ALRC considers that some form of independent prices surveillance in
relation to patented genetic products and processes
may be desirable if evidence
emerges that the pricing of these inventions is having a negative impact on
equitable access to healthcare
services within Australia.
25.45 The Terms of Reference direct the ALRC to have regard to the objective of
‘protecting intellectual property rights to
contribute to the promotion of
technological innovation, to the mutual advantage of producers and users of
technological knowledge
and in a manner conducive to social and economic
welfare, and to a balance of rights and obligations’.
25.46 The use of price control powers on patented genetic inventions could
unduly favour users of patented genetic inventions at
the expense of the
producers of those inventions. If the price is set too low to be financially
attractive to patent holders, this
could present a disincentive to future
investment in genetic research and development. Accordingly, the ALRC does not
consider this
a useful option for reform. Prices notification or a public
inquiry could be useful tools for prices surveillance, but in the absence
evidence of unfair pricing, these do not appear necessary at this stage.
25.47 The ALRC considers that informal prices monitoring could be a desirable
vehicle for addressing community concern regarding
the pricing of medical
genetic tests and other genetic inventions involved in the provision of
healthcare services, if there is evidence
that prices are having an adverse
effect on these services.
Proposal 25 - 1
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
should conduct informal price monitoring of patented medical genetic tests and
other genetic inventions involved in the provision of healthcare services if
evidence emerges that such prices are having an adverse
impact healthcare
Productivity Commission,
Prices Surveillance Act 1983
The ACCC’s formal price monitoring
is currently restricted to stevedoring and airport services: Department of the
Parliamentary
Trade Practices Legislation Amendment Bill 2003
Digest No 9, 2003 - 04)
Services that have been declared for price
notification are harbour towage services, letter services reserved to Australia
air services and aeronautical services: Ibid, 4.
Productivity Commission,
Review of the
Prices Surveillance Act 1983
(2001), 4. See
Prices Surveillance Act
Prices Surveillance Act 1983
Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission,
Industry Regulation and Price Monitoring
<www.accc.gov.au/content/index.phtml/itemId/3671> at 10 December 2003; see
also Department of the Parliamentary Library,
Trade Practices Legislation
Amendment Bill 2003
(Bills Digest No 9, 2003 - 04)
(2003), fn 6.
Productivity Commission,
Review of the
Prices Surveillance Act 1983
(2001), rec 5.1.
Explanatory
Memorandum,
Trade Practices Legislation Amendment Bill 2003
The Act will commence operation upon
proclamation or, at latest, by 17 June 2004.
For example, the new Part VIIA contains
an objects clause, and permits bodies other than the ACCC to hold public
inquiries: see
Trade Practices Legislation Amendment Act 2003
Department of the Parliamentary Library,
Trade Practices Legislation
Amendment Bill 2003
(Bills Digest No 9, 2003 - 04)
See Explanatory Memorandum,
Practices Legislation Amendment Bill 2003
Productivity Commission,
Prices Surveillance Act 1983
(2001), 35 - 36, 38.
Australian Association of Pathology
Practices Inc,
Submission P10
, 24 September 2003; Cancer Council of New
South Wales,
Submission P1
, 5 June 2003; Australian Huntington’s
Disease Association (NSW) Inc,
Submission P27
, 1 October 2003; Cancer
Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003; G Suthers,
Submission P30
, 2 October 2003; Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; Cancer Council Tasmania,
, 29 September 2003; Cancer Council South Australia,
, 9 October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
October 2003; Department of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
November 2003.
Human Genetics
Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003.
Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January 2004.
Cancer Voices NSW Inc,
, 16 September 2003; Breast Cancer Action Group NSW Inc,
, 19 September 2003; Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
September 2003; Cancer Council Tasmania,
Submission P40
, 29 September
2003; Cancer Council South Australia,
Submission P41
, 9 October 2003; D
McFetridge,
Submission P23
, 30 September 2003; National Health and
Medical Research Council,
Submission P52
, 31 October 2003; Department of
Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November 2003.
Australian Health Ministers’
Advisory Council Working Group on Human Gene Patents,
Final Draft Report of
the AHMAC Working Group on Human Gene Patents
(2001), 11.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question 17 - 3.
For example, Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September 2003;
Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003;
Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January 2004.
Human Genetics
Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003.
Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January 2004.
Submission P30
October 2003.
Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
7 November 2003; GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003.
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003.
Competition and Consumer Commission,
Submission P64
, 12 December
Productivity
Commission,
Review of the
Prices Surveillance Act 1983
(2001), xvii.
Ibid, 44, Finding 3.1.
Finding 2.2.
Trade Practices Legislation
Amendment Act 2003
Productivity Commission,
Prices Surveillance Act 1983
(2001), 46 - 47.
Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission,
Submission P64
, 12 December 2003.
Productivity Commission,
Prices Surveillance Act 1983
Department of the Parliamentary
Trade Practices Legislation Amendment Bill 2003
(Bills Digest No 9,
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
26. Crown Use and Acquisition
Introduction
The Patents Act
Who is the Crown?
Services of the Commonwealth or the State
Crown use in research and healthcare
Application to research
Application to healthcare
Other jurisdictions
Acquisition by the Crown
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Transfer of ‘know-how'
PART G: Non - Voluntary Uses
26. Crown Use and Acquisition
Introduction
chapter discusses the Crown use and acquisition provisions of the
Patents Act
Patents Act
). It examines how these may be applied to
address concerns that gene patents may impede access to genetic materials and
technologies
for use in research and hinder the provision of healthcare, and it
discusses options for reform.
26.2 The Crown use provisions allow the Commonwealth or a
either to exploit a patented
invention (or an invention that is the subject of a patent application) without
infringement, or to
authorise another person to do so. The Crown acquisition
provisions allow the Commonwealth to acquire compulsorily all rights in
patented invention (or an invention that is the subject of a patent
application).
26.3 The Crown use provisions are similar to those relating to compulsory
licensing (discussed in Chapter 27) in allowing the exploitation
of an invention
without the consent of the patent holder or applicant—in effect creating a
compulsory licence in favour of
the Crown. Like compulsory licensing, the terms
of remuneration or compensation are agreed or, in the absence of agreement,
by a court. However, unlike compulsory licensing, the Crown use and
acquisition provisions may be invoked by the Crown without first
seeking the
authorisation or agreement of the patent holder.
26.4 For reasons discussed in this chapter, the Crown use provisions seem to be
used only rarely. They may nevertheless be important
in ensuring that patent
protection does not have an adverse impact on significant public interests,
including those in the conduct
of research and the cost-effective provision of
healthcare.
26.5 Crown use provisions were
introduced into English patent legislation in
Earlier case law had held
that the Crown may retain rights to exploit inventions for which a patent had
been granted, although this
depended on the terms of the particular
‘letters patent’ issued under the
Statute of Monopolies
With the enactment of the
Crown use provisions in 1883, the Crown agreed to be bound by patents, but
obtained the protection of these
provisions when using patented
inventions.
26.6 In 1903, Crown use and acquisition provisions were included in Australian
patents legislation.
described the purpose of the Crown use provisions in the
Patents Act 1952
(Cth) as being to ‘ensure that the governments of the Commonwealth and of
the States have the invention available to them for
the benefit of the services
of the respective governments at once, rather than at the end of the term of the
letters patents’.
26.7 In its submission to the Inquiry, the South Australian Government
characterised the Crown use provisions as being intended to
balance between the rights of an inventor and the rights of the Crown,
representing the public interest’.
26.8 In December 2003, the Advisory Council on Intellectual Property (ACIP)
released a Discussion Paper on review of the Crown use
provisions in patents and
designs legislation (ACIP Discussion Paper). The ACIP Discussion Paper stated
that, historically, the two
main justifications for Crown use provisions have
(i) the Crown should not be impeded by patents (which are, in effect,
Crown grants) from acting in the public interest, particularly
in relation to
matters of national defence; and
(ii) unlike private traders, the Crown, through its departments and
authorities is ordinarily engaged in public services, rather than
activities, and therefore should be in a special position in regards to use of
patented inventions.
26.9 At the time the Crown use provisions were first enacted, the scope of
government activities was more limited than at present.
Pfizer Corp v
Ministry of Health
), Lord Reid observed:
In Victorian times [the services of the Crown] were the armed
services—the navy and the army—the Civil Service, the foreign
colonial and consular services, the Post Office, and perhaps some others. Now
there are many more Government activities which are
staffed and operated by
servants of the Crown, and are subject to the direction of the appropriate
26.10 Expansion in government services, including the provision of healthcare,
has greatly broadened the scope for use of the Crown
use provisions. However,
the frequency with which the provisions have been used is difficult to
establish. Evidence that the provisions
have been used may be found in the
reported cases in which the application of the Crown use provisions has been
contested. There
are two reported cases in Australia, from 1964 and 1994,
involving the use of patented inventions in water meters by local
and in central
bearing structures for railway carriage construction by a state Commissioner for
respectively.
26.11 In response to questions about how frequently Crown use is authorised in
Australia, Australia stated in a 1997 report to the
Council for Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Council for TRIPS) that:
If the Crown use provisions were invoked the case would be between the
relevant instrumentality of the Crown and the patentee and
would not involve any
of the administrative bodies responsible. As such it is difficult to determine
the frequency of use, though
we expect this has been
26.12 While the Crown use provisions have been used only rarely, their
importance may lie more in their potential for use. One view
is that the primary
purpose of the Crown use provisions is ‘to force an unwilling licensor to
the negotiating table’
and that the ‘threat of resort to the Crown
use provisions may assist in ensuring an acceptable result from those
negotiations’.
26.13 There are various reasons why the Crown might seek to exercise the Crown
use or acquisition provisions in respect to genetic
inventions used in
scientific research or healthcare provision, including:
to facilitate genetic research by organisations such as the
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO);
to provide medical genetic testing through public sector genetics
laboratories; or
to provide novel therapies (such as those involving gene therapy,
therapeutic proteins or stem cells) through public sector health
organisations
or other healthcare providers.
26.14 The Crown use provisions involve
significant interference with the rights that patent holders otherwise have
under the patent
system. It is arguable that the Crown use and acquisition
provisions should not be relied upon too readily and should be invoked
exceptional circumstances if confidence in the patent system is to be preserved.
For example, reliance upon the provision
may be justifiable in the case of
public health emergencies, such as those in which the United States and Canadian
governments contemplated
compulsory use of Bayer’s patent on the
ciprofloxacin antibiotic following bioterror attacks using the anthrax organism
the United States.
26.15 However, even in these circumstances, Crown use or acquisition of a patent
may be controversial and this factor may act as
a political constraint on the
exercise of these provisions of the
Patents Act
. Another constraint is
that, as discussed below, where the provisions are invoked, adequate
remuneration or compensation must still
be paid to the patent holder.
The Patents Act
26.16 Section 163(1) of the
Patents Act
allows the exploitation of a patented invention by the
Commonwealth or a State, or by a person authorised by the Commonwealth or
State, without liability for infringement of the patent, provided that
exploitation is ‘for the services of the Commonwealth
The permitted
exploitation by the Crown expressly includes exploitation by an authority of the
Commonwealth or of a State.
26.17 The relevant Crown authority must notify the patent holder of the
exploitation as soon as practicable after the invention has
been exploited and
give the patent holder information about the exploitation, as reasonably
required from time to time.
terms of the exploitation, including remuneration payable to the patent holder,
are to be agreed between the patent holder and
the relevant authority or
determined by a prescribed
The exploitation of the
patented invention by the Crown must cease upon a prescribed court declaring
that the exploitation of the
invention is no longer necessary for the proper
provision of services of the Commonwealth or the
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS Agreement) contains detailed provisions dealing with the use of
patented inventions ‘without the authorization of the
right holder,
including use by the government or third parties authorized by the
government’.
provisions, which are discussed in more detail in the context of compulsory
apply to Crown use of
patented inventions.
26.19 Importantly, art 31(b) of the TRIPS Agreement provides that use without
the authorisation of the patent holder may only be
permitted if, prior to the
use, the proposed licensee has made previous efforts for a reasonable period to
obtain authorisation from
the right holder on reasonable commercial terms and
conditions.
This requirement may
be waived in the case of a national emergency or other circumstances of extreme
emergency, or in cases of public
non-commercial
Crown use is considered to
be ‘public non-commercial use’ for the purposes of the TRIPS
Crown use may,
therefore, be permitted without efforts being made to obtain authorisation from
the patent holder.
Who is the Crown?
26.20 The Crown use
provisions may be exercised by the Commonwealth or a State, an authority of the
Commonwealth or a State,
person authorised in writing by the Commonwealth or a
26.21 Case law provides some guidance on the entities that may constitute
‘an authority of the Commonwealth or of a State’
for the purposes of
the Crown use provisions.
Stack v Brisbane City
Federal Court of Australia considered the position of the Brisbane City Council,
which had installed water meters in homes
in Brisbane, which incorporated
assemblies in respect of which the applicants were beneficially entitled to a
patent. The applicants
sought an injunction restraining the Council from
infringing the patent. The Council relied on the Crown use provisions as a
to the claim of infringement.
26.22 The Federal Court held that the primary focus in determining whether a
body was an authority of the State was on the functions
of government. A body
would be an authority of the State if its functions were ‘impressed with
the stamp of government’
or if the body had been given the power to direct
or control the affairs of others on behalf of the State. The role and
involvement
of the executive, through the Governor in Council or the appropriate
Minister, was also a relevant
The Federal Court stated
that in determining whether a body satisfied the test, no one consideration was
decisive. It was a question
of fact and degree in the circumstances and depended
on the structure, powers and functions of the
26.23 The Federal Court found that the Brisbane City Council was an authority of
the State. Relevant factors were that the Council
was a statutory body,
established and ultimately controlled by State legislation, and its functions
and powers were State governmental
functions and powers, which the State had
delegated to it in legislation, and which were to be exercised in the interests
community. The State executive retained a prominent role and a practical
involvement in the functions of the
26.24 In considering what entities may constitute the Crown or a Crown
authority, IP 27 referred to the ALRC’s work on Commonwealth
(sometimes referred to as the ‘shield of the
conducted in the
context of its review of the
Judiciary Act 1903
The issue of whether an
entity is the Crown, for these purposes, is straightforward if legislation
establishing the entity states
that an entity is entitled to the privileges and
immunities of the Crown. In the absence of an express statutory provision, the
of whether an entity is entitled to the immunities of the Crown is
determined by implication according to two criteria, established
in the common
law. These involve the nature of the activities carried out by the entity and
the degree of control exercised by the
executive (usually a Minister) over the
, Cooper J stated that the long line of cases relating to
Crown privileges and immunities were of limited relevance because the phrase
‘authority of a State’ carried a ‘different
However, he
conceded that there is some overlap in the concepts of Crown entities for
immunity purposes and authorities of the Commonwealth
or of a State for the
purposes of the
It seems likely that
most Crown entities for immunity purposes will also be authorities of the
Commonwealth or a State for
Patents Act
26.26 The ACIP Discussion Paper observed that case law suggests the Crown use
provisions are applicable to a ‘vast number of
municipal councils and
statutory authorities throughout
Australia’.
The vast range of entities that may be considered the Crown is the basis
of some arguments that the Crown use provisions, whilst justified,
apply to too
many entities that have more commercial interests such as profits rather than
the proper provision of Government services
26.27 The ACIP Discussion Paper suggested that consideration should be given to
limiting the range of government bodies that can
exploit patents under the Crown
use provisions—in particular so that ‘deregulated and
corporatised’ statutory bodies
do not obtain an ‘unfair advantage in
the market place’.
ACIP Discussion Paper noted:
One possible option that may address this risk is to amend the
legislation to require any Crown use of patents by any council, statutory
corporation or any other like body to require Ministerial approval. This would
centre the responsibility for invoking the Crown use
provisions and would ensure
that they are not commercially abused contrary to competition principles such as
competitive neutrality.
Services of the Commonwealth or the State
26.28 The Crown use
provisions apply to exploitation ‘for the services of the Commonwealth or
the State’.
An invention
is taken to be exploited for the services of the Commonwealth or the State if
the exploitation is ‘necessary for
the proper provision of those services
within Australia’.
26.29 The ACIP Discussion Paper noted that there are some uncertainties about
the circumstances in which the Crown use provisions
can be used and stated that
‘the over use or incorrect use of this right may be seen as an abuse of
power by the Government
and possibly an easy and convenient method of acquiring
technology on the
Federal Court considered the meaning of the phrase ‘services of the
Commonwealth or the State’. The applicant submitted
that the installation
of the water meters by the Brisbane City Council was a revenue-gathering
function of the Council and not for
the services of the
26.31 This argument was rejected by the Federal Court, which found that the
water meters were an asset of the Council that enabled
it to quantify and charge
for water supplied and were a component part of the apparatus by which water was
supplied as a function
government.
The exploitation of
the meters was ‘for the services of the State’ for the purposes of s
Patents Act
26.32 In arriving at its decision, the Federal Court considered the reasoning of
the House of Lords in
in which it was
held that the use of a patented drug (tetracycline) in National Health Service
hospitals for patients was ‘for
the services of the
The House of Lords
held that the phrase was not to be limited to the internal activities of Crown
authorities but that the services
at issue could ultimately benefit individual
members of the public.
26.33 The facts of
were that the Ministry of Health had invited
tenders for the supply of tetracycline from various firms and offered protection
tenderers by relying on the Crown use provisions of s 46 of the
successful tenderer imported the drug from Italy, where it was not patented and
thus could be legally produced by a supplier
without the patent holder’s
26.34 The House of Lords held, by majority, that an act was done ‘for the
services of the Crown’ if it was done for the
purpose of performing a duty
or exercising a power which was imposed upon or invested in the executive
government by statute or by
prerogative, including providing services to the
general public.
26.35 The ACIP Discussion Paper referred to
and noted that the
case shows how the Crown use provisions could be applied to the supply of drugs
used in the treatment of
The ACIP Discussion
Paper questioned whether the sale of patented products to members of the public
should be characterised as a
use necessary for the proper provision of
Commonwealth or State services.
It also suggested that one option was:
to categorise and condense the broad range of circumstances in which the
Government can invoke the [Crown use provisions]. Making
approval based on a
national interest basis, with associated criteria could do this. For example the
provisions could be restricted
to use in time of national emergency, for defence
purposes, and/or health purposes.
Crown use in research and healthcare
26.36 The Crown use
provisions are of broad potential application and include the conduct of
research and the provision of healthcare.
However, as discussed below, there are
some limitations on, and uncertainties about, the application of the Crown use
to the use of patented genetic materials and technologies in research
and healthcare. These relate to whether: (a) particular bodies
are the Crown and
(b) exploitation is for the services of the Crown.
Application to research
26.37 The use of patented
genetic materials or technologies in research by a Commonwealth or State
organisation, such as the CSIRO
or a State public teaching hospital, would quite
clearly involve exploitation by the Commonwealth or a State for the services of
the Commonwealth or a State.
26.38 However, as discussed in Chapter 11, while more than half of human
health-related biological research in Australia is funded
by the Australian
Government, much of this research is conducted by bodies that may not constitute
the Commonwealth or a State, or
an authority of the Commonwealth or of a State,
for the purposes of the
Patents Act
26.39 For example, publicly funded research is often conducted by medical
research institutes, such the Garvan Institute for Medical
Research (Garvan) and
the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research (WEHI). Such institutes
may be established by state
legislation
affiliated with public sector universities or
However, they are
self-governing, set their own research priorities, and receive some funding from
non-government sources, including
private donations.
26.40 Following the approach taken by the Federal Court in
it seems likely
that such bodies would not constitute authorities of a State for the purposes of
Patents Act
. They are not ‘impressed with the stamp of
government’ because their functions are not governmental or delegated by
State. Further, while institutes such as the Garvan may be established by
state legislation, the State executive generally does not
retain a prominent
role or practical involvement in their
26.41 This conclusion is consistent with comments made in a submission from the
Medical Genetics Elective Group of the University
of Newcastle, which stated
that most research is not conducted by entities that would qualify for the
benefit of the Crown use provisions—the
CSIRO constituting a significant
26.42 Another issue that arises is whether research is ‘for the services
of the Commonwealth or the State’. Where research
is conducted by an
authority of the Commonwealth or of a State, such as the CSIRO or a public
teaching hospital, it could be expected
the research would be considered to be
‘for the services of the Commonwealth or the State’. A government
authority would
be using the patented invention directly for government research
Application to healthcare
26.43 There are similar
questions about the application of the Crown use provisions to the use of
patented genetic materials and technologies
in the provision of healthcare.
26.44 In Australia, responsibility for the provision of healthcare is divided
between Commonwealth, state and territory governments,
and between the
government and non-government
26.45 In most cases, it will be clear that the use of patented genetic materials
or technologies in healthcare involves exploitation
by an authority of the
Commonwealth or of a State—for example, where medical genetic testing of
patients is carried out by
a public sector laboratory attached to a state public
hospital. It seems equally clear that the same testing carried out by a private
sector laboratory or a private medical practitioner would not involve
exploitation by an authority of the Commonwealth or of a State.
26.46 A more problematic issue is whether the provision of healthcare to
patients is ‘for the services of the Commonwealth
or the State’. As
Dr Amanda McBratney and others have observed, if the question were to be
considered by an Australian court,
the House of Lords decision in
may constitute persuasive authority, but much would turn on the circumstances of
26.47 Following the reasoning in
it seems likely
that the use of a patented genetic test by a public hospital would be held to be
for the services of a State. The
provision of healthcare by public hospitals to
their patients is a function of the State and its health authorities. However,
position is not beyond doubt.
Other jurisdictions
26.48 The patents
legislation of other jurisdictions, including the United Kingdom, New Zealand
and Canada, contains Crown use provisions
similar to those in the
26.49 In the United Kingdom, the
Patents Act 1977
(UK) provides for the
exploitation of a patented invention ‘for the services of the Crown’
by ‘any government department
and any person authorised in writing by a
government department’.
The Act provides specifically that the term ‘services of the Crown’
includes, among other things, ‘the production
or supply of specified drugs
and medicines’.
provision was not present in the
Patents Act 1949
(UK) and may have been
considered desirable in order to remove any doubt about the effect of the
decision in
Act also includes detailed provisions as to Crown use during an
26.50 In New Zealand, the
Patents Act 1953
(NZ) provides for the
exploitation of a patented invention by ‘any Government Department and any
person authorised in writing
by a Government Department ... for the services of
the Crown’.
26.51 In Canada, the
Patent Act 1985
(Can) provides that the Commissioner
of Patents may ‘on application by the Government of Canada or the
government of a province,
authorize the use of a patented invention by that
government’,
on terms set
by the Commissioner.
There is no
requirement in the Act that the use must be for the services of the
Government.
26.52 There is no evidence that the Crown use provisions in the United Kingdom,
New Zealand or Canada have been used any more frequently
than in Australia.
There is a small number of reported United Kingdom cases in which the Crown use
provisions were at issue. These
, and two cases from the
1920s involving the supply of fire extinguishers to the Ministry of Munitions
during the First World War,
the welding of aluminium articles for use by
government.
26.53 In a 1998 report to the Council for TRIPS, the United Kingdom stated that,
at least since 1996, no Crown use authorisations
The report implies that,
in the United Kingdom, the Crown use provisions are most likely to be asserted
by the Ministry of Defence.
Similarly, New Zealand reported in 1997 that, at least since 1993, there had
been no exercise of Crown use
provisions.
Acquisition by the Crown
26.54 In addition to Crown
use, s 171 of the
Patents Act
provides for compulsory acquisition by the
Commonwealth of an invention covered by a patent or patent
application.
The Act does not
stipulate any limitations on the circumstances in which the Commonwealth may
acquire an invention, but the Commonwealth
must compensate a patent
The section does not
extend to compulsory acquisition by a State or Territory.
26.55 There are several situations in which the Commonwealth might wish to
acquire a gene patent, such as in dealing with national
emergencies or for
defence purposes.
conceivable that the Australian Government may wish to acquire gene patents so
as to provide open access to specific genetic
materials or technologies.
However, in 1997 the Australian delegation to the World Trade Organization
stated that there are no instances
of this provision having been
Submissions and consultations
26.56 IP 27 asked whether
the Crown use provisions in the
Patents Act
are capable of applying to
the provision of healthcare services using patented genetic materials and
technologies.
In response, some
submissions suggested that the Crown use provisions are adequate in scope and do
not require amendment.
26.57 For example, GlaxoSmithKline submitted that Crown use provisions are
‘potentially extremely broad in their operation’
and that, in
relation to healthcare, these provisions:
could be used in a wide variety of ways which would of course be adverse
to the rights originally afforded to the patentee under the
patent system. In
view of the fact that the Crown use provisions would appear to be contrary to
the general public policy intention
of the Act to reward inventors and encourage
innovation, it is perhaps not surprising that these provisions have not been
to any significant extent. This is evidence that the patent system is
not abused so as to necessitate resort to these provisions
and there is no
reason to suppose that gene patenting will change the
26.58 Other submissions suggested that legislative amendment is desirable to
make it clear that the Crown use provisions apply to
For example, the Human
Genetics Society of Australasia submitted that, while the Crown use provisions
appear capable such application,
it might still be advisable:
to amend the legislative provisions to ensure that the definition of
service includes health care activities and that health care
providers fall
under the definitions of Commonwealth, State or an authority of
26.59 The Commonwealth Department of Health and Ageing noted that while Crown
use of gene patents may address problems of accessibility,
it would not
necessarily address cost issues.
The Department stated:
it would be preferable to ensure that the operation of the Act in
relation to gene patents ensures appropriate levels of competition.
obviate the need to apply Crown use or compulsory licensing provisions except in
extraordinary circumstances.
26.60 The Medical Genetics Elective Group of the University of Newcastle
submitted that the Crown use provisions should be amended
to apply to situations
where research is ‘funded by the Commonwealth and is not intended for
However, they
also cautioned that the Crown use provisions should only be used ‘in
extreme circumstances’.
An over use of this defence could undermine the patent system and be more
detrimental to research and healthcare in the long term.
The threat of use may
be enough to encourage patentees to provide general licences thus benefiting
both the patentee and the public.
ALRC’s views
26.61 As discussed in
Chapter 2, patent law seeks to achieve a balance between the desirability of
encouraging the provision of new
and useful goods by rewarding inventiveness,
and the undesirability of ongoing monopolies for critical processes or
26.62 In some circumstances, the exercise of patent rights may have adverse
implications for governmental or public interests. Where
this is the case, the
Crown use provisions ensure that governments can step in to exploit a patent or
authorise others to do so.
These provisions may be seen as a ‘safety
valve’ in particular cases, preventing the public interest from being
by the patent system.
26.63 Where important public interests are involved, the Australian Government
could potentially legislate to permit the use or acquisition
of property,
including patents, so as to address the particular problem at hand. However, the
Crown use provisions may offer a more
expeditious and efficient
and one that is also
available to state and territory governments and their health authorities.
26.64 In practice, as is the case with the compulsory licensing provisions, the
Crown use provisions are not often used. However,
they may be important in
encouraging patent holders to negotiate on reasonable terms with prospective
licensees, including government
authorities.
26.65 The Inquiry proposes a pattern of laws and practices that is flexible
enough to anticipate and respond to any future problems
for research or
healthcare delivery attributable to gene patents. The potential use of the Crown
use provisions by Commonwealth,
State and Territory governments may contribute
desirable flexibility to the patent system.
26.66 The ALRC’s proposals anticipate that Commonwealth, state and
territory governments may, in future, consider exercising
the Crown use and
acquisition provisions of the
Patents Act
more actively, and that there
may be circumstances in which it is appropriate to do so. Notably, in Chapter
20, the ALRC proposed
a more active role for Commonwealth, state and territory
health departments, in liaison with the Australian Health Ministers’
Advisory Council (AHMAC), in considering whether to exploit or acquire a patent
under the Crown use or acquisition provisions of
The ALRC also proposes
that AHMAC and the Commonwealth Department of Health and Ageing should develop
policies regarding the circumstances
in which is it is appropriate for the Crown
to exploit a patented invention under these provisions for the purpose of
promoting human
health (Proposal 26 - 1).
26.67 In the light of this, the ALRC considers that it would be desirable to
Patents Act
to clarify that ‘the services of the
Commonwealth or of a State’ includes the provision of healthcare services
or products
to members of the public (Proposal 26 - 2). While the case law
suggests this interpretation, the position is not beyond doubt and
it would be
appropriate, in healthcare
The ALRC is interested
in comments on how such an amendment might be drafted. For example, should a
distinction be drawn between
the exploitation of a patent to provide a service,
such as medical genetic testing, and situations involving the re-supply or sale
of a patented product to others?
26.68 There appears to be no similar need for an amendment directed at research
use by the Crown of patented genetic materials or
technologies. The problem in
this context relates more to whether a particular research organisation
constitutes ‘an authority
of the Commonwealth or of a State’. There
are existing solutions to this problem. Where there is some doubt about its
a research institution may be authorised in writing by the Commonwealth
or a State (before or after the patented invention is
exploited).
Alternatively, the
institution may be able to invoke the compulsory licensing
provisions.
26.69 The ALRC also considers that the
Patents Act
should be amended to
clarify that, when the Crown exploits or acquires a patent under the Act, the
compensation payable must be just
and reasonable. Commonwealth acquisition of a
patent under s 171 of the
Patents Act
would, in any case, fall within the
scope of s 51(xxxi) of the Australian
Constitution
, which requires that any
acquisition of property—including intellectual property—by the
Commonwealth must be on ‘just
26.70 The compulsory licensing provisions state that a patent holder is entitled
to be paid for use of a patent under a compulsory
licence at an agreed rate or,
failing agreement, such amount as is determined by a prescribed court to be
‘just and reasonable
having regard to the economic value of the
This provision
was inserted by the
Patents (World Trade Organisation Amendments) Act
(Cth), which made a suite of amendments to the
Patents Act
enable Australia to ratify the TRIPS Agreement, by ensuring that Australian
patents legislation was consistent with
26.71 Article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement, which deals with both Crown use and
compulsory licensing, as those terms are understood
in Australian law, requires
the patent holder to be paid ‘adequate remuneration in the circumstances
of each case, taking into
account the economic value of the
authorization’.
26.72 Following the 1994 amendments, the
Patents Act
now refers to the
fact that remuneration for Crown use is payable to the patent
However, there is no
guidance on the quantum of remuneration, but only on the mechanism by which any
dispute about remuneration is
to be resolved. The ALRC considers that a
legislative standard is desirable and proposes that an amendment to the Crown
use and Crown
acquisition provisions follow the language of the equivalent
compulsory licensing provision (Proposal 26 - 3).
26.73 The ALRC recognises that questions have been raised about whether the
Crown use provisions are already too broad in their potential
application. For
example, the ACIP Discussion Paper highlights the broad ambit of the Crown use
provisions and asks, among other
things, whether the availability of the
provisions should be limited or denied to certain entities and whether it would
be advantageous
to restrict the circumstances in which government can invoke
These are important
questions. However, the central focus of the ALRC’s Terms of Reference is
on the desirability of reforms
to address the possible adverse impact of gene
patents on research and healthcare. Questions about whether the Crown use
should be wound back have not been a focus of consultation.
Proposal 26 - 1
The Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory
Council should develop a policy regarding the circumstances in which it is
appropriate
for the Commonwealth or a State to exploit a patented invention
under the Crown use provisions of the
Patents Act 1990
) for the purposes of promoting human health. Similarly, the Commonwealth
Department of Health and Ageing should develop a policy
regarding the
circumstances in which it is appropriate for the Commonwealth to acquire a
patent for the purposes of promoting human
Proposal 26 - 2
The Commonwealth should amend the
Patents Act
to clarify that, for the purposes of the Crown use provisions, an invention
is exploited ‘for the services of the Commonwealth
or the State’ if
the exploitation of the invention is for the provision of healthcare services or
products to members of the
Proposal 26 - 3
The Commonwealth should amend the
Patents Act
to provide that when a patent is exploited or acquired under the Crown use
or Crown acquisition provisions of the
Patents Act
, the Crown must pay
such remuneration or compensation as is:
(a) agreed between the parties; or
(b) determined by a prescribed court to be just and reasonable having regard
to the economic value of the patent.
Transfer of ‘know-how’
26.74 A patent application
must fully disclose an invention. The
Patents Act
provides that a
complete specification must ‘describe the invention fully, including the
best method known to the applicant
for performing the
invention’.
However, the
patent holder may later acquire valuable know-how and experience that is
necessary to exploit the invention effectively
or optimally.
26.75 Where Crown use or acquisition rights are asserted over a patented
invention, the Crown, or the person authorised by the Crown,
may encounter
problems in exploiting the patented product or process if it does not have the
necessary know-how to do so. Thus, the
mere right to exploit without
infringement may be insufficient to enable the Crown to use a patented invention
effectively or optimally.
Access to the patent holder’s know-how may also
be required, for example through the provision of additional information by
patent holder, or access to documentation about the invention. This issue has
arisen more frequently in the context of compulsory
licences over patented
inventions, rather than in relation to Crown use, and is discussed in further in
Chapter 27.
Question 26 - 1
Should the Commonwealth amend the
Patents Act
to require a patent holder to transfer ‘know-how’ relating to the
patented product or process to the Crown when the Crown
uses or acquires a
patent under the Act?
For the purposes of the Crown use
provisions, ‘State’ includes the Australian Capital Territory, the
Northern Territory
and Norfolk Island:
Patents Act 1990
Patents, Designs, and Trade Marks
v The Queen
[1865] EngR 205
(1865) 6 B & S 257
Pfizer Corporation v
Ministry of Health
[1965] AC 512
Pfizer Corporation v Ministry
[1965] AC 512
Patents Act 1903
General Steel Industries
Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
South Australian
Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Council on Intellectual Property,
Review of Crown Use Provisions in Patents
and Designs Legislation
Pfizer Corporation v Ministry of
Stack v Brisbane City
[1995] FCA 1427
(1994) 131 ALR
General Steel Industries Inc v
Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR
for Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights,
Legislation in the Fields of Patents, Layout-Designs (Topographies) of
Integrated Circuits, Protection of Undisclosed Information
and Control of
Anti-competitive Practices in Contractual Licences: Australia, 22 October
, World Trade Organization,
<www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/intel8_e.htm> at 17 December
W Cornish, M Llewelyn and M
Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) and Genetics
Consumer Project on Technology,
Ciprofloxacin: The Dispute over Compulsory Licenses
<www.cptech.org/ip/health/cl/cipro> at 3 June
The right to exploit an invention
under s 163(1) includes the right to sell products made in exercise of that
Patents Act 1990
Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into
force on 1 January 1995) art 31. See also Ch
Contracting states need not apply
this condition where such use is permitted to remedy a practice that is
determined after a judicial
or administrative process to be anti-competitive
practice. The need to correct anti-competitive practices may be taken into
in determining the amount of remuneration in such cases:
Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh
Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
into force on 1 January 1995) art
See Ibid art
See Council for Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights,
Review of Legislation in the Fields
of Patents, Layout-Designs (Topographies) of Integrated Circuits, Protection of
Undisclosed Information
and Control of Anti-competitive Practices in Contractual
Licences: Australia, 22 October 1997
, World Trade Organization,
<www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/intel8_e.htm> at 17 December
Patents Act 1990
Stack v Brisbane City
[1995] FCA 1427
(1994) 131 ALR 333
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner
for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
Committee of Direction of Fruit
Marketing v Delegate of the Australian Postal Commission
[1980] HCA 23
(1980) 144 CLR
Stack v Brisbane City
[1995] FCA 1427
(1994) 131 ALR 333.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
The Judicial Power of the Commonwealth: A Review of the
and Related Legislation
, DP 64 (2000), Ch
Australian Law Reform Commission,
The Judicial Power of the Commonwealth: A Review of the
Judiciary Act 1903
and Related Legislation
, ALRC 92 (2001),
[29.6] - [29.17].
Stack v Brisbane City
[1995] FCA 1427
(1994) 131 ALR 333
Advisory Council on Intellectual
Review of Crown Use Provisions in Patents and Designs
Legislation
Patents Act 1990
Advisory Council on
Intellectual Property,
Review of Crown Use Provisions in Patents and Designs
Legislation
Brisbane City Council
[1995] FCA 1427
(1994) 131 ALR
Pfizer Corporation v Ministry
example, Lord Reid indicated that it would not be workable for the purposes of
the Crown use provisions to distinguish between
the use of patented articles for
the benefit of the government department or service that uses them, and use for
the benefit of others:
‘Most, if not all, activities of Government
departments or services are intended to be for the benefit of the public, and
can be regarded solely, or even mainly, for the benefit of the department or
of members of the service’: Ibid,
Patents Act
(UK) s 46(1) provided: ‘Notwithstanding anything in this Act, any
Government department and any person authorised in writing
by a Government
department may make use and exercise any patented invention for the services of
the Crown in accordance with the
following provisions of this
Corporation v Ministry of Health
[1965] AC 512
, 535, 543, 551 - 552;
Stack v Brisbane City Council
[1995] FCA 1427
(1994) 131 ALR 333
Advisory Council on Intellectual
Review of Crown Use Provisions in Patents and Designs
Legislation
Ibid, 10 - 11. The
minority in
considered that re-supply by a government department
to members of the general public in competition with the patent holder should
not be covered by the Crown use provision:
Pfizer Corporation v Ministry of
[1965] AC 512
, Cooper J stated that he was not
required to express a view as to which view more closely reflected the law in
Stack v Brisbane City Council
[1995] FCA 1427
(1994) 131 ALR 333
Advisory Council on Intellectual Property,
Review of Crown Use Provisions in
Patents and Designs Legislation
For example,
Garvan Institute of
Medical Research Act 1984
For example, WEHI is affiliated
with the University of Melbourne and the Royal Melbourne
Stack v Brisbane City
[1995] FCA 1427
(1994) 131 ALR 333
The New South Wales Minister for
Health nominates two directors for membership of the 15-person Garvan Institute
Garvan Institute of Medical Research Act 1984
(NSW) sch 1, cl
E Milward and others,
Submission P46
, 20 October
A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Stack v Brisbane City
[1995] FCA 1427
(1994) 131 ALR
Patents Act
(UK) s 55(1).
Pfizer Corporation v Ministry
[1965] AC 512.
Patents Act
RS c P-4 (Canada) s 19(1).
19(2). The terms must comply with principles set out in that
subsection.
Pyrene Co Ltd v Webb
Lamp Co Ltd
(1920) 37 RPC
Aktiengesellschaft für
Autogene Aluminium Schwiessung v London Aluminium Co Ltd (No 2)
Council for Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights,
Review of Legislation in the Fields
of Patents, Layout-Designs (Topographies) of Integrated Circuits, Protection of
Undisclosed Information
and Control of Anti-competitive Practices in Contractual
Licences: United Kingdom, 7 January 1998
, World Trade Organization,
<www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/intel8_e.htm> at 7 January
for Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights,
Legislation in the Fields of Patents, Layout-Designs (Topographies) of
Integrated Circuits, Protection of Undisclosed Information
and Control of
Anti-competitive Practices in Contractual Licences: New Zealand, 24 October
, World Trade Organization,
<www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/intel8_e.htm> at 7 January
Patents Act 1990
Council for Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights,
Review of Legislation in the Fields
of Patents, Layout-Designs (Topographies) of Integrated Circuits, Protection of
Undisclosed Information
and Control of Anti-competitive Practices in Contractual
Licences: Australia, 22 October 1997
, World Trade Organization,
<www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/intel8_e.htm> at 17 December
Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003),
Question 15 - 1.
Royal College of
Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; Davies
Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October 2003; GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Cancer Council Australia,
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003; Human Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; Queensland Government,
, 5 January 2004; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003. The
South Australian Government highlighted the absence of definitive Australian
case law: South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Commonwealth Department of Health
and Ageing,
Submission P65
, 28 January
Milward and others,
Submission P46
, 20 October
Advisory Council on Intellectual Property,
Review of Crown Use Provisions in
Patents and Designs Legislation
In this context, it is noted that
United Kingdom legislation defines ‘services of the Crown’ as
including certain specific
activities. These are: (a) the supply of anything for
foreign defence purposes; (b) the production or supply of specified drugs and
medicines; and (c) purposes relating to the production or use of atomic energy
or research:
Patents Act
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act 1990
Patents (World
Trade Organisation Amendments) Act 1994
(Cth). Being an original Member of
the World Trade Organisation with effect from 1 January 1995, Australia was
obliged to bring its
laws in conformity with the TRIPS Agreement by January
Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into
force on 1 January 1995) art
Patents (World Trade
Organisation Amendments) Act 1994
(Cth) s 15(c);
Patents Act 1990
See Advisory Council on
Intellectual Property,
Review of Crown Use Provisions in Patents and Designs
Legislation
Patents Act 1990
s 40(2)(a).
This is known as the ‘sufficiency requirement’:
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
27. Compulsory Licensing
Introduction
Compulsory licensing
Relationship to Crown use
Patents Act
The TRIPS Agreement
Application to research and healthcare
The legislative test
Anti-competitive conduct
Compulsory licensing
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Dependent patents
Emergency and public non-commercial use
TRIPS Agreement
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Remuneration
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Licensing of ‘know-how'
Submissionsand consultations
ALRC's views
27. Compulsory Licensing
Introduction
compulsory licence is an authorisation given by a national authority, without or
against the consent of the patent holder,
for the exploitation of a particular
patented product or process, or other intellectual property
27.2 This chapter considers the circumstances in which compulsory licences may
be granted under the
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act
facilitate access to patented genetic inventions for use in scientific research
or healthcare provision. The chapter considers
particular issues and problems
arising from the existing test for granting a compulsory licence, and proposes
several reforms.
Compulsory licensing
27.3 The compulsory licensing
provisions of the
Patents Act
allow the exploitation of a patented
invention without the consent of the patent holder. The terms of remuneration or
compensation
are agreed or, in the absence of agreement, determined by a court.
The Act stipulates the conditions upon which a court may grant
27.4 The concept of a compulsory licence over patents arose from the historical
requirement that a patent holder must ‘locally
work’ a patented
product or process. This meant that the patent holder was required to use or
produce the patented invention
within the country in which the patent was
registered.
Where a patent holder
failed to ‘work’ the invention locally, the patent was subject to
forfeiture. Compulsory licences
were developed as a less drastic means to ensure
a patent was exploited.
27.5 Compulsory licensing provisions were included in the first Australian
patents legislation.
described the objects of similar compulsory licensing provisions in the now
Patents Act
(1) fostering Australian manufacturing industry to make the patented
article or to use the patented process and (2) ensuring that
the Australian
demand for the patented article or articles made in accordance with the patented
process should be reasonably met
whether from local production or from
27.6 However, in its report,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation
under the Competition Principles Agreement
, the Intellectual Property and
Competition Review Committee (IPCRC) suggested that these objectives may no
longer be appropriate:
The current terms ... hark back to a period where the primary concern was
the promotion of domestic industry, rather than securing
the best use of
resources and achieving high levels of productivity. Moreover, they lack an
explicit competition test, and do not
seem to allow for the legitimate interests
of the rights owner to be adequately
27.7 Compulsory licences have been granted on a diverse range of grounds in
other countries, including: to address local working
and lack of appropriate
supply; to remedy a refusal to
to remedy anti-competitive
conduct; in the public interest;
facilitate dependent patents; to facilitate government
and to facilitate access to
27.8 The United Kingdom’s Nuffield Council on Bioethics (Nuffield Council)
has suggested that compulsory licensing may be one
way of ameliorating the
problems arising from the grant of patents on genetic diagnostic tests. For
example, compulsory licensing
may be an appropriate remedy if the patent
holder’s monopoly is such that an important diagnostic tool is available
the inventor at an unreasonably high cost, and the patent holder is
unwilling to license others to provide a cheaper
alternative.
27.9 The Nuffield Council also outlined the main arguments against compulsory
licensing. These were that such licensing would decrease
the incentive to
develop new inventions and encourage secrecy among inventors; increase the cost
and complexity of the patent system;
and result in fewer challenges to the
validity of gene patents, meaning that invalid patents may never be challenged.
It recognised
the strong opposition to compulsory licensing within the
pharmaceutical industry, and emphasised the need to strike a careful balance
27.10 Compulsory licensing also raises several practical concerns. For example,
national governments that allow compulsory licences
may face censure from major
trading partners under pressure from powerful patent holding
In addition, it may
be difficult to exploit the patented invention under a compulsory licence
without the co-operation of the patent
holder, unless the necessary
‘know-how’ to work the invention is included in the
27.11 Several commentators have discussed the benefit of using the threat of
compulsory licensing as a means of inducing patent holders
to enter into
voluntary licences for their patented
inventions.
In its review of
similar provisions in
Patents Act 1952
(Cth), the Industrial Property
Advisory Committee (IPAC) commented that:
there is anecdotal evidence that compulsory licences have an impact on
licence negotiations, notably between foreign rights owners
and potential users
of patents in Australia. It is claimed that the threat of acquiring a compulsory
licence often encourages parties
to reach agreement where they otherwise would
27.12 In contrast, AusBiotech Ltd submitted to the Inquiry that:
There is no solid evidence that the mere existence of the compulsory
licence provisions does encourage patentees to negotiate with
licensees as only a handful of such cases were flagged by AusBiotech Members.
This is so for all fields of
technology.
27.13 It is difficult to obtain empirical information about the use of these
provisions in licence negotiations in Australia. In
one recent international
example, the South African Competition Commission announced that it had reached
a settlement with GlaxoSmithKline,
and was in discussion with Boehringer
Ingelheim, regarding the grant of voluntary licences to several generic
manufacturers to produce
anti-retrovirals for sale throughout sub-Saharan
Africa. The South African Competition Commission had previously found that the
had abused their dominant position in the market. It had referred the
matter to the Competition Tribunal, which had the power to
grant compulsory
Relationship to Crown use
27.14 As discussed in Chapter
Patents Act
permits the Commonwealth or a State, or a person
authorised by the Commonwealth or a State, to exploit a patented invention
infringing the patent, provided that exploitation is ‘for the
services of the Commonwealth or the State’. The permitted
exploitation by
the Crown expressly includes exploitation by an authority of the Commonwealth or
of a State.
27.15 A public organisation seeking access to patented genetic materials or
technologies may be able to choose whether to invoke
either the Crown use
provisions or apply for a compulsory licence under the
Patents Act
example, where a state health department or other public sector healthcare
authority seeks to use a patented medical genetic
test, in circumstances where
the patent holder has refused to provide a licence, the health authority may
have the option of asserting
Crown use, or applying to a court for a compulsory
27.16 There may be an advantage in exercising Crown use as compared with seeking
a compulsory licence. The costs and delay involved
in prior negotiation and
court proceedings may be avoided. On the other hand, there may be more
uncertainty about the remuneration,
ultimately payable to the patent holder,
where Crown use is involved.
Patents Act
27.17 Section 133(1) of the
Patents Act
provides that a person may apply to a prescribed court for a
compulsory licence to work a patent after a period of three years has
since the patent was granted. The court may make the order if it is satisfied
the ‘reasonable requirements of the public’ with respect
to the patented invention have not been satisfied; and
the patent holder has not given a satisfactory reason for failing to
exploit the
27.18 Section
135 sets out the circumstances in which the ‘reasonable requirements of
the public’ will be deemed not to
have been satisfied:
A new or existing trade or industry in Australia is unfairly
prejudiced, or the demand in Australia for the patented
is not reasonably met,
because of the patent holder’s failure to: manufacture sufficient
quantities of the patented product
and supply it on reasonable terms; carry on a
patented process to a reasonable extent; or grant licences on reasonable
A trade or industry in Australia is unfairly prejudiced by the
conditions the patent holder has attached to the purchase, hire or
patented product or to the use or working of a patented process.
The patented invention is not being worked in Australia on a
commercial scale, but is capable of being worked in
27.19 Additional
provisions apply where the patent in question is a ‘dependent
patent’, that is, an invention that cannot
be worked without infringing
another patent.
27.20 A compulsory licence must not be in the nature of an exclusive
The patent holder is
entitled to be paid for use of the patent at an agreed rate or, failing
agreement, ‘such amount as is
determined by a prescribed court to be just
and reasonable having regard to the economic value of the
A compulsory
licence may be revoked where the circumstances that justified its grant have
ceased to exist and are unlikely to recur,
and the interests of the licensee are
not likely to be adversely affected by the
revocation.
27.21 Few, if any, compulsory licences have been granted under Australian patent
law, and the compulsory licensing provisions have
received little judicial
consideration.
A report of the
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Industry, Science and Technology
in 1992 stated that ‘no compulsory
licences have been granted since
Federation’.
The ALRC is
not aware of any compulsory licences having been granted since that date.
The TRIPS Agreement
27.22 Article 31 of the
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 1994
(TRIPS Agreement) deals with the use of patented inventions without the
authorisation of the patent holder. Such use includes Crown
use and use pursuant
to the grant of a compulsory licence. Article 31 does not specify or limit the
grounds upon which a compulsory
licence may be granted, but outlines the
procedures that governments must follow when they grant a licence, and specifies
provisions to be
These include:
each case must be considered on its individual merits;
the proposed licensee must have made previous efforts for a
reasonable period to obtain authorisation from the right holder on reasonable
commercial terms and
—however, this
requirement may be waived in the case of a national emergency or other
circumstances of extreme urgency or in
cases of public non-commercial use;
the use must be non-exclusive;
any such use must be predominantly for the supply of the domestic
market of the authorising Member;
the authorisation must be liable, subject to adequate protection of
the legitimate interests of the persons so authorised, to be
terminated if and
when the circumstances which led to it cease to exist and are unlikely to
the right holder must be paid adequate remuneration in the
circumstances of each case, taking into account the economic value of
authorisation; and
where such use is authorised to permit the exploitation of a patent
(dependent patent) that cannot be exploited without infringing
another patent
(original patent), the invention claimed in the dependent patent must involve an
important technical advance of considerable
economic significance in relation to
the invention claimed in the original patent; the owner of the original patent
must be entitled
to a cross-licence on reasonable terms to use the invention
claimed in the dependent patent; and the use authorised in respect of
original patent must be non-assignable except with the assignment of the
Application
to research and healthcare
27.23 There are various
reasons why a person or organisation might seek a compulsory licence for a
patented genetic invention for
use in scientific research or healthcare
provision, including:
a researcher or research institution might seek access to an
upstream genetic research tool to develop a downstream product such
pharmaceutical drug;
a researcher or research institution that has developed an
improvement on a patented research tool might seek a licence over the
tool in order to exploit the patented improvement;
a pharmaceutical company or other private organisation might seek to
provide novel therapies, such as gene therapy, the production
of therapeutic
proteins, or the use of stem cells to the Australian community where the patent
holder has failed to do so; or
a public sector health authority might seek to provide a patented
medical genetic test or other healthcare service where the demand
in Australia
is not being
27.24 IP 27 asked
whether the compulsory licensing provisions in the
Patents Act
patent holders to exploit or license gene patents; and whether the grant of a
compulsory licence is an adequate and appropriate
mechanism to remedy the
possible adverse impacts of gene patents on access to healthcare or the ability
to conduct research related
27.25 One submission suggested that the compulsory licence provisions do not
appear to assist in this context due to ‘the legalities
in pursuing
In contrast, the
Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources submitted that:
The Patents Act provides an appropriate mechanism for the application of
compulsory licensing of gene patents and adequate compensation
to the Patentee.
Even though compulsory licensing has rarely been applied, its potential
has provided incentive for the exploitation and licensing
of patent across
technologies.
27.26 Several submissions supported the use of compulsory licensing provisions
as a means to facilitate access to gene patents for
the provision of healthcare
The Department of
Health and Ageing submitted that the compulsory licence provisions
may in principle be applied to the provision of healthcare services.
However, as these provisions have not been used for this purpose
it is unclear
whether they would operate effectively ... Health believes that the Inquiry
should seek to address the circumstances
in which it would be appropriate to use
these mechanisms and whether any changes to the Act are necessary to allow
access to the
mechanisms.
27.27 The Human Genetics Society of Australasia submitted that:
The current provisions of the Patent Act 1990 (Cth) relating to
compulsory licences should be amended to contain specific reference
relating to access to health care and ability to conduct research related to
human health. In this way it may be possible
to grant a compulsory licence where
patent holders are not acting in the best interest of public health (akin to
French law). It
seems that by amending the Patent Act in such a positive fashion
we may limit or remove the ambiguities surrounding ‘the reasonable
requirements of the public’ clause in the Patent
27.28 Several other submissions expressed support for a French law that permits
the Minister of Health to grant a compulsory licence
over a patented invention
on public health grounds.
fact, this law appears to provide for a form of Crown use of patented
inventions, in which the Crown may authorise a third party
to work a patented
invention for the services of the Crown—including public health
27.29 The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research submitted that
although the threat of compulsory licensing is a major
incentive for the patent
holder to exploit its patent, in practice the provisions have been very rarely
used. It considered that
‘this is probably a good thing because frequent
use of this capacity would undermine the entire patent system and its value
the innovation system’.
27.30 Davies Collison Cave, an Australian patent attorney firm, did not support
amending the compulsory licensing provisions specifically
for gene patents. It
noted that the IPCRC had already considered the question of the appropriate test
for the grant of a compulsory
licence, and suggested that any amendment of this
test should be applied in relation to patents in all fields of
technology.
27.31 Finally, GlaxoSmithKline submitted that:
Where it is not possible to deal with any problems which are genuinely
associated with patents by means outside the patent system,
the application of
compulsory licensing laws can be an appropriate means of dealing with the
problem and will generally be adequate.
In this regard, we regard the provisions
of Sections 133 and 135 of the Patents Act as being appropriately
We emphasise, however, that provisions such as these should not be
regularly applied but only applied in exceptional cases where the
concerned are clearly being exercised in an abusive manner to the detriment of
society. Regular application of compulsory
licensing laws by any country will
have a chilling effect on long-term innovation and competition and of direct
investment into the
country concerned.
Further, like other weak patent laws, regular use of compulsory licensing
could also delay or prevent introduction onto the Australian
innovative products ... Thus, excessive use of compulsory licensing can in fact
impede access to healthcare.
The legislative test
27.32 As noted above, s 133
Patents Act
provides that a person may apply to a prescribed court
for a compulsory licence order three years after the grant of a patent where
‘reasonable requirements of the public’ with respect to the patented
invention have not been satisfied; and the patent
holder has not given a
satisfactory reason for failing to exploit the
27.33 Section 135 sets out the circumstances in which the ‘reasonable
requirements of the public’ will be deemed not
to have been satisfied. It
is not clear whether the circumstances outlined in s 135 constitutes an
exhaustive list or whether they
are merely illustrative.
27.34 In any case, s 135 appears to accommodate many of the circumstances in
which an applicant might seek access to a patented genetic
invention. For
example, where a patent holder refuses to grant a licence for a research tool on
reasonable terms, a scientific researcher
or research institution could apply
for a compulsory licence on the basis that the demand in Australia for that tool
is not being
reasonably met. In
Fastening Supplies Pty Ltd v Olin Mathieson
Chemical Corporation
, Menzies J interpreted a similar provision in the
Patents Act
(Cth) as follows:
The demand for the patented article has not been reasonably met if the
Court should be satisfied that, because of its superiority
over articles already
on the market, potential purchasers would have bought it had it been available.
A market for a less efficient
article indicates, other things being equal, a
market for a more efficient
27.35 As noted above, few (if any) compulsory licences have been granted in
Australia since Federation. Commentators have suggested
several reasons why
these provisions have been rarely invoked. IPAC suggested that this might be due
to the formulation of the ‘reasonable
requirements of the public’
test and the broad discretion granted to the court in applying it:
It is something of an enigma that, despite the apparent number of
situations in which the compulsory licensing provisions could be
invoked, only 2
cases of petitions for compulsory licences are known to have gone to court in
Australia. One reason for this might
be that in fact the provisions in question
are ineffectual; that persons who would be prospective applicants for compulsory
perceive, and are advised, that the grounds are so hedged with
qualifications, discretion on the part of the court, difficulties
of proof, and
expense, that to petition would be too onerous or
27.36 Dr Dianne Nicol and Jane Nielsen have expressed concerns about the lack of
judicial guidance on what constitutes the ‘reasonable
requirements of the
public’, what remuneration must be paid, and what amounts to reasonable
remuneration for a compulsory licence.
They commented that:
The circumstances in which an application can be made could also be
clarified, rather than having to rely on the argument that the
requirements of the public have not been
27.37 In consultations, Professor Jill McKeough noted the difficulty for an
applicant in establishing that a patent holder has no
satisfactory reason for
failing to exploit the patent. The patent holder could offer a wide range of
explanations as to why the patent
had not been exploited or licensed to third
27.38 Several submissions expressed support for the clarification or broadening
of the test to encourage applications for compulsory
licences in the
The ALRC considers that
there may be merit in clarifying the circumstances in which an individual or
organisation can apply for a
compulsory licence. This could be done by amending
Patents Act
to replace the ‘reasonable requirements of the
public’ test with a new test. Alternatively, the existing test may be
retained, but the Act amended to provide that s 135 is not exhaustive as to the
circumstances in which the reasonable requirements
of the public have not been
27.39 As the ALRC has received few submissions addressing the formulation of the
‘reasonable requirements of the public’
test, it is not in a
position to formulate a reform proposal at this time.
Question 27 - 1
Should the Commonwealth amend the
Patents Act
Patents Act
) to clarify the test for the grant of a
compulsory licence? If so, should the Commonwealth
(a) clarify the circumstances in which the ‘reasonable requirements
of the public’ will not have been satisfied; or
(b) specify that s 135 is not an exhaustive list of the circumstances in
which a patented invention would fail to satisfy the ‘reasonable
requirements of the public’?
Anti-competitive conduct
27.40 Chapter 24 discussed
the competition law implications of the patenting of genetic materials and
technologies. It noted that,
given the unique nature of many biotechnology
inventions, and their lack of substitutability, if a patent holder engages in
anti-competitive
conduct in relation to its patent this could have significant
implications for downstream research or access to certain healthcare
27.41 An individual or organisation might seek a compulsory licence over a
patented genetic invention in response to a patent holder
engaging in
anti-competitive conduct. The ALRC has heard concerns that the compulsory
licence provisions may be too narrow to address
all of the circumstances in
which such an order may be warranted on competition grounds.
Patents Act
currently does not specifically provide for the
grant of a compulsory licence as a remedy for anti-competitive
In some circumstances,
the ‘reasonable requirements of the public’ test may permit the
grant of a compulsory licence
where there is anti-competitive conduct in
relation to gene patents. For example, where the patent holder of an upstream
research tool, for which there is no substitute, refuses to grant a
licence on reasonable terms and this prejudices a trade or industry
the court may grant a compulsory licence on the basis that the reasonable
requirements of the public have not been satisfied.
However, certain
anti-competitive conduct may fall outside the scope of this test.
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) (TPA) may provide a mechanism
for the grant of a compulsory licence as a remedy for anti-competitive behaviour
of the Act. Section 87 provides that the court may make such
orders ‘as it thinks fit’ in proceedings for a breach of
Relevant conduct might include entering into anti-competitive agreements, the
misuse of market power, the use of exclusionary
provisions, and exclusive
dealing. The court has a wide discretion to make orders for compensatory or
pre-emptive purposes, and this
could extend to the grant of a compulsory
However, the ALRC is
not aware of any cases under the TPA in which a compulsory licence has been
granted for a patented invention.
Compulsory licensing
Competition-based test
its review, the IPCRC noted that the compulsory licensing provisions lack an
explicit competition test. The Committee commented
We accept that, at a conceptual level, there may be instances when a
compulsory access right is warranted. These include situations
bargaining between parties is not able to achieve an outcome or, more
appropriately, situations in which the access right
acts as a pro-competitive
remedy that tempers the exclusivity that the patent right primarily provides.
Experience in other jurisdictions
with compulsory licences ... demonstrates that
these can, in carefully defined circumstances, lead to more efficient and
outcomes without harming long-term incentives to innovate. Indeed, the
threat of compulsory licensing may lead to innovations being
worked sooner, and
more widely than they would otherwise have
27.45 As noted above, the IPCRC recommended that the existing ‘reasonable
requirements of the public’ test for granting
a compulsory licence be
replaced with a competition-based test. The competition-based test would contain
the following conditions:
access to the patented invention is required for competition in the
(relevant) market;
there is a public interest in enhanced competition in that
reasonable requirements for such access have not been met;
the order will have the effect of allowing these reasonable
requirements to be better met; and
the order will not compromise the legitimate interests of the patent
owner, including that owner’s right to share in the return
society obtains
from the owner’s invention, and to benefit from any successive invention,
made within the patent term, that
relies on the
27.46 The IPCRC
suggested that the conditions for granting a compulsory licence should be
stringent. The term ‘required for
competition in the (relevant)
market’ should mean that there is no other option for competition in that
market, and that the
enhancement of competition that would be secured by the
grant would have to be material and substantial. It commented that:
We believe that subject to safeguards such as these, a compulsory
licensing scheme is likely to promote efficiency in the use of patents
promote competition. We note that such a scheme is fully consistent with
Australia's international
obligations.
27.47 The Australian Government accepted this recommendation in part. The
Government stated that it would adopt the competition-based
test in addition to,
rather than instead of, the existing ‘reasonable requirements of the
public test’.
At the time
of writing, this recommendation had not been implemented.
‘Essential facilities’ test
27.48 An alternative approach would be to amend Part
IIIA of the TPA, which deals with access to the services of essential
facilities,
to cover patented genetic materials and technologies. This would
provide a legislative basis for access to gene patents that are
‘essential facilities’ within a certain
27.49 In European Community law, the ‘essential facilities’ doctrine
provides for the grant of a compulsory licence as
a remedy for an abuse of a
dominant position within a secondary, downstream market. Under that doctrine, a
compulsory licence could
be ordered where:
by refusing to licence, a dominant company is monopolising a
downstream market and preventing users from accessing a new kind of
product for
which there is an unsatisfied demand;
a dominant company has previously granted licences, and had allowed
its licensees to build up downstream activities on that basis,
and subsequently
refuses to grant licences for anti-competitive purposes; or
a dominant company refuses to licence and charges prices that are so
high as to be
IPCRC considered whether the Part IIIA regime under the TPA should be expanded
to apply to intellectual property. It considered
that there was merit in having
provisions for granting access to intellectual property rights similar to those
provided in Part IIIA
the TPA. However, it concluded that a better approach was to address the need
for reform through intellectual property statutes.
Accordingly, the IPCRC
recommended an amended compulsory licensing provision in the
Patents Act
incorporating a competition-based
Submissions and consultations
27.51 IP 27 did not ask any
specific questions about the grant of compulsory licences to remedy
anti-competitive conduct. However,
several submissions provided general
statements about the application of compulsory licensing in this context.
27.52 The Australian Centre for Intellectual Proeprty in Agriculture (ACIPA)
commented that compulsory licensing and forfeiture provide
potentially useful
tools to implement competition objectives where a patent holder seeks to impose
high prices and restrict access
to its invention. It recommended that the
compulsory licensing provisions be revised in accordance with the IPCRC’s
recommendations.
27.53 Dr Amanda McBratney and others submitted that compulsory licensing is the
most appropriate mechanism to deal with patentees
who exercise their rights in
an anti-competitive manner. However, they submitted that the current system is
likely to be too expensive
and too slow to be of much benefit to those who need
it most, even after the introduction of the new competition-based
27.54 The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) suggested that
any amendments to the compulsory licensing provisions
be reviewed after three
years to assess their effectiveness in assisting with competition concerns
arising from patents in general.
It commented that such a review could canvass
any concerns specifically arising in relation to gene
ALRC’s views
27.55 In the absence of
reported use of the compulsory licensing provisions, it is difficult to evaluate
the effectiveness of the
‘reasonable requirements of the public’
test as a remedy for anti-competitive conduct.
27.56 While the courts’ general powers to remedy breaches of
the TPA could permit the grant of a compulsory licence, this power does not
appear to have been used for this purpose. In any
case, such a power is only
available if the court has already found a breach of
of the TPA.
27.57 The IPCRC’s proposed test would appear to cover a wider range of
anti-competitive conduct than might be available under
of the TPA,
including at least some of the type of conduct addressed by the European
Community’s ‘essential facilities’
doctrine. The ALRC proposes
that the Australian Government should implement the IPCRC’s recommended
test for the grant of a
compulsory licence, in addition to the existing
‘reasonable requirements of the public’ test.
27.58 The ALRC agrees with there may be merit in the ACCC’s suggestion
that the compulsory licensing provisions should be reviewed
at a later date to
assess their effectiveness in addressing the competition concerns arising from
patents. Given the infrequency
with which these provisions are used, the ALRC
proposes a period of five years before such a review. This would provide a
opportunity for use of the provisions prior to their review.
Proposal 27 - 1
The Commonwealth should amend the
Patents Act
to insert the competition-based test that was recommended
by the Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee as an additional
ground for the grant of a compulsory licence. The amendment should also provide
for an independent review of the operation of the
compulsory licensing
provisions in addressing competition concerns arising in relation to patented
inventions. This review should
be conducted five years after the new test
commences operation.
Dependent patents
27.59 Where a patented
invention (‘dependent patent’) cannot be worked without exploiting
an earlier patented invention
(‘original patent’), the owner of the
dependent patent generally must obtain a licence for the original patent. If
is not granted, the owner of the dependent patent might seek authorisation
through a compulsory licence to use the original patent.
Patents Act
makes specific provision for the grant of a
compulsory licence over an original patent in circumstances where an applicant
access to a dependent patent. That is, where an applicant seeks a
compulsory licence for a patented invention that cannot be worked
exploiting an earlier patented invention, the court may grant a compulsory
licence in relation to
inventions. The court must be satisfied that
the dependent patent involves an important technical advance of considerable
significance on the original
This provision is
consistent with art 31(l) of the TRIPS
27.61 In contrast, where an applicant seeks a compulsory licence over an
original patent in order to work his or her own dependent
patent, the applicant
would need to satisfy the ‘reasonable requirements of the public’
There is no provision in
Patents Act
specifically permitting the owner of a dependent patent
to apply for a compulsory licence over an original patent.
27.62 In some circumstances the owner of a dependent patent could satisfy the
‘reasonable requirements of the public’
test in relation to the
original patent. For example, where the dependent patent involves a new medical
genetic test, and the original
patent is a broad patent over a genetic sequence,
the applicant could argue that the original patent holder’s refusal to
its patented sequence means that the demand in Australia for the
sequence is not being reasonably met.
27.63 In its submission, AusBiotech Ltd commented that:
at present the legislation does not provide for a compulsory licence in
the situation where a patented invention cannot be used by
the patentee without
also using an earlier invention, which was patented by another party. In
contrast, a party who owns neither
an original patent nor a later dependent
patent can seek a compulsory licence to both patents. To exclude the former
situation is
completely illogical.
27.64 Richard Hoad has described this as ‘clearly an illogical
suggested that the
Patents Act
should be amended to provide that where a
dependent patent cannot be worked without exploiting the original patent, the
the dependent patent should be granted a compulsory licence to work
the original patent if the invention claimed in the dependent
patent constitutes
a significant technological advance over the prior art:
Absent a voluntary cross-licensing agreement, the advance would otherwise
be delayed during the term of the original patent, a result
that is clearly
inefficient and carries real social costs that outweigh any potential damage to
the incentive to innovate.
27.65 Nicol and Nielsen have also discussed this concern:
Given that circumstances of dependency are likely to arise frequently in
the area of biotechnology, there may be justification for
amending the existing
provisions, making special provision for issuance of compulsory licences to
dependant patent holders where
the invention covered by the dependant patent
‘involves an important technical advance of considerable economic
significance’
over the invention for which the compulsory licence is
27.66 The ALRC’s preliminary view is that there may be merit in amending
Patents Act
to expand the scope of the compulsory licensing
provisions to permit an applicant who holds a dependent patent to apply for a
licence over the original patent in order to exploit his or her
invention where the dependent patent involves an important technical
considerable economic significance over the original patent. This approach would
provide greater clarity and certainty.
However, as few submissions addressed
this issue, the ALRC is not in a position to formulate a proposal at this
Question 27 - 2
Patents Act
be amended to allow a
compulsory licence to be granted to a patent holder who cannot work his or her
patent without using another
patent for which authorised use cannot be obtained?
If so, in what circumstances?
Emergency and public non-commercial use
Patents Act
provides that an applicant for a compulsory licence must first try, for a
reasonable period, to obtain a licence from the patent
holder on reasonable
terms and conditions.
27.68 This requirement is consistent with art 31(b) of the TRIPS Agreement,
which provides that, subject to certain circumstances,
a compulsory licence may
be granted only if the applicant has first made attempts, for a reasonable time,
to obtain authorisation
from the patent holder on reasonable commercial terms
and conditions. According to a commentary on the TRIPS Agreement:
The reasonable time for negotiations may depend on the purpose for which
the licence is sought. As [an] example, a negotiator seeking
to commence
production of a life-saving pharmaceutical would be justified in seeking a more
rapid conclusion of negotiations than
a negotiator seeking to commence
production of an improved fishing rod.
It seems unlikely that in the general case negotiations for a commercial
patent licence could not reasonably be concluded within six
months from the
initial request for a licence.
27.69 The requirement of prior negotiation reflects the nature of a patent
right, which is an exclusive right to exploit a new invention
for a specified
period. However, it necessarily delays the process of obtaining a compulsory
licence while an individual or organisation
seeking a licence attempts to
negotiate with the patent holder.
27.70 In some circumstances, this delay may not be in the public interest. For
example, an individual or organisation might seek
an urgent compulsory licence
in the following circumstances:
A public health department might seek a compulsory licence over a
medical genetic test or genetic therapy to address a public health
However, as noted above, invoking the Crown use provisions in these
circumstances may be preferable as there is no need for
prior negotiation.
A pharmaceutical company might seek a compulsory licence over a
gene-related therapy that the patent holder has failed to make available
Australian community.
A researcher or research institution might seek a compulsory licence
over a broad upstream patent for use in genetic research. Where
the research
involves the use of several patented research tools, the process of negotiation
with each patent holder could delay
the research.
27.71 Article 31(b) of the
TRIPS Agreement provides that prior negotiation may be waived in the case of a
national emergency or other
circumstances of extreme emergency, or in cases of
public non-commercial use.
27.72 In November 2001, a special session of the World Trade Organization (WTO)
at Doha, Qatar, released a
Ministerial Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and
Public Health
Declaration)
which provided
that, among other things, Members have the right to grant compulsory licences
and the freedom to determine the grounds
upon which such licences are granted,
and what constitutes a national emergency or other circumstances of extreme
27.73 The concept of ‘public non-commercial use’ is said to leave
governments considerable flexibility in granting licences
without requiring
commercial negotiations in
There are many ways the
term ‘public non-commercial use’ may be defined in good
For example,
‘public use’ could refer to use by the government (as opposed to use
by a private sector entity) or to use
(by any entity) for the public
‘Non-commercial’ may refer to use by public institutions that are
not functioning as commercial enterprises—for
example, public hospitals
operating on a non-profit basis.
27.74 Commentary on art 31(b) of TRIPS has suggested that, in the context of
national emergency or extreme urgency, waiver of prior
negotiation applies to
grants of compulsory licences for private commercial, as well as public
non-commercial purposes.
Submissions and consultations
27.75 While IP 27 did not
directly address the circumstances in which the requirement of prior negotiation
might be waived, several
submissions addressed the issue, particularly in
relation to public health concerns. For example, the South Australian Government
described the requirement of prior negotiation as a ‘fairly high
threshold’ requirement, and noted that it may be unworkable
in the case of
urgent medical need.
Furthermore, the fact that an application must be made to a court means
that it is an expensive and possibly time consuming process.
There is probably a
need to make compulsory licensing more accessible in the area of human
27.76 The Department of Health Western Australia submitted that gene patent
holders can restrict the provision of public health services,
and noted the
danger involved in governments assuming that patent holders will not seek to
enforce their right when population health
is at risk or where already
disadvantaged families, such as those afflicted with a genetic disorder, require
equitable access to
testing. The Department suggested that the
be amended in accordance with the waiver of negotiation provisions of
art 31(b) of the TRIPS
27.77 The Caroline Chisholm Centre for Health Ethics submitted that WTO Member
should be able to protect and optimise public health and overly
burdensome or uncooperative patent holders may be forced to accept
a compulsory
licence for their invention. Greater use could be made of this provision to
ensure broader public access to vital patented
technology. This is not
unprecedented and offers a solution to overly protective and/or aggressive
license holders.
27.78 ACIPA commented that:
The debate over access to essential medicines is not just the exclusive
concern of developing countries. As the SARS outbreak in China,
Singapore, Hong
Kong and Canada demonstrated, developed countries as well as developing
countries can suffer from public health epidemics.
The race to patent the SARS
virus raised important questions about access to essential medicines. There is
therefore a need to ensure
that the Australian patent system is appropriately
adapted to providing compulsory licenses to patents in national
emergencies.
27.79 ACIPA submitted that the compulsory licensing provisions in the
should be revised in line with the TRIPS Agreement (and the Doha
Declaration).
ALRC’s views
27.80 As noted above, the
TRIPS Agreement provides that the requirement of prior negotiation may be waived
in the case of a national
emergency or other circumstances of extreme emergency,
or in cases of public non-commercial
27.81 The compulsory licensing provisions in the
Patents Act
provide for circumstances in which the obligation of prior negotiation may be
waived. Any individual or organisation seeking
a compulsory licence for a
patented invention must have attempted, for a reasonable period, to negotiate a
licence before applying
for the compulsory licence. In contrast, the Crown use
provisions do not require prior negotiation before they are invoked.
27.82 In future it is possible that Australia could face a public health crisis
or bio-terror attack, requiring a rapid and efficient
response. As ACIPA
commented in its submission, the SARS outbreak showed that developed countries
also may be threatened by public
health epidemics. The bio-terror attacks using
the anthrax organism in the United
could be characterised as
a circumstance of extreme emergency.
27.83 In most cases, the ALRC considers that the Australian Government, or a
state or territory government or health department,
would take the initiative in
responding to these situations. Where access to a gene patent is needed, the
relevant government or
health department could invoke the Crown use provisions
to work the patent itself, or authorise another body to do so. In these
circumstances
there would be no need to seek a compulsory licence.
27.84 However, there may be circumstances where the Crown, for whatever reason,
does not act. In such circumstances, it may be desirable
for a pharmaceutical
company or other private organisation to be able to urgently provide genetic
tests or therapies to the Australian
community where the patent holder has
failed to do so. The requirement that the applicant must have tried for a
reasonable period
to obtain a licence could be onerous and, in the absence of
legislative or judicial guidelines, it is unclear what constitutes ‘a
reasonable period’ of negotiation.
27.85 Whether it would be appropriate, however, to grant a compulsory licence
even in a national or other emergency in circumstances
where the applicant has
not tried at all to obtain a licence from the patent holder is more problematic.
The ALRC would welcome comments
27.86 Under the TRIPS Agreement, the requirement of prior negotiation may also
be waived for ‘public non-commercial use’
of a patented invention.
The Australian Government has stated that it considers Crown use as an example
of the ‘public non-commercial
use’ of a patented
Accordingly, where a
state or territory health department seeks compulsory access to a patented
medical genetic test or other genetic
technology for the ‘services of the
Crown’, it could invoke the Crown use provisions. As these provisions do
not involve
an application to a court, they are more likely to be used than the
compulsory licensing provisions.
27.87 The term ‘public non-commercial use’ appears capable of
broader interpretation than Crown use. For example, a not-for-profit
organisation might argue that the use of a patented genetic research tool or a
medical genetic test is non-commercial, and
for the benefit of the public,
particularly if being used for research. The difficulty in this circumstance
might be in determining
at what point non-commercial research becomes
commercial.
27.88 Therefore, while Australian governments and public authorities may invoke
the Crown use provisions, including in cases of national
emergency, extreme
urgency or public non-commercial use, the ALRC considers that there remain
certain limited situations in which
it might be appropriate to permit a
compulsory licence to be granted instead.
27.89 Accordingly, the ALRC asks whether the
Patents Act
amended to provide that a compulsory licence may be granted over a patented
product or process in circumstances of ‘a
national emergency or other
circumstances of extreme urgency or in cases of public non-commercial
use’; and if so, whether
a compulsory licence should be available whether
or not the applicant has tried for a reasonable period to obtain a licence from
the patent holder.
Question 27 - 3
Given the provision in the
Patents Act
Crown use of patented inventions, should the Act
also make provision for
the grant of a compulsory licence over a patented invention in circumstances of
‘a national emergency
or other circumstances of extreme urgency, or in
cases of public non-commercial use’? If so, should a compulsory licence be
available whether or not the applicant has tried for a reasonable period to
obtain a licence from the patent holder?
27.90 An applicant for a
compulsory licence must apply to a ‘prescribed court’, which is the
Federal Court or a state
or territory Supreme
The ALRC has heard
concerns that the potential cost of court proceedings to obtain a compulsory
licence and uncertain outcome, may
deter potential applicants.
27.91 One option for reform would be to transfer jurisdiction to grant a
compulsory licence from the courts to a tribunal or other
administrative body.
This would generally be consistent with the IPCRC’s recommendation that
compulsory licensing orders should
be obtained through the Australian
Competition Tribunal, with rights of appeal to the Federal
Submissions and consultations
27.92 IP 27 asked whether
compulsory licences should be available only by order of a court, or whether the
Patents Act
should be amended to allow the Commissioner of Patents, or a
tribunal or agency, to grant compulsory
27.93 Several submissions expressed the view that courts would be best placed to
determine whether to grant a compulsory
For example,
GlaxoSmithKline submitted that:
the Courts, particularly those comprising judges with experience in
patent law and commercial patent practice, are the best arbiters
compulsory licences should be
27.94 The Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia (RCPA) submitted that:
serious consideration should be given to create or appoint a patent
ombudsman, tribunal or commissioner to hear such cases and to
grant compulsory
licenses, determine appropriate fees and compensation, and to be empowered to
penalise companies that behave in
a socially irresponsible
27.95 The ACCC submitted that it ‘flags a concern as to whether the
Federal Court’s processes are well adapted to resolving
what, at their
heart, are “terms of access”
McBratney and
others submitted that the most appropriate body to determine such applications
would be a tribunal or agency within
it would make sense to establish a separate tribunal or agency within the
ACCC to administer the compulsory licensing system. It would
fit well with the
intent behind the compulsory licensing system. The ACCC is already perceived as
the ‘corporate watchdog’
and it would be more likely than the Patent
Office to have the relevant resources and personnel trained for the
The choice is more preferable than administering the compulsory licensing
system through the Patent Office, as there might be some
perception that its
decisions may be to some extent biased towards the patentee.
The choice is also more preferable than the current system. The time,
cost and effort of obtaining a court order is likely one of
the reasons why the
system has not been used to any significant extent to
ALRC’s views
27.96 Submissions did not
reveal any broadly based support for transferring jurisdiction to a tribunal or
other administrative body.
Due to the small number of applications that are
likely to be made for the grant of a compulsory licence, the ALRC considers it
not be feasible to establish a new body for this purpose.
27.97 While there were suggestions that the ACCC be given jurisdiction to
determine applications for compulsory licences, a regulator
in the field of
competition law may not have sufficient expertise to apply the ‘reasonable
requirements of the public’
test, which deals with issues broader than
competition.
27.98 IP Australia is another administrative body that could be given
recommended that such jurisdiction be removed from the precursor of that body.
It recommended that jurisdiction for compulsory
licensing be vested exclusively
in the Federal Court, without provision for preliminary consideration by the
Commissioner of Patents.
making this recommendation, IPAC commented that:
Cases could be expected to be decided faster and better, with lower
costs, if all such matters were dealt with by the one court. That
would permit
the judges (or a particular division) of that court to develop (and perhaps in
due course to be appointed for) expertise
and experience in relation to the
relevant subject matter and both legal and economic
principles.
27.99 The Australian Government stated, in its response to the IPCRC’s
recommendations, that all applications for compulsory
licences should be
considered by the Federal Court in the first
27.100 As discussed in Chapter 10, the ALRC considers it important that a
consistent body of patent law develops in Australia, particular
in relation to
new technological areas such as genetics, where the application of patent law
principles might not be clear. The Federal
Court has already developed
substantial expertise in determining patent cases generally. A coherent and
consistent interpretation
Patents Act
will be facilitated by
concentration of judicial experience and expertise with respect to patent
matters in a single court system.
27.101 Accordingly, the ALRC considers that federal courts should have original
licences. Proposal
10 - 1 already addresses this concern, by proposing that original
Patents Act
should be conferred
exclusively on federal courts.
Remuneration
Section 133(5)
Patents Act
provides that, when a compulsory licence is granted, a patent
holder must be paid an amount that is agreed between the patent holder
applicant, or an amount that the court determines to be just and reasonable
having regard to the economic value of the licence.
27.103 Several commentators have discussed the difficulty of determining a
reasonable royalty for use of genetic research tools—particularly
involved in upstream research—and have suggested that medical researchers
should be permitted to use patented genetic
royalty unless or until the researcher develops a commercially valuable
27.104 In the United States, Professor Rebecca Eisenberg has suggested that
third parties should be permitted to use patented upstream
research tools free
of charge for improvement research; that is, for research to improve upon the
patented tools. If the improvement
becomes commercially valuable, the improver
should then be required to pay a reasonable royalty to the patent
Assistant Professor
Donna Gitter has proposed that the compulsory licence fee for gene patents
should be dependent on the commercial
value of the product developed as a result
of the research.
27.105 The Ontario Government report,
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting:
Charting New Territory in Healthcare
recommended that compulsory licences
should be granted in return for a reasonable royalty to be established by the
Commissioner of
Patents. The royalty should include an amount for the use of the
invention, and not the profit gained by the patent holder in providing
27.106 Article 31(h) of the TRIPS Agreement provides that, where compulsory
licences are granted, the rights holder shall be paid
adequate remuneration in
the circumstances of each case, taking into account the economic value of the
authorisation.
27.107 Professor Warren Pengilley has expressed concerns about courts’
ability to determine a ‘reasonable price’
for goods in the context
of proceedings brought under s 46 of the TPA. He commented that:
The court record in setting ‘reasonable’ prices is depressing
... All courts have expressed their general inability to
determine the
reasonable price in any useful
27.108 While this comment relates to a different legislative regime, similar
difficulties may arise where courts attempt to determine
what is a just and
reasonable royalty in relation to a licence over a biotechnology patent. A
patent holder might argue that the
economic value of its patented genetic
research tool cannot be determined until the value of any downstream product
developed from
its use is known.
27.109 However, the ALRC notes that courts are regularly asked to make difficult
assessments as to the amount of financial compensation
to be paid to a party in
proceedings, such as in awarding damages in personal injury cases. The use of
expert evidence may assist
the court in making these determinations.
Submissions and consultations
27.110 IP 27 asked whether,
if compulsory licences were to be granted more frequently, the
should be amended to provide increased protection for patent holders,
such as mechanisms for determining the compensation due, or
whether certain
mandatory terms should be included in such
27.111 In response, the RCPA submitted that guidelines should be established to
determine reasonable fees and compensation; for example,
these could be limited
to 5 - 10% of the cost of performing the
27.112 The South Australian Government submitted that compensation should be
determined on a case by case basis depending on the
technology, and that a
generic compensation scheme or mandatory licence terms would be too
restrictive.
McBratney and
others submitted that:
it would be extremely difficult to settle on a formula or mechanism for
determining compensation. Similar provisions are contained
in the German
Employee Inventions Act 1957 and they are considered some of the most difficult
provisions of the law. In addition,
since the compulsory licensing system would
apply across the board and not just to patented gene-related inventions, it
almost impossible to find a formula that could be applied across the
entire range of possible patentable subject matter. The matter
should be decided
on a case by case basis, taking into account all relevant
circumstances.
27.113 GlaxoSmithKline submitted that:
the law should provide (whether through statute or otherwise), that the
compensation payable should be that which would be agreed
between a willing
licensor and licensee for the invention in question. All other requirements of
TRIPS should, of course, be complied
ALRC’s views
27.114 The ALRC considers it
appropriate that, where the parties cannot agree on the appropriate royalty for
a compulsory licence,
federal courts should have the power to determine this
amount. While the parties themselves are best placed to identify the commercial
value of a licence, where necessary the court would have the power to hear
evidence from the parties, and expert witnesses, to determine
this value. As
noted above, courts are required to make similarly difficult determinations of
financial compensation in other areas
of law. Therefore, the ALRC does not
propose any reform of the provision relating to remuneration for compulsory
Licensing of ‘know-how’
27.115 A patent application
must fully disclose an invention. Under the
Patents Act
, a complete
specification must ‘describe the invention fully, including the best
method known to the applicant for performing
invention’.
the patent holder may later acquire valuable know-how and experience that is
necessary to exploit the invention effectively
or optimally.
27.116 Where a compulsory licence is granted over a patented invention, the
licensee may encounter significant problems in exploiting
the patented product
or process if it does not have the necessary know-how to do so. The
currently does not make specific provision for the inclusion in a
compulsory licence of the know-how that may be necessary to work
the patented
product or process properly.
27.117 In some jurisdictions, know-how has been subject to a compulsory licence
in connection with, or independently of, the compulsory
licensing of patents.
For example, in the United States case
FTC v Xerox Corporation
, a consent
decree eliminated Xerox’s patent and know-how barriers to competition by
requiring the company to license some of
its patents free of royalty, and the
rest at low royalties, and to offer all of its office copier know-how free of
royalty to United
States patent
27.118 IPAC recommended that, in ordering the grant of a compulsory licence, the
court be given a discretionary power to order the
transfer of related know-how
as part of the reasonable terms on which the licence is
IPAC acknowledged
that there was no evidence to support this argument, but considered the proposal
was worth applying on a trial
It noted that, if this
recommendation were implemented, it would be left to the court’s
discretion to determine whether any
and what know-how should be transferred in
conjunction with a compulsory licence. The court would also need to formulate
appropriate
directions for arranging its transfer, meeting the costs involved,
and providing suitable compensation, as part of the reasonable
terms upon which
the compulsory licence is
27.119 The Australian Government did not accept this recommendation, citing
concerns regarding:
the imprecise scope of the term ‘know-how’;
the uncertainty with which the proposal would operate in the absence
of parallel legislation overseas; and
the uncertainty as to whether Australian courts can set enforceable
terms for such a compulsory licence, particularly where the licensee
operations outside
Submissions
and consultations
27.120 IP 27 did not ask
patented invention, and the ALRC
has received few comments in submissions or
consultations on this issue.
27.121 As discussed in Chapter 29, the ALRC has been informed that a number of
researchers and companies have engaged in the licensing
of know-how, and that in
some circumstances know-how licensing can be more important than patent
protection. One company commented
that it prefers to do the work for others,
rather than to licence-out the know-how associated with its processes, because
of concerns
been disclosed.
27.122 In consultations, the Institute of Patent and Trade Mark Attorneys of
Australia commented that in some circumstances it can
be important to include
know-how in the terms of a compulsory licence, provided that commercial terms
are paid for it.
ALRC’s views
27.123 In circumstances
where it is not possible to effectively work a patented invention without the
know-how associated with it,
the ALRC considers that there may be merit in
permitting courts to require the transfer of the know-how when granting a
licence for a patented invention. However, the ALRC recognises that
there is a difference between granting a compulsory licence over
an intellectual
property right that has been granted by the state, and granting compulsory
access to know-how that is not the subject
of the patent. The ALRC has not heard
sufficient information to formulate a proposal for reform, and seeks further
information to
determine whether reform is required.
Question 27 - 4
Should the Commonwealth amend the
Patents Act
to authorise a prescribed court, when granting a compulsory licence, to require
the transfer of ‘know-how’ relating to
the patented product or
Intellectual Property
Rights and the Use of Compulsory Licenses: Options for Developing Countries
(1999) South Centre, 3.
See below for more
This requirement was introduced in
Statute of Monopolies 1623
(UK) and many other national patent laws
during the 19th century.
Intellectual Property Rights and the Use of Compulsory Licenses: Options for
Developing Countries
(1999) South Centre, 3 - 4. See also M Halewood,
‘Regulating Patent Holders: Local Working Requirements and Compulsory
at International Law’ (1997) 35
Osgoode Hall Law Journal
243, 251 - 254; J Reichman and C Hasenzahl,
Non-voluntary Licensing
of Patented Inventions: Historical Perspective, Legal Framework under TRIPS, and
an Overview of the Practice
in Canada and the United States of America: Issue
(2003) UNCTAD - ICTSD Capacity Building Project on IPRs and
Sustainable Development,
Patents Act 1903
Supplies Proprietary Limited v Olin Mathieson Chemical Corp
[1969] HCA 61
(1969) 119 CLR
Intellectual
Property and Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property
Legislation under the Competition Principles Agreement
For example, the United Kingdom
provides for the grant of a compulsory licence on this ground where an export
market is not being
supplied, the working of any other patented invention that
makes a substantial contribution is prevented or hindered, or the establishment
or development of commercial or industrial activities in the country is unfairly
prejudiced: C Correa,
Intellectual Property Rights and the Use of Compulsory
Licenses: Options for Developing Countries
(1999) South Centre,
For example, European Union
member states permit the grant of compulsory licences on public interest
grounds, but define the public
interest differently: J Reichman and C Hasenzahl,
Non-voluntary Licensing of Patented Inventions: Historical Perspective, Legal
Framework under TRIPS, and an Overview of the Practice
in Canada and the United
States of America: Issue Paper No 5
(2003) UNCTAD - ICTSD Capacity
Building Project on IPRs and Sustainable Development,
See generally, C Correa,
Intellectual Property Rights and the Use of Compulsory Licenses: Options for
Developing Countries
(1999) South Centre, 10 - 21. Canada previously
permitted the grant of compulsory licences for the importation, manufacture, use
and sale of patented medicines. In France, compulsory licences may be granted
when medicines are ‘only available to the public
in insufficient quantity
or quality or at abnormally high price’: Ibid,
Nuffield Council on
The Ethics of Patenting DNA
D Nicol and J Nielsen, ‘The
Australian Medical Biotechnology Industry and Access to Intellectual Property:
Issues for Patent
Law Development’
[2001] SydLawRw 16
Sydney Law Review
See the discussion below for more
See, eg, D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
6; C Lawson, ‘Patenting Genes and Gene Sequences and Competition:
at the Expense of Competition’
[2002] FedLawRw 4
Federal Law Review
; Industrial Property Advisory Committee,
Patents, Innovation and
Competition in Australia
(1984); IP Australia,
Submission P56
November 2003; Australian Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 3 October
Property Advisory Committee,
Patents, Innovation and Competition in
Submission P58
, 7 November
Competition Commission of South
Africa, ‘Competition Commission Concludes an Agreement with Pharmaceutical
Media Release
, 10 December
Patents Act 1990
Regulations 1991
(Cth) r 12.1. However, a person cannot apply for a
compulsory licence in respect of an innovation patent that has not been
Or for a product
resulting from the patented
Patents Act 1990
s 135(1). However, if it appears that the patent is not being worked on a
commercial scale in Australia, the patent is capable
of being worked in
Australia, and the reason for non working is due to the nature of the invention
or some other cause, the court
may adjourn the hearing of an application for a
compulsory licence for a period sufficient to permit working on a commercial
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act 1990
See Ch 19 and the discussion below for more detail about dependent
Fastening Supplies
Proprietary Limited v Olin Mathieson Chemical Corp
[1969] HCA 61
(1969) 119 CLR 572
Wissen Pty Ltd v Lown
(1987) AIPC 90. In Bristol-Myers v Faulding,
Finkelstein J made a brief reference to the provisions, commenting that
may be cumbersome and expensive to apply’:
Bristol-Myers
Squibb Co v FH Faulding & Co Ltd
[2000] FCA 316
(2000) 170 ALR 439
House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Industry Science and Technology,
Genetic Manipulation: The
Threat or the Glory?
(1992), 227.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and International Centre for
Trade and Sustainable Development,
Resource Book on TRIPS and Development: An
Authoritative and Practical Guide to the TRIPS Agreement
UNCTAD - ICSTD Capacity Building Project on IPRs and Sustainable
Development, 123.
Members need not
apply this condition where such use is permitted to remedy a practice that is
determined after a judicial or administrative
process to be anti-competitive
practice. The need to correct anti-competitive practices may be taken into
account in determining
the amount of remuneration in such cases:
Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh
Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
into force on 1 January 1995) art
However, as noted above, public
healthcare providers could invoke the Crown use provisions of the
Patents Act
an alternative to seeking a compulsory licence.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
I Turnbull,
, 25 September
Department of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
For example, Cancer Council
Submission P25
, 30 September 2003; Commonwealth Department of
Health and Ageing,
Submission P65
, 28 January 2004; Cancer Council
Submission P40
, 29 September 2003; Cancer Council South
Submission P41
, 9 October 2003; E Milward and others,
Submission P46
, 20 October
Commonwealth
Department of Health and Ageing,
Submission P65
, 28 January
Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
For example, Royal College of
Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; Human
Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003;
Department of Health Western Australia,
Submission P53
, 3 November 2003;
Submission P30
, 2 October
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
Davies Collison Cave,
Submission P48
, 24 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Patents Act 1990
Patents Regulations 1991
(Cth) r 12.1. However, a person cannot
apply for a compulsory licence in respect of an innovation patent that has not
been certified:
Fastening Supplies Proprietary Limited v Olin Mathieson Chemical Corp
[1969] HCA 61
(1969) 119 CLR 572
Property Advisory Committee,
Patents, Innovation and Competition in
(1984), 28.
D Nicol and J
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues
Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional
Paper No 6, 237 - 238. See also C Lawson, ‘Patenting Genes and Gene
and Competition: Patenting at the Expense of Competition’
[2002] FedLawRw 4
Federal Law Review
Consultation
, Sydney, 15 October
For example, Royal College of
Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October 2003; Human
Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
In contrast, United States courts
and regulatory agencies have the power to impose compulsory licences in relation
to intellectual
property rights to remedy various anti-competitive practices: J
Reichman and C Hasenzahl,
Non-voluntary Licensing of Patented Inventions:
Historical Perspective, Legal Framework under TRIPS, and an Overview of the
in Canada and the United States of America: Issue Paper No 5
UNCTAD - ICTSD Capacity Building Project on IPRs and Sustainable
Development, 21.
See H Ergas,
Treatment of Unilateral Refusals to License and Compulsory Licensing in
Intellectual
Property and Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property
Legislation under the Competition Principles Agreement
IP Australia,
Response to Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee
Recommendations
, <www.ipaustralia.gov.au/pdfs/general/response1.pdf>
at 2 May 2003.
does not apply to the use of intellectual property, except to the extent that it
is an integral but subsidiary part of the
service provided by the facility.
Intellectual property rights have been recognised as an ‘essential
facility’ in European
Community law: J Temple Lang,
Licensing of Intellectual Property in European Community Antitrust Law: Paper
prepared for the Department of Justice/Federal
Trade Commission Hearings,
Washington DC
(2002), 6. See Ch
Practices Act 1974
(Cth) provides an access regime for
telecommunications.
Intellectual
Property and Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property
Legislation under the Competition Principles Agreement
Australian Centre for Intellectual
Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September
A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Submission P64
, 12 December
Patents Act 1990
Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into
force on 1 January 1995) art 31(l).
Patents Act 1990
Submission P58
, 7 November
Compulsory Licensing
of Patents: Balancing Innovation and Competition
(2003) unpublished
manuscript,
D Nicol and
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues
Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional
Paper No 6, 239.
Patents Act
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and International Centre for
Trade and Sustainable Development,
Resource Book on TRIPS and Development: An
Authoritative and Practical Guide to the TRIPS Agreement
UNCTAD - ICSTD Capacity Building Project on IPRs and Sustainable
Development, 131.
Declaration on the
TRIPS Agreement and Public Health
, 14 November 2001, World Trade
Organization 4th Ministerial Conference, WT/MIN (01)/DEC/2. The Doha Declaration
is a political statement
and a Ministerial decision. It does not appear to have
any specific legal status in the framework of World Trade Organization law:
Implications of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and
Public Health: Health Economics and Drugs EDM Series No 12
(2002) World
Health Organization, 40.
Declaration
on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health
, 14 November 2001, World Trade
Organization 4th Ministerial Conference, WT/MIN (01)/DEC/2 art
United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development and International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development,
Resource Book on TRIPS and Development: An Authoritative and Practical Guide
to the TRIPS Agreement
(2003) UNCTAD - ICSTD Capacity Building Project
on IPRs and Sustainable Development,
South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Department of Health Western
Submission P53
, 3 November
Chisholm Centre for Health Ethics Inc,
Submission P38
, 17 October
Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C
of the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into force on 1 January 1995) art
Consumer Project on Technology,
Ciprofloxacin: The Dispute over Compulsory Licenses
<www.cptech.org/ip/health/cl/cipro> at 3 June 2003. See Ch 26 for more
See Council for Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights,
Review of Legislation in the Fields
of Patents, Layout-Designs (Topographies) of Integrated Circuits, Protection of
Undisclosed Information
and Control of Anti-competitive Practices in Contractual
Licences: Australia, 22 October 1997
, World Trade Organization,
<www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/intel8_e.htm> at 17 December
Patents Act 1990
Intellectual Property
and Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation
under the Competition Principles Agreement
(2000), 163. However, the
Australian Government did not accept this recommendation, stating that it would
be inappropriate for the
Tribunal to consider applications for compulsory
licences in the first instance because it is essentially a review body. The
also considered that the Tribunal would not be the appropriate body
to hear applications under the ‘reasonable requirements
public’ test: IP Australia,
Government Response to Intellectual
Property and Competition Review Committee Recommendations
<www.ipaustralia.gov.au/pdfs/general/response1.pdf> at 2 May 2003,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
For example, South
Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October 2003; GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
November 2003; Department of Industry Tourism and Resources,
, 13 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
College of Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission,
Submission P64
, 12 December
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Industrial Property Advisory
Patents, Innovation and Competition in Australia
(1984), rec
IP Australia,
Response to Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee
Recommendations
, <www.ipaustralia.gov.au/pdfs/general/response1.pdf>
at 2 May 2003, 9.
For example, D
Gitter, ‘International Conflicts over Patenting Human DNA Sequences in the
United States and The European Union:
An Argument for Compulsory Licensing and a
Fair-Use Exemption’
New York University Law Review
R Eisenberg, ‘Patents and
the Progress of Science: Exclusive Rights and Experimental Use’
University of Chicago Law Review
1076 - 1077.
‘International Conflicts over Patenting Human DNA Sequences in the United
States and The European Union: An Argument
for Compulsory Licensing and a
Fair-Use Exemption’
New York University Law Review
Ontario Ministry of Health and
Long-Term Care,
Genetics, Testing & Gene Patenting: Charting New
Territory in Healthcare: Report to the Provinces and Territories
Pengilley cited
Pont Data Australia Pty Ltd v ASX Operations Pty Ltd
(1990) 21 FCR 385:
W Pengilley, ‘Misuse of Market Power: The Unbearable
Uncertainties Facing Australian Management’
Trade Practices
Law Journal
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
Royal College of
Pathologists of Australasia,
Submission P26
, 1 October
South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Patents Act 1990
s 40(2)(a).
This is known as the ‘sufficiency requirement’: see Ch
Intellectual
Property Rights and the Use of Compulsory Licenses: Options for Developing
(1999) South Centre,
Industrial Property Advisory
Patents, Innovation and Competition in Australia
(1984), rec
Ibid, 31 - 32. One Committee
member dissented, arguing that such a provision would act as a disincentive to
patenting, so that manufacturers
would resort to secrecy to protect innovations,
rather than to the patent system.
and Designs: Looseleaf Service
BresaGen Limited,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 15 September
Institute of Patent and Trade
Mark Attorneys of Australia,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 5 September
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
28. A Statutory Licensing Scheme
Introduction
Current law and practice
Patents Act
Statutory licensing for patents
Submissions and consultations
Possible models
Nicol and Nielsen model
Gitter model
Voluntary or compulsory?
Reasonable remuneration
TRIPS Agreement
ALRC's views
28. A Statutory Licensing Scheme
Introduction
Discussion Paper has discussed the concern that the patenting or licensing of
genetic materials and technologies could impact
negatively on scientific
research or healthcare provision.
28.2 Various chapters have discussed different models for facilitating access to
patented genetic materials and technologies. Chapters
14 and 22 discussed the
existence, scope and limitations of defences to patent infringement for the
purpose of experimental use and
medical treatment. Chapter 23 discussed the
possibility of establishing voluntary industry-based licensing schemes for
patented genetic
inventions. Chapters 26 and 27 discussed the framework for
access through Crown use and compulsory licensing.
28.3 This chapter discusses another possible option for facilitating access to
such patented inventions, in the form of a statutory
licensing scheme under
Patents Act 1990
Patents Act
). The primary difference
between industry-based licensing and statutory licensing is that the latter is a
more formal framework that
operates pursuant to statutory requirements and
conditions.
28.4 Chapter 29 outlines the statutory licensing schemes operating under the
and Chapter 30
discusses the possibility of introducing a statutory licensing scheme in
relation to databases of genetic information.
Current law and practice
Patents Act
currently permits the use of a patented invention without the patent
holder’s consent pursuant only to a court-ordered compulsory
licence, or
under the Crown use provisions. By contrast, the
broader provision for use of copyright material without consent through a number
of statutory licensing schemes.
Patents Act
Patents Act
provides for Crown use of patented inventions. Where the
Commonwealth or a State (or a person authorised by the Commonwealth or a
exploits a patented invention ‘for the services of the Commonwealth or the
State’, this does not constitute an
infringement of the patent rights. The
Crown must inform the patent holder as soon as practicable of the exploitation,
and provide
any information that is reasonably required, unless this is contrary
to the public interest. The remuneration and terms for exploitation
agreed between the parties or, in the absence of agreement, determined by a
prescribed court.
Patents Act
also provides that a prescribed court may grant a
compulsory licence for a patented invention where the patent holder has not
the ‘reasonable requirements of the public’ in relation to
that invention. These licences are granted on a case-by-case
basis, provided the
applicant has first attempted to negotiate a licence with the patent holder. The
licensee must pay the patent
holder a reasonable royalty in exchange for the
compulsory licence.
As noted in
Chapter 27, it appears that few, if any, compulsory licences have been granted
under Australian patent law.
contains several statutory licensing schemes that permit the use of copyright
material without the copyright owner’s consent,
subject to the payment of
equitable remuneration and compliance with certain statutory conditions. These
licences are sometimes referred
to as ‘statutory licences’ because
statute, rather than a court or other body, confers them.
28.9 The Act includes statutory licensing schemes for the reproduction of a work
or sound recording for the purpose of
broadcasting;
making of sound
broadcasts of literary and dramatic works by holders of a print disability radio
recording of musical and
literary works;
reproduction and
communication of broadcasts by educational institutions and institutions
assisting people with an intellectual
disability;
reproduction and
communication of works and published editions by educational institutions and
institutions assisting people with
a print or intellectual
disability;
retransmission of free
to air broadcasts;
performance and broadcasts of sound
recordings;
and Crown use of
also provides for voluntary licensing of copyright material
in addition to, and as an alternative to, reliance on statutory
28.10 Statutory licensing schemes are generally administered through collecting
societies, which collect and distribute fees on behalf
of the copyright
The Commonwealth
Attorney-General declares certain organisations to be the collecting society for
a particular licensing scheme.
Other collecting societies are not declared under the Act, but conduct similar
activities for their members. For example, the Copyright
Agency Limited (CAL) is
the declared society for the reproduction and communication of works by
educational institutions under statutory
licence, and represents its author,
publisher and journalist members in licensing their copyright works.
28.11 The Copyright Tribunal has jurisdiction to settle disputes regarding the
determination of royalties or equitable remuneration
for uses under the
statutory licences, and arbitration of some other disputes between licensors and
those seeking a licence.
28.12 Professor Sam Ricketson and Chris Creswell have suggested that the purpose
of statutory licensing is to provide a legislative
balance between the rights of
the copyright owner and the interests of third parties who desire access to the
Basic to each of these licences is the assumption that, if left to
themselves, the parties will be unable to reach a satisfactory
resolution of the
terms for the access desired. The reasons for this differ, ranging from
unacceptably high transaction costs in
cases where individual users would be too
difficult to identify and control, to instances where the user is in a powerful
position and has been able to impose a statutory solution in its favour
... Ultimately, however, each of the statutory licences established
(Cth) can be seen as attempts to stimulate market solutions,
i.e., to allow use subject to the kinds of rates and conditions that
been arrived at in hypothetical and freely negotiated
28.13 The Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee (IPCRC)
reviewed the statutory licensing schemes under the
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation under the Competition
Principles Agreement
. The IPCRC commented that these schemes are more
limited than compulsory licensing under the
Patents Act
particularly as
they do not generally apply to most commercial uses. The IPCRC recognised that
statutory licensing could reduce the
transaction costs otherwise involved in
negotiating licences, and recommended that the statutory licensing scheme remain
28.14 The IPCRC also considered the operation of copyright collecting societies.
It noted that these societies provide creators with
an administrative option for
effectively enforcing their rights, both in relation to copyright use and for
the collection and distribution
of copyright licence fees. They also play an
advocacy role for their members, representing owners’ interests in public
and lobbying for relevant changes to copyright laws. The IPCRC considered
that if a proper balance is struck in defining copyright
rights, it is desirable
to have effective mechanisms for enforcing those rights, including through
collective management and enforcement
mechanisms.
28.15 The IPCRC also noted concerns about the impact of collecting societies on
competition, including the potential abuse of market
power to extract higher
licence fees. The IPCRC recommended several mechanisms to address these
Statutory licensing for patents
28.16 This Discussion Paper
has examined the concern that the patenting of genetic materials and
technologies could negatively affect
scientific research or healthcare
provision. For example, a researcher or research institution could be hindered
from conducting
certain genetic research due to the time and costs involved in
identifying the patent holder and negotiating a licence for each genetic
research tool, or where the patent holder refuses to grant a licence for the
tool. A healthcare provider might be deterred from conducting
certain medical
genetic tests, or using genetic therapies, for similar reasons.
28.17 The Discussion Paper has discussed various options for addressing these
concerns, including:
Experimental and medical use defences to infringement of a patented
Industry-based facilitation of licensing of patented inventions, for
example through patent pools.
Crown use of a patented invention ‘for the services of the
Commonwealth or a State’.
Compulsory licensing of a patented
Dianne Nicol and Jane Nielsen, of the University of Tasmania’s Centre for
Law and Genetics, have suggested the possibility
of a statutory licensing scheme
Patents Act
as another option to facilitate third party access
to certain types of biotechnology patents, where such access is in the public
They suggested that
the statutory licensing schemes operating in copyright law should be examined
‘with a view to implementing
equivalent use strategies’ in patent
It may be more appropriate to think of this area in the same way as the
educational and other automatic licensing provisions under
Educational institutions have to pay remuneration for the use of copyright
material, but they do not have to negotiate individual
licences. Nor do they
have to apply for compulsory licences. They merely fill out the appropriate
remuneration form and pay the appropriate
remuneration to approved collection
agencies. There are generally standard rates for fees, and if there are disputes
these are resolved
by the Copyright
Submissions and consultations
28.19 IP 27 did not discuss a
potential statutory licensing scheme for patented inventions, and therefore most
of the submissions
did not address the issue.
28.20 Luigi Palombi suggested the creation of a new ‘genetic sequence
and proposed a
form of statutory licensing for that right:
The Registered GSR [genetic sequence right] would grant to the owner the
right to receive a royalty on any use of the genetic material
defined by the
sequence of the GSR ... Users would be required to register such use with the
patent office and a record of such use
would be kept by the patent office and
communicated to the GSR owner. The amount of the royalty to be paid for such use
determined by a published scale and collected by GSR collecting
organisations. Provision could be made for owners to seek specific
above the approved published royalties if the owner could establish that due to
factors relating to the nature of the GSR
or unforeseeable events in the market,
the amount of royalties would be insufficient to recoup the owners investment in
the research
and development ... The life of the GSR would be 20 years from the
date of registration ...
28.21 The Department of Health Western Australia submitted that the ALRC should
investigate the possibility of instituting a statutory
licensing scheme for some
28.22 The ALRC raised the proposal for a statutory licensing scheme in a number
of its consultations, and heard ‘in principle’
support for a
statutory licensing scheme in several
Some stakeholders,
while expressing an interest in such a scheme, raised some practical concerns
with it. One concern was that, because
there would be fewer patent holders with
whom to negotiate than in the copyright field, a statutory licensing scheme
might not be
necessary. That is, as the system is designed to deal with multiple
users, it might be overly complicated in the context of gene
patents, where
there are fewer patent holders, and fewer third parties likely to seek access to
the patented invention.
another stakeholder commented that the fact that a scheme might not be subject
to widespread use should not be fatal to
28.23 Concerns were also raised regarding the means of calculating and
collecting licence fees;
whether a statutory licensing scheme would be TRIPS
At least one
stakeholder suggested that informal patent pooling might be a better alternative
to a statutory licensing
Possible models
28.24 There are several
possible models for a statutory licensing scheme under the
Nicol and Nielsen model
28.25 Nicol and Nielsen have
suggested a voluntary statutory licensing scheme, which could involve:
patent holders registering patents—putting the onus on them to
notify users that they have a patent and will pursue infringers;
the payment of standard licence fees;
the collection of fees by approved collecting agencies; and
the creation of a Patent Tribunal to resolve disputes and determine
structures.
suggested that this type of scheme would reduce the time and cost involved in
conduct, increase certainty and
decrease individual licence fees. It would also provide an ongoing income for
the patent holder through
licence fees. However, they note that statutory
licensing would not necessarily be appropriate for the licensing of all types of
biotechnology patents:
In most instances freedom of contract should be maintained. However,
where broad access to patented products or processes is clearly
in the public
interest, this sort of regime may provide a suitable means of balancing access
and incentive to innovate. Examples
might include patented research tools and
diagnostic tests.
Gitter model
28.27 In the United States,
Assistant Professor Donna Gitter has also proposed a form of statutory licensing
for patented DNA sequences.
Under her proposed scheme, the patent holder would
be required to license a patented sequence to any scientist pursuing commercial
research in return for a reasonable licence fee. The scientist would be required
to give the patent holder written notice before
commencing research using or on
the sequence, and the licence fee would be dependent on the commercial value of
the end product developed
through the research. This would eliminate the need
for licence negotiations and up-front payments while still protecting the patent
holder’s right to a reasonable
Educational licensing
Nicol and Nielsen model appears to be based on the statutory licensing scheme
for educational and other institutions under
. Under that scheme, educational and other institutions may make both
analogue and electronic reproductions of works, and communicate
them, for the
proper purposes of the institution provided that this is done in accordance with
the procedures specified in the Act
for recording, noting, giving notice, and
limiting access to the work. ‘Equitable remuneration’ is paid for
such reproduction
communication.
28.29 There are several conditions for the application of the statutory licence
under the Part VB scheme. First, the reproductions
must be made for the
‘educational purposes of the institution or of another educational
institution’. Second, the institution
must give the collecting society a
‘remuneration notice’, undertaking to pay equitable remuneration to
the society for
the licensed copies and communications that it makes. It must
also specify how the equitable remuneration will be
determined.
institution must comply with the marking and record keeping, or notice giving
and access limiting, requirements of whichever
The scheme also
acknowledges individual copyright owners’ continuing right to enter into
voluntary arrangements for the use
of their material.
28.30 As noted above, the CAL is the declared collecting society under the Part
VB statutory scheme. It collects the licence fees
from the educational
institutions under the statutory licence. Where the licence fees and other
conditions of use cannot be agreed
between the institutions and the collecting
society, the Copyright Tribunal may determine these
28.31 The primary difference between Nicol and Nielsen’s suggested model
and the educational statutory licensing scheme is
that participation in the
former would be voluntary, while the latter permits voluntary licensing but is
principally a compulsory
licensing scheme.
Part VI licences
28.32 Part VI of the
voluntary licences entered into between copyright owners and third parties.
, a licensor (or collecting society) may refer a ‘licence
scheme’ to the Copyright Tribunal for its approval. A ‘licence
scheme’ is a scheme formulated by the licensor (or licensors) which sets
out classes of cases in which it would be willing
to grant a licence, and the
fees and conditions applying to such
The Copyright Tribunal may
also determine disputes arising under a licence scheme.
28.33 In practice, a potential licensee approaches the licensor (or collecting
society) for a licence and, if the licensor refuses
to license or insists on an
unreasonable licence condition, the licensee may refer the matter to the
Tribunal for a determination.
The Tribunal may make an order specifying the fees
and conditions that it considers reasonable in the
circumstances.
28.34 The main difference between the
scheme and the
licence is that the latter form of licence must be sought from the licensor (or
collecting society), who can offer it on
conditions or refuse it. By contrast, a
person seeking to operate under a statutory licence need not have any prior
negotiations
with the copyright owner. While the licences dealt with under
are of a commercial nature, the
licensing scheme reflects a balance
between the commercial interests of copyright owners and the public interest in
facilitating
access to copyright works for educational purposes.
Voluntary or compulsory?
28.35 A statutory licensing
scheme for patented inventions could be structured to provide access to
inventions where this is required
in the public interest or, more broadly, for
commercial purposes. In either case, an important issue is whether patent
participation in such a scheme should be voluntary or compulsory.
28.36 As noted above, Nicol and Nielsen have suggested a voluntary scheme in
which patent holders would register their patented inventions
for the purpose of
statutory licensing. The patent holder could choose not to register an invention
for various reasons, for example
if it wishes to negotiate an exclusive licence
for the invention or to use the invention exclusively itself.
28.37 However, where a patent holder wishes to license a patented invention
widely, a statutory licensing scheme could provide an
effective and efficient
mechanism to facilitate such licensing. For example, the holder of a patent over
a generic research tool
might choose to participate in a statutory licensing
scheme in order to notify all other researchers that the product has been
and to provide a mechanism for determining and collecting an
appropriate licence fee from each licensee. This would avoid the time
involved in identifying each individual user.
28.38 An alternative model would be compulsory participation in a statutory
licensing scheme. As noted above, the
educational
licensing scheme is based primarily on compulsory participation. Educational
institutions are authorised by statute to
use copyright work for certain
purposes without the copyright owner’s authorisation, provided they
satisfy the statutory conditions
for such use.
28.39 A statutory licensing scheme for patented inventions could be made
compulsory for certain types of inventions, or for certain
purposes or uses of
those inventions. For example, it may be considered in the public interest to
introduce a compulsory scheme to
facilitate access to patented upstream genetic
research tools. Under such a scheme, a third party could use the research tool
prior authorisation, while allowing for payment of a set remuneration.
Any such scheme must comply with the TRIPS Agreement, which
is discussed
Reasonable remuneration
28.40 Another important
issue is how to determine the appropriate remuneration for the use of a patented
invention subject to statutory
28.41 Nicol and Nielsen have suggested that standard licence fees might be
payable under a statutory licence scheme. These fees could
be collected by
approved collecting agencies, and a new Patent Tribunal could be established to
resolve disputes and determine fee
structures.
statutory licensing scheme under the
provides that the educational institution must pay the relevant collecting
society ‘equitable remuneration’ for the making
of licensed copies
and communications. The amount of remuneration is determined between the
institution and the collecting society
or, failing agreement, by the Copyright
By contrast, under
‘licence schemes’, the licensor sets the amount of
remuneration, but the licensee may refer the matter to the Copyright
for its determination.
TRIPS Agreement
28.43 Any proposed statutory
licensing scheme for patented inventions would need to comply with
Australia’s international obligations
under the TRIPS
28.44 Article 27.1 of the TRIPS Agreement provides that patent rights generally
must be enjoyable without discrimination as to the
technology.
However, the
Canada-Patent Protection
case confirmed that this article does not
prohibit bona fide exceptions to deal with problems that may exist only in
certain product
28.45 It is unlikely that a voluntary licensing scheme would be inconsistent
with art 27 because a voluntary scheme would not adversely
affect a patent
holder’s enjoyment of the patent rights. A compulsory scheme that applied
only to patented genetic inventions
could be inconsistent if it constituted
‘discrimination’ by field of technology. Therefore it may be that,
in order to
be TRIPS compliant, a proposed statutory licensing scheme would need
to apply to categories (or uses) or patented inventions generally,
rather than
being limited to patented genetic materials and technologies
28.46 Chapter 4 discussed the TRIPS Agreement’s permissible legislative
exceptions to the exclusive rights granted by a patent.
Article 30 deals with
exceptions to the patent rights conferred, and art 31 deals with other uses
without the patent holder’s
authorisation.
28.47 Article 30 permits Members to provide limited exceptions to the exclusive
rights conferred by a patent, provided that these
exceptions do not unreasonably
conflict with the normal exploitation of the patent, and do not unreasonably
prejudice the patent
holder’s legitimate interests, taking into account
the legitimate interests of third parties. Article 31 permits Members to
for ‘other uses’ of a patented invention without the right
holder’s authorisation, subject to specified
conditions. For example,
authorisation of such use must be considered on a case-by-case
and the applicant
generally must have previously attempted to negotiate a licence from the patent
holder on reasonable terms and
conditions—except in circumstances of
national emergency, other extreme urgency, or for public non-commercial
28.48 It appears doubtful that arts 30 or 31 would be breached by a statutory
licensing scheme based on voluntary participation.
Such a licensing scheme does
not appear to constitute an ‘exception’ to the rights conferred by a
patent, or a use without
the right holder’s authorisation. Instead, the
scheme would be better characterised as a mechanism to facilitate the exercise
of patent holders’ rights in relation to their patented inventions.
28.49 A compulsory statutory licensing scheme potentially could comply with art
30, provided the scheme satisfies each of its requirements.
By contrast, it is
unlikely that such a scheme would comply with art 31. As statutory licensing
schemes are generally based on the
statutory authorisation of a category of
inventions, or uses of an invention, this is unlikely to comply with the
requirement that
the authorisation of any proposed use be considered on its
individual merits, or that the parties had attempted prior negotiation.
ALRC’s views
28.50 The ALRC considers
that the establishment of a statutory licensing scheme under the
is worthy of consideration. Such a scheme could provide an efficient and
effective mechanism to facilitate third party access to
certain patented
inventions. It could potentially apply to:
certain categories of patented inventions—such as research
tools or medical diagnostic tests generally, or specific categories
tools and tests; or
certain uses of patented inventions, such as use for public
non-commercial research or healthcare provision.
28.51 Such a scheme
could strike an effective balance between the rights and interests of both the
patent holder and third parties
by ensuring reasonable access to the patented
invention in exchange for reasonable remuneration. This remuneration could be
by negotiation or, failing agreement, by a tribunal or court.
28.52 The scheme would be likely to reduce the time and cost of searches in
relation to biotechnology patents, increase certainty
and decrease individual
licence fees. At the same time, it would provide an ongoing income for the
patent holder through licence
While competition concerns
have been raised about collecting societies operating under copyright law, the
ALRC considers that the
practical and other benefits of a statutory licensing
scheme are likely to outweigh these potentially negative
28.53 The ALRC has not formed a view as to whether any statutory scheme should
be based on voluntary or compulsory participation
on the part of patent holders,
although it notes significant difficulties with a compulsory scheme. Under a
voluntary model, a third
party could access any patented inventions that have
been included on a register for these purposes, in exchange for reasonable
remuneration.
The weakness with this approach is that some patent holders may
refuse to participate in the scheme, particularly where the patented
has few substitutes and is therefore a highly valuable commodity. In those
circumstances, third parties would have to attempt
to negotiate an individual
licence with the patent holder or, failing that, invoke the Crown use provisions
(where appropriate) or
seek a compulsory licence under the
28.54 The alternative is a statutory scheme based on compulsory participation,
to apply in very limited circumstances. For example,
where a patent holder has a
broad patent over a patented upstream genetic research tool, but refuses to
license the tool to other
researchers, there may be a public interest in
facilitating such access. However, this would represent a significant exception
the exclusive right of exploitation generally granted by a patent, and could
potentially be inconsistent with the TRIPS Agreement.
28.55 Under either model, one or more collecting societies could represent
patent holders in negotiating the licence fees, and in
collecting and
distributing these payments. This would streamline the process and minimise the
transaction costs involved in negotiating
licences with numerous patent
Alternatively, the
provides for the payment of remuneration direct to the
circumstances.
relatively small numbers of patent holders who are likely to be involved in such
a scheme, direct payment may be more appropriate.
28.56 Where the parties cannot agree on the reasonable remuneration, an
independent body should determine the matter. There are several
options for such
a body, including a new Patent Tribunal, an expanded and renamed Copyright
Tribunal or a court. The ALRC considers
that, assuming this power is judicial in
nature, the federal courts may be appropriate for this role. The Federal Court
already exercises
similar powers in other patent matters, in particular in
ordering compulsory licences and determining an appropriate remuneration.
28.57 The ALRC considers that there is merit to consideration being given to a
statutory licensing scheme for certain patented inventions,
and seeks further
views on this. Accordingly, the ALRC asks whether the Commonwealth should amend
Patents Act
to insert a statutory licensing scheme for patented
inventions. If so, the ALRC asks whether the scheme should be available only in
a limited class of patents, or to a limited class of users; whether it should be
voluntary or compulsory in nature; how a reasonable
royalty should be
determined; and who should administer the scheme.
Question 28 - 1
Should the Commonwealth amend the
Patents Act 1990
(Cth) to include a statutory licensing scheme for patented inventions? If
(a) should the scheme be available only to a limited class of patents or
a limited class of users;
(b) should the scheme be voluntary or compulsory in nature; and
(c) how should a reasonable royalty for the scheme be determined and who
should administer the scheme?
Patents Act 1990
. See Ch 26 for more
, 135. See Ch 27 for
more detail.
For example, despite the statutory
licensing regime under
, individual copyright owners are free to grant
licences authorising the use of their material by educational and other
institutions
covered by the licensing scheme: Ibid s
J McKeough, K Bowrey and P
Intellectual Property: Commentary and Materials
See, eg, see
(Cth) s 135P.
J McKeough, K
Bowrey and P Griffith,
Intellectual Property: Commentary and Materials
(2002), 160.
Ricketson and C Creswell,
The Law of Intellectual Property: Copyright,
Designs and Confidential Information: Looseleaf Service
Intellectual Property and
Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation
under the Competition Principles Agreement
Ibid, 118 - 119,
See Ch 14 and 22 for
more detail.
See Ch 23 for more
See Ch 26 for more
See Ch 27 for more
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
See Ch 29 for more
and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of
Issues Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics
Occasional Paper No 6, 240.
submitted that genetic sequences should not be patentable, but should be
eligible for protection through a ‘genetic
Submission P28
, 1 October
Department of Health Western
Submission P53
, 3 November
For example, Western Australian
Department of Health and others (healthcare issues),
Consultation
17 September 2003; Intellectual Property Research Institute of Australia,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 4 September 2003; J McKeough,
Consultation
, Sydney, 15 October
Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 3 October
J McKeough,
Consultation
Sydney, 15 October 2003.
Consultation
, Sydney, 9 September 2003; J McKeough,
Consultation
, Sydney, 15 October
Intellectual Property Research
Institute of Australia,
Consultation
, Melbourne, 4 September
Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Consultation
, Brisbane, 3 October
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the Australian
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No 6, 240; see
also D Nicol, ‘Gene Patents: The Ultimate Snatch’
(Paper presented
at Hatching, Matching, Snatching and Dispatching, AIHLE 7th Annual Conference,
Newcastle, 27 - 30 June 2002),
D Nicol and
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues
Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional
Paper No 6, 240 - 241.
‘International Conflicts over Patenting Human DNA Sequences in the United
States and The European Union: An Argument
for Compulsory Licensing and a
Fair-Use Exemption’
New York University Law Review
1679, 1683. Gitter has suggested that scientists conducting non-commercial
research should be subject to an experimental use
Educational reproduction is covered by Div 2 and 2A; reproduction
by institutions assisting persons with a print disability is covered
and reproduction by institutions assisting persons with an intellectual
disability is covered by Div 4. See generally,
S Ricketson and C Creswell,
The Law of Intellectual Property: Copyright, Designs and Confidential
Information: Looseleaf Service
This may be done on the basis
of a records system, a sampling system or an electronic use system. See below
for more detail.
S Ricketson and C
The Law of Intellectual Property: Copyright, Designs and
Confidential Information: Looseleaf Service
also R Reynolds and N Stoianoff,
Intellectual Property: Text and Essential
(2003), 216.
D Nicol and J
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues
Facing the Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional
Paper No 6, 240.
(Cth) ss 135ZU, 135ZV(1), 135ZW(1),
Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh
Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
into force on 1 January 1995).
Canada: Patent Protection
of Pharmaceutical Products: Complaint by the European Communities and their
Member States
, 17 March 2000, WT/DS114/R,
See Ch 4 for more
discussion about art 27.1 of the TRIPS
Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh
Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
into force on 1 January 1995) art
Ibid art 31(b). See Ch 4, 27 for
more detail. See also, D Gervais,
The TRIPS Agreement: Drafting History and
(2nd ed, 2003),
D Nicol, ‘Gene
Patents: The Ultimate Snatch’ (Paper presented at Hatching, Matching,
Snatching and Dispatching, AIHLE
7th Annual Conference, Newcastle, 27 - 30
June 2002), 13.
See Ch 24 for more
discussion about the interaction between intellectual property and competition
Or, in some circumstances, under
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth). See Chs 24 and 27 for more
D Nicol and J Nielsen,
Patents and Medical Biotechnology: An Empirical Analysis of Issues Facing the
Australian Industry
(2003) Centre for Law and Genetics Occasional Paper No
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
29. Copyright, Trade Secrets and Designs
Introduction
Current law and practice
Application to genetic research
Submissions and consultations
Options for reform
ALRC's views
Trade secrets
Current law and practice
Application to genetic research
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
Current law and practice
Application to genetic research
Submissions and consultations
ALRC's views
PART H: Other Intellectual Property Issues
29. Copyright, Trade Secrets and Designs
Introduction
chapter discusses the potential application of copyright, trade secrets and
designs law to genetic materials and technologies,
and considers the possible
implications of such intellectual property protection. Chapter 30 discusses the
application of copyright
and other intellectual property rights to databases of
genetic information.
29.2 IP 27 noted that
scientific researchers might rely on copyright protection of certain research
tools and results rather than
other forms of intellectual property protection.
For example, copyright might protect a computer program developed for use in
research or it might protect collections of research data, such as a
29.3 Copyright protection for some research tools and data may be an attractive
alternative to an application for patent protection,
particularly where the
researcher has little knowledge of the function of the material, and because
a work have a practical application.
29.4 However, the recognition of copyright in research tools could have
significant implications for scientific research, due to
the duration and
exclusive nature of copyright protection. For example, if copyright subsists in
the representation of a molecular
sequence, this could present an impediment to
its use by other researchers—unless the use falls within the scope of a
dealing exception to copyright
infringement.
On the other hand,
the copyright owner cannot prevent researchers from independently sequencing the
same biological information.
Current law and practice
29.5 Copyright protects the
form of expression of ideas, rather than the ideas, information or concepts
expressed. The
) regulates
artistic works, and ‘subject matter
other than works’.
29.6 On 8 February 2004, Australia and the United States finalised the
Australia - United States Free Trade Agreement (AUSFTA). This
among other things, that Australia will amend several aspects of its copyright
law to bring it into greater harmony with
United States’ copyright law. As
these amendments are not yet part of Australian law, they are not discussed
Subsistence of copyright
29.7 Copyright in literary, dramatic, musical or
artistic works is the exclusive right to reproduce the work in a material form;
the work; perform the work in public; communicate the work to the
public; make an adaptation of the work; enter into a commercial
arrangement in respect of the work reproduced in a sound recording of the work;
and for computer programs, to enter into a
commercial rental arrangement in
respect of that program.
29.8 Copyright subsists in an unpublished literary, dramatic, musical or
artistic work if the author was a ‘qualified
at the time the work
was made or for a substantial part of this time. Copyright subsists in a
published work if the work is first
published in
if the author was a
‘qualified person’ at the time the work was first published; or if
the author died before that time
but was a ‘qualified person’
immediately before his or her
29.9 In order to attract copyright, a work must be a literary, dramatic,
musical, or artistic ‘work’, and the work must
‘original’. Literary works include tables and compilations expressed
in words, figures or symbols, computer programs
and compilations of computer
A literary work need not
display literary merit, however it is usually intended to convey information and
instruction, or pleasure,
in the form of literary
This requirement has
been interpreted broadly, and has been held to include codes comprising foreign
or invented words, and computer
By contrast, the word
‘EXXON’ has been held not to be a literary work because, while the
word is new and original, it
‘has no meaning and suggests nothing in
29.10 The work need not be the expression of original or inventive thought, but
it must originate with an author and must not be
a copy. A work originates with
an author if it is the product of the author’s skill, labour and expertise
or experience. The
requisite degree of labour, skill and expertise will depend
on the facts of the case and will be a question of
In Australia, the
Federal Court has held that originality can flow purely from the ‘sweat of
the brow’ involved in collecting,
verifying and presenting information in
a compilation, even if there is no creativity involved in its selection or
arrangement.
29.11 Generally, copyright subsists until 50 years after the end of the calendar
year in which the author died.
Where a literary work was not published before the author’s death,
of the calendar year
in which it was first
Ideas and expression
the United States, courts have held that copyright does not subsist in facts or
ideas, and where the idea and its expression
merge, copyright does not subsist
in the expression. Therefore, where an idea has only one possible form of
expression, copyright
protection does not extend to the protection of the
expression.
It is unclear
whether this ‘merger doctrine’ applies in Australia. Some
commentators have suggested that Australian courts
have accepted the
while others suggest
that the High Court has impliedly rejected
In a recent Federal Court
case, Lindgren J commented that the doctrine does not apply in Australian law in
relation to ‘whole
of universe’ factual compilations, such as a
telephone directory.
29.13 Copyright is infringed if a person does or
authorises the doing, in Australia, of any act falling within the copyright of a
work without the copyright owner’s
permission.
Such reproduction or
other conduct must relate to the whole or a ‘substantial’ part of
the work, and the test of substantiality
refers primarily to the quality of what
Fair dealing provisions
provides for certain acts
of ‘fair dealing’ with a copyright work, that constitute exceptions
to infringement of copyright.
One such exception is fair dealing for the purpose
of research or study.
29.15 The Federal Court has interpreted the terms ‘research’ and
‘study’ in accordance with their ordinary
dictionary meanings.
‘Research’ means diligent and systematic enquiry or investigation
into a subject in order to discover
facts or principles. ‘Study’ has
several meanings, including the application of the mind to the acquisition of
and a thorough examination and analysis of a particular subject. The
research or study must be carried on by the person who actually
benefit of the fair dealing
Section 40(2)
provides guidelines for
determining whether the reproduction of the whole or a part of a work
constitutes a fair dealing for the purposes
of research or
These factors include:
the purpose and character of the dealing;
the nature of the work or adaptation;
the possibility of obtaining the work or adaptation within a
reasonable time at an ordinary commercial price;
the effect of the dealing upon the potential market for, or the
value of, the work or adaptation; and
where only a part of the work is copied, the amount and
substantiality of that part compared to the whole work or
adaptation.
places limits on the amount of reproduction that will be
deemed to be a fair dealing under
, provided it is made for the purpose
of research or study:
in the case of a work comprising an article in a periodical
publication, the whole or part of the work; or
in any other case, not more than a ‘reasonable portion’
of the work.
Australian courts are yet to determine whether fair dealing for the purpose of
research or study applies only to non-commercial
research or
Professor Sam Ricketson
argues that there appears to be no reason to limit the purposes for which
research or study is conducted
to basic, non-commercial research, provided the
activity falls within the scope of the dictionary
However, the
Commonwealth Attorney-General’s Department has submitted that this remains
an open question.
29.19 An important issue in relation to fair dealing is whether, in practice, an
individual or organisation is able to gain access
to the copyright work for fair
dealing purposes. In the genetic research field, this concern arises primarily
in relation to genetic
the protection of genetic databases by contract and other forms of protection.
Statutory licensing provisions
contains several
statutory licensing schemes that permit third party use of copyright works
without prior negotiation or permission,
in exchange for a reasonable royalty.
These schemes include: copying by educational and other
institutions;
recording of
musical works;
broadcasting
sound recordings or causing them to be heard in
retransmitting free to
air broadcasts;
recording or
filming works for the purpose of ephemeral broadcast by another person, or
copying such a recording;
Crown use of copyright
29.21 The statutory licensing regime for Crown use of copyright permits the
reproduction or other act comprised in the copyright
of a work or other subject
matter ‘for the services of the Commonwealth or State’. The Crown
must, as soon as possible
(unless contrary to the public interest), inform the
that he or she may reasonably require. The Crown and the copyright owner must
agree to the terms of such use, and if an agreement
cannot be reached, the
Application to genetic research
Genetic materials and products
27 noted that scientific researchers might seek to assert copyright over the
written representation of a sequence of natural
or modified genetic material, or
an amino acid sequence of a natural or modified protein
29.23 Sue Coke has suggested that the written representation of a sequence of
modified DNA or protein may be protected as an original
literary work under the
. As the legislative definition of a ‘literary
work’ includes a table or compilation expressed in words, figures or
the written representation of a genetic sequence or product—being
a string of letters representing the four nucleotides, adenine,
thymine, guanine
and cytosine (A, G, T and C)—is likely to be a ‘literary work’
within the meaning of the
. Coke has commented that:
Since copyright was held to subsist in the list of numbers in the
‘newspaper bingo’ game used to promote the circulation
of a Sunday
newspaper, it can hardly be asserted that a sequence of letters (which may not
be meaningful to a lay person but would
be to a molecular biologist) denoting
nucleotides of modified DNA or the amino acids making up the protein the product
of that modification
would not be protected by copyright, provided sufficient
skill, labour and effort was involved in elucidating the
29.24 In other jurisdictions, commentators have suggested that copyright may not
subsist in such a written record because there is
only one established way of
representing a sequence of nucleotides (or amino acids). In this case, the idea
and expression merge.
to Professor Gunnar Karnell:
It is an internationally recognised, distinguishing feature of copyright
that no-one should be allowed to appropriate for himself,
by means of copyright
law, either the only way to express or describe a certain type of real matter
(here: a DNA sequence, recombinant
or other) or such matter as can only be
described in such a way.
29.25 As noted above, while it is unclear whether the merger doctrine applies
generally in relation to copyright in Australia, it
does not apply to
‘whole of universe’ factual
compilations.
provided sufficient skill, labour and
effort is involved in creating that
expression.
29.26 In other jurisdictions several commentators have suggested that copyright
may subsist in a modified nucleotide or amino acid
molecule itself, in addition
to its written representation.
This is unlikely under Australian law because the molecule, by itself, is not in
writing and provides no information, instruction
or entertainment to human
beings—unlike its written representation.
Computer programs
29.27 Computer programs may be designed to conduct
various steps in the identification or modification of genetic or protein
or in the storage of such sequences or associated information.
29.28 A computer program or a compilation of computer programs, may attract
defines a computer program as ‘a set of statements or instructions
to be used directly or indirectly in a computer in order
to bring about a
certain result’.
Therefore, copyright protects the expression of the set of statements and
instructions that constitute an original literary work
in the form of a computer
29.29 As copyright does not protect the functional elements of a computer
program, a competitor could avoid infringement by using
different object or
source codes to achieve the same functional
It has been suggested
that as most of the commercial value in bioinformatics machines lies in their
functional elements, copyright
law may provide insufficient protection to have
any real application in this
Submissions and consultations
29.30 IP 27 asked what role
relation to human health.
29.31 Several submissions suggested that copyright law would be an inappropriate
means of protecting genetic materials and
technologies.
The Department of
Industry, Tourism and Resources submitted that:
materials and technologies in relation to human health, except for databases
that contain specific gene
29.32 Several submissions submitted that although copyright protection applies
to databases and software programs used to analyse,
sort and record genetic
material and information, it has a limited role in dealing with the actual
genetic materials and technologies
themselves.
In addition,
AusBiotech Ltd submitted that:
Since copyright applies only to the specific form of expression, it is
not suitable for protection of inventions relating to nucleic
acids, because
protection has frequently been proposed
as being suitable for this purpose, it
would be completely impracticable. Moreover, copyright would not be amenable to
of uses of the sequence information. Similarly copyright could
protect the depiction of the three-dimensional structure of a protein,
not protect the protein molecule itself or its
29.33 The Department of Health and Ageing submitted that it would be concerned
to inhibit medical research
or the application of such research in
healthcare.
The South Australian
Government also expressed concern about the potential impact of copyright law on
research and healthcare
29.34 The Human Genetics Society of Australasia submitted that, rather than
to protect the
intellectual property rights (if any) attached to genetic materials and
29.35 Dr Amanda McBratney and others submitted that:
there would be a serious policy question as to whether the Australian
government would want to confer the significantly longer protection
of copyright
to genetic materials and technologies. In so far as industry is concerned, the
untested nature of copyright protection
for gene-related inventions makes it an
unattractive option.
29.36 The Australian Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture (ACIPA)
submitted that Australian copyright law ‘should
promote the primary public
interest in the free flow and exchange of scientific information amongst
researchers and scientists’.
ACIPA commented that:
to facilitate the dissemination of scientific information
amongst scientists. It
should ensure that scientists are not burdened by additional imposts levied by
scientific publishers. There
is a need to reform the defence of [fair] dealing
to recognise that the use of academic journals and scientific databases are
and transformative uses.
Options for reform
29.37 The ALRC has not
identified any particular concerns with the potential subsistence of copyright
in the written representation
of a genetic or protein sequence, or a computer
program. However, as this is a developing area of technology, it is possible
concerns may arise in the future.
29.38 As noted in Chapter 30, copyright may subsist in factual compilations of
genetic information, and this may give rise to concerns
regarding third party
access for scientific research. In particular, ACIPA identified an issue fair
dealing in relation to scientific
research that may have commercial
implications.
29.39 This section discusses whether it may be desirable to amend the fair
dealing provisions in the
to clarify whether fair dealing
for the purpose of research or study applies to research of a commercial nature,
which would include
genetic research. Such an amendment would remove the
existing uncertainty for researchers who wish to rely on the fair dealing
provisions,
but who are involved in research that is either commercial from the
outset, or may become commercial at some point within the life
29.40 Such clarification could be achieved by amending the
to provide greater guidance as to what extent the fair dealing provisions
for research or study applies to commercial research; or
by adopting the United
States’ concept of ‘transformative use’ in relation to fair
use of copyright works.
Commercial/non-commercial research
29.41 As noted above, Ricketson argues that there
appears to be no reason to limit the purposes for which research or study is
to basic, non-commercial research, provided the activity falls within
the scope of the dictionary
However, the
Commonwealth Attorney-General’s Department has submitted that this remains
an open question.
29.42 The European Union has recently provided for a voluntary fair dealing
exemption from copyright infringement for ‘non-commercial’
For some member states, implementing this provision would mean limiting the
scope of their existing fair dealing exceptions.
The United Kingdom’s
Royal Society has noted the difficulty in defining the commercial character of
research, particularly
as many research ventures and collaborations only
subsequently become commercial. It commented that such a limitation would give
rise to uncertainty, not be useful, and be complex to
29.43 The Commonwealth Attorney-General’s Department submitted that an
expansion of the existing fair dealing provisions to
cover commercial research
could, potentially, minimise some of the concerns arising from the protection of
factual databases. However,
the Department suggested that it would be difficult
to envisage a broad exclusion for scientific research that would comply with
Berne Convention
for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works
(Berne Convention).
29.44 The Berne Convention contains a ‘three step test’ for
exceptions to the exclusive rights of copyright owners. Art
9(2) provides
It shall be a matter for legislation in the countries of the Union to
permit the reproduction of such works in certain special cases,
provided that
such reproduction does not conflict with a normal exploitation of the work and
does not unreasonably prejudice the
legitimate interests of the
29.45 This test has been incorporated, in a slightly amended form, into art 13
Agreement on the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
(the TRIPS Agreement). The first condition requires that
a limitation or exception be clearly defined in national legislation and
narrow in scope and reach. The second condition is breached if the use would put
the user into economic competition with the way
that the right holder would
normally extract economic value from the right, thus depriving the right owner
of significant tangible
Under the third
condition, the right holder’s legitimate interests would be unreasonably
prejudiced if an exception causes,
or has the potential to cause, an
unreasonable loss of income for the copyright
Transformative use
29.46 In consultations, Professor Jill McKeough suggested
that the concept of ‘transformative use’ under the United States’
fair use provisions might be an alternative to the commercial/non-commercial distinction
for fair dealing.
ACIPA also suggested that
the fair dealing provisions should be reformed to recognise that the use of academic
journals and scientific
29.47 Section 107 of the
(US) provides that
‘fair use’ of a copyright work for research (or other specified
purposes) is not an infringement of
a fair use the factors to be considered include the purpose and character of the
including whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for non-profit
educational purposes.
29.48 The Copyright Law Review Committee (CLRC) discussed the fair use doctrine
in its report,
Simplification of the
to the Exclusive Rights of Copyright Owners
. The Committee commented that
the concept of ‘transformative use’ is relevant to the examination
of the purpose and character
of the use. This concept refers to the distinction
between ‘productive’ and ‘reproductive’ uses of a work.
It assesses the value generated by the secondary use and the means by which such
value is generated. An untransformed copy or ‘reproductive
work is likely to be used for the same purpose as the original, while a
‘productive use’ makes some contribution
of new intellectual value
and therefore promotes the advancement of the arts and
States’ Supreme Court has held that although
a transformative use is not absolutely necessary for a finding of fair
use ... the more transformative the new work, the less will
be the significance
of the other factors, like commercialism, that may weigh against the finding of
29.49 The CLRC recommended that the fair dealing provisions be amended by
consolidating the current fair dealing provisions into
a single provision;
expanding fair dealing to an open-ended model that specifically refers to the
current exclusive set of purposes
but is not confined to them; and applying the
non-exclusive set factors provided for in
all fair dealings.
29.50 The Committee commented that these amendments would result in a fair
dealing provision similar to, but more precise than, the
United States’
fair use provision.
Australian Government has not implemented this recommendation.
ALRC’s views
29.51 As noted above, it has
been argued by some that copyright could apply to the written representation of
a sequence of nucleotides
or amino acids in a genetic or protein molecule. This
issue does not appear to have been considered by an Australian court to date,
and the state of the law is not settled. It appears very unlikely that copyright
would subsist in a genetic or protein molecule itself.
might also apply to the computer software used in genetic research. Chapter 30
notes that, in Australian law,
genetic information and this may have significant implications for researchers.
29.52 The ALRC has not identified any particular concerns with the potential
application of copyright law to an original written
representation of a genetic
or protein sequence, or to a computer program. However, as copyright may subsist
in a database of genetic
information, it is possible that copyright could in
future have some impact on the conduct of genetic research. Therefore, the ALRC
considers that the fair dealing provisions for the purpose of research or study
would benefit from clarification.
29.53 The ALRC proposes that the Commonwealth should amend the
to clarify the extent to which ‘fair dealing for the purpose of
research or study’ applies to commercial research using
genetic research
tools and results that are protected by copyright.
29.54 The concept of ‘transformative use’ could be an attractive
alternative to the commercial/non-commercial distinction
in fair dealing for the
purpose of research or study. It is arguable that there is a public interest in
facilitating third party
access to a copyright work—whether for commercial
or non-commercial purposes—for use in developing an entirely new product
that will contribute to scientific and intellectual knowledge. However, at this
stage the ALRC has insufficient information about
this option to suggest any
Proposal 29 - 1
The Commonwealth should amend the
(Cth) to clarify the extent to which ‘fair dealing for the
purpose of research or study’ applies to commercial genetic
Trade secrets
29.55 A scientific
researcher might seek to protect particular research tools or results as a trade
secret while pursuing patent protection,
or as an alternative to other forms of
intellectual property protection. Trade secrets may also protect certain
background information
use the new product or process most effectively.
Current law and practice
29.56 Trade secrets are a
form of confidential information that arises in a commercial
Trade secrets law is
based primarily in the common law. An individual may bring an action either in
contract or in equity for breach
of confidence in relation to a trade secret.
Trade secret protection
29.57 In order to attract protection as a trade secret,
the information must be secret, and there must have been an understanding
time of receiving the information that it is confidential. The recipient of
confidential information breaches confidence when
he or she discloses or uses
that information beyond the purpose for which it was given—whether the
misuse is intentional, unintentional,
subconscious or
29.58 This protection may be lost if the information is disclosed (for example
by a person who is given access to the information,
such as a former employee)
or otherwise enters the public domain.
Breach of confidence
29.59 Actions for breach of confidence may be based on
contract or in equity. An action for breach of contract may be based on an
express or implied condition of the contract that information be treated as
confidential. However, where a contract purports to protect
trivial or mundane
information in the public domain as ‘confidential information’, a
court may consider whether the presumption
against contracts in restraint of
trade should apply. Alternatively, the defendant might argue that a contract is
harsh and unconscionable
if it has the effect of unreasonably restraining the
use of information that is freely available to the
29.60 The basis of an equitable action for breach of confidence ‘lies in
the notion of an obligation of confidence arising
from the circumstances in or
through which the information was communicated or
The equitable
obligation of confidence has four elements:
the confidential information for which protection is sought must be
identified with specificity, and not merely in global terms;
the information must have the necessary quality of confidence;
the circumstances in which the information was received must have
imported an obligation of confidence; and
misuse of that information must be actual or threatened, without the
29.61 In some
cases, the owner of the trade secrets will clearly be able to show that he or
she was the source of the information.
However, in those cases where the owner
is not able to prove how the information was obtained, but the similarity
between the product
or process allegedly disclosed and that used is so marked as
to defy coincidence, the courts have drawn an inference of
Defences to breach of confidence
29.62 There are several defences to an action for
breach of confidentiality, including legal
compulsion,
disclosures in
respect of which privilege is
and disclosures made
in the public interest.
29.63 In respect of private litigants, the public interest exception appears to
apply only where information discloses an iniquity
in the sense of a crime,
civil wrong or serious misdeed of public
importance.
Professor James
Lahore and Ann Dufty have commented that there is no clear definition of an
iniquity, nor any clear indication of
the criteria to be used in determining
whether the disclosure of particular information might be excused on this basis.
They suggested
that the precise scope of the public interest defence in
Australia is unclear.
29.64 In cases involving government information, the courts appear to have
adopted a balancing test to determine whether the public
interest in disclosure
outweighs the public interest in observing trust and
confidences.
Application to genetic research
29.65 Scientific researchers
or industry might choose to protect a new invention or research results through
trade secrets law for
various reasons, including because trade secrets
protection is not limited to a specific duration; trade secrets do not require
time and financial resources involved in obtaining patent
protection;
and, where the
invention does not satisfy the criteria of patentability, trade secrets may be
the most effective alternative form
of protection.
29.66 However, the protection of genetic research through trade secrets law may
have several disadvantages both for the inventor,
and for the conduct of further
research and development. Trade secrets protection can be easily lost by the
release of the confidential
information into the public domain. In addition, a
trade secret cannot be enforced against third parties who independently develop
the invention. Trade secrets can also inhibit the conduct of further research
and development by third persons because the knowledge
is not available in the
public domain.
29.67 In consultations, the ALRC heard that a number of researchers and
companies have engaged in the licensing of ‘know-how’,
and that in
some circumstances know-how licensing can be more important that patent
protection. By contrast, one company commented
that it prefers to conduct its
commercial process for others, rather than to licence-out the know-how
associated with the process,
due to concerns about maintaining the
confidentiality of the information once it has been
Submissions and consultations
29.68 IP 27 asked whether
trade secrets law has any significant application to the conduct of genetic
research and its commercialisation;
and if so, whether the law requires
29.69 ACIPA submitted that trade secrets law has a significant impact upon the
conduct of genetic research and its commercialisation,
and that the law may need
reform to allow for greater access to scientific information. It proposed an
expansion of the defences
available under trade secrets law, and suggested a
general public interest defence to claims of infringement of trade secrets,
of the much more limited iniquity
29.70 McBratney and others commented that, in practice, the cost and time taken
to develop genetic inventions usually means that
the investors will require much
more certainty than trade secrets law could provide. They discussed the
potential advantages and
disadvantages of trade secrets protection of genetic
inventions:
There are three major attractions of protecting an invention by trade
secrecy or the law of confidence: (i) it is free; (ii) its protection
potentially perpetual; and (iii) it may allow sufficient time for certain
‘enabling experiments’ to be conducted to
adequately protect the
invention via patenting. However, on balance these advantages do not outweigh
the disadvantages, except in
special circumstances where delaying publication
may provide competitive advantage to the incumbent or when ‘enabling
experimentation’
may be required to fairly base the
29.71 McBratney and others commented that although keeping an invention secret
appears to be ‘free’, there is a very
real cost involved. In order
to protect the trade secret in court the inventor must be able to show that the
information was confidential;
that sufficient steps were taken to prevent that
information from entering the public domain; and that the information is
defined. They suggested that it may be necessary to implement various
mechanisms to achieve secrecy, such as marking documents; training
and implementing physical, technical or contractual barriers to prevent
unauthorised personnel from obtaining the information.
They noted that:
probably the most significant disadvantage of protecting an invention by
trade secrecy is that the law of confidence does not provide
the inventor with
any property rights. If the inventor takes their invention to market and others
who owe no duty of confidence can
copy or reverse engineer it freely, in the
absence of other intellectual property protection or causes of action the
inventor has
no recourse against the free-rider. Even contractual obligations of
confidence may not assist the inventor if the provisions have
been drawn too
29.72 The Queensland Government also noted some of the shortcomings with trade
secrets protection, being that:
trade secrets do not provide protection that is certain. In contrast to
patents, once the substance of the trade secret is revealed,
the owner has no
real recourse in relation to the material or a right that can be asserted
against others. Therefore, generally,
industry prefers to patent intellectual
property rather than maintaining it as a trade
29.73 Several submissions suggested that trade secrets law has only a very
limited application to genetic research and its commercialisation,
and therefore
does not require reform.
AusBiotech Ltd submitted that:
Because of the difficulty in maintaining trade secrets, particularly in
relation to living material, which is readily replicated,
most innovations in
the biotechnology field are protected via patents. Consequently confidentiality
is essential only until a patent
application has been lodged. The patent
application will automatically be published eighteen months after its priority
date, unless
it is explicitly withdrawn beforehand. Moreover, the inability to
enforce a trade secret against a third party who develops the invention
independently is a further limitation on trade secret protection in the
highly-competitive biotechnology field.
29.74 Several submissions and consultations suggested that any attempt to weaken
this area of law would result in a greater amount
of information being kept out
of the public domain.
example, the Walter and Eliza Hall Medical Research Institute submitted that:
The use of trade secrets law and confidentiality agreements allows
parties to negotiate agreements prior to the patent being awarded
information is not in the public domain). Weakening of this protection would
simply delay development until the patent is
awarded and would not be in the
public interest.
29.75 GlaxoSmithKline submitted that trade secrets law applies to genetic
research and its commercialisation in the same way as to
any other field of
technology:
So, for example, a patent owner of a mechanical device will often make
adjustments to its manufacturing process over time to improve
the efficiency of
the manufacturing process or to improve the quality of the marketed product.
Depending on the nature of the improvements
and the priorities of the patent
owner, those improvements may be patented or may be kept secret (and thus
subject to trade secrets
law). Exactly the same applies in the field of genetic
ALRC’s views
29.76 The ALRC recognises
that trade secrets protection, and ‘know-how’ licensing, play an
important part in research
and development in Australia. In the interests of
fostering future research it is important to strike an appropriate balance
the need to protect research results prior to—or as an alternative
to—patent protection, and the need to ensure that
important research
information becomes publicly available for use by other researchers.
29.77 Most of the submissions stated that there was no need to reform trade
secrets law in relation to genetic materials and technologies.
However, ACIPA
proposed broadening the defences to a claim of infringement of trade secrets,
for example through a general public
While the existing
defences to infringement arise in the common law, such expansion presumably
would take statutory form. The ALRC
notes the caution expressed by Lahore and
Dufty about such an approach:
[If] a breach of confidence is permitted simply because the court
considers that there is something unsavoury about the plaintiff's
conduct and
that the public is entitled to have details of it, the action for breach of
confidence will be significantly changed.
The balance of public interest which
traditionally favoured the protection of information disclosed in confidence,
will be tipped
in favour of disclosure unless the court can find nothing
objectionable in the plaintiff's
29.78 As the ALRC has not heard any significant problems with the application of
trade secrets law in relation to genetic materials
and related technologies, at
this stage it does not consider it necessary to propose any reform of the common
law public interest
defence, or to the applicaton of trade secrets law
generally. Chapters 26 and 27 discuss the possibility of amending the
to include the know-how necessary to work a patented
invention within the scope of the Crown use and compulsory licensing
provisions.
29.79 Design registration is
another form of intellectual property right that may apply to genetic research.
The purpose of the industrial
designs system is to encourage innovation by
giving designers the exclusive right to exploit their designs for a limited time
prevent competitors free-riding on their design
innovations.
29.80 The industrial designs registration system protects the appearance of
articles, rather than their function. In contrast, the
patent system grants
exclusive rights relating to devices, substances, methods or processes that have
a use or function. Therefore,
articles that are innovative because of their
visual appearance would qualify for protection under the designs registration
rather than the patent
29.81 IP 27 noted suggestions that design protection might be useful in product
development in the biotechnology field, for example
by protecting the
distinctive appearance of products such as genetic diagnostic kits and
analytical tools.
Current law and practice
Designs Act
(Cth) currently regulates the industrial designs registration system in
Australia. This Act is in the process of being repealed and
replaced by new
legislation which implements the Australian Government’s response to the
ALRC’s report,
Designs Act 2003
Designs Act
(Consequential Amendments) Act 2003
(Cth) received Royal Assent on 17
December 2003 and will commence operation upon proclamation or, at latest, by 17
June 2004. The
Designs Act
will replace the existing Act with a new
designs registration system.
29.84 The main changes that will be effected by the new
Designs Act
higher threshold for obtaining registration;
broader infringement test;
more streamlined registration process;
reduced term of registration from 16 to 10 years; and
amended enforcement and dispute resolution
procedures.
Designs Act
defines a ‘design’ in relation to a product,
as the overall appearance of the product resulting from one or more visual
features of the product.
‘product’ includes a thing that is manufactured or handmade, and a
component part of a complex product, if it is made
separately from the
feature’ includes the shape, configuration, pattern and ornamentation of
the product. It may, but need not,
serve the functional
29.86 A design is registrable if it is new and distinctive when compared with
the prior art base for the design, as it existed before
the design’s
priority date. The prior art base consists of designs publicly used in
Australia, and published in a document
within or outside
29.87 The owner of a registered design has the exclusive right, during the term
of registration, to: make (or offer to make) a product,
in relation to which the
design is registered, which embodies the design; import such a product into
Australia for sale, or for use
for the purposes of any trade or business; sell,
hire or otherwise dispose of (or offer to do so) such a product; use such a
in any way for the purposes of any trade or business; keep such a
product for specified purposes; and authorise another person to
do any of these
29.88 Generally, a person infringes a registered design if, without appropriate
authority, the person deals in certain ways with
a product that embodies the
design, or a design that is substantially similar to
Application to genetic research
29.89 While the potential
application of designs registration to genetic materials appears somewhat
limited, it could be useful in
certain biotechnology product development, for
example by protecting the distinctive appearance of diagnostic kits and
29.90 Design protection (as with patent protection) is unlikely to cover
naturally occurring DNA or protein sequences. Such a sequence
represents a set
of nucleotides in their naturally occurring state. The shape or configuration
that these make is determined by principles
of chemistry, not through any
innovation on the part of the scientist. However, commentators in the United
Kingdom have suggested
that recombinant genetic or protein sequences may be
eligible for design protection in that jurisdiction where there has been some
creation of shape or
configuration.
29.91 Microarrays, diagnostic kits and analytical tools are genetic products
that could potentially be eligible for designs registration.
Although the
underlying function might be patentable, the visual appearance of the product
may be commercially valuable and may therefore
warrant design protection.
Submissions and consultations
29.92 IP 27 asked whether
the existing or proposed design laws have any significant application to the
conduct of genetic research
and its commercialisation; and if so, whether these
laws require reform.
29.93 Most of the submissions that addressed this question suggested that design
laws would have not have any significant application
to the conduct of genetic
research and its
commercialisation.
Australian Government suggested that although design law is unlikely to apply to
genetic material, it could possibly apply
to diagnostic kits or analytic
The requirements for registration under the Designs Act 1906 (Cth) are
that the design must be new or original and must be applied
to an article.
Genetic material does not readily meet the criteria for design registration. It
may apply to provide protection to
diagnostic kits or analytic tools. However
the requirement that a design be different from a design that is already
registered and
is not an obvious adaptation of an existing design may mean that
many standard genetic tests do not meet the criteria for design
registration.
29.94 Finally, ACIPA submitted that ‘it would be inapposite to apply the
registration system of Australian designs law to deal
with biological
inventions’.
ALRC’s views
29.95 The ALRC recognises
that there may be some potential application for designs registration in
relation to genetic materials and
technologies. It has been suggested that such
protection could extend to the visual appearance of modified genetic or protein
and genetic technologies such as microarrays and diagnostic tests. As
the ALRC has not heard any concerns arising from the potential
application of
designs law in this context, it does not propose any reforms in this area.
See Ch 30 for more detail about
information.
See the discussion
for the nature of copyright in subject matter other
than works.
A ‘qualified
person’ is an Australian citizen, resident or an Australian protected
person. An ‘Australian protected
person’ is a person who is under
the protection of the Australian government: Ibid
‘Publication’ is the
authorised supply of reproductions of a work to the public: Ibid
In addition, the
(Cth) confer a
similar protection on most works that are made or published
R Reynolds and N Stoianoff,
Intellectual Property: Text and Essential Cases
(2003), 42 - 44,
Hollinrake v Truswell
[1894] 3 Ch
R Reynolds and N Stoianoff,
Intellectual Property: Text and Essential Cases
Exxon Corporation v
Exxon Insurance Consultations International Ltd
[1981] 2 All ER 495
(Graham J). See J McKeough and A Stewart,
Intellectual Property in
(2nd ed, 1997), 142.
Ricketson and C Creswell,
The Law of Intellectual Property: Copyright,
Designs and Confidential Information: Looseleaf Service
(1999), [7.50],
Desktop Marketing Systems
Pty Ltd v Telstra Corporation Ltd
(2002) 192 ALR 433. See also J Lahore,
Patents, Trade Marks & Related Rights: Looseleaf Service
[10,065], [10,115]. See Ch 30 for more
By contrast, the European Union and the United States have extended the
duration of copyright in works to 70 years after the author’s
Directive 93/98/EEC of the European Council on Harmonising the Term of
Protection of Copyright and Certain Related Rights
, (entered into force on
29 October 1993);
(US). See R Reynolds and N
Intellectual Property: Text and Essential Cases
See J McKeough and A Stewart,
Intellectual Property in Australia
(2nd ed, 1997),
R Reynolds and N Stoianoff,
Intellectual Property: Text and Essential Cases
(2003), 21 - 22,
Data Access Corporation v Powerflex Services Pty Ltd
[1999] HCA 49
However, Reynolds & Stoianoff note that in
Autodesk Inc v
, Dawson J had made a statement supporting the existence of the
doctrine in Australian law:
Autodesk Inc v Dyason
[1992] HCA 2
(1992) 173 CLR
Desktop Marketing Systems Pty
Ltd v Telstra Corporation Ltd
(2002) 192 ALR 433, 474. In that case,
Telstra’s telephone directory was a ‘whole of universe’
compilation because
there was no selection of the subscribers to be included.
The universe for each regional directory constituted all subscribers in
region, except those who had a silent number. Therefore, any persons exploring
the same universe would discover the same factual
information: Ibid,
J McKeough and A Stewart,
Intellectual Property in Australia
(2nd ed, 1997),
De Garis v Neville Jeffress
Pidler Pty Ltd
(1990) 37 FCR 99
; see also S Ricketson and C Creswell,
Law of Intellectual Property: Copyright, Designs and Confidential Information:
Looseleaf Service
The Copyright Law Review
Committee has commented that although
and (3) use the expression
‘a dealing by way of copying’, it considers that these fair dealing
provisions are not limited
to the right of reproduction, but apply to the
exercise of all rights: Copyright Law Review Committee,
Simplification of the
Exceptions to the Exclusive Rights of Copyright
(1998), 34.
‘reasonable portion’ generally means 10% of the work, determined
either by page number or, in the case of digital copies,
word count:
See Copyright Law Review
Simplification of the
Exceptions to the
Exclusive Rights of Copyright Owners
(1998), 37; see also S Ricketson and C
The Law of Intellectual Property: Copyright, Designs and
Confidential Information: Looseleaf Service
S Ricketson and C Creswell,
The Law of Intellectual Property: Copyright, Designs and Confidential
Information: Looseleaf Service
Attorney-General’s
Department,
Submission P61
, 11 November
See generally, J
McKeough, K Bowrey and P Griffith,
Intellectual Property: Commentary and
(2002), 159 - 160; H Ergas,
Treatment of Unilateral
Refusals to License and Compulsory Licensing in Australia
See Ch 26 for a discussion of the meaning of the term ‘for the
services of the Commonwealth or the
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003),
‘Copyright and Gene Technology’
Journal of Law and
discussion in Ibid, 101,
‘Protection of Results of Genetic Research by Copyright or Design
European Intellectual Property Review
Desktop Marketing Systems Pty
Ltd v Telstra Corporation Ltd
(2002) 192 ALR 433, 474 (Lindgren J).
See, eg, I Kayton, ‘Copyright in
Living Genetically Engineered Works’
George Washington Law
; N Derzko, ‘Protecting Genetic Sequences under the Canadian
Intellectual Property Journal
3131, 39. See
also S Coke, ‘Copyright and Gene Technology’
Law and Medicine
; J Silva, ‘Copyright Protection of Biotechnology
Works: Into the Dustbin of History?’,
Boston College Intellectual
Property and Technology Forum
, 28 January 2000, <www.bc.edu/itpf>, 2,
Ibid. This definition was
inserted into the
Agenda) Act 2000
(Cth). The Commonwealth Attorney-General’s Department
is currently conducting a review of the operation of this legislation
to report to the Attorney-General in
S McBride, ‘Bioinformatics
and Intellectual Property Protection’
Berkeley Technology Law
Ibid, 1350.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
For example, Department of
Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003; South
Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
of Industry Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
For example, Human Genetics
Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; Queensland
Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January 2004; AusBiotech Ltd,
, 7 November
Submission P58
, 7 November
Commonwealth Department of Health
and Ageing,
Submission P65
, 28 January
South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Human Genetics Society of
Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
September 2003.
S Ricketson and C
The Law of Intellectual Property: Copyright, Designs and
Confidential Information: Looseleaf Service
Attorney-General’s
Department,
Submission P61
, 11 November
Royal Society,
Keeping Science
Open: The Effects of Intellectual Property Policy on the Conduct of Science
(2003), 20, citing
Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council on the Harmonisation of Certain Aspects of Copyright and Related
in the Information Society
, (entered into force on 22 May
Attorney-General’s
Department,
Submission P61
, 11 November
Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works
9(2). This test has been incorporated into the TRIPS Agreement through art 9(1),
which incorporates the obligations under
arts 1 - 21 of the Berne
Convention, and art 13, which restates the test in a slightly wider form that
applies to all the exclusive
rights of copyright owners. It has also been
incorporated into the WIPO Copyright Treaty:
Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into
force on 1 January 1995) art 9(1), 13;
WIPO Copyright Treaty
, 20 December
1996, WIPO/CRNR/DC/94, art 1(4), 10.
determining the normal exploitation, it is necessary to consider both the
existing and the potential uses of a copyright
Agreement: Drafting History and Analysis
(2nd ed, 2003), 147 - 150,
citing the WTO Panel’s decision in
United States—Section 110(5)
, document WT/DS160/R. See Copyright Law Review
[3.08] - [3.14].
J McKeough,
Consultation
, Sydney, 15 October
Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September
Simplification of the
Exceptions to the Exclusive
Rights of Copyright Owners
Campbell v Acuff-Rose Music Inc
114 S Ct 1164
(1994), 1171;
American Geophysical Union v Texaco Inc
Simplification of the
Exceptions to the Exclusive
Rights of Copyright Owners
Patents, Trade Marks
& Related Rights: Looseleaf Service
(2001), [33,080]. By contrast,
‘know-how’ represents the confidant’s (ie employee’s)
accumulated experience
and knowledge in a particular position or field. This is
usually more peculiar to the industry than the particular employer: R Reynolds
and N Stoianoff,
Intellectual Property: Text and Essential Cases
R Reynolds and N
Intellectual Property: Text and Essential Cases
Trade Marks & Related Rights: Looseleaf Service
Ibid, [33,000], citing
Moorgate Tobacco Co Limited v Philip Morris Limited (No 2)
[1984] HCA 73
(1984) 156 CLR
, 437 - 438.
Patents, Trade Marks & Related Rights: Looseleaf Service
[33,000], citing
Smith Kline & French Laboratories (Australia) Ltd v
Secretary, Department of Community Services and Health
[1989] FCA 384
(1990) 95 ALR 87.
is not clear whether the plaintiff must also show that use or disclosure of the
information will be detrimental to the
Patents, Trade
Marks & Related Rights: Looseleaf Service
For example, where a
statutory provision expressly or by necessary inference directs that information
be disclosed; or a court orders
discovery of the information: Ibid, [39,010],
For example, a lawyer is not
required to disclose confidential information if the information is covered by
legal professional privilege
and the client chooses not to waive that privilege:
Ibid, [39,040].
For example, the court
may reject an application for relief if the plaintiff has allowed an
unreasonable time to elapse between the
alleged breach of confidence and
commencement of proceedings; or where the plaintiff has been guilty of some
impropriety and has
not come to the court with ‘clean hands’: Ibid,
[39,100], [39.110].
R Reynolds and N Stoianoff,
Intellectual Property: Text and Essential Cases
Patents, Trade Marks
& Related Rights: Looseleaf Service
(2001), [39,130], [39,170].
Information which Australian courts have held to be of such public importance to
justify disclosure includes:
a breach of national security, the commission of a
crime or fraudulent conduct, a breach of a statute, and other serious misdeeds
of public importance.
R Reynolds and N
Intellectual Property: Text and Essential Cases
B Arnold and E Ogielska-Zei,
‘Patenting Genes and Genetic Research Tools: Good or Bad
Innovation?’ (2002)
Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics
BresaGen Limited,
Consultation
, Adelaide, 15 September
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
For example, Human Genetics
Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
, 7 November 2003; Department of Industry Tourism and
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003; South Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Submission P58
, 7 November
For example, Walter and Eliza
Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003;
Commonwealth Government Departments,
Consultation
, Canberra, 5 May
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October
Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September
Patents, Trade Marks & Related Rights: Looseleaf Service
(2001), [39,190].
Revised Explanatory
Memorandum to the Designs Bill 2003 (Cth),
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
See Revised Explanatory
Memorandum to the Designs Bill 2003 (Cth),
Designs Act 2003
The prior art base
for a design also consists of designs in relation to which each of the following
criteria is satisfied: the design
is disclosed in a design application; the
design has an earlier priority date than the designated design; and the first
time documents
disclosing the design are made available for public inspection is
on or after the priority date of the designated
H Laddie and others,
Modern Law of Copyright and Designs
(3rd ed, 2000),
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
Department of Industry
Tourism and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October 2003; Human Genetics
Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October 2003; Walter and Eliza
Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October 2003; A
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October 2003; IP Australia,
Submission P56
, 4 November 2003; Queensland Government,
, 5 January
Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September
ALRC Discussion Paper 68
Gene Patenting and Human Health
30. Protection of Genetic Databases
Introduction
Genetic research databases
Public databases
Private databases
Protection of rights in genetic databases
Contract and other protection
Other jurisdictions
United States
European Union
International treaties
International principles
Issues and problems
Submissions and consultations
Options for reform
Amend the level of copyright protection
Fair dealing for research or study
Statutory licensing regime
Genetic database subscriptions
30. Protection of Genetic Databases
Introduction
chapter discusses the various means by which owners of genetic databases may
seek to protect their investment in those databases,
and considers whether
reform is necessary to ensure reasonable third party access to these databases
for the purpose of scientific
Genetic research databases
30.2 Genetic
genomes—including whole genomes,
single genes and gene fragments, such as
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and expressed sequence tags
(ESTs)—or information
expression of genes.
30.3 In recent years, there has been a proliferation of both public and private
They have become essential for
research biologists because:
First, the increasing rate of discovery and the increasingly varied
publication options make it difficult for scientists to keep abreast
knowledge. Second, most of the new scientific data, such as [a] nucleic acid
sequence, is no longer being published by conventional
means, such as in
scholarly journals. Third, an electronic cataloguing of the sequence information
within a database facilitates
the emerging need for computational analysis of
genetic information.
30.4 Genetic databases may be compiled by academic or
government institutes, or by biotechnology or pharmaceutical
Access may be free, or
it may be subject to a price. Database owners have sought to protect and
commercially exploit their genetic
including copyright and contract
Public databases
30.5 One of the features of
public genomic research has been the creation of public or quasi-public
widely and rapidly available. Public
funding of the sequencing of the human genome was predicated on the public
availability of the
data, although it was expected that patents would be sought
for products derived from such public genomic information.
30.6 Internationally, publicly available databases include the International
Human Genome Sequencing Consortium; the Mammalian Gene
Collection; the
International Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration; the SNP Consortium;
and the International HapMap Project.
30.7 The Wellcome Trust—the world’s largest biomedical research
funding charity—is a source of funding for the
creation of some databases,
particularly in the United Kingdom. GenBank is the United States National
Institutes of Health (NIH)
genetic sequence database. It provides access to all
publicly available genetic sequences, but does not guarantee that all the
information
it provides is free from patent, copyright or other intellectual
property claims. The NIH also has a program to develop a library
of clones of
all human genes.
30.8 The SNP Consortium Ltd (known as TSC) is a non-profit foundation that was
established to provide a public resource of single
polymorphisms SNPs in the human genome. The TSC comprises academic institutions,
biomedical, pharmaceutical and biotechnology
companies, and the Wellcome Trust.
The TSC has stated that it will file patent applications solely to establish the
relevant date
of the discovery and it will not allow any patents to issue.
However, it notes that discoveries made using the data could be
30.9 The International HapMap Project was established to develop a haplotype map
of the human genome, which will also be placed in
the public domain. The HapMap
will describe the common patterns of human DNA sequence variation to assist
researchers to identify
genes affecting health, disease and responses to drugs
and environmental factors. Once SNPs have been genotyped densely enough to
define regions of strong association, the haplotypes, individual genotypes, and
tag SNPs in those regions will be released publicly
without restriction. Before
this, the individual genotype data will be made available under a ‘data
access policy’, under
which users must agree not to reduce others’
access to the data, and to share the data only with those who have made the same
Private databases
30.10 Private
genetic databases have also been established. A feature of the private databases
is that access comes at a price. Their
attraction lies in the additional
information that they contain—that is, the annotations that have been
added to the sequence
information.
30.11 In June 2000, the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC)
negotiated a three-year agreement between the Australian
Government and Celera
Genomics to provide Australian researchers with subsidised access to five of
Celera’s databases, including
its Human Genome Database, Human Gene Index
and Human SNP Reference Database. Access was available for publicly funded
researchers,
including those with Australian Research Council (ARC) funding, and
other publicly funded bodies such as the Commonwealth Scientific
and Industrial
Research Organisation (CSIRO). Each participating institution paid an annual
licence fee based on the number of teams
wanting database access and which
30.12 The NHMRC recently negotiated a new three-year academic subscription
agreement on behalf of Australian researchers, which commenced
operation on 1
July 2003. The NHMRC is no longer involved in the administration of the new
agreement. Instead, the Applera Corporation
(through its Applied Biosystems
administers all
subscriptions directly with individual users and institutions. Subscription fees
under the new agreement are US$2,000
per annum for each individual user per
30.13 The Australian Genomic Information Centre operates the Australian National
Genomic Information Service (ANGIS), which provides
access to a comprehensive
system of bioinformatics databases, software, documentation, training and
support. This includes Internet-based
access to various publicly available
nucleotide, protein, structure and reference databases, and other
30.14 Access to ANGIS is based on a yearly fee. Academic pricing is available to
universities and non-government not-for-profit organisations,
hospitals. Government pricing is available to federally and state funded
organisations and institutions. Subscription fees
are charged at a base rate for
the first 15 users, and an additional rate for each additional group of 50
users, being: $1,300/$1,300
(academics); $3,000/$1,500 (government); and
$5,000/$2,500 (commercial).
Protection of rights in genetic databases
30.15 The creation of
to provide sufficient incentive
and protection for investment to encourage the
creation of new databases for use in research, and the need to facilitate
researchers’
access to such data on reasonable terms, to advance
scientific knowledge.
) regulates copyright in Australia in
relation to original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works, and
‘subject matter
other than works’. Chapter 29 discussed Australian
30.17 As discussed in Chapter 29, in order to attract copyright, a
‘work’ must be a literary, dramatic, musical, or artistic
it must be ‘original’. A literary work need not display literary
merit, but is usually intended to convey information
and instruction, or
pleasure, in the form of literary
The work need not be
the expression of original or inventive thought, but it must originate with an
author and must not be a copy.
A work originates with an author if it is the
product of the author’s skill, labour and expertise or experience. The
degree of labour, skill and expertise will depend on the facts of the
case and will be a question of
30.18 In Australia, the Full Federal Court has held that originality can flow
purely from the ‘sweat of the brow’ involved
in collecting,
verifying and presenting information in a compilation of facts, even if there is
no creativity involved in its selection
arrangement.
Marketing Systems Pty Ltd v Telstra Corporation Ltd
, the court held that
literary work. Lindgren J stated that
a factual compilation will be original if
the compiler has exercised sufficient labour and expense in collecting,
verifying, recording
and assembling the
information.
Sackville J stated
that a factual compilation will be original if the compiler has undertaken
substantial labour or incurred substantial
expense in collecting the information
recorded in the compilation.
High Court refused special leave to appeal against this
30.19 Therefore, in Australia copyright may subsist in a database of factual
information on the basis of the ‘sweat of the
brow’ involved in
obtaining and compiling the information, as well as the selection and
arrangement of the information. In
addition, copyright may subsist in the
individual items contained within the database. The Commonwealth
Attorney-General’s
Department submitted that:
The consequence of the decision in Desktop Marketing v Telstra is that
raw data, including raw data that may only be represented in
one particular way,
will be subject to protection under the
, at least where
substantial independent skill, labour and effort have been used to compile the
data. This would cover most, if not
all, databases in existence in
30.20 The Australian approach to originality has been criticised: as amounting
to protection of the information and facts contained
in a work, rather than the
form of expression of the work; for preventing ‘second comers’ from
building on ideas; and
for potentially conflicting with competition
Contract and other protection
discussed in Chapter 29, the
provides that certain acts of
fair dealing with a copyright work constitute exceptions to infringement of
is fair dealing for the purpose of research or
Several commentators have
suggested that, where database owners use contract law to restrict access to a
the fair dealing exceptions applying in copyright
30.22 Online databases frequently have technological protection
to restrict or control
access to, or copying of, their contents. Examples of such measures are
encryption, password protection, or
‘read only’
technology.
Generally, access is
permitted on individual contractual terms, either by a written licence agreement
or a click-through agreement
In practice therefore,
while a scientific researcher may have a legal right to reproduce information
held in a genetic database for
fair dealing purposes, the database owner could
nonetheless block physical access to its contents, or limit access or copying
to contractual terms.
30.23 This could thwart the policy behind the fair dealing provisions and may
give a database owner effective control over the data
and information beyond his
or her legal entitlement.
According to Associate Professor Mark Davison:
Increasingly, the contract providing for access to a database dictates
the relationship between the owner and user, rather than laws
technological devices can be used to prevent
access to anyone who has not formed
a contractual relationship with the
30.24 In practice, a researcher or other individual could use a circumvention
device to avoid the effect of a technological protection
measure. Under the
, a ‘circumvention device’ is a device
(including a computer program) that has only a limited commercially significant
purpose or use, or no such purpose or use, other than the circumvention, or
facilitating the circumvention, of a technological protection
30.25 While the
does not prohibit the use of circumvention
devices, s 116A prohibits the making, importing, selling, distribution and
promotion of
such devices and services, subject to certain ‘permitted
‘permitted purposes’ under s 116A do not include fair dealing.
Therefore, while it might be lawful for an individual
to use a circumvention
device to access and reproduce copyright works for the purpose of fair dealing
for research or study, it would
be difficult to obtain such a device within
Australia for this purpose.
30.26 In addition it has been suggested that database owners could use
contractual arrangements to prevent the use of a circumvention
device to gain
access to copyright works for the purpose of fair
30.27 The Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee (IPCRC)
considered the regulation of circumvention devices in its
Intellectual Property Legislation under the Competition Principles
. The IPCRC noted that some copyright owners had increased the use
of technological means to ‘lock up’ works, for example
by relying on
encryption devices. It concluded that:
The Committee is broadly satisfied that the Government’s approach
to the issues associated with technological protection measures
preserves a
reasonable balance between competing interests. However, we would be concerned
if the use of technological locks, perhaps
accompanied by greater reliance on
contract, were to displace or in any way limit the effectiveness of fair dealing
provisions.
30.28 The Copyright Law Review Committee (CLRC), in its report,
, considered the extent to which trade in copyright material is
subject to contracts that purport to exclude or modify the copyright
exceptions.
The CLRC found that contracts have been used to exclude or modify the copyright
exceptions in Australia, and that overseas
contracts that purport to do so may
be indicative of norms of behaviour in the
e-marketplace.
30.29 The CLRC considered that it would be impractical to expect copyright users
to assume the risk of expensive litigation to maintain
the copyright exceptions
where individual contracts purport to exclude or modify them. In its view, risk
management practices would,
more often than not, dictate that organisations
simply refrain from exercising the exception or pay for the right to use
material, even though they may be entitled to that use under the
30.30 In order to maintain an appropriate balance between the rights of
recommended that
be amended to provide that an agreement (or a provision
of an agreement) that excludes or modifies the operation of certain statutory
provisions—including the fair dealing provisions—has no
The Australian
Government has not yet implemented this recommendation.
30.31 The Australian Copyright Council has expressed opposition to this
recommendation for several reasons. In particular, the Council
has queried the
CLRC’s view that a contractual provision that may be inconsistent with the
application of an exception to copyright
infringement is necessarily
By contrast, the United
Kingdom’s Royal Society has expressed support for the CLRC’s
recommendation, and has recommended
that copyright and database laws in that
exceptions to
infringement.
30.32 An alternative approach might be to amend s 116A of the
to expand the list of ‘permitted uses’ for which a
circumvention device or service may be imported, made, sold or distributed
so on in Australia, to include fair dealing for the purpose of research or
study. This would permit scientific researchers to
obtain circumvention devices
within Australia for use for fair dealing purposes. However, this would not
protect against copyright
owners using contract to prevent the use of these
devices; and it could facilitate copyright infringement if individuals were to
obtain such devices for purposes other than fair dealing.
30.33 The ALRC notes that the Commonwealth Attorney-General’s Department
is currently dealing with this matter in its review
Amendment (Digital Agenda) Act
(Cth) which is due to report to
the Attorney-General in 2004. The ALRC did not canvass these issues in IP 27,
and has not received
any significant comment on them. However, as issues of
access to genetic research and data are directly relevant to this Inquiry,
ALRC seeks further views on this matter.
30.34 Accordingly, the ALRC asks whether the Commonwealth should amend the
to provide that, in relation to genetic databases protected
by copyright, the operation of the fair dealing for the purpose of research
study provisions must not be excluded or modified by contract or technological
protection measures. While the issue may be relevant
to all copyright works, the
ALRC has confined the question to genetic information in accordance with the
Terms of Reference.
Question 30 - 1
Should the Commonwealth amend the
(Cth) to provide that, in relation to genetic databases protected by
the purpose of
research or study must not be excluded or modified by contract or technological
protection measures?
Other jurisdictions
United States
the United States, the legal protection of databases is based on copyright, the
tort of misappropriation and
The United States has
rejected the ‘sweat of the brow’ approach to originality in
protection only to those factual
compilations that display a degree of creativity, and can therefore be
considered intellectual
Feist Publications Inc v Rural Telephone Service
, the United
States Supreme Court held that a white pages telephone directory was not
sufficiently original to attract copyright protection.
The Supreme Court noted
that copyright did not subsist in the individual telephone book entries, but
could subsist in an original
selection, co-ordination or arrangement of these
facts provided this involved independent creation and a minimum degree of
creativity.
30.37 In the absence of copyright protection, database owners tend to protect
their investment through other measures including licensing
arrangements,
contract and technological protection
Since 1996, several
bills have been introduced into Congress to create a form of
sui generis
protection for databases or collections of information, however none of these
has been implemented.
30.38 On 8 October 2003, the Database and Collection of Information
Misappropriation Bill 2003 (HR 3261) was introduced into the
Representatives. If passed through both Houses, this Bill would impose
substantial civil penalties on anyone who made available
commerce’ a ‘quantitatively substantial’ part of an existing
collection.
European Union
30.39 In 1996, the European
Parliament and Council of the European Union (EU) adopted a directive on the
legal protection of databases
Directive).
The purpose of the
Directive was to harmonise copyright law among EU member states in relation to
original databases; and to introduce
a new database right to protect
non-original databases, or factual compilations, which were not protected by
30.40 The Database Directive defines a ‘database’ as a collection of
independent works, data or other materials arranged
in a systematic or
methodical way and individually accessible by electronic or other
Chapter II of the
Directive deals with copyright protection for databases that, by virtue of the
selection or arrangements of their
contents, constitute the author’s own
intellectual creation. Copyright protection does not extend to the database
and does not affect any rights subsisting in those
30.41 Chapters I and IV of the Directive provide for a
sui generis
substantial investment—either quantitatively or qualitatively—in
obtaining, verifying or presenting the contents of the database. The Directive
prohibits the unauthorised
re-utilisation
of the whole or a
substantial part of the database contents, whether evaluated quantitatively or
qualitatively.
The term of
protection is 15 years, which may be extended by a substantial change—in
qualitative or quantitative terms—to
the database
30.42 The Database Directive permits three different sets of rights in relation
to a database. First, copyright may subsist in the
structure of the information
in a database; that is, the selection and arrangement of the database. Second,
in the individual items constituting the database
contents. Third, the database right may protect the contents of the
30.43 The Database Directive contains several exceptions to both copyright and
the database right.
includes a limited form of fair dealing provision that permits the extraction of
for teaching or scientific
research, to the extent justified by the non-commercial purpose to be
30.44 European courts have been asked to interpret several provisions of the
‘substantiality’ of the investment required to attract the right,
the status of the database
test of infringement.
to Professor Bernt Hugenholtz:
[I]t is far too early to draw conclusions, except, perhaps, that
non-European countries contemplating the introduction of a database
similar regime would be well advised to wait and see—wait until the
European Court of Justice has had the opportunity
to clarify the key notions of
the Directive; and see if what ensues is beneficial to the information industry,
and in the public
30.45 The protection provided by the database right may be higher than copyright
protection in several ways. First, the protection
is potentially perpetual.
While the database right lasts for 15 years only, it may be renewed whenever
there is a substantial change
in the database contents. Second, the extraction
of small amounts of data over time is prohibited where those small amounts
constitute a substantial
30.46 Third, the exceptions to the database right are more limited than those
available under Australian copyright law. For example,
the directive provides
that the database may be used for the purpose of ‘illustration’ for
teaching and scientific research,
but does not define this term; and, unlike the
fair dealing provisions applying to Australian copyright, it is specifically
to non-commercial
Davison has commented
Many teaching and research institutions have a commercial aspect of their
operations, partly in response to reductions in public funding.
The potential
for a mix of commercial and non-commercial purposes for which teaching or
research may be undertaken has dramatically
increased as a
30.47 The Database Directive provides that the EU may conclude agreements to
extend the database right to databases made in third
countries, such as
It appears that
protection will be offered only on the basis of reciprocity; that is, where the
third country offers comparable protection
to the database
30.48 The United Kingdom’s Royal Society has concluded that the database
right is inappropriate for scientific data and has
recommended that it be
repealed or substantially
The Human Genome
Organisation’s (HUGO) Ethics Committee has recommended that the Database
Directive be amended to provide for
compulsory licensing of access to genetic
International treaties
Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works 1886
Convention) and the
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights 1994
(TRIPS Agreement) provide copyright protection for
collections of works, including compilations of
30.50 In 1996, the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) adopted the
WIPO Copyright Treaty
, which extends copyright protection to compilations
of data or other material that, by reason of the selection or arrangement of
their contents, constitute intellectual
Australia has not yet
signed this treaty.
30.51 WIPO has also considered adopting a draft treaty that would create a
special protection regime similar to that provided in
the Database Directive. To
date, the treaty has not been
However, database
protection remains on the agenda of the WIPO Standing Committee on Copyright and
Related Rights.
The Commonwealth
Attorney-General’s Department’s submission commented that:
The issue of database protection remains outstanding, and although it
remains on the agenda for the international intellectual property
community, no
consensus is likely to be reached until the United States makes a firm
commitment either way.
International principles
30.52 Specific concerns have
been expressed about the possible impact of intellectual property laws on access
to information about
the human genome. A number of international initiatives
have sought to overcome some of these concerns.
The Bermuda Principles
30.53 The Bermuda Principles
are a set of principles that seek to ensure that genomic sequence data is made
as freely available as
possible. The principles were established in 1996 at an
International Strategy Meeting on Human Genome
Sequencing,
and endorsed in
Bermuda the following year. The Bermuda Principles state that:
primary genomic sequences should be in the public domain;
primary genomic sequences should be rapidly released; and
HUGO should be advised of large-scale sequencing of particular
regions of the
30.54 In December 2002,
HUGO’s Ethics Committee released a
Statement on Human Genomic
, which declared there was a need to place primary genomic
sequences rapidly in the public domain. The Statement also recognised the
potential global good arising from genetic research; the scientific and clinical
uses of genomic databases; the potential for conflicts
between the free flow of
information that is crucial to research advances and the legitimate rights to
return from research expenditure;
and the potential risk of misusing genetic
Issues and problems
30.55 The legal protection
of genetic databases raises significant policy considerations. Limiting access
to, and the use of, such
information can stifle potentially useful scientific
research. However, it is also necessary to provide sufficient incentive for
in scientific research.
30.56 As genetic databases are protected by a mixture of copyright and contract
law in Australia, third party researchers who seek
access to the database
contents would generally need to negotiate a licence with the database owner. As
noted above, even if the
proposed use falls within the scope of fair dealing for
the purpose of research or study, the researcher could be barred from physically
accessing the database contents if they are protected by technological
protection methods.
30.57 If a database owner refuses researchers access to the database contents,
or places unreasonable conditions on such access,
this could potentially hinder
publicly useful research. Therefore, it is desirable to ensure that the law
strikes an appropriate
balance between protecting the investment involved in
developing such databases, and ensuring reasonable third party access to their
Submissions and consultations
30.58 IP 27 asked whether
Australian copyright law provides adequate protection of databases that hold
factual compilations of genetic
sequences and other genetic
Most of the submissions
addressing this question suggested that copyright law does provide adequate
protection. The Human Genetics
Society of Australasia submitted that:
Australian copyright law does provide adequate protection of databases
that hold factual compilations of genetic sequences and other
genetic data. If
we introduce a special data base right into Australian law ... it would be
important to ensure that we do not increase
the legal protections afforded to
such databases to the point that access to data that may have been publicly
funded is severely
30.59 Dr Amanda McBratney and others submitted that:
Australia already provides adequate protection for database creators. As
the Telstra v Desktop Marketing case shows, the threshold
for what will
constitute an original copyright work in Australia is very low ... Given the
decision in this case, and the refusal
of the High Court to entertain an appeal,
the ‘sweat of the brow’ doctrine is firmly entrenched in Australian
operation it can produce similar results to the European database
30.60 They suggested that possibly the only major advantage of enacting
legislation on this issue would be to strengthen Australia’s
negotiating
position with the EU to provide Australian citizens with reciprocal protection
under the European database
30.61 The Queensland Government considered that it is unclear whether a
The universities consulted seem to be satisfied with the use of copyright
law to protect databases, however industry puts a lot more
emphasis on patent
protection over genetic material rather than protecting databases containing
genetic information.
30.62 The South Australian Government submitted that unless there is an
identified practical problem with copyright law, there would
not seem to be a
case for introducing special database rights just for genetic databases:
Even if the
was amended to introduce a special database
right in similar or the same terms as the EU’s Directive on the Legal
of Databases, this does not justify any specific considerations in
relation to gene patents. If necessary the Crown Use provisions
could be invoked to enable reasonable access for State Government
laboratories conducting genetic
30.63 The Australian Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture (ACIPA)
submitted that there would be less incentive for private
companies to monopolise
essential scientific information if scientific databases did not attract
amended so that scientific databases are recognised as global public goods that
are not subject to copyright protection.
Alternatively, the fair dealing
provisions should be amended to include the sharing of scientific information
within their scope.
30.64 IP 27 also asked whether publicly or privately funded research is being
impeded because of lack of access to data about human
genetic material and, if
so, whether the NHMRC’s Celera subscription provides an appropriate model
for seeking to increase
Australian researchers’ access to information
30.65 Several organisations submitted that they do not consider that research
has been impeded by a lack of access to
The Queensland Government
submitted that:
Queensland Health advises that the NHMRC’s Celera subscription has
improved access for researchers to data about human genetic
Researchers and industry may benefit from education on how to use the
subscription and the information obtained under the
subscription.
30.66 AusBiotech Ltd submitted that:
There is little evidence that research is being impeded because of lack
of access to data about human genetic material. The public
comprehensive, and are constantly being updated with further annotations.
Although commercial databases such as Derwent’s
Gene Patent Database are
available by subscription, access is also available on a fee per use basis. It
is possible that there is
some restriction on access to more specialised
30.67 McBratney and others submitted that:
In our experience, patents of human genes have not impeded access to data
of any part of the human genome with regard to sequences
... It is important to
note that the Human Genome Consortium’s human genome sequence was publicly
available at this time, so
it would be incorrect to imply there was a lack of
access to human genetic data. However, due to the database design, the
information
on the Celera ‘Discovery System’ was better organised,
annotated, and easier to search. Moreover, Celera’s sequence
of the human
genome involved fewer gaps in the data, and was also complementary to publicly
available data. In addition, the Discovery
System included extensive databases
of human SNPs and ESTs—which combined public data with data generated by
Celera. Several
other organisms’ genomes were available as part of the
package, some of which were not publicly available at the time.
Although a significant portion of the information on the database was
publicly available elsewhere, the Celera package was more comprehensive,
therefore advantageous to Australian
Researchers.
30.68 The Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources submitted that most of
the results of the Human Genome Project are publicly
available, and there are
several examples of genetic databases being licensed for a
30.69 By contrast, several submissions suggested that research has been impeded
by a lack of access to data about human genetic
The New South Wales
Health Department submitted that:
NSW Health is concerned that private companies have been able, by using
the patent process, to hold their findings from public access
and make them
available only to those who are prepared to pay. Industry licence fees are
reportedly up to several millions
internationally.
30.70 The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research (WEHI) submitted
that publicly and privately funded research is being
impeded. WEHI commented
that public databases usually catch up quite quickly, but
where the database is in private hands the only options are to not use it
or attempt to negotiate the best possible deal for public
researchers.
30.71 The Caroline Chisholm Centre for Health Ethics submitted that Celera
Genomics has laid down conditions that are being followed
by other companies
publishing genome databases which do not ensure unrestricted access to the
genetic information. The Centre commented
These access issues to important information are of grave concern to many
leading scientists in the field ... With such important
information the issue of
access is paramount: who controls its release, and where it is stored becomes
pivotal to progress in this
emerging field. Perhaps legislation could help
ensure equitable access to important information. That such databases could be
solely for financial motives, when doing so compromises basic human
needs such as health, is questionable. This begs several important
which databases in particular, under what circumstances and what compensation
should be made to the company(ies) that
developed or generated the genetic
Options for reform
30.72 The ALRC considers
that it is important to strike an appropriate balance between the need to
encourage investment in technology
by protecting databases created through
private funds, and the need to facilitate legitimate third party use of such
research. The various options for reform are discussed below.
Amend the level of copyright protection
30.73 As a result of the
Federal Court’s decision in
Desktop Marketing Systems Pty Ltd v Telstra
Corporation Ltd
currently offers a high level of copyright protection for genetic and other
of factual information if the
verifying, recording and assembling
the information.
30.74 One possible reform option is to raise the level of protection of genetic
sui generis
to that existing in the EU. The ALRC considers that the primary reason to
propose this option would be so
that Australia could enter into an agreement
with the EU for the reciprocal protection of non-original databases. The
Commonwealth
Attorney-General’s Department submitted that:
It is certainly arguable that the common law ‘sweat of the
brow’ test provides, in substance, the same level of protection
generis Directive. However, the form of that protection is sufficiently
different as to leave some doubt as to whether
protection would be granted in
the absence of express legislation or agreement dealing with the
30.75 However, the Department noted that any proposal to adopt a
protection in Australia would be likely to meet a significant degree
of opposition from scientific and academic communities:
While there are few parties who would deny the importance of protecting
investments in information, there are many who are concerned
‘privatisation’ of information, and the effect it could have on the
scientific community. Specifically, it
is feared that additional protections may
mean that databases that were previously available openly, and free of charge
will be restricted
and that the complexity and cost of research will rise as a
result. Opponents also argue that current protections are sufficient,
excessive, and additional protection is potentially risky and simply
unnecessary.
30.76 The ALRC considers that the level of protection of genetic databases under
Australian copyright law is already high, and is
arguably close to the level of
protection granted by the EU’s Database Directive. In the light of the
submissions and consultations
conducted to date, the ALRC does not consider it
necessary to propose the introduction of a
sui generis
30.77 An alternative would be to amend the
to lower the
level of copyright protection of genetic databases to facilitate greater access
for third party researchers. For example,
Australia could adopt the United
States’ standard of originality for copyright, which requires independent
creation and a minimum
degree of creativity. Those databases that do not fulfil
these minimum requirements would not be protected by copyright.
30.78 When IP 27 asked whether Australian copyright law provides adequate
protection of databases that hold factual compilations
of genetic sequences and
other genetic data, most of the submissions addressing this question considered
that the existing level
of copyright protection was adequate.
30.79 In addition, if non-original genetic databases were not protected by
their investment,
such as the introduction of a
sui generis
contract and technological prevention methods. While researchers generally would
have fair dealing
rights in relation to databases protected by copyright, these
may be lost where databases are protected by other means. Accordingly,
lowering of copyright protection could in practice lead to more limited access
to information for scientific researchers.
30.80 Further, given that the selection and arrangement and/or the contents of
many genetic databases do exhibit a degree of creativity,
this amendment would
not have any impact on these ‘original’ databases.
Fair dealing for research or study
30.81 Another possible
reform option would be to amend the fair dealing provisions in the
to clarify to what extent ‘fair dealing for the purpose of
research or study’ applies to commercial research using genetic
protected by copyright. This would remove existing uncertainty for researchers
who wish to rely on the fair dealing provisions
but are uncertain as to their
30.82 Proposal 29 - 1 provides that the Commonwealth should amend the
to clarify the extent to which ‘fair dealing for the
purpose of research or study’ applies to commercial genetic research.
proposal already addresses this concern.
30.83 As noted above, another issue relevant to fair dealing for the purpose of
research or study is whether, in practice, an individual
is able to access the
contents of a genetic database in order to reproduce the copyright works for
fair dealing purposes. Question
30 - 1 asks whether the Commonwealth should
to provide that, in relation to genetic databases
protected by copyright, the operation of the fair dealing for the purpose of
or study provisions must not be excluded or modified by contract or
technological protection measures.
Statutory licensing regime
30.84 Another option is to
introduce a new statutory licensing scheme into the
facilitate third party access to, and use of, genetic databases in exchange for
a reasonable royalty. An important difference
between statutory licensing and
fair dealing is that a statutory licence requires the payment of reasonable
remuneration to use the
30.85 As noted above, the
already contains a number of
statutory licensing regimes, including for Crown use of copyright works. This
permits the Commonwealth
or a State (or an authorised representative) to do an
act comprised in the copyright in a work or other subject matter without
or State’. While this term is not defined in the legislation,
it has been
suggested that it should be interpreted widely in order to cover any activity
related to the purpose of
government.
If this is the case,
it is possible that Commonwealth, state and territory health departments could
rely on these provisions to access,
and use, genetic databases protected by
30.86 Sackville J of the Federal Court raised the option of statutory licensing
for factual compilations in
Desktop Marketing Systems Pty Ltd v Telstra
Corporation Ltd
There may be powerful reasons ... for requiring the owner of copyright in
the compilation to submit to a compulsory licensing regime.
Such schemes are
established by statute in other areas: see, for example,
providing that copyright in a recording is not infringed by a public performance
if equitable remuneration is paid. A compulsory
licensing regime might
appropriately reward the monopolist’s labour and expense, yet leave room
for innovative competitors
who cannot gain access to the basic information
required to establish databases of potential commercial value.
A court is ill-equipped to undertake the inquiries and make the policy
assessments necessary to resolve these issues. The questions
are for parliament
to consider.
30.87 Sharon Givoni has also raised the possibility of a statutory licensing
scheme for databases of factual information that are
protected by copyright. She
argues that this could meet the objectives of copyright law by ensuring that
socially significant databases
are easily accessible to the general public, and
by providing a mechanism for overcoming
‘free-riding’.
30.88 In its submission, the Commonwealth Attorney-General’s Department
discussed existing statutory licensing schemes in relation
to educational
The statutory licensing schemes provide an effective means for
institutions that have access to required materials, with minimal financial
disadvantage to the owners. A similar model could potentially be used to provide
access to information stored in databases. However,
more analysis is necessary
to determine whether any advantages would be offset by the administrative burden
on the parties involved.
30.89 The ALRC considers that there may be merit in introducing a statutory
licensing regime for genetic databases. This would provide
third parties the
right to access and use such databases for public healthcare purposes, in
exchange for a reasonable royalty to
be agreed with the copyright owner, or
otherwise determined by the Copyright Tribunal. This regime would have broader
application
than the Crown use provisions because it would apply also to
non-government organisations and individuals involved in public health
or healthcare provision.
30.90 However, any such statutory licensing scheme must comply with the Berne
Convention’s ‘three step test’ for
exceptions to the exclusive
rights of copyright owners.
addition, it would be necessary to consider the administrative mechanism for
enforcing such schemes.
30.91 The ALRC does not consider that it has sufficient information at this time
to make a reform proposal regarding a statutory
licensing scheme for genetic
order to obtain more
information and feedback about this issue, the ALRC asks
whether the Commonwealth should amend the
to establish a
statutory licensing scheme that would allow access to genetic databases for
research in exchange for a reasonable royalty.
Question 30 - 2
Should the Commonwealth amend the
to establish a statutory licensing scheme in relation to genetic databases
protected by copyright?
Genetic database subscriptions
30.92 The final potential
reform option is to expand the scope of genetic database subscriptions for use
by Australian researchers
and research institutions.
30.93 As noted above, the NHMRC initially negotiated a three-year agreement with
Celera Genomics providing publicly funded institutions
with access to five of
Celera’s databases. The NHMRC paid a base subscription to Celera, and each
institution paid an additional
licence fee depending on the number of users, and
the databases used. When that agreement expired in June 2003, the NHMRC
a new three-year academic subscription agreement. The NHMRC is no
longer involved in the administration of the subscription. Fees
under the new
agreement have increased to US$2,000 per person per database, and all users
requiring access must register
individually.
30.94 IP 27 asked whether the NHMRC’s Celera subscription provides an
appropriate model for seeking to increase Australian
researchers’ access
to information about the human
While few submissions
addressed this issue, the ALRC heard general satisfaction with the NHMRC’s
subscription in consultation
meetings. AusBiotech Ltd submitted that:
The current model of the National Health and Medical Research
Council’s Celera Subscription is certainly an avenue of providing
to increase Australian researchers’ access to information about the human
genome. However, there is limited data on
how effective this has been and
whether the increasing volume and quality of information with the publicly
available databases offer
a suitable alternative to such
initiatives.
ALRC has not heard any substantial concerns with the operation of the Celera
subscription. However, as the new agreement
commenced operation only recently,
it is difficult to determine whether this apparent satisfaction applied only to
the previous agreement,
or extends also to the new access arrangement.
30.96 The ALRC would like further information regarding the practical operation
of the new Celera agreement, and other database subscriptions.
In particular,
the ALRC is interested in views as to whether it would be desirable for the
NHMRC—or another Commonwealth body—to
have responsibility for
monitoring the negotiation and practical operation of these agreements in the
Question 30 - 3
Does the new Celera subscription agreement cause any
significant concerns for public research institutions or researchers engaging
publicly funded research? If so, what are these concerns?
Question 30 - 4
Should the National Health and Medical Research
Council, or another Commonwealth body, have responsibility for monitoring the
of agreements between genetic database owners and publicly funded
research institutions within Australia?
E Baba, ‘From Conflict to
Confluence: Protection of Databases Containing Genetic Information’
Syracuse Journal of International Law and Commerce
addition, the Australian
Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture’s
submission stated that biotechnology firms also have applied for patents
Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September
However, one writer has argued that
the United States Government and those who use some of the clones may be
infringing patents over
specific genes: J Merz, ‘A Note from the
Editor’ (2002) 10(3)
PennBioethics
SNP Consortium Ltd,
Consortium: Frequently Asked Questions
http://snp.cshl.org/about/faq.shtml
at 10 April
The HapMap is a collaboration among
scientists in Japan, the United Kingdom, Canada, China, Nigeria and the United
International HapMap Project
<www.hapmap.org/abouthapmap.html> at 25 November
See generally D Nicol and J Nielsen,
‘The Australian Medical Biotechnology Industry and Access to Intellectual
Property: Issues
for Patent Law Development’
[2001] SydLawRw 16
The Celera Genomics group and Applied Biosystems
group are both part of the Applera Corporation: see <www.applera.com>
at 13 February 2004.
National Health and Medical
Research Council,
<www.nhmrc.gov.au/research/special/celdesc.htm> at 10 December
Australian Genomic Information
, <www.angis.org.au/new/about/index.html> at 12
December 2003. The Australian Genomic Information Centre operates ANGIS with
funding from subscriptions, and NHMRC and ARC
Australian Genomic Information
Subscription and Costs
<www.angis.org.au/new/about/subscription.html> at 12 December 2003. These
prices are exclusive of goods and services
Royal Society,
Keeping Science
Open: The Effects of Intellectual Property Policy on the Conduct of Science
(2003), 23.
R Reynolds and N Stoianoff,
Intellectual Property: Text and Essential Cases
(2003), 42 - 44,
Hollinrake v Truswell
[1894] 3 Ch
S Ricketson and C Creswell,
Law of Intellectual Property: Copyright, Designs and Confidential Information:
Looseleaf Service
(1999), [7.50],
Desktop Marketing Systems
Pty Ltd v Telstra Corporation Ltd
(2002) 192 ALR 433. See also J Lahore,
(1996), [10,065], [10,115].
Desktop Marketing Systems Pty Ltd v
Telstra Corporation Ltd
(2002) 192 ALR 433,
Desktop Marketing
Systems Pty Ltd v Telstra Corporation Ltd
(Unreported, High Court of
Australia, Hayne and Callinan JJ, 20 June
Attorney-General’s
Department,
Submission P61
, 11 November
S Givoni, ‘Pushing the
Boundaries of Copyright: Protection of Databases’ (2003) 15
Intellectual Property Law Bulletin
8, 15. See Ch 24 for more information
For example, Royal Society,
Keeping Science Open: The Effects of Intellectual Property Policy on the
Conduct of Science
(2003), 24; see also the discussion in Phillips Fox,
Digital Agenda Review: Circumvention Devices and Services, Technological
Protection Measures and Rights Management Information: Issues
Paper prepared for the Commonwealth Attorney-General’s Department;
‘technological protection measure’ is a device or product, or a
component incorporated into a process, that is designed
to prevent or inhibit
the infringement of copyright in a work by ensuring that access to the work is
only available by use of an
access code or process with the copyright
owner’s authority; or through a copyright control mechanism:
and C Kendall, ‘Technological Protection Measures and Fair Dealing:
Maintaining the Balance between Copyright Protection
and the Right to Access
Information’
Digital Technology Law Journal
Royal Society,
Keeping Science
Open: The Effects of Intellectual Property Policy on the Conduct of Science
(2003), 24.
The Legal Protection of Databases
In addition, a ‘circumvention service’ means a service, the
performance of which has only a limited commercially significant
purpose, or no
such purpose or use, other than the circumvention, or facilitating the
circumvention, of a technological protection
Ibid s 116A. This provision
reflects art 11 of the
WIPO Copyright Treaty
, which provides that member
states must provide adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies
against the circumvention
of effective technological measures that are used by
authors in connection with the exercise of their rights, and that restrict acts
in respect of their works, which are not authorised by the authors concerned or
permitted by law:
WIPO Copyright Treaty
, 20 December 1996,
WIPO/CRNR/DC/94.
Phillips Fox,
Digital Agenda Review: Circumvention Devices and Services, Technological
Protection Measures and Rights Management Information: Issues
Paper prepared for the Commonwealth Attorney-General’s Department,
Ibid, 27. This issues paper was
released as part of the Commonwealth Attorney-General’s Department’s
review of the operation
(Cth) and aspects of the
(Cth). The review is due to report to the Attorney-General of Australia
Intellectual
Property and Competition Review Committee,
Review of Intellectual Property
Legislation under the Competition Principles Agreement
Australian Copyright Council,
Response to Report of Copyright Law Review Committee on Copyright and
Keeping Science Open: The Effects of Intellectual Property Policy on
the Conduct of Science
The Legal Protection
of Databases
(2003), 160.
Feist Publications Inc v Rural
Telephone Service
[1991] USSC 50
(1991). See also E Baba, ‘From Conflict
to Confluence: Protection of Databases Containing Genetic Information’
Syracuse Journal of International Law and Commerce
Attorney-General’s
Department,
Submission P61
, 11 November
Protection of Databases
Attorney-General’s
Department,
Submission P61
, 11 November
Directive 96/9/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the Legal Protection of Databases
(entered into force on 11 March 1996).
‘Extraction’ is
defined as the permanent or temporary transfer of all or a substantial part of
the contents of a database
to another medium by any means or in any form: Ibid
‘Re-utilisation’
is defined as any form of making available to the public all or a substantial
part of the contents of
a database by the distribution of copies, by renting, by
online or other forms of transmission: Ibid art
The Legal Protection
of Databases
Directive 96/9/EC of
the European Parliament and of the Council on the Legal Protection of
, (entered into force on 11 March 1996) art 6,
Ibid, art 6(2)(b),
B Hugenholtz,
The New Database
Right: Early Case Law from Europe
(2001) Ninth Annual Conference on
International IP Law & Policy, Fordham University School of Law, New York,
Report on the
Protection of Databases
Hugenholtz,
The New Database Right: Early Case Law from Europe
Ninth Annual Conference on International IP Law & Policy, Fordham University
School of Law, New York,
Attorney-General’s Department,
Submission P61
, 11 November
Protection of Databases
Directive 96/9/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the Legal Protection of Databases
(entered into force on 11 March 1996) art
Ibid recital
Royal Society,
Keeping Science
Open: The Effects of Intellectual Property Policy on the Conduct of Science
(2003), 27.
H Pearson, ‘Human
Genome Organisation Meeting, Cancun, Mexico, April 2003: Database Free for
, 30 April 2003,
<www.nature.com/nsu/030428/030428-10.html>.
Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Annex 1C
of the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization)
[1995] ATS 8
, (entered into force on 1 January 1995).
WIPO Copyright Treaty
December 1996, WIPO/CRNR/DC/94.
‘From Conflict to Confluence: Protection of Databases Containing Genetic
Information’
Syracuse Journal of International Law and
, 145 - 146. See also World Intellectual Property
Organization,
Draft Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of
Attorney-General’s
Department,
Submission P61
, 11 November
taking part in the meeting included the Wellcome Trust, the United Kingdom
Medical Research Council, the United States National
Centre for Human Genome
Research, the United States Department of Energy, the German Human Genome
Program, the European Commission,
the HUGO and the Human Genome Project of
Japan: Wellcome Trust,
Genome Data Release
<www.wellcome.ac.uk/en/1/awtvispoldat.html> at 10 April
The Principles noted that some
data would be released on a daily basis and other data, as soon as sequencing
was finished: Wellcome
Summary of Principles Agreed at the
International Strategy Meeting on Human Genome Sequencing
, University
College London, <www.gene.ucl.ac.uk/hugo/bermuda.htm> at 10 April
HUGO Ethics Committee,
Statement on Human Genomic Databases
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
Genetics Society of Australasia,
Submission P31
, 3 October
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
Australian Government,
Submission P51
, 30 October
Australian Centre for
Intellectual Property in Agriculture,
Submission P12
, 29 September
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
GlaxoSmithKline,
Submission P33
, 10 October 2003; AusBiotech Ltd,
Submission P58
November 2003; A McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Queensland Government,
Submission P57
, 5 January
Submission P58
, 7 November
McBratney and others,
Submission P47
, 22 October
Department of Industry Tourism
and Resources,
Submission P36
, 13 October
New South Wales Health
Department,
Submission P37
, 17 October 2003; Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
South Wales Health Department,
Submission P37
, 17 October
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Submission P39
, 17 October
Chisholm Centre for Health Ethics Inc,
Submission P38
, 17 October
Desktop Marketing Systems Pty
Ltd v Telstra Corporation Ltd
(2002) 192 ALR
Attorney-General’s Department,
Submission P61
, 11 November
Law Review Committee,
(2002) [3.157], citing S
Ricketson and C Creswell,
The Law of Intellectual Property: Copyright,
Designs and Confidential Information: Looseleaf Service
Marketing Systems Pty Ltd v Telstra Corporation Ltd
(2002) 192 ALR 433,
S Givoni, ‘Pushing the
Boundaries of Copyright: Protection of Databases’ (2003) 15
Intellectual Property Law Bulletin
8, 17. See also, G Stals,
‘Copyright and Competition Policy in the Post-Hilmer Environment’
Media and Arts Law Review
Attorney-General’s
Department,
Submission P61
, 11 November
Berne Convention for the
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works
National Health and Medical
Research Council,
<www.nhmrc.gov.au/research/special/celdesc.htm> at 10 December
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
, IP 27 (2003), Question
Submission P58
, 7 November 2003.
Appendix 1. List of Submissions
Submission no
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Services
Attorney General’s Department
AusBiotech Ltd
Australian Association of Pathology Practices Inc
Australian Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory Council
Australian Huntington’s Disease Association (NSW) Inc
Associate Professor Agnes Bankier
Associate Professor Ross Barnard
Dr Michela Betta
Breast Cancer Action Group NSW Inc
Breast Cancer Network Australia
Cancer Council Australia
Cancer Council New South Wales
Cancer Council South Australia
Cancer Council Tasmania
Cancer Council Victoria
Cancer Foundation of Western Australia Inc
Cancer Voices NSW Inc
Caroline Chisholm Centre for Health Ethics Inc
Children’s Cancer Institute Australia for Medical Research
Mr Justin Cole and Mr Somerset Barnard
Commonwealth Department of Health and Ageing
Confidential Submission
Confidential Submission
Davies Collison Cave
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Department of Health Western Australia
Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources
Mr Gerard De Ruyter
Mrs Rae Edson
Mr Dimitrios Eliades
Genetic Support Council WA (Inc)
Genetic Technologies Limited
GlaxoSmithKline
Dr John Graham
Mr Anton Hughes
Human Genetics Society of Australasia
IP Australia
Professor David Isaacs
Mr David Jackson
Mr Adam Johnston
Mr Stephen Karpeles
Professor John Mattick
Mr David McAndrew
Dr Amanda McBratney and others
Dr Duncan McFetridge
Medicines Australia
Dr E Milward and others
Professor Alec Morley
National Health and Medical Research Council
Dr Warwick Neville
New South Wales Health Department
Ms Carol O’Donnell
Mr Luigi Palombi
Mr Malcolm Pryor
Queensland Government
Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia
South Australian Government
Dr Graeme Suthers
Dr Ian Turnbull
Walter & Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research
Wondu Business & Technology Services Pty Ltd
Appendix 2. Abbreviations
Administrative Appeals Tribunal
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
Advisory Council on Intellectual Property
Australian Centre for Intellectual Property in Agriculture
Australian Health Ethics Committee
Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory Council
Australian Law Reform Commission
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Managing Justice: A Review of the
Federal Civil Justice System
Australian Law Reform Commission,
The Judicial Power of the
Commonwealth: A Review of the
Judiciary Act 1903
and Related Legislation
Australian Law Reform Commission and Australian Health Ethics Committee,
Essentially Yours: The Protection of Human Genetic Information in
Australian National Genomic Information Service
Australian Postgraduate Awards
AU Published Patent Data Searching
Australian Research Council
Assisted reproductive technology
Association of South-East Asian Nations
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Services
Australia - United States Free Trade Agreement
Association of University Technology Managers (US)
Biotechnology Innovation Fund
Computerised Axial Tomography
Complementary DNA
Canadian Biotechnology Advisory Committee
Canadian Intellectual Property Office
Community Patent Convention
Cooperative Research Centres
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
Commonwealth of Australia
Department of Education, Science and Training
Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Deoxyribonucleic acid
Department of Justice (US)
European Court of Justice
European Community Treaty
European Patent Convention
European Patent Office
Expressed sequence tag
European Union
Food and Drug Administration (US)
Federal Trade Commission (US)
Gross Domestic Product
Cooperative Research Centre for Discovery of Genes for Common Human
Gene Technology Ethics Committee
Genetic Technologies Limited
Gene Technology Technical Advisory Committee
Human Genome Diversity Project
Human Genetics Commission of Australia
Human Genetics Society of Australasia
Human Research Ethics Committee
Human Genome Organisation
International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development
Innovation Investment Fund
Intellectual property
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Gene Patenting and Human Health
Industrial Property Advisory Committee
International Patent Classification
Intellectual Property and Competition Review Committee
Intellectual property rights
Industry Research and Development Board
Knowledge Commercialisation Australasia
Japanese Patent Office
Medicare Benefits Scheme
Magnetic resonance imaging
Medical Services Advisory Committee
Materials transfer agreement
National Competition Council
National Human Genome Research Institute (US)
National Health and Medical Research Council
United States National Institutes of Health
New Patent Solution system
National Stem Cell Centre
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Patent Administration System
Patent Indexing System
Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
Polymerase chain reaction
Patent Cooperation Treaty 1970
Pooled development funds
PDF Program
Pooled Development Fund Program
Pharmaceuticals Industry Investment Program
Prime Minster’s Science Engineering and Innovation Council
Prices Surveillance Act 1983
Research and development
Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia
Ribonucleic acid interference
Small and medium-sized enterprises
Single nucleotide polymorphism
Therapeutic Goods Administration
Trade Practices Act 1974
TRIPS Agreement
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
The SNP Consortium
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization
United States Patent and Trademark Office
Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research
WiCell Research Institute Inc
World Intellectual Property Organization
World Trade Organization
Appendix 3. Glossary
Adult stem cells
Undifferentiated cells found
in differentiated tissue (in a foetus or a fully developed organism). Adult stem
cells can self-renew
and are multipotent—that is, they can give rise to
specialised cell types within the tissue from which they originated. (See
multipotent stem cells
A version of a gene. Different alleles produce
variation in inherited characteristics, for example eye colour.
The transfer of intellectual property rights to a
third party.
Bioinformatics
The application of computational tools and methods
to managing and analysing biological data.
Biotechnology
The technological application and manipulation of
living organisms, for example in the development of pharmaceutical drugs,
therapeutics
and research tools, or in environmental management and
An early embryo comprising about 120 to 150 cells.
A blastocyst is a sphere made up of an outer layer of cells (which later forms
the placenta), a fluid-filled cavity and a cluster of cells on the interior
(called the inner cell mass).
Broad patent
A patent asserting broad rights to an invention,
for example to all future uses of the claimed product or process, whether known
Complementary DNA (cDNA)
Strong, amplified copies of otherwise fragile
Compulsory licence
A licence granted pursuant to a court order
requiring a patent holder to allow a third party to use a patented product or
where the patent holder has failed to exploit it, or has exploited it
on overly restrictive terms.
An intellectual property right subsisting in an
original literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work (or other subject matter),
which protects against the unauthorised reproduction or other acts in
relation to the whole, or a substantial part of, the work.
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
A large molecule comprising a chain of sugar
groups that are missing an oxygen molecule. It is mainly found in the nucleus of
An intellectual property right protecting the
distinctive appearance of an article.
Downstream product
A product or process resulting from downstream
research, for example a pharmaceutical drug, genetic test, therapy or
therapeutic device.
Downstream research
Applied research usually directed at the
development of a product or process with a potential commercial application.
Embryonic stem cells
Undifferentiated cells derived from the inner cell
mass of a developing blastocyst. Embryonic stem cells are self-renewing and
pluripotent—that
is, they are capable of forming all the different types
of cells found in the body, except the placenta and other supporting tissue
necessary for foetal development.
The region of DNA within a gene that codes for a
protein. A protein is usually coded by multiple exons, separated by introns.
Expressed sequence tag (EST)
A known cDNA sequence of several hundred
nucleotides, which forms part of a gene and is derived from RNA. The RNA usually
a protein or protein fragment of unknown function.
An ordered sequence of nucleotides that contains
all the information to direct the production of a specific protein or RNA.
Gene fragment
A wide range of different types of isolated
genetic materials including SNPs, ESTs and other gene fragments that encode
regions of proteins. The term may refer to sequences that are not,
technically, part of a gene.
Gene therapy
The transfer of DNA or RNA into human cells to
treat disease using various delivery methods, including improving membrane
permeability
to DNA, microinjection and the use of viral vectors.
Genetic materials
All forms of DNA, RNA, genes and chromosomes,
including genetic materials of whole genomes, single genes and gene fragments.
Discussion Paper ‘natural genetic material’—forms of
genetic material in their natural state—are distinguished
‘isolated genetic materials’—forms of genetic material
isolated from nature, such as cDNA.
Genetic products
In this Discussion Paper, items produced by the
use of genetic materials, including proteins, nucleic acid probes, nucleic acid
(such as vectors and plasmids), and anti-sense DNA.
Genetic sequences
Any sequence of nucleotides in DNA or RNA.
Genetic technologies
In this Discussion Paper, a broad category of
methods and items used in genetic research and healthcare services, including
used in sequencing DNA, medical genetic testing and gene therapy.
The complete sequence of DNA in a cell or
The study of genes and their function.
The unique combination of alleles found in an
individual’s genome.
Grace period
The period between an inventor’s public
disclosure of a product or process and the latest date on which the inventor may
a patent application without the prior disclosure precluding a patent being
Closely linked alleles along a region of a
chromosome which tend to be inherited together. A haplotype is identified by
patterns of
SNPs. Haplotype maps are intended to identify complex genetic
variations of importance to health and disease.
Infringement
The use or exploitation of another individual or
organisation’s intellectual property rights without lawful authority.
Inner cell mass
A cluster of cells inside a blastocyst from which
embryonic stem cells are derived. In a developing embryo, the inner cell mass
rise to all of the organs and tissue of the future embryo and
Intellectual property
Property rights granted in relation to the product
of original creative endeavour, such as patents, copyright, designs and trade
A DNA sequence—usually with no currently
identified function—that interrupts the protein-coding sequence of a
Inventiveness
A requirement for patentability. An invention must
not be obvious to a person skilled in the technological field of the invention
at the time a patent application is filed.
An agreement between a patent holder and a third
party authorising the use of a patented product or process, which would
constitute infringement of the patent holder’s rights.
Licence fee
A payment made to a patent holder by a licensee
(or to a licensee by a sub-licensee) in return for the right to use a patented
Licence fees may take the form of one or more of the following:
royalties; fixed fees; minimum guaranteed payments; or milestone
To acquire a licence authorising the use of a
patented product or process.
Licence-out
To grant a licence authorising the use of a
patented product or process by a third party.
Manner of manufacture
A requirement for patentability under Australian
law. The manner of manufacture requirement is used to determine whether an
is appropriate subject matter for patenting.
March-in right
A right, under United States law, allowing the
government to acquire title to a patented product or process developed with
funds, in certain limited circumstances.
Materials Transfer Agreement
An MTA is a written agreement defining the terms
and conditions governing the transfer of biological or other research materials
the owner or authorised licensee to a third party for internal research
purposes only.
Medical genetic testing
Molecular genetic testing that directly analyses
DNA or RNA for clinical or medical purposes. This includes diagnostic testing,
or presymptomatic testing, genetic carrier testing, screening testing
and pre-implantation or prenatal testing.
Messenger RNA (mRNA)
A complementary copy of DNA made up of RNA
nucleotides, which carries the coded genetic information to the
protein-producing units
in the cell, called ribosomes.
Milestone fee
A lump sum payment made by a patent licensee upon
reaching specified stages in the development or commercialisation of a product
Multipotent stem cells
adult stem cells
Non-coding DNA
Regions of the DNA molecule that do not code for
proteins—popularly, but incorrectly, referred to as ‘junk
A requirement for patentability. An invention
must not have been known or available to the public before the priority date of
application.
The building blocks of DNA and RNA. There are
four nucleotides for DNA: adenine (A) and guanine (G), which are known as
and thymine (T) and cytosine (C), which are known as
‘pyrimidines’. In RNA, thymine is replaced by uracil (U).
Nucleotides
are arranged in triplets, called codons.
An intellectual property right granted by a
patent office to the inventor of a new, inventive and useful product or process,
its exclusive exploitation for a limited period of time.
Patent application
A formal application to a patent office
requesting that patent protection be granted for a product or process.
Patent claims
Written statements that define a patented product
or process and the scope of protection granted by the patent.
Patent holder
The individual or organisation entitled to
exercise the rights granted by a patent. A patent holder may also be referred to
as a ‘patentee’.
Patent pool
A cooperative arrangement allowing the holders of
several patents—all of which are necessary for the development of a
or process—to license or assign their rights at a single
Patent specification
A written description of a patented product or
process, including a technical description and the patent claims, which define
scope of patent protection.
Patent thicket
The problem caused by multiple upstream patents,
where overlapping rights may impede the commercialisation of a product or
Pharmacogenetics (or pharmacogenomics)
The study of the interaction between an
individual’s genetic make-up and his or her response to a particular
An individual’s physical characteristics
determined by the interaction of genotype and environmental factors.
Pluripotent stem cells
Stem cells that can become all types of cells found in the body, but not the
placenta and other supporting tissue necessary for
foetal development.
Polymorphism
A variation in DNA sequence between individuals,
which may cause no harm, or may make a gene faulty in the way it directs the
of a protein.
Priority date
A specified date—usually the date when a
patent application is first filed—against which the novelty and
inventiveness
of an invention is assessed.
A large molecule composed of one or more chains
of amino acids in a specific order. Proteins are required for the structure,
and regulation of the body’s cells, tissues and organs; and each
protein has unique functions.
The study of the full set of proteins encoded by
the genome.
Reach-through
A claim made by a patent holder in a patent or a
patent licence asserting rights over a future product or process that might
from the use of a patent.
Research tools
The range of resources that scientists use in
their laboratories, which have no immediate therapeutic or diagnostic value.
include cell lines, monoclonal antibodies, reagents, laboratory
equipment and machines, databases and computer software.
Ribonucleic acid (RNA)
A single stranded nucleic acid molecule that
plays an important role in protein synthesis and other chemical activities of
There are three types of RNA: messenger (mRNA), transfer, and
A payment made by a licensee as compensation for
the use of a patented invention, for example a percentage of gross sales of a
product or process, or a fixed sum paid each time a patented product or
process is used.
Royalty stacking
A problem caused by a multiplicity of patents
over a single area, which requires the payment of licence fees to many patent
Seed funding
An early stage investment in a start up company
or project, generally used to develop an idea to proof of concept stage, to
market research or for initial product development.
Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
Single nucleotide variations in the genome sequence.
Cells capable of differentiating into
specialised cell types, and of renewing themselves—allowing the
maintenance of stem cell
populations for long periods through cell
Totipotent cells
The zygote and cells from fertilization to about
the eight-cell stage. Totipotent cells have the capacity to form the placenta
other supporting tissue necessary for embryonic development, as well as all
Trade secret
An intellectual property right protecting
confidential information that arises in a commercial context.
Transcription
The process by which the DNA sequence is copied
Translation
The process by which RNA is used to produce a
protein in the ribosomes.
Upstream patent
Foundational patents on which further knowledge
and development depends.
Upstream research
Research that usually focuses on increasing
fundamental knowledge, for example, research into the sequence and function of a
A requirement for patentability. An invention
claimed in an Australian patent application must produce the results that are
upon a fair reading of the patent specification.
Venture capital
Funding provided by investors to early stage
companies, generally after they have demonstrated strong growth potential and
good management.
Often provided in return for equity in the company.
Related Materials
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (4.87 MB)
Word format (DOC) (8.59 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter