URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCIP/2001/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:36:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sentencing: Young offenders - Issues Paper [2001] NSWLRCIP 19
Issues Paper 19 (2001) - Sentencing: Young offenders
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of abbreviations
List of issues
1. INTRODUCTION
EXTENT OF OFFENDING
COURSE OF THIS REFERENCE
Identifying the issues
This Issues Paper
Consultation and recommendations
2. DIVERSIONARY SENTENCING
YOUNG OFFENDERS ACT 1997 (NSW)
Youth justice conferences
Legal advice
Record keeping
Statutory requirements
Evidence of prior offences
Media identification
Diversion rate
Young Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander offenders
Intellectual disability
Referral to youth justice conferences by magistrates higher than referral by police
Supervising police discretion
Net widening
TREATMENT FOR ALCOHOL AND DRUG MISUSE
Treatment services
Drug Courts
New South Wales Youth Drug Court
Other Drug Courts
CIRCLE SENTENCING
3. SENTENCING BY COURTS
Criminal jurisdiction
Children’s Court
Local Courts
District and Supreme Courts
Care jurisdiction
SENTENCING PRINCIPLES
Common law sentencing objectives
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
International law
Sentencing under C(CP)A and sentencing at law
Range of penalties
Breach of community based orders
POLICE POWERS
PUBLIC ORDER OFFENCES
COMMENCING PROCEEDINGS
POLICE QUESTIONING
Discretion to dispense with bail
Discretion to grant bail
Bail conditions
CHILDREN’S COURT
Specialisation
Name of Court
CRIMINAL RECORDS
Recording criminal offences
Evidence of prior offences
MEDIA IDENTIFICATION
MANDATORY SENTENCES
SENTENCING GUIDELINE JUDGEMENTS
RESTORATIVE JUSTICE IN COURT-BASED SENTENCING
YOUNG ABORIGINAL OFFENDERS
Communication
Effect of detention
INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
Over-representation
Defining and identifying intellectual disability
: Reference group
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Issues Paper 19 (2001) - Sentencing: Young offenders
Terms of reference
History of this Reference (Digest)
To inquire into and report on the laws relating to sentencing in New South Wales with particular reference to:
(i) the formulation of principles and guidelines for sentencing;
(ii) the rationalisation and consolidation of current sentencing provisions;
(iii) the adequacy and use of existing non-custodial sentencing options with particular reference to home detention and periodic detention;
(iv) the adequacy of existing procedures for the release of prisoners by the Offenders Review Board and the Serious Offenders Review
Council and the benefits that might accrue from the review of the decisions of the Offenders Review Board and the Serious Offenders
Review Council by judicial officers; and
(v) any related matter.
In undertaking this reference, the Commission should have regard to the proposals in relation to sentencing contained in the Australia
Labor Party policy documents formulated in Opposition.
Terms of Reference
Participants
Submissions
List of abbreviations
List of issues
Bibliography
Table of Contents
Issues Paper 19 (2001) - Sentencing: Young offenders
Participants
History of this Reference (Digest)
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act
(NSW) the Chairperson of the Commission constituted a Division for the purpose of conducting the reference. The members of the Division
The Honourable Justice Michael Adams*
His Honour Judge Robert Bellear
Associate Professor Janet Chan
The Honourable Justice Greg James
Her Honour Judge Angela Karpin
The Hon Jeff Shaw QC
(* denotes Commissioner-in-Charge)
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Legal Research and Writing
Ms Ailsa Goodwin
Ms Lauren Walker
Ms Dita Kruze
Desktop Publishing
Ms Rebecca Young
Administrative Assistance
Ms Wendy Stokoe
Terms of Reference
Participants
Submissions
List of abbreviations
List of issues
Bibliography
Table of Contents
Issues Paper 19 (2001) - Sentencing: Young offenders
Submissions
History of this Reference (Digest)
The Commission invites submissions on the issues relevant to this review, including but not limited to the issues raised in this
Issues Paper.
All submissions and enquiries should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
postal addresses
GPO Box 5199, Sydney NSW 1044 or DX 1227 Sydney
street address
Level 17, 8-12 Chifley Square, Sydney NSW
nsw_lrc@agd.nsw.gov.au
telephone (02) 9228 8230
facsimile (02) 9228 8225
TTY (02) 9228 7676
There is no special form required for submissions. If it is inconvenient or impractical to make a written submission you may telephone
the Commission and either direct your comments to a Legal Officer over the telephone, or else arrange to make your submission in
The closing date for submissions is 30 September 2001.
Use of submissions and confidentiality
If you would like your submission to be treated as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Submissions made to the
Commission may be used in two ways:
Since the Commission’s process of law reform is essentially public, copies of submissions made to the Commission will normally
be made available on request to other persons or organisations. However, if you would like all or part of your submission to be treated
as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Any request for a copy of a submission marked “confidential”
will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
In preparing further papers on this reference, the Commission will refer to submissions made in response to this Issues Paper. However,
requests for confidentiality will be respected by the Commission in relation to the publication of submissions.
Other publication formats
The NSW Attorney General’s Department is committed to fully meeting its obligations under State and Commonwealth anti-discrimination
legislation. These laws require all organisations to eliminate discriminatory practices which may prevent people with disabilities
from having full and equal access to our services.
This publication is available in alternative formats, if you have any difficulty in accessing this document please contact the Law
Reform Commission.
Terms of Reference
Participants
Submissions
List of abbreviations
List of issues
Bibliography
Table of Contents
Issues Paper 19 (2001) - Sentencing: Young offenders
List of abbreviations
History of this Reference (Digest)
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
Specialist Youth Officer
Young Offenders Act 1997
Youth Justice Conferencing Directorate, Department of Juvenile Justice
Terms of Reference
Participants
Submissions
List of abbreviations
List of issues
Bibliography
Table of Contents
Issues Paper 19 (2001) - Sentencing: Young offenders
List of issues
History of this Reference (Digest)
CHAPTER 2: DIVERSIONARY SENTENCING
Is the range of offences covered by the
Young Offenders Act 1997
(NSW) appropriate?
Should the Children’s Court continue to have a power to caution young offenders under the
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
(NSW)? If so, when should this power, rather than the power to caution under the
Young Offenders Act 1997
(NSW) be used?
Should people who attend youth justice conferences as respected members of the offender’s community be paid for their services?
Are the outcomes of youth justice conferences appropriate to achieve the objects of the
Young Offenders Act 1997
Do lawyers advise young people against participation in youth justice conferencing? If so, why? Should the
Young Offenders Act 1997
(NSW) be amended to address this issue?
Do the Police Service and the Department of Juvenile Justice comply with the record keeping requirements under the
Young Offenders Act 1997
Are the statutory record keeping requirements under the
Young Offenders Act 1997
(NSW) appropriate and adequate?
What is an appropriate rate for diversion of young offenders under the
Young Offenders Act 1997
(NSW)? How can this be achieved?
How effective is the Youth Drug Court, both in reducing re-offending by young offenders and improving their health and well being?
Are the alcohol and drug treatment services available for young people in New South Wales adequate?
Is circle sentencing an appropriate way of dealing with young people who commit offences? Is the currently understood structure of
circle sentencing an appropriate one?
CHAPTER 3: SENTENCING BY COURTS
Should the Director General of the Department of Juvenile Justice be able to exercise his or her power to discharge detainees under
and (c) of the
Children (Detention Centres) Act 1987
(NSW) in relation to young offenders dealt with according to law as well as those dealt with under the C(CP)A?
What is the current procedure for dealing with care issues which come to the attention of the Children’s Court in the course
of sentencing a young offender? Is it adequate?
Is the range of sentencing options under the
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
(NSW) fully utilised by sentencing courts? Is the current range of options adequate?
Should licence disqualification be available as a sentence for all offences?
Could community-based sentencing orders be better structured to enable young offenders to participate in educational or vocational
Is the current law dealing with young people and bail appropriate? If not, how should it be changed?
Do police and courts exercise their powers in relation to bail appropriately? If not, in what way? How should this be addressed?
Are Children’s Magistrates appropriately trained, skilled and experienced?
Should the Children’s Court be renamed? If so, what should it be called?
: Evidence of prior offences
Is the law regulating the admissibility of evidence that a person pleaded guilty to or was found guilty of previous offences while
aged under 18 appropriate?
Is the law regulating the admissibility of evidence that a person has been dealt with under the
Young Offenders Act 1997
(NSW) appropriate?
Should courts have the power to permit the identity of young offenders to be published or broadcast? If so, is the current law appropriate?
Should New South Wales introduce mandatory sentences for offences committed by young offenders?
Should guideline judgments apply to young offenders?
Does court-based sentencing of young offenders adequately emphasise the role of restorative justice? If not, how can more emphasis
be given to restorative justice?
How should the over-representation of young Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander in the juvenile justice system be addressed in
the context of sentencing?
Do young people from particular ethnic groups or backgrounds encounter discrimination in the sentencing process? If so, which groups
or backgrounds? How should this be addressed?
Do young people from regional or rural New South Wales encounter discrimination in the sentencing process? If so, how should this
be addressed?
Do young offenders with intellectual disabilities encounter discrimination in the sentencing process? If so, how can this be addressed?
Do young offenders in state care encounter discrimination in the sentencing process? If so, how can this be addressed?
How are young offenders in need of state care dealt with by sentencing courts?
Terms of Reference
Participants
Submissions
List of abbreviations
List of issues
Bibliography
Table of Contents
Issues Paper 19 (2001) - Sentencing: Young offenders
1. Introduction
History of this Reference (Digest)
Extent of offending
Course of this Reference
1.1 On 12 April 1995, the then Attorney General, the Hon Jeff Shaw QC,
referred the reform of sentencing law to the New South Wales
Commission (the Commission).
The Commission divided the reference into three phases.
The first phase, an evaluation of the general principles of sentencing
law in New South Wales, was the subject of the Commission’s
Report entitled
The second phase
involves a review of the particular problems which arise in sentencing
groups of offenders requiring special consideration,
such as Aboriginal
people and juveniles.
In due course the Commission will
undertake further work in connection with penalising corporations. The
third phase will involve
the review and rationalisation of the maximum
penalties prescribed by statute in New South Wales.
1.2 The age of criminal responsibility in New South Wales is 10.
There is a conclusive presumption that no child who is younger than
years old can commit an offence.
1.3 Children aged between 10 and 14 who commit criminal offences
are presumed to be incapable of committing a crime because of a lack
mens rea (criminal intention). To rebut this presumption, the
prosecution must prove that the child did the act charged and that
doing the act, the child knew that it was a wrong act of some
seriousness, as distinct from an act of mere naughtiness or childish
mischief. This must be proven to the criminal standard of proof which
is beyond reasonable doubt.
1.4 Offenders who are aged between 10 and 17 at the time they
commit an offence, and who are under 21 when charged, are sentenced
under a separate system to adults.
In order to determine
questions of jurisdiction, a court may rely on the apparent age of an
accused person if no other evidence is
readily available.
1.5 While older legislation dealing with people aged under 18
refers to them as “children” or “juveniles”,
recently enacted legislation uses the term “young
offender”, which is also the term preferred by the Commission.
EXTENT OF OFFENDING
1.6 Community perceptions about young offenders are influenced
largely by the media, which often exaggerates and sensationalises the
level and type of offending by young people. In fact, a study by the
New South Wales Department of Juvenile Justice of over 50,000
offenders who appeared before the Children’s Court from 1984 to
1994 found that 70% of young people committed only one
offence, and a
further 15% committed only two offences. Nine percent of young
offenders were responsible for almost one third of
all criminal court
appearances by young people and less than 2% were responsible for
almost 10% of all criminal court appearances.
1.7 The majority of offences committed by young people are
property offences such as housebreaking with intent to steal, motor
theft and stealing. Violent offences are in the minority, even
for those few young people who are repeat offenders.
COURSE OF THIS REFERENCE
Identifying the issues
1.8 The Commission commenced work on this reference by reviewing
the literature on juvenile justice in Australia, particularly in
South Wales. There is an enormous body of published literature in this
area, including the Report of the 1991 Royal Commission
into Aboriginal
Deaths in Custody
and numerous reports by a wide range of
government and non-government agencies, including the Aboriginal
Justice Advisory Council,
the Australian Institute of Criminology;
the Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research;
the Community Services Commission;
the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission;
the Judicial Commission;
the Juvenile Justice Advisory Council;
the New South Wales Attorney General’s Department;
the New South Wales Department of Juvenile Justice;
the New South Wales Ombudsman;
the New South Wales Parliament
and the Youth Justice Coalition.
1.9 The Commission also engaged in extensive preliminary
consultations with the Aboriginal Justice Advisory Council; the
Institute of Criminology; the Attorney General’s
Department; the Children’s Court; the Department of Juvenile
the Juvenile Justice Advisory Council; the Law Society of New
South Wales; Legal Aid New South Wales; the New South Wales Bar
Association;
New South Wales Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions; the New South Wales Police Service; the Positive Justice
Public Defenders. The Commission also established a
reference group which greatly assisted the Commission in identifying
issues. The members of the reference group are listed at
Appendix A.
This Issues Paper
1.10 During preliminary consultations, a wide range of issues
were raised about many aspects of the criminal justice system including
police powers, public order offences, alternative ways of commencing
proceedings and legal representation of young people. The Commission
has taken the view that although these issues are worthy of further
consideration, they are outside the scope of this reference,
focuses on sentencing issues.
1.11 This Issues Paper consists of three chapters. Chapter 1 is
an introduction. It sets out the background to this Issues Paper,
definition of “young offender” and the course of this
1.12 Chapter 2 deals with existing schemes which divert young
offenders away from courts, including warnings, cautions and youth
conferences under the
Young Offenders Act 1997
(NSW) and the Youth Drug Court. It also considers circle sentencing.
1.13 Chapter 3 deals with sentencing by courts. It sets out the
criminal jurisdiction of courts over young people, sentencing
and the penalties which courts can impose. It describes
police powers over young people, public order offences, the
alternatives
for commencing criminal proceedings and young
peoples’ right to legal representation when questioned by police
and in court.
1.14 Chapter 3 raises issues in relation to bail; the name of
the Children’s Court and specialisation of the Children’s
Magistracy; the role of evidence of previous offences committed by a
young person in later hearings and trials, media identification
young people and restorative justice. It looks at mandatory sentencing
and guideline sentencing judgments. Finally, Chapter 3
particular groups of young people who are over represented as
Consultation and recommendations
1.15 This Issues Paper identifies 27 issues relating to
sentencing young offenders. The Commission plans to consult extensively
the community on these issues before preparing its final report on
young offenders. The Commission is interested in information and
raised in the Issues Paper in your submission if you
have information
or views on only one or some. The Commission would also welcome
submissions about other issues related to sentencing
young offenders
not identified in this Issues Paper.
The deadline for receipt of submissions for this Issues Paper is 30 September 2001.
Terms of Reference
Participants
Submissions
List of abbreviations
List of issues
Bibliography
Table of Contents
. The background to the reference is outlined in New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
(Discussion Paper 33, 1996) at para 1.1-1.9.
. See NSWLRC DP 33 at para 1.11-1.20.
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
(Report 79, 1996).
. See New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Sentencing: Aboriginal Offenders
(Report 96, 2000).
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
For discussion of this law, see Australian Law Reform Commission/Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal Process
(Report 84, 1997) at para 18.12-18.16 and Recommendation 194; New South
Wales, Attorney General’s Department, Criminal Law
A Review of the Law on the Age of Criminal Responsibility of Children
(2000); L Doherty, “Children Still Presumed to be Innocent – At Least Until 14”
Sydney Morning Herald
(12 February 2001) at 5.
(Unreported, New South Wales,
Court of Criminal Appeal, 18 December 1996). For discussion of this
presumption, see ALRC Report 84
at para 18.17-18.20 and Recommendation
195; New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department, Criminal Law
Review Division,
A Review of the Law on the Age of Criminal Responsibility of Children
(2000); Australian Institute of Criminology,
The Age of Criminal Responsibility
(Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice, No 181, 2000).
. If no other evidence is
readily available, a court is entitled to rely on the apparent age of a
person in order to determine whether
it has jurisdiction: C(CP)A
For a discussion on the aspects of the juvenile justice system which
apply to offenders who were under 18 when they committed an
offence but
aged 18-21 when charged see S Mullany, “The Child Offender who
(1997) 35(10)
Law Society Journal
. M Cain, “An Analysis of Juvenile Recidivism” in Australian Institute of Criminology,
Juvenile Crime and Justice
(1997) 12 at 13; New South Wales, Department of Juvenile Justice,
Recidivism of Juvenile Offenders in NSW
. K Buttrum, “Juvenile Justice: What Works and What Doesn’t” in Australian Institute of Criminology,
Juvenile Crime and Justice
(1997) 63 at 63-64.
. Australia, Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody,
National Report
Regional Report for New South Wales, Victoria and Tasmania
(1991-1992).
. New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department, Aboriginal Justice Advisory Committee,
Circle Sentencing: Involving Aboriginal Communities in the Sentencing Process
(Discussion Paper, 1999); New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department, Aboriginal Justice Advisory Committee,
Fraction More Power: Review of the Impact of the Children (Protection
and Parental Responsibility) Act on Aboriginal People in Moree
(1999); New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department, Aboriginal Justice Advisory Committee,
Policing Public Order: Offensive Language and Conduct, The Impact on Aboriginal People
(1999). (In 1999 the Committee was renamed the Council).
. Australian Institute of Criminology,
Family Conferencing and Juvenile Justice
(1994); Australian Institute of Criminology,
Juvenile Crime and Justice
(1997); Australian Institute of Criminology,
Juveniles in Australian Corrective Institutions
(1999); Australian Institute of Criminology,
Restorative Justice and Conferencing in Australia
(Trends and Issues 186, 2001).
. New South Wales, Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research,
Race and Offensive Language Charges
(Bureau Brief, August 1999; New South Wales, Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research,
NSW Drug Court Evaluation: Program and Participant Profiles 2000
(Crime and Justice Bulletin 50); New South Wales, Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research,
Drug Court Evaluation: Interim Report on Health and Well being of Participants 2001
(Crime and Justice Bulletin 53); New South Wales, Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research,
An Evaluation of the NSW Youth Justice Conferencing Scheme
(2000); New South Wales, Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research,
The Scope for Reducing Indigenous Imprisonment Rates
. New South Wales, Community Services Commission,
The Drift of Children in Care into the Juvenile Justice System
. Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Bringing Them Home
Report of the National Inquiry into the Separation of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Children from their Families (1997);
Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission,
Seen and Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal Process
(ALRC, Report 84, 1997).
. New South Wales, Judicial Commission,
Sentencing Disparity and the Ethnicity of Juvenile Offenders
(Report 17, 1998).
. New South Wales, Juvenile Justice Advisory Council,
Aboriginal Over-representation and Discretionary Decisions in the NSW Juvenile Justice System
. New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department, Crime Prevention Division,
Juvenile Crime in New South Wales Report: Statistical Profile of Juvenile Offenders
(1996); N Hennessy,
Review of Gatekeeping Role in
Young Offenders Act 1997
. New South Wales, Department of Juvenile Justice,
Juveniles in Detention: Issues of Over Representation
(1995); New South Wales, Department of Juvenile Justice,
Recidivism of Juvenile Offenders in NSW
. New South Wales, Ombudsman,
Inquiry into Juvenile Detention Centres
(1996); New South Wales, Ombudsman,
Policing Public Safety
(1999); NSW Ombudsman,
Investigation into Kariong Juvenile Justice Centre
. New South Wales, Parliament, Legislative Council, Standing Committee on Social Issues,
Juvenile Justice in NSW
. New South Wales, Youth Justice Coalition,
Kids In Justice – A Blueprint for the 90s
Issues Paper 19 (2001) - Sentencing: Young offenders
2. Diversionary sentencing
History of this Reference (Digest)
Young Offenders Act 1997
Treatment for alcohol and drug misuse
Circle sentencing
2.1 Young offenders can be dealt with by warnings, cautions and youth justice conference under the
Young Offenders Act 1997
(NSW) (“YOA”). New South Wales is also currently trialing a Youth Drug Court as a diversionary option for young offenders
with alcohol or drug problems.
2.2 This Chapter outlines these diversionary sentencing options. Issues raised include the scope of the YOA, the interaction between
participation in youth justice conferencing and legal advice, the fairness of youth justice conferencing to young offenders, victims
of crime and the community, and the rate of diversion under the YOA. This Chapter also raises the issue of the effectiveness of the
Youth Drug Court, both in reducing re-offending by young people and improving their health.
2.3 This Chapter also outlines a diversionary sentencing option known as circle sentencing, which is increasingly used overseas and
has been trialed on adult offenders in several Australian jurisdictions. The last issue raised in this Chapter is whether circle
sentencing is an appropriate sentencing option for young offenders in New South Wales.
YOUNG OFFENDERS ACT 1997
2.4 Under the YOA, young people who commit certain offences can be dealt with by police warnings, cautions delivered by either police
or courts or youth justice conferences, instead of being sentenced by a court.
2.5 The YOA includes the following general principles:
The least restrictive sanction is to be imposed on young offenders.
Criminal proceedings should not be instituted against young offenders if there is an appropriate alternative.
Where appropriate, young offenders should be dealt with in their communities.
Parents are primarily responsible for the development of young people and should participate.
Victims are entitled to be told about their potential involvement in and the progress of action taken under the YOA.
2.6 The YOA applies to summary offences and indictable offences triable summarily. This includes public order offences, property
offences, many drug offences and assaults. Some offences, including offences that result in death, most sexual offences, serious
drug offences and traffic offences (if the offender is old enough to hold a licence), cannot be dealt with under the YOA.
2.7 During consultations, the Aboriginal Justice Advisory Council observed an emerging trend, particularly in the South Coast of New
South Wales, for young Aboriginal people to be fined for committing offences under the
Fisheries Management Act 1994
(NSW). The Council argued that young people who commit offences under this Act should be dealt with under the YOA rather than by
being sentenced by a court to a fine which they often have no way of paying.
Is the range of offences covered by the
Young Offenders Act 1997
(NSW) appropriate?
2.8 Warnings are available for non-violent summary offences. They cannot be given for indictable offences triable summarily, offences
involving violence, or where the investigating police officer considers that it would be more appropriate in the interests of justice
to deal with the young offender by other means.
The intention of the YOA was that warnings would be given for all minor, summary offences not involving violence, such as offensive
The Director of the Department of Juvenile Justice Youth Justice Conferencing Directorate (“YJCD”) has expressed disappointment
that despite this intention a significant number of young Indigenous people continue to appear in court charged with offensive language.
2.9 Warnings are given by the investigating police officer. Officers are not permitted to attach any conditions or other penalties
to warnings,
and are required to explain the purpose and effect of being warned to the young offender.
Young offenders are not required to admit an offence to receive a warning.
2.10 Warnings constituted 17% of the total number of police interventions for young people in the year 1999-2000.
2.11 Cautions are available for all offences covered by the YOA.
Young offenders must admit the offence to be eligible for a caution and must agree to be cautioned.
Young offenders must not be cautioned where it would be more appropriate in the interests of justice to deal with the young person
by other means. The YOA prescribes a number of factors to be considered in deciding whether a caution would be appropriate, including
the seriousness of the offence, the degree of violence, the harm suffered by the victim, any other offences committed by the young
offender and any other instances in which the young person has been dealt with under the YOA.
2.12 The YOA provides for the appointment of police officers as specialist youth officers (“SYOs”).
SYOs are appointed by their Local Area Commanders. All existing Youth Liaison Officers and most custody managers have been appointed
as SYOs. The decision to caution a young offender can be made by the investigating police officer, an SYO or the Director of Public
Prosecutions.
2.13 Where the investigating police officer decides that it is not in the interests of justice for a young offender to be cautioned,
the matter must be referred to an SYO to consider whether a youth justice conference would be appropriate.
Where the offence did not involve violence and was not serious, but the victim has suffered substantial harm, or where other circumstances
of the victim make it appropriate to do so, the investigating official can refer the matter to an SYO to decide whether the young
offender should be referred to a youth justice conference.
2.14 Cautions can be administered by a police officer or a respected member of the community.
Police officers are not permitted to attach any conditions or other penalties to warnings,
except for requesting the young person to write an apology to the victim.
Courts can also caution young people under the YOA.
The YOA expressly provides that this does not affect the power of a court to caution a child under the
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
2.15 The Director of the YJCD has argued that it is preferable that courts rely on the power to caution young offenders under the
YOA. This provides a formal opportunity for courts to influence the nature of police decision making, since magistrates who caution
young offenders under the YOA are required to inform the relevant Area Commander of their reasons for doing so.
Should the Children’s Court continue to have a power to caution young offenders under the
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
(NSW)? If so, when should this power, rather than the power to caution under the
Young Offenders Act 1997
(NSW) be used?
2.16 In the first full year of operation, 8,128 young people were cautioned by police under the YOA. This represented 34% of all young
people dealt with by police during the period. Females comprise 22% of young people dealt with by police, however, the proportion
of females who received a caution was higher than for males – 44% of females were cautioned, compared with 31% of males.
No data is available on the number of young offenders cautioned by courts.
Youth justice conferences
2.17 Youth justice conferencing is designed to encourage young offenders to accept responsibility for their behaviour, strengthen
their families, provide developmental and support services and enhance the rights and interests of victims of crime.
The YJCD is responsible for conferencing under the YOA.
2.18 Youth justice conferencing is available for all the offences covered by the YOA.
The young offender must admit the offence and consent to conferencing.
Where an investigating police officer determines that a warning or caution would not be appropriate in the interests of justice,
the matter must be referred to an SYO to consider whether a conference would be appropriate.
The SYO has a discretion to decide whether it would be more appropriate to caution the young offender or commence criminal proceedings.
The YOA prescribes a number of factors to be considered when determining this, including the seriousness of the offence, the degree
of violence, the harm suffered by the victim, any other offences committed by the young person and any other instances in which the
young person has been dealt with under the YOA.
2.19 Each youth justice conference is allocated to a conference administrator.
Where the administrator disagrees with a referral, the case is referred to the Director of Public Prosecutions for a final decision.
Hennessy has observed that SYOs and conference administrators would benefit from access to the Director of Public Prosecution’s
reasoning in these cases.
2.20 Courts can also refer young offenders to youth justice conferences.
The court must take into account the factors outlined above in paragraph 2.18, but the consent of the young offender is not required.
During consultations, it was argued that where young offenders do not consent to being referred to youth justice conferences their
full participation may be doubted.
2.21 Some magistrates who divert young offenders to conferences also make orders requiring progress reports to be given to the court,
undermining the diversionary purpose of the YOA.
During consultations, it was suggested that in some cases young offenders are granted conditional bail or sentenced to good behaviour
bonds in conjunction with diversion. This is also inconsistent with the diversionary policy of the YOA.
2.22 The Director of the YJCD has also expressed concern that some magistrates refer young offenders to youth justice conferencing
for first, minor offences, where a caution is more appropriate.
2.23 During consultations, concern was also expressed that some magistrates continue to rely on diversion schemes outside the YOA.
In particular, in appears that some magistrates continue to divert young offenders to Community Aid Panels, which are local initiatives
run by police and magistrates and not based on restorative justice principles.
Hennessy recommended that magistrates should give consideration to confining their decisions to the diversionary options under the
A Practice Direction issued by the Children’s Court states that any referral of young offenders to Community Aid Panels should
be considered in light of the legislative intent expressed in the
Young Offenders Act 1997
2.24 The YOA requires that where possible, youth justice conferences must be held within 21 days of referral, but more than ten days
after the young offender has been notified of referral.
An evaluation of the conferencing scheme by the New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research found that this statutory
time frame was not met in most cases. On average, 40 days elapsed between the referral date and the date of the conference. 28% of
conferences were held before the 10 day notice period expired. Only 8% of conferences met both statutory time frames.
The Bureau commented that the value of thorough preparation for conferences outweighed the value of meeting the statutory time frames.
2.25 The offender, a conference convenor,
a parent, carer, other members of the offender’s family or other adult, a solicitor advising the young offender,
the investigating police officer the and SYO, the victim and a support person for the victim are entitled to attend youth justice
conferences. The conference convenor may also invite a respected member of the community and professionals such as social workers.
2.26 These participants determine an outcome plan. This may require the offender to apologise to the victim, compensate the victim
or the community, participate in an educational or vocational program, or address alcohol or drug misuse. The outcome plan must be
realistic and appropriate and must not impose sanctions that are more severe than penalties that might be imposed by a court.
The outcome plan is not binding unless the young offender and the victim agree to it.
Where the young offender was referred to youth justice conferencing by a court, the court must also approve the outcome plan.
2.27 A conference administrator supervises the completion of each outcome plan and issues a written notice detailing whether or not
the young offender has completed the plan to the offender, the victim and the police or referring court.
2.28 No further criminal proceedings may be taken against a young offender who completes an outcome plan.
Where a court refers a young person to youth justice conferencing without finding an offence proven, the court must dismiss the charge
on receiving notice of completion of the outcome plan.
2.29 According to police data, 806 young offenders, or 3% of all young people dealt with by police, were referred by police to youth
justice conferencing in the first full year of operation of the YOA. The YJCD recorded 1,267 conferences and 710 completed outcome
plans during the period.
2.30 An evaluation of youth justice conferencing by the New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research found a high level
of satisfaction on the part of both victims and offenders with pre-conference preparation, conference proceedings and outcome plans.
2.31 The YOA states that youth justice conferencing should be culturally appropriate where possible.
Commentators have criticised the conferencing system on the basis that it does not cater for the needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander communities. It is argued that there are not enough Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander conference convenors to ensure
that young Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander offenders are matched with Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander convenors, and that
there should be scope for co-convenors.
2.32 The Director of the YJCD reports that conference administrators have worked to recruit convenors from specific cultural groups
and to train convenors to address specific cultural needs,
and to ensure a high level of community participation.
Thirty out of 350 conference convenors are Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander people, enabling cultural matching of Indigenous
offenders and convenors in most cases.
2.33 Another criticism is that while the YOA provides for a respected member of the offender’s community to attend youth justice
conferences, it is expected that these people attend voluntarily rather than as paid consultants.
2.34 Commentators have also expressed concern that one outcome of youth justice conferences may be that parents are blamed for the
behaviour of their children. It has been observed that this has led to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander families feeling stigmatised.
In its preliminary submission to the Commission, the Australian Institute of Criminology argued that research is needed to establish
whether outcome plans are fair and consistent.
The New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research evaluation found a high level of satisfaction with outcome plans.
Should people who attend youth justice conferences as respected members of the offender’s community be paid for their services?
Are the outcomes of youth justice conferences appropriate to achieve the objects of the
Young Offenders Act 1997
Legal advice
2.35 Young offenders are entitled to obtain legal advice, and must be told how to obtain it, before being cautioned or referred to
a youth justice conference.
The conference convenor must also give the young offender a written notice that informs them of their right to obtain legal advice
before the conference takes place.
2.36 The availability of independent legal advice at the police station is critical to ensure that such admissions under the YOA are
made voluntarily.
Legal aid is available to young people in this situation by way of the Children’s Legal Service telephone advice service.
2.37 The Bureau of Crimes Statistics and Research found that 85% of young offenders who attended youth justice conferences had been
informed of their right to obtain legal advice and 80% were told how to get advice from a lawyer. Twenty one percent of young offenders
obtained legal advice.
2.38 Concern has been expressed that some lawyers have advised young offenders against youth justice conferencing because it can result
in a more onerous outcome than court-based sentencing processes.
Hennessy observed that the number of legal advisers present at conferencing was very low.
She concluded that it would be in the interests of young people for lawyers working in the area to familiarise themselves with the
YOA and attend some conferences.
On the other hand, it has also been argued that it is not valid to compare outcome plans with court-based sentences since the two
process have different objectives.
Do lawyers advise young people against participation in youth justice conferencing? If so, why? Should the
Young Offenders Act 1997
(NSW) be amended to address this issue?
Record keeping
Statutory requirements
2.39 When a young person is given a warning or caution by a police officer, the officer is required to enter a record of the warning
on the Computerised Operational Policing system.
In relation to warnings, the name and gender of the young person and details of the offence must be recorded.
There is no requirement to record the cultural or ethnic background of young offenders given a warning. For cautions, additional
information about the age and cultural or ethnic background of the young person and information about the caution must also be recorded.
Where a court cautions a young offender under the YOA, the Registrar must notify the Area Commander of the caution, with reasons.
2.40 Where a young offender is referred to a youth justice conference, the Commissioner of Police must be notified.
Details of conferences, including the name, gender and cultural or ethnic background of the young offender, the nature of the offence,
and particulars of the outcome plan, including whether it was completed, must also be recorded.
2.41 It has been observed that in the first year of operation of the YOA, the Police Service did not fulfil its record keeping duties
under the YOA.
Do the Police Service and the Department of Juvenile Justice comply with the record keeping requirements under the
Young Offenders Act 1997
Are the statutory record keeping requirements under the
Young Offenders Act 1997
(NSW) appropriate and adequate?
Evidence of prior offences
2.42 While the fact that a young person has committed other offences or previously been dealt with under the YOA is a relevant factor
in deciding whether it is appropriate to deal with them under the YOA,
a young person must not be denied access to diversion on this basis.
2.43 The fact that a person has been dealt with under the YOA is not considered to be criminal history, except in subsequent proceedings
before the Children’s Court.
Media identification
2.44 The name or any information tending to identify a young offender dealt with under the YOA must not be published or broadcast
at any time, unless the offender is 16 or over and consents to being identified.
Diversion rate
2.45 Although no specific targets were set for diversion under the YOA, it was originally anticipated that the majority of young offenders
would be diverted away from court proceedings.
Hennessy concluded that the diversion rate for 1998, the first full year of operation of the YOA, was lower than anticipated. In
this year, 37% of young people dealt with by police received a caution or a referral to a youth justice conference.
Hennessy observed that this diversion rate was lower than rates achieved in other jurisdictions.
The diversion rate for 1999 was 35% and in 2000 it increased to 41%.
Young Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander offenders
2.46 Hennessy concluded that diversion rate for young Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander offenders was significantly lower than
the overall diversion rate: 24% of young Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people dealt with by police were diverted, compared
with the overall rate of 37%.
In a preliminary submission, the Australian Institute of Criminology also drew attention to the under-representation of young Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander offenders in diversion schemes, and the need for further research.
2.47 Fourteen percent of youth justice conferences held during the period examined by Hennessy were recorded as involving young Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander offenders. Hennessy found that recording of information about the cultural background of young offenders
dealt with by conference was inadequate. Therefore, the actual rate of participation by young Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders
may have been higher than the recorded rate.
2.48 The YJCD recorded 6% of young people who participated in conferences as being from a non-English speaking background, although
the actual rate may have been higher.
Hennessy observed that the inadequacy of police records made it impossible to draw conclusions about the operation of the YOA in
relation to young offenders from particular ethnic groups. She recommended that the Police Service should develop strategies to record
information about race as required by the YOA, observing that the Judicial Commission has developed a questionnaire to identify ethnicity
which could be adapted for use in the Police Service so that this data can be captured.
2.49 Hennessy found a disparity between diversion rates across Area Commands during the first year that the YOA was in operation.
Diversion rates for young non-Aboriginal people over one month ranged from 33% in Northern New South Wales to 16% in the Hunter region.
Diversion of young Aboriginal people also varied from 3% in the Macquarie region to 34% in the Endeavour region during the same month.
Concern about different levels of diversion of young offenders in different parts of New South Wales was also expressed during preliminary
consultations for this project.
2.50 A related concern is a serious lack of services such as alcohol and drug misuse assessment and treatment, counselling, educational
and vocational services in certain areas.
Intellectual disability
2.51 The over representation of people with an intellectual disability in the criminal justice system is discussed in Chapter 3 of
this Issues Paper. Chapter 3 also summarises the Commission’s previous recommendations in relation to people with an intellectual
disability and the criminal justice system. These include the need for a statutory definition of intellectual disability and a police
Code of Practice dealing with the identification of intellectual disability and the adjustment of police procedures, such as interview
techniques.
These recommendations are also relevant to diversion of young offenders under the YOA.
2.52 Hennessy noted that police records of incidence of intellectual disability among young people dealt with by police were inadequate,
making it impossible to draw conclusions about the operation of the YOA in relation to young people with intellectual disabilities.
During consultations, concern was expressed that some young offenders with an intellectual disability were inappropriately referred
to youth justice conferences, and that the provisions for participation in conferencing may need to be strengthened to encourage
attendance by parents or other support people of young offenders with cognitive and developmental disorders.
2.53 In a preliminary submission to the Commission, the Positive Justice Centre argued that diversion under the YOA is under-utilised
for state wards.
Referral to youth justice conferences by magistrates higher than referral by police
2.54 Hennessy concluded that more young people were referred to youth justice conferences by magistrates than by police.
Hennessy observed that magistrates’ powers of referral were designed as a safety net and were not intended to be the most common
source of referral to conferencing.
In 1999, Bargen observed that it was originally envisaged that 70% of referrals under the YOA would be made by police, however in
practice, 50% of young people were referred by magistrates.
2.55 Police officers are required to divert young offenders in relation to offences covered by the YOA unless instructed to commence
proceedings by an SYO. Hennessy expressed concern that police officers do not always comply with this requirement, recommending that
the Police Service should organise comprehensive training for investigating police officers who are likely to make decisions under
The Police Service has developed and implemented several training initiatives, as well as publicising the YOA in the Police Service
Weekly, Police Issues and Practice Journal and on Police TV.
2.56 Anecdotal evidence suggests that one reason for police reluctance to use diversionary processes is that they are more time consuming
to institute than court-based procedures.
2.57 Hennessy also expressed concern that there were not enough adequately resourced SYOs to perform the functions required by the
The position of SYO was created to ensure that decision making about referrals to diversion by police was kept at arms length from
investigations.
Hennessy observed that the appointment of existing custody managers as SYOs was problematic in rural and regional areas, where, because
there are fewer police, custody managers were likely also to be involved in criminal investigations.
Supervising police discretion
2.58 In a preliminary submission, the Australian Institute of Criminology argued that consideration should be given to supervising
the exercise of police discretion in relation to diversion.
Hennessy recommended establishing a mechanism for review by police prosecutors of police decisions to commence criminal proceedings
against young people for offences covered by the YOA.
Net widening
2.59 Condliffe argues that there is a risk that diversionary schemes are being imposed on young people who would have a lesser or
no action taken against them if diversion was not available. For example, cases which would be hard to prove in court may be referred
to youth justice conferences.
2.60 Hennessy found that the diversion rate of 37% achieved in the first full year of operation of the YOA was accompanied by some
decline in the number of new matters dealt with by the Children’s Court, but not to the extent that would have been expected.
This may be attributable in part to net-widening, as well as the increased police powers referred to in Chapter 2.
More recent evidence suggests that the number of appearances in the Children’s Court has significantly fallen since the YOA
was introduced.
2.61 The Aboriginal Justice Advisory Council and the University of New South Wales have commenced a joint review of the YOA.
What is an appropriate rate for diversion of young offenders under the
Young Offenders Act 1997
(NSW)? How can this be achieved?
TREATMENT FOR ALCOHOL AND DRUG MISUSE
2.62 National drug use surveys indicate that in 1995, 32% of young people aged between 14 and 19 used an illegal drug. In 1998, this
figure had increased to 38%.
Recent research has estimated that there are 74,000 dependent heroin users in Australia, of whom 35,400 live in New South Wales.
These figures suggest that Australia has a substantial public health problem with dependent heroin use that is of magnitude similar
to that in comparable European societies.
2.63 Illegal drugs cause approximately 1,000 deaths in Australia every year.
Over the past eight years there has also been significant growth in levels of property crime in Australia. The growth has been marked
in the offence of robbery, which is often committed by heroin dependent people because it provides ready access to cash to buy heroin.
Treatment services
2.64 Alcohol and drug treatment can be provided through either residential or outpatient services. Services focus either on reducing
or eliminating use of the drug or dependence, or minimising harm associated with drug use.
2.65 The initial treatment for reducing or eliminating drug use is detoxification, which involves managing the symptoms of withdrawal
from drug use. Detoxification is available in hospitals, community health services and designated detoxification units. There are
currently 355 beds in New South Wales dedicated to detoxification treatment, 80% of which are located in metropolitan areas. There
is very little data on the extent of need for detoxification treatment. There are no specialist detoxification services for young
people. The New South Wales Health Department has recognised the need for a detoxification service specifically for young people.
Detoxification is not a cure for drug dependence and must be followed up by long term treatment.
2.66 The principal form of long term treatment for dependence on opioid drugs is pharmacotherapy. This involves substituting use of
the drug of dependence with a longer acting drug of the same pharmacological class, which prevents the onset of withdrawal and therefore
reduces or eliminates consumption of the drug of dependence.
The principal pharmacotherapy service in New South Wales is methadone maintenance treatment. Approximately 13,500 people in New South
Wales currently receive this treatment. 1,300 new places in methadone programs will be created in New South Wales by the end of 2001.
Several new forms of pharmacotherapy are currently being trialed in New South Wales.
2.67 Medically supervised drug injection is an alternative to pharmacotherapy which aims to stop the contraction and spread of blood-borne
viral infections such as HIV/AIDS and Hepatitis B and C among injecting drug users. The Uniting Church has begun an 18 month trial
of this treatment in inner-city New South Wales.
Drug Courts
2.68 In 2000, the New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research examined the existing research on preventing drug related
The Bureau observed that the research indicates that legally coerced drug treatment can decrease drug use and criminal activity by
offenders. In particular, research suggests that offenders dealt with by drug courts in the United States have lower re-arrest rates
than offenders dealt with by the traditional criminal justice system. The Bureau concluded that while this research is limited and
is open to criticism on methodological grounds, legally coerced treatment is worthy of further investigation.
New South Wales Youth Drug Court
2.69 New South Wales is currently conducting a pilot Youth Drug Court.
The trial commenced in July 2000. Young offenders are referred to the Youth Drug Court by the Children’s Court. In deciding
whether to refer a young offender, the Children’s Court considers the severity of their dependence on drugs or alcohol, their
health, educational and vocational status, family and peer relationships, social skills and attitude towards drug treatment.
The Children’s Court is targeting serious injecting drug users for referral to the Youth Drug Court. Young people on remand
and young women are targeted as a priority for referrals.
2.70 Young offenders referred to the Youth Drug Court are initially assessed to confirm that they have a demonstrable drug or alcohol
problem and to determine immediate needs such as detoxification and accommodation.
They then appear before the Youth Drug Court, which determines whether they are eligible to participate in the trial. Young offenders
who are aged between 14 and 18, who are charged with an offence which the Children’s Court has jurisdiction over,
who plead guilty, who agree to participate in the trial, who have a drug or alcohol problem, who are ineligible for diversion under
the YOA; and are likely to be sentenced to detention, are eligible.
2.71 In addition, because the Youth Drug Court is a trial program operating out of the Campbelltown and Cobham Children’s Courts,
young offenders are required to have a connection to one of these areas through family or work.
2.72 After the Youth Drug Court accepts a young offender, their case is adjourned for 14 days while a joint assessment and review
team involving the Departments of Health, Community Services, Education and Training and Juvenile Justice assesses their needs and
develops an individual plan requiring the young offender to submit to tests and attend programs that aim to reduce or eliminate drug
or alcohol misuse and related criminal behaviour.
2.73 The Youth Drug Court makes orders requiring the young offender to comply with the conditions in their individual plan and deferring
the final sentencing for a minimum of six months.
Each young offender is allocated a Program Manager and a Support Worker to supervise, monitor and assist their progress. Participants
also have regular meetings with the Youth Drug Court Magistrate, initially on a fortnightly or monthly basis.
2.74 Offenders who complete the program are sentenced more favourably by the Children’s Court. It is expected that young offenders
who successfully complete the program will receive unsupervised orders such as suspended sentences.
2.75 If an offender has difficulty complying with their individual plan, the Youth Drug Court Magistrate can adjust it to increase
the level of supervision or extend the initial orders for up to six months. Offenders who continually or seriously breach their individual
plans may be discharged from the Youth Drug Court and transferred to the Children’s Court for sentencing. The Children’s
Court will also take into account their achievements in the Youth Drug Court.
2.76 The Youth Drug Court trial will be evaluated to determine the rate of participation by eligible offenders, the level of re-offending
by participants, the factors which affect completion or non-completion of the program by young offenders, the health and social impact
of participation and the resources required to maintain and expand the program.
Other Drug Courts
2.77 New South Wales is also trialing an adult Drug Court.
The New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research is evaluating this trial. Preliminary evaluation has found that the rate
of re-offending by participants is low, participants have experienced significant health improvements, and report a high level of
satisfaction with the fairness of the program and the treatment services available under it.
2.78 Western Australia is the only other Australian jurisdiction currently conducting a trial Youth Drug Court. Queensland, South
Australia and Western Australia are also piloting adult drug courts.
How effective is the Youth Drug Court, both in reducing re-offending by young offenders and improving their health and well being?
Are the alcohol and drug treatment services available for young people in New South Wales adequate?
CIRCLE SENTENCING
2.79 Circle sentencing is a community-based sentencing process administered by community committees. A sentencing circle can be held
in a court house or a community space.
2.80 Participants include the offender and the victim and their respective supporters; a judge, community elder, prosecutor, defence
counsel, police and court workers; who sit arranged in a circle; and friends and relatives of the offender and the victim, professionals
such as alcohol and drug treatment workers and members of the local community; who sit in an outer circle.
2.81 While procedures vary from community to community, generally the judge or community elder formally opens the sentencing circle,
then each participant introduces themselves, and explains why they are attending. The prosecutor outlines the facts of the offence,
and defence counsel responds. Then all participants address the offender and the victim and discuss the extent of similar crime in
their community, the underlying reasons for it, the impact on victims and on the community, what must be done to heal the victim
and rehabilitate the offender, and what the community can do to prevent similar crimes.
Participants develop a sentence plan which the judge uses to sentence the offender. Custodial sentences can be included in a sentence
plan; but this is rare.
2.82 The sentencing circle reconvenes several months later to examine the offender’s progress towards completing the sentencing
plan. If their progress has not been satisfactory, participants can agree to modify or extend the sentence plan, or abandon it. In
this case the offender is sentenced by a traditional court.
2.83 The concept of circle sentencing evolved in Canada, initially as an alternative to traditional sentencing of indigenous offenders.
The Aboriginal Justice Advisory Council supports circle sentencing for Aboriginal offenders, arguing that it makes sentencing practices
more culturally relevant to Aboriginal people and ensures that the offender sees the punishment as being more appropriate as it comes
from his or her own community.
2.84 Proponents of circle sentencing also argue that it enables participants to contribute directly to the sentencing process, and
provides much more information about the offender, the impact of the offence, and problems experienced in the community, than a traditional
court receives by way of pre-sentence reports. This enables the circle to tailor the sentence to the unique situation of the offender,
increasing the likelihood of rehabilitation.
It also enables communities to take responsibility for broader issues identified during the process and fosters mutual respect between
the criminal justice system and communities.
In a preliminary submission, the Senior Public Defender, Mr John Nicholson QC, emphasised that sentencing initiatives need to be
developed and implemented at the local level to maximise their effectiveness.
2.85 Critics of circle sentencing argue that it costs much more than traditional court sentencing processes. While an initial circle
sentencing session usually takes between one and three hours to complete, about four to five times longer than a traditional court
the additional cost may be outweighed when the lower rate of custodial sentences and increased prospects of rehabilitation are taken
into consideration. However, as circle sentencing is in its infancy, there is no long term empirical research on its costs compared
to traditional sentencing processes.
2.86 Circle sentencing is also criticised on the basis that it gives communities an unstructured discretion in dealing with offenders,
leading to inconsistent sentencing outcomes.
On the other hand, it is arguable that the flexibility afforded by closely examining the circumstances of individual offenders and
communities facilitates responsive sentencing which increases the prospects of rehabilitating offenders.
2.87 Another criticism of circle sentencing is that it leads to lack of proportionality in sentencing, with sentence plans which may
be too lenient or too harsh for the offence committed, depending on the attitudes of participants.
However, it is also arguable that the extensive information gathering processes associated with circle sentencing lead to more proportionate
sentencing outcomes. Further, the focus on proportionality of sentences ignores the role of restorative justice, crime prevention
and rehabilitation in sentencing.
2.88 Circle sentencing is increasingly being used to sentence both indigenous and non-indigenous offenders in North America, the United
Kingdom, Europe, Singapore and New Zealand.
The Australian Capital Territory
and Queensland
have also experimented with circle sentencing. The New South Wales Government is planning a pilot circle sentencing project for adult
Aboriginal offenders early in 2002. In a preliminary submission, the New South Wales Director of Public Prosecutions expressed concern
Is circle sentencing an appropriate way of dealing with young people who commit offences? Is the currently understood structure of
circle sentencing an appropriate one?
Terms of Reference
Participants
Submissions
List of abbreviations
List of issues
Chapter 2 |
Bibliography
Table of Contents
. For an overview of diversionary schemes in New Zealand, the United Kingdom and Europe, see Justice,
Restoring Youth Justice – New Directions in Domestic and International Law and Practice
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
. Preliminary consultation, M Ella-Duncan, Executive Officer, Aboriginal Justice Advisory Council, 25 January 2001.
Young Offenders Act 1997
. J Bargen, “Young Offenders and the New Options in Youth Justice”
(1999) 37(10)
Law Society Journal
at 54 (Bargen 1999a).
. Bargen 1999a at 54; J Bargen, “The
Young Offenders Act 1997
– Is the Diversionary Scheme Being Diverted?” (2000) (April)
Judicial Officers Bulletin
at 18. See also para 3.55-3.56.
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
. NSW Police Service,
Annual Report 1999-2000
(2000) at 13.
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
See also para 3.86-3.91.
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
, (4) and (5) and
Young Offenders Act 1997
See para 2.17-2.34.
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
See para 3.32.
Young Offenders Act 1997
; Bargen 2000 at 18. See para 2.39-2.43.
. N Hennessy,
Review of Gatekeeping Role in
Young Offenders Act 1997
(1999) at para 38. See also Bargen 2000 at 19.
. Bargen 2000 at 19.
Young Offenders Act 1997
For theoretical analysis of conferencing see A Ashworth, “Restorative Justice and Victims’ Rights” [2000] (March)
84; Australian Institute of Criminology,
Family Conferencing and Juvenile Justice
(1994). For an overview of conferencing schemes in Australia, see Australian Institute of Criminology,
Restorative Justice and Conferencing in Australia
(Trends and Issues 186, 2001) at 2.
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
(1). See para 2.12.
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
See also para 3.86-3.91.
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
. Hennessy at para 67.
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
s 33(1)(c1)
Young Offenders Act 1997
. Bargen 2000 at 19; Preliminary consultation, Reference Group (18 December 2000).
. Preliminary consultation, Reference Group (7 November 2000); Preliminary consultation, Reference Group (18 December 2000); M Dennis,
and Young People” paper presented to Legal Aid Commission at
Continuing Legal Education Conference
, (Dubbo, 2 December 2000) at 2.
. Bargen 2000 at 19.
. Preliminary consultation, Reference Group (7 November 2000); Preliminary consultation, Reference Group (18 December 2000). See also
Bargen 2000 at 18.
. Hennessy Recommendation L.
. New South Wales, Children’s Court, Practice Direction 17 (12 October 2000).
Young Offenders Act 1997
. New South Wales, Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research,
An Evaluation of the NSW Youth Justice Conferencing Scheme
(2000) (2000a) at Table 43 and 62-63.
. Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research 2000a at 68-69.
Young Offenders Act 1997
. Subject to
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Regulation 1997
(NSW) r 18 and 19.
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
. Hennessy at para 49. Young Offenders have up to six months to complete Outcome Plans:
Young Offenders Regulation 1997
(NSW) r 18.
. Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research 2000a at Chapter 3.
Young Offenders Act 1997
s 34(1)(a)(v).
. L Kelly and E Oxley, “A Dingo in Sheep’s Clothing? The Rhetoric of Youth Justice Conferencing” (February 1999)
[1997] IndigLawB 29
Indigenous Law Bulletin
at 5. See also Australia, Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Bringing Them Home
, Report of the National Inquiry into the Separation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Children from their Families (1997)
at 490 and 502; C Cunneen, “Community Conferencing and the Fiction of Indigenous Control” (1997) 30
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology
. Bargen 1999a at 57.
. J Bargen, “Youth Justice Conferencing: The Debate Continues”
Indigenous Law Bulletin
(1999b) at 18.
. Bargen 1999b at 18.
. Kelly and Oxley at 6.
. Kelly and Oxley at 6.
. Australian Institute of Criminology,
Preliminary Submission
at 1. See para 2.38.
. See para 2.30.
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
s 45(3)(g).
See Hennessy Recommendation G and NSWLRC Report 79 at para 12.24.
. Bargen 1999a at 55.
. See para 3.60.
. Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research 2000a at Table 28 at 50-52.
. Hennessy at para 73; Bargen 1999a at 57; Bargen 2000 at 19.
. Hennessy at para 75.
. Hennessy at para 75.
. Preliminary consultation, Reference Group (18 December 2000).
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Regulation 1997
(NSW) r 15(2) and r 16(2).
Young Offenders Regulation 1997
(NSW) r 15(1).
Young Offenders Regulation 1997
(NSW) r 16(1).
. New South Wales, Children’s Court, Practice Direction No 17 (12 October 2000).
Young Offenders Act 1997
The referral process is explained at para 2.18-2.24.
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Regulation 1997
(NSW) r 20.
. Hennessy at Recommendation A and para 35-43.
Young Offenders Act 1997
s 37(3)(d).
Young Offenders Act 1997
Young Offenders Act 1997
See para 3.86-3.91.
Young Offenders Act 1997
. Hennessy at para 3.
. Hennessy at para 38.
. Hennessy at para 3-6, 35, 38 and 52. Note that the statistics do not separate out offences not covered by the YOA, or warnings.
. G Clancey and P Jackson, “The Young Offenders Act 1998-2001: Three Years of Diverting Young People Away From Court”
(2001) 13(13)
Police Service Weekly
. Hennessy at para 38 and 54. See also Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission at 501.
. Australian Institute of Criminology,
Preliminary Submission
. Hennessy at para 48 and 49.
. Hennessy at para 48 and 49.
. Hennessy at Recommendation A and para 42 and 43. See para 2.39-2.43.
. Hennessy at para 44. See also Bargen 1999a at 54.
. Preliminary consultation, Reference Group (7 November 2000).
. Preliminary consultation, Reference Group (7 November 2000).
. See para 3.144-3.149.
. Hennessy at para 54.
. Preliminary consultation, Reference Group (18 December 2000).
. Positive Justice Centre,
Preliminary Submission
at 5. The concept of wardship has now been abolished in NSW. The Children’s Court has the power to make care orders in relation
to children and young people in need of state care, including an order placing a young person in the sole guardianship of the Minister
for Community Services. The care jurisdiction of the Children’s Court is discussed at para 3.13-3.21.
. Hennessy at para 50.
. Hennessy at para 50 and 53. See also Bargen 1999a at 55.
. Bargen 1999a at 55.
. Hennessy Recommendation B, E and F and para 56-59 and Appendix F.
. Clancey and Jackson at 4.
. J Wundersitz, “Pre-court Diversion: The Australian Experience” in A Borowski and I O’Connor,
Juvenile Crime, Justice and Corrections
(Sydney, Longman, 1997) at 275.
. Hennessy at para 79, Recommendation D.
. Hennessy at para 61.
. Hennessy at para 62.
. Australian Institute of Criminology,
Preliminary Submission
. Hennessy Recommendation Q and para 171-177.
. P Condliffe, “The Challenge of Conferencing: Moving the Goal Posts for Offenders, Victims and Litigants”
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
. Hennessy at para 45-47.
. See para 3.45-3.54.
. Clancey and Jackson at 7-8.
. New South Wales, Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research,
Drug Crime Prevention and Mitigation: A Literature Review and Research Agenda
(2000) (2000b) at 5, citing Australia, Institute of Health and Welfare,
National Drug Strategy Household Survey
. T Hall, “How Many Dependent Heroin Users are there in Australia?” (2000) 173
Medical Journal of Australia
528 at 528 and 532.
. Hall at 532.
. Australia, Institute of Health and Welfare,
National Drug Strategy Household Survey
(1999) at 26.
. Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research 2000b at 5.
. New South Wales, Department of Health,
The NSW Drug Treatment Services Plan: 2000-2005
(2000) at 18-22.
. Department of Health at 33.
. Department of Health at 43.
. These are Naltrexone, buprenorphine and LAAM (levo-alpha-acetyl-methadol): “Is Naltrexone a Cure for Heroin Dependence?”
(Editorial) (1999) 171
Medical Journal of Australia
9; Department of Health at 35-39; www.turningpoint.org.au (17 May 2001).
. M Sun, “Drug Room Open for Business”
Daily Telegraph
(7 May 2001) at 5. The Supreme Court of New South Wales has upheld the licence for this trial issued pursuant to the
Drug Summit Legislative Response Act 2000
Kings Cross Chamber of Commerce and Tourism v Uniting Church of Australia Property Trust (NSW)
[2001] NSWSC 245.
. New South Wales, Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research,
Drug Crime Prevention and Mitigation: A Literature Review and Research Agenda
(2000) (2000b).
. Bureau of Crimes Statistics and Research 2000b at 38-48. See also T Miethe, H Lu and E Reese, “Reintegrative Shaming and Recidivism
Risks in Drug Court: Explanations for Some Unexpected Findings” [2000]
Crime and Delinquency
522 which reports the results of a study drug courts in two jurisdictions in the United States that found that drug court participants
had substantially higher recidivism risks than non-drug court participants.
. The Youth Drug Court was established as a result of a recommendation made at the 1999 NSW Drug Summit: New South Wales,
NSW Drug Summit 1999 – Government Plan of Action
(1999) Recommendation 6.11
. K Graham, “Piloting a Youth Drug Court Program” [2000] (8)
Law Society Journal
. D De Fina, “New Youth Drug Court – The Pilot Programme Commences”
(2000) 12 (5)
Judicial Officers Bulletin
. De Fina at 33.
. See para 3.7-3.8 and Table 3.1.
. Graham at 34.
. Graham at 34.
. De Fina at 34.
. De Fina at 34.
. De Fina at 35.
. De Fina at 35.
. Graham at 34.
. De Fina at 35.
Drug Court Act 1998
. New South Wales, Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research,
NSW Drug Court Evaluation: Program and Participant Profiles 2000
(Crime and Justice Bulletin 50); New South Wales, Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research,
Drug Court Evaluation: Interim Report on Health and Well being of Participants 2001
(Crime and Justice Bulletin 53).
Drug Rehabilitation (Court Diversion) Act 2000
(Qld); www.courts.sa.gov.au/courts/magistrates/drug_court.html (at 17 May 2001). For a recent summary of Australian drug courts see
A Freiberg, “Australian Drug Courts”
Criminal Law Journal
. New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department, Aboriginal Justice Advisory Committee,
Circle Sentencing: Involving Aboriginal Communities in the Sentencing Process
(Discussion Paper, 1999), available at
http://www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/ajac.nsf/
pages/circlesentencing
. Aboriginal Justice Advisory Committee; M Linker, “Sentencing Circles and the Dilemma of Difference”
Criminal Law Quarterly
. Linker at 117; C Pollard, “Victims and the Criminal Justice System: A New Vision”
Criminal Law Review
. Aboriginal Justice Advisory Committee.
. Aboriginal Justice Advisory Committee.
(1992) 71 C C C (3d) 347.
. Aboriginal Justice Advisory Committee.
. Aboriginal Justice Advisory Committee; Pollard at 13.
. Aboriginal Justice Advisory Committee; Linker at 117.
. J Nicholson,
Preliminary Submission
. Aboriginal Justice Advisory Committee.
. J Roberts and C LaPrairie, “Sentencing Circles: Some Unanswered Questions”
Criminal Law Quarterly
. Linker at 121-128.
. Roberts and LaPrairie.
. Linker at 119-121.
. Pollard at 13.
. See L Sherman,
Experiments in Restorative Policing: A Progress Report on the Canberra Reintegrative Shaming Experiments
(Australian Federal Police and Australian National University, Canberra, 1998).
. See H Hayes, T Prenzler and R Wortley,
Making Amends: Final Evaluation of the Queensland Community Conferencing
Pilot (Queensland Department of Justice, 1998).
. N Cowdery QC,
Preliminary Submission
Issues Paper 19 (2001) - Sentencing: Young offenders
3. Sentencing by courts
History of this Reference (Digest)
Sentencing principles
Police powers
Public order offences
Commencing proceedings
Police questioning
Children’s court
Criminal records
Media identification
Mandatory sentences
Sentencing guideline judgements
Restorative justice in court-based sentencing
Young Aboriginal offenders
Intellectual disability
3.1 This Chapter outlines the jurisdiction of courts over young people,
sentencing principles and the penalties which courts can
young offenders. It describes police powers over young people, public
order offences, alternative ways of commencing criminal
proceedings,
and young peoples’ right to legal representation when questioned
by police and in court.
3.2 The Chapter then discusses the issues identified by the
Commission so far, including bail; the role of evidence of previous
committed by a young person in later hearings and trials;
media identification of young people and restorative justice. It looks
at the name and status of the Children’s Court; mandatory
sentencing and guideline sentencing judgments.
3.3 Chapter 3 also considers particular groups of young people
who are over represented as offenders, including young Aboriginal
particular ethnic groups, young people with intellectual
disabilities and young people in State care. Finally, geographical
disparity is considered.
3.4 The main Act which governs sentencing of young offenders by courts is the
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
(NSW). This Act is referred to throughout this Chapter as the C(CP)A.
3.5 Courts have both criminal and care jurisdiction over young
people. The Children’s Court, Local, District and Supreme Courts
all hear criminal charges against young people.
The Children’s Court also has jurisdiction over children and young people in need of care and protection.
Criminal jurisdiction
3.6 The Children’s Court, Local, District and Supreme
Courts all hear criminal charges against young people, depending on the
offence that the young person is charged with.
Criminal proceedings in the Children’s Court 1998/1999
Number of appear-
ren with offences proven
Assault, abduction
Sexual offences
Property offences
Offences against justice procedures
Offences against good order
Drug offences
Driving offences
Weapons and explosives offences
notes to table 3.1
1. This includes charges referred to the District and Supreme Courts.
2. These figures include all appearances, including where the offence was not proven.
3. Tables 2.4a and 2.4b provide breakdowns of males and females in each age bracket for each category of offence.
4. Category includes murder, attempted murder, manslaughter and driving causing death.
5. Category includes robbery, blackmail, extortion, break and
enter, theft from a person, retail and motor vehicle theft, receiving
stolen property, fraud and property damage offences.
6. Category includes possession, trafficking, cultivation and manufacture.
7. Category includes driving under the influence of alcohol and drugs, dangerous driving and traffic offences.
Children’s Court
3.7 The Children’s Court hears most criminal charges
against young people. It has jurisdiction over all offences except
driving offences and “serious children’s indictable
offences”, including homicide, other offences which attract
most severe penalties (imprisonment for life or 25 years or more), and
a number of serious sexual offences.
Table 3.1 summarises criminal proceedings heard in the Children’s Court in 1998/1999.
3.8 In 1998/1999 the Children’s Court heard 13,672 charges
against young people. 10,277 of these charges were proven. Property
offences were the most common, followed by assault, offences against
good order and drug offences. Most young people who appeared
Children’s Court were male. In general, increase in age
correlated with an increase in the number of offences proven.
Local Courts
3.9 The Local Courts cannot hear charges that the
Children’s Court has jurisdiction over, except where permitted
under the C(CP)A.
The jurisdiction of the Local Courts
over young people mainly relates to driving matters where the young
person was old enough to
have a licence or permit.
1998/1999, 1,028 young people were found guilty of offences in the
Local Courts. Table 3.2 summaries the number of young people
guilty of offences in the Local Courts in 1998/1999.
Young people found guilty in the Local Courts, 1998/1999
number of children found guilty
Assault, abduction
Property offences
Offences against justice procedures
Offences against good order
Drug offences
Driving offences
notes to table 3.2
1. Category includes robbery, blackmail, extortion, break and enter,
theft from a person, retail and motor vehicle theft, receiving
property, fraud and property damage offences.
2. Category includes possession, trafficking, cultivation and manufacture.
3. Category includes driving under the influence of alcohol and drugs, dangerous driving and traffic offences.
District and Supreme Courts
3.10 The District Court and the Supreme Court have jurisdiction
over young people charged with indictable offences along with the
Children’s Court. In addition, only the District Court and the
Supreme Court can hear charges against young people involving
“serious children’s indictable offences”.
Young people accused of “serious children’s indictable offences” must be dealt with according to law.
These Courts have a discretion to deal with young people accused of
indictable offences either according to law or under the C(CP)A.
3.11 Where the District Court or Supreme Court deals with a
young accused person according to law, this has a number of procedural
consequences. One consequence arises where the young person is
convicted and sentenced to a period of detention. The Director General
of the Department of Juvenile Justice has the power to discharge young
offenders dealt with under the C(CP)A from full time detention,
does not have this power in relation to young offenders dealt with
according to law.
The New South Wales Court of Criminal
Appeal has observed that it is anomalous that this power is not
available for young offenders
dealt with according to law.
Should the Director General of the Department of Juvenile Justice
be able to exercise his or her power to discharge detainees under
24(1)(b) and (c) of the
Children (Detention Centres) Act 1987
(NSW) in relation to young offenders dealt with according to law as well as those dealt with under the C(CP)A?
3.12 The District and Supreme Courts can also remit young offenders to the Children’s Court for sentencing.
In 1998/1999, 35 young offenders were convicted in the District Court and the Supreme Court.
Care jurisdiction
3.13 The Children’s Court also has care jurisdiction over
young people in need of care and protection. This jurisdiction was
completely overhauled by the
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection Act) 1998
3.14 The Department of Community Services can bring proceedings
in the Children’s Court for a care order. The Children’s
Court may make a care order if satisfied that the child or young person
is in need of care or protection for any of the following
There is no parent available to care for them.
The parents acknowledge that they have serious difficulty caring for them.
They have been, or are likely to be, physically or sexually abused.
The parents are not meeting, or are not likely to meet, their basic physical, psychological or educational needs.
They are suffering, or are likely to suffer, serious
developmental impairment or psychological harm because of the
environment they
live in at home.
They are aged under 14 and have exhibited sexually abusive behaviours.
They are subject to a care order in another Australian jurisdiction that is beings breached.
3.15 The Act encourages the use of alternative dispute resolution
to avoid the need to bring care proceedings. The Department, a child
young person and their family are able to reach an agreement about
care, which can be registered in the Children’s Court.
approved by the Children’s Court, a care agreement has the effect
of a consent order without the need for the Department
to formally
initiate care proceedings.
3.16 If the Department initiates care proceedings, a preliminary
conference between the Department, the child or young person and
family is held with a Children’s Registrar, to attempt to resolve
the matter by consent.
3.17 If the matter proceeds to hearing, the Department must put
forward a care plan covering the proposed allocation of parental
responsibility,
the kind of placement which will be sought for the
child or young person, the agency which will supervise the placement,
arrangements
for contact with parents, and any services that the child
or young person requires. The Department must endeavour to obtain
with the parents on the care plan.
3.18 When the Children’s Court makes a care order, it
allocates parental responsibility. Care may be allocated between the
and others, most commonly family members or foster parents.
The Court can also place the child or young person in the sole
guardianship of the Minister, which is the equivalent of a wardship
order, although wardship has been abolished.
important legal and fiduciary functions for children and young people
in the care of the Minister are exercised by the person
holding the
newly created position of Children’s Guardian.
3.19 When a child or young person is placed in out-of-home care,
the Act distinguishes between care responsibility, which is vested
the person with whom they are placed, and covers the authority
necessary to care for them on a daily basis; and supervisory
responsibility,
which is vested in a designated agency to ensure that
the placement promotes their well being.
3.20 The Department of Community Services and police officers
also have emergency powers to remove a child or young person from a
place of risk, including their home. When considering the emergency
removal of a child or young person from their home, they must
consider whether to ask police to obtain an apprehended violence order
to remove the person who is endangering the child or
young person
Where the emergency removal powers are
exercised, the Department must apply to the Children’s Court for
an emergency care and
protection order. In this situation the child or
young person is to be kept at a place approved by the government and
the Director-General
of the Department has care responsibility for them.
3.21 The separation of the criminal and care jurisdictions of
the Children’s Court in New South Wales occurred as part of a
national move to separate welfare from justice matters in most
Australian jurisdictions, beginning in the late 1970s.
The Children’s Court sentencing a young offender in the course of
its criminal jurisdiction may become aware that the young
offender is
in need of care and protection. While the formal separation of the care
the Court in this
situation is clear, it is important to ensure that the two
that care issues
which arise in this situation are adequately addressed.
What is the current procedure for dealing with care issues which
come to the attention of the Children’s Court in the course
sentencing a young offender? Is it adequate?
SENTENCING PRINCIPLES
3.22 Courts sentencing young offenders can choose from a range of sentencing options.
The exercise of judicial sentencing discretion is guided by common law
sentencing objectives, principles set out in the C(CP)A and
international law.
Common law sentencing objectives
3.23 While the objectives of sentencing are traditionally stated as retribution, deterrence, rehabilitation and incapacitation,
the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal has emphasised on a number
of occasions that distinct principles apply in the sentencing
offenders, where the focus is on promoting rehabilitation.
However, tension between these objectives does arise. The High Court
has observed that the objectives of sentencing are “guideposts
the appropriate sentence but sometimes they point in different
directions”.
3.24 This tension can also arise in relation to the practical
operation of the juvenile justice system. For example, a 2000 Report
the New South Wales Ombudsman on Kariong Juvenile Justice Centre
criticised the Department of Juvenile Justice and the management
at Kariong for conflict and role confusion between rehabilitative and
custodial functions. The Report commented that Kariong
was operated for
the purpose of containing detainees and did not address the goal of
rehabilitation.
3.25 When a young offender conducts themselves like an adult,
and commits a crime involving violence or of considerable gravity,
focuses on protecting the community by giving effect to the
retributive and deterrent elements of sentencing, rather than
rehabilitation.
Preliminary submissions by both the
Director of Public Prosecutions, Mr Nicholas Cowdery QC, and the Senior
Public Defender, Mr John
Nicholson QC, commented on the difficulty
resolving conflict between the sentencing principles of rehabilitation,
retribution and
deterrence in these cases.
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
3.26 The C(CP)A also sets out the following principles which courts must take into account when dealing with young people:
Children have the same rights and freedoms before the law as
adults, including the right to be heard and to participate in processes
leading to decisions that affect them.
Children who commit offences need to bear responsibility for
their actions, but because of their dependency and immaturity, they
guidance and assistance.
It is desirable, wherever possible, not to interrupt the education or employment of a child.
It is desirable, wherever possible, to allow a child to reside in his or her home.
The penalty imposed on a child should be no greater than the penalty imposed on an adult who commits the same offence.
3.27 These principles apply whenever a court sentences a young
offender, whether sentencing according to law or under the C(CP)A.
International law
3.28 Australia is signatory to a number of international
conventions relating to the rights of children in particular and human
in general, including the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of the Child
and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
These conventions also include principles relevant to sentencing young offenders:
The best interest of the child is the paramount consideration in
all actions concerning young people, including legal proceedings.
No child should be subject to cruel, inhuman or degrading
punishment, and a child who is imprisoned must be treated with humanity
and dignity, taking into account the needs of a person of their age.
Imprisonment of children must be a measure of last resort, and
a variety of other appropriate and proportionate penalties should be
available to children found guilty of criminal offences, with a focus
on rehabilitation.
Imprisonment of children must be for the shortest appropriate period of time.
Children are entitled to privacy at all stages of criminal proceedings.
3.29 The principle that the best interests of the child is the
paramount consideration in legal proceedings does not mean that the
interests of the community are to be disregarded by courts sentencing
young people. Nor does it mean that courts are required to
when sentencing young people.
Sentencing under C(CP)A and sentencing at law
3.30 The Children’s Court must sentence young offenders under the C(CP)A.
Other courts have a discretion to sentence young offenders wither under the C(CP)A or at law.
In deciding which approach to take, a court should consider the penalty
which would be appropriate in the circumstances, including
of the offence and the age of the offender.
Range of penalties
3.31 The range of penalties under the C(CP)A consists of
cautions, good behaviour bonds, fines, probation, community service
and detention.
Dismissal, caution.
In 1998/1999, the Children’s Court cautioned 1,786 young offenders under the C(CP)A.
Courts also have the power to caution young offenders under
oung Offenders Act
(NSW). This power is discussed in Chapter 2.
Good behaviour bond.
The maximum period for a
bond is 2 years. There are a number of compulsory conditions, which are
set out in s 33(1A) of the C(CP)A.
A good behaviour bond must not
require the young offender to perform community service work or pay a
fine or compensation.
In 1998/1999, the Children’s Court sentenced 2,236 offenders to a bond.
The maximum fine courts can impose is either the maximum fine at law for the offence, or $1,100 – whichever is less.
In 1998/1999 the Children’s Court fined 1,568 young offenders.
Courts can sentence young offenders to a combined good behaviour bond
and fine. In 1998/1999 117 offenders sentenced by the Children’s
Court received this sentence.
The maximum time for a probation
order is 2 years. In 1998/1999 the Children’s Court sentenced
1,715 children to probation.
Community service.
Courts can sentence
offenders aged under 16 to a maximum of 100 hours of community service.
For offenders aged 16 or over, the maximum
number of hours depends on
the offence, up to a maximum of 250 hours.
Community service orders can only be imposed where the court can also sentence the young offender to detention.
In 1998/1999 the Children’s Court imposed 918 community service orders.
The maximum period for a detention order is 2 years.
Courts can only sentence young offenders to detention where the penalty for the offence at law is imprisonment,
and cannot impose a detention sentence that is more severe than the penalty at law.
Detention can be suspended or combined with a good behaviour bond.
Courts cannot sentence a young offender to detention unless satisfied
that all the other sentencing options available under the C(CP)A
inappropriate.
In 1998/1999 the Children’s Court sentenced 876 young offenders to detention.
Alcohol and drug rehabilitation.
adjourn a hearing for up to 12 months and release the young accused
person on bail in order to assess their suitability
for rehabilitation
and/or permit them to participate in a rehabilitation program (formerly
known as a “Griffith remand”).
At Campbelltown and Cobham,
this includes referring the offender to the Youth Drug Court.
The Youth Drug Court is a pilot program which began operating in July 2000. It is discussed in Chapter 2.
Youth justice conferencing.
Courts can also refer a young offender to a youth justice conference.
Youth justice conferencing is a diversionary sentencing option available under the
Young Offenders Act 1997
(NSW). It is discussed in Chapter 2.
Licence disqualification.
Young people found guilty of driving offences can be disqualified from holding a driver’s licence.
3.41 Table 3.3 shows the sentences imposed by the Children’s Court in 1998/1999 by type of offence.
Sentences imposed by the Children’s Court, 1998/1999
total penalties for type of offence
bond and fine
Assault, abduction
Sexual offences
Property offences
Offences against justice procedures
Offences against good order
Drug offences
Driving offences
Weapons and explosives offences
notes to table 3.3
1. CSO: Community Service Order
2. Category includes robbery, blackmail, extortion, break and
enter, theft from a person, retail and motor vehicle theft, receiving
stolen property, fraud and property damage offences.
3. Category includes possession, trafficking, cultivation and manufacture.
4. Category includes driving under the influence of alcohol and drugs, dangerous driving and traffic offences.
3.42 During preliminary consultations, it was suggested that it
would be valuable for the Commission to consider whether the
community-based
sentencing options available under the C(CP)A are fully
utilised. It was also suggested that the Commission should consider
the range of non-custodial sentencing options available under
the C(CP)A needs to be increased.
One option may be to
widen the availability of licence disqualification as a sentence so
that it is available generally, rather than
restricted to driving
3.43 Another issue raised during preliminary consultations was
whether community-based sentencing orders such as community service
orders could be better structured to enable young offenders to
participate in educational and vocational activities, rather than
menial work.
Is the range of sentencing options under the
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
(NSW) fully utilised by sentencing courts? Is the current range of options adequate?
Should licence disqualification be available as a sentence for all offences?
Could community-based sentencing orders be better structured
to enable young offenders to participate in educational or vocational
Breach of community based orders
3.44 Where a young offender breaches the conditions of a good
behaviour bond or probation order, or fails to comply with a community
service order, the court may impose any of the penalties originally
available for the offence.
POLICE POWERS
3.45 Police in New South Wales have a range of powers to enable
them to carry out their law enforcement function in relation to young
At common law, a police officer
may search a person under arrest if the officer reasonably believes
that this is necessary to discover
a concealed weapon, or secure or
preserve evidence.
This is enhanced by a more general
statutory power to search a person in lawful custody and take anything
found during the search.
The suspect’s consent is not required.
Forensic tests.
Forensic procedures can be
carried out on young people, but only if police obtain an order from a
Magistrate or authorised justice.
Forensic procedures include taking
photographs, finger-prints, palm-prints, casts, physical measurements,
hair, nail, blood or saliva
samples, dental impressions or swabs.
3.48 Since 1998, several new police powers have been enacted. These powers have a significant impact on young people.
Police can search a person in a
public place or school who is reasonably suspected of having a knife.
This includes the power to search
the person’s school bag or
locker. Police can confiscate knives and it is an offence to refuse to
submit to a search.
Give directions.
Police can give directions
to a person in a public place reasonably suspected of obstructing,
harassing, intimidating or frightening
another person. Refusal to
comply with a direction without reasonable excuse is an offence.
Name and address.
Police can demand the name
and address of a person at or near the place of an alleged indictable
offence who the police officer suspects
may be able to assist in an
investigation. Refusal to provide this information without reasonable
excuse is an offence.
3.52 A police officer can only search a person for a knife, give
directions or demand their name and address if the police officer
tells the person their name and place of duty, gives a reason for
exercising the power and warns that failure to comply may
offence. If the police officer is not in uniform, they must also
provide evidence that they are a police officer.
Remove young people.
Police can also remove a
person believed to be under 16 years old from a public place which has
been declared an “operational
area”. This power can be
exercised if the police officer believes on reasonable grounds that the
young person is not subject
to the supervision or control of a
responsible adult and is at risk of harm or of committing an offence.
The young person must be
escorted to the residence of a parent or
carer. Police officers may request the name, age and address of the
child, remove concealed
weapons and use reasonable force to exercise
this power.
3.54 The enactment of these additional police powers and their
effect in practice has been criticised by the Aboriginal Justice
the Australian Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
and commentators.
Concerns were raised with the Commission during preliminary consultations for this review.
While an examination of this issues is outside the scope of the
Commission’s terms of reference, the Commission considers that
they merit further consideration.
PUBLIC ORDER OFFENCES
3.55 There are a number of statutory public order offences in the
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) and the
Summary Offences Act 1988
(NSW). Commonly prosecuted public order offences include offensive conduct,
offensive language,
assault police
and resist arrest.
In 1998 a new offence of carrying a knife in a public place or school without reasonable excuse was enacted.
3.56 The incidence of offensive language charges is increasing,
while the incidence of other categories of offence is stable or falling.
This increase, and the impact of prosecuting adults and young people
for public order offences, has been criticised by the Aboriginal
Justice Advisory Council;
Magistrate David Heilpern;
the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission;
and commentators.
It was also raised as an issues of concern during preliminary consultations for this Issues Paper.
While consideration of public order offences is outside the scope of
the Commission’s terms of reference for this review, the
Commission considers that the increase in prosecutions for public order
offences and the impact of charging adults and young people
with public
order offences warrants further attention.
COMMENCING PROCEEDINGS
3.57 Police can commence criminal proceedings either by issuing
a summons or court attendance notice or arresting and charging the
suspect. The C(CP)A states that criminal proceedings against young
people should be commenced by summons or attendance notice rather
arrest, except where:
The young person is suspected of committing a “serious children’s’ indictable offence”.
The young person is suspected of committing a indictable drug offence.
The violent nature of the offence or the violent behaviour of the young person indicates that they should be held in custody.
There are reasonable grounds to believe either that the young
person is unlikely to comply with a summons, or is likely to commit
further offences if proceedings are commenced by way of summons.
3.58 This effectively establishes a statutory presumption in favour of
commencing proceedings by summons or attendance notice (this
consistent with the common law position).
3.59 The Australian Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
the Juvenile Justice Advisory Council,
Magistrate David Heilpern,
the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody
and commentators
have observed that the statutory preference for summonses and
attendance notices is not always observed in practice, and that the
arrest process is likely to escalate conflict between police and young
people. This concern was also raised with the Commission during
preliminary consultations.
It is likely that the fact
that issuing a summons involves more paperwork for police officers than
arresting a suspect contributes
to the low use of summons.
This issue is not within the terms of reference for this review, but the Commission considers that is has merit.
POLICE QUESTIONING
3.60 During consultations, it was argued that the availability
of adequate legal representation for young people at police stations,
as well as during court hearings, including bail hearings, is an issue
that significantly affects court-based sentencing of young
New South Wales Legal Aid Children’s Legal Service operates a
legal advice hotline for young people who have committed or are
suspected of committing an offence.
3.61 In October 2000 the Law Society of New South Wales adopted
a statement of principles for lawyers representing children which
with the role of the lawyer, and duties of representation.
3.62 The Law Society Specialist Accreditation Board has also
given in principle approval to setting up Children’s Law as an
area of accreditation for lawyers. The Law Society will establish a
Children’s Law advisory committee which will be responsible
structuring the speciality and formulating the accreditation assessment
3.63 In England and Wales, the arrest, detention, questioning
and treatment of adults and young people by police is extensively
Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984
(“PACE”) and a number of police Codes of Practice enacted
under PACE. While the treatment of young people by police
is not within
the terms of reference for this review, the Commission considers that
there is merit in considering whether it is desirable
to introduce
legislation governing the arrest, detention, questioning and treatment
of young people in New South Wales, using PACE
as a model.
3.64 A young person who is charged with a criminal offence can either be released on bail or held on remand.
3.65 People charged with minor offences are entitled to be released on bail.
There is a presumption in favour of bail for most offences except
serious drug offences, homicide and related offences, kidnapping,
aggravated forms of robbery, certain sexual assaults and certain
domestic violence offences.
There is a presumption
against bail in relation to serious drug offences, but no presumption
either for or against bail in relation
to the rest of these offences.
This is consistent with the international law principle that detention be used only as a measure of last resort.
3.66 The initial decision on bail is made by police.
Where police refuse bail, the young accused person must be brought
before a court as soon as practicable, (and no later than the
The court reconsiders the issues of bail.
3.67 Dennis argues that police often refuse bail, but then do
not oppose the granting of bail by a magistrate, in order to shift
responsibility
to the court for any offences which the accused person
may commit whilst on bail.
Discretion to dispense with bail
3.68 A court that may grant bail to a young accused person may instead dispense with the requirement for bail.
This means that the young person is entitled to remain at liberty until required to appear in court.
3.69 During consultations it was suggested that courts sometimes
place young people on bail in circumstances where it would be more
appropriate to dispense with bail, such as where the young person has
been charged with a summary offence which does not attract
order as its maximum penalty.
Discretion to grant bail
Bail Act 1978
(NSW) prescribes the factors to be
considered in deciding whether to grant bail. These criteria relate to
the probability that the
young accused person will appear in court,
considering his or her background and community ties. Their previous
history of attending
court, the circumstances of the offence, their
interests, the likelihood of re-offending and the interests of the
victim and the
community are also relevant factors.
3.71 The Juvenile Justice Advisory Council
and the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
have expressed concern that young Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people are more likely to be refused bail and held on remand
non-Aboriginal people. The Australian Institute of Criminology also
expressed concern about this in a preliminary submission
to this review.
Bail Act 1978
(NSW) states that where the young
accused person is under 18, the fact that he or she does not live with
his or her parents is not
a relevant factor.
this provision, it has been argued that homeless young people and young
people in state care are sometimes refused bail and
held on remand
because they are considered to be at risk or flight, or by well
intentioned police and Magistrates as a way of finding
accommodation
This issue was also raised during preliminary consultations for this Issues Paper.
3.73 The Australian Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and
Equal Opportunity Commission also observed that young people from rural
communities are often transported long distances to detention centres
pending a bail hearing. If granted bail and released, the young
often has no way of returning home.
3.74 During consultations concern was also expressed that young
people are sometimes released on bail with no way of getting home,
with nowhere to live.
A case manager from Reiby Juvenile
Detention Centre commented that young accused people under the age of
14 who are initially refused
bail by a rural court are often
subsequently granted bail by a metropolitan court. It is often
difficult to arrange transport back
to rural areas serviced
intermittently by public transport during the week and even less often,
or not at all, during public holidays.
In these situations, the young
person may be held in custody for up to two days until transport can be
3.75 The Australian Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and
Equal Opportunity Commission recommended that this issue should be
addressed by the establishment of bail hostel programs, and that police
should have a statutory duty of care to ensure that young
released on bail are either able to return home immediately or referred
to suitable alternative accommodation.
Bail conditions
3.76 A young accused person who is granted bail must undertake to appear in court.
Bail can be granted with or without conditions.
There is a statutory presumption in favour of unconditional bail,
and a statutory prohibition on inappropriately onerous bail conditions.
3.77 The Australian Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
and commentators
have criticised the imposition of inappropriate and harsh bail
conditions on young people which they cannot meet, effectively setting
them up to breach bail.
This was also raised during preliminary consultations.
3.78 For example, concern was expressed about young Aboriginal
people living in rural New South Wales being granted bail on the
that they reside in one place and comply with a curfew. This
is often unrealistic because young, rural Aboriginal people often do
not reside in one place, but have three or four places that they
consider home. Curfews may also prevent them from fulfilling family
responsibilities including caring for younger children and shopping for
food at night.
3.79 A young accused person who has been granted conditional bail can apply to a magistrate to review the conditions imposed.
Dennis has emphasised the importance of vigilance by solicitors in insisting that courts exercise this supervisory power.
3.80 A police officer who believes on reasonable grounds that a
young person has breached a bail condition can arrest the young person
without a warrant, or obtain a warrant or summons.
Dennis has observed that police officers frequently rely on their power to arrest without a warrant in this situation.
This is likely to reflect the fact that the procedure for arresting
suspects involves less paperwork for police than the procedure
issuing a summons.
Is the current law dealing with young people and bail appropriate? If not, how should it be changed?
Do police and courts exercise their powers in relation to bail appropriately? If not, in what way? How should this be addressed?
CHILDREN’S COURT
Specialisation
3.81 The Australian Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and
Equal Opportunity Commission recommended that criminal jurisdiction
over young people should be exercised exclusively by a specialised
children’s magistracy, including a rural circuit to overcome
practical difficulty of providing this service in rural areas.
3.82 Until recently, the jurisdiction of the Children’s
Court was exercised by both specialist Children’s Magistrates
Magistrates authorised to exercise the jurisdiction of the
Children’s Court.
In amendments to the composition
of the Children’s Court in December 2000, the concept of
“authorised Magistrates”
was abolished.
The qualifications for appointment as a Children’s Magistrate were also strengthened.
Are Children’s Magistrates appropriately trained, skilled and experienced?
Name of Court
3.83 Most other Australian jurisdictions use the name
Children’s Court for the specialised court which deals with young
The Northern Territory uses the name Juvenile Court,
while South Australia uses the term Youth Court.
In Tasmania, the Youth Justice Division of the Magistrates Court has criminal jurisdiction over young people.
3.84 England,
and New Zealand
also adopted the term Youth Court. While court structures in Canada
vary between the various provinces, the Provincial Court
province includes either a Youth Division or Young Offenders Division.
3.85 Recently enacted legislation in New South Wales has also
moved away from using the term children when referring to all people
aged under 18, to better recognise the wide range of developmental
capacities of young people.
Should the Children’s Court be renamed? If so, what should it be called?
CRIMINAL RECORDS
Recording criminal offences
3.86 Where a person aged under 16 pleads guilty to or is found
guilty of an offence, the court must not proceed to conviction or
the finding as a conviction.
The Children’s
Court and the Local Courts also have a discretion not to proceed to or
record a conviction against young offenders
who are 16 or older.
The District and Supreme Courts can record a conviction where a young offender is found guilty of an indictable offence.
Evidence of prior offences
3.87 In the Children’s Court, there is no restriction on
the admissibility of evidence that a young person has pleaded guilty
or been found guilty of a previous offence or has previously been dealt
with under the
Young Offenders Act 1997
3.88 In hearings and trials in the Local, District and Supreme
Court, evidence that a person pleaded guilty to or was convicted of
offence when they were aged under 18 cannot be admitted into evidence
if no conviction was recorded and the person has not been
punished for
any other offence for the last 2 years.
3.89 Evidence that a young person has been warned or cautioned or participated in a youth justice conference under the
Young Offenders Act 1997
(NSW) is not admissible in subsequent proceedings in the Local, District or Supreme Courts.
3.90 These laws are designed to minimise the labelling of young
people who commit offences as criminals. This reflects the fact that
most young offenders “grow out” of crime and it is unfair
to label them as criminals as adults merely because of youthful
mistakes. Related to this is the view that an offence committed when a
person was under 18 should not be allowed to affect their
obtain employment and travel.
It also reflects current
criminological theory which argues that labelling young people as
deviant or criminal (“stigmatic
shaming”) creates a social
stigma which is likely to entrench criminal behaviour rather than
promote rehabilitation.
The same policy is reflected in
the criminal record expungement legislation in New South Wales, which
is more lenient in relation
to offences dealt with by the
Children’s Court than for adult convictions.
3.91 On the other hand, depriving sentencing courts of
information about previous offences committed by offenders and previous
makes it more difficult for courts to sentence offenders
appropriately.
Is the law regulating the admissibility of evidence that a person
pleaded guilty to or was found guilty of previous offences while
under 18 appropriate?
Is the law regulating the admissibility of evidence that a person has been dealt with under the
Young Offenders Act 1997
(NSW) appropriate?
MEDIA IDENTIFICATION
3.92 In New South Wales it is an offence to publish or broadcast the
name of or any identifying information about a young person who
subject of criminal proceedings at any time before, during or after the
proceedings.
There are several exceptions:
The prohibition does not apply to young people convicted of driving offences in the Local Courts.
A young person aged 16 or over may be identified if he or she consents.
A young person aged under 16 may be identified with the
consent of the court. If the young person is capable of consenting to
be identified,
consent is required. If the young person is unable to
consent, the court must be satisfied that publishing or broadcasting
identity is in the public interest.
When the District Court of Supreme Court sentences a young
person convicted of a “serious children’s indictable
the Court can order that their name be
broadcast or published. The Court must be satisfied that such an order
is in the interests
of justice and the prejudice to the young person
arising from identification does not outweigh the interests of justice.
is not required.
This exception was introduced in 1999.
3.93 Commentators who support a prohibition on the public
identification of young offenders emphasise the importance of
young offenders from stigma and reprisals as part of
rehabilitation.
3.94 Proponents of public identification of young offenders, who
include the New South Wales Commissioner for Police, Mr Peter Ryan,
argue that identifying young offenders in the media would force them to
accept responsibility for their actions and act as a deterrent.
It is also argued that as the identity of young offenders would be
known within their communities, informing others would not have
harmful effect.
Should courts have the power to permit the identity of young
offenders to be published or broadcast? If so, is the current law
appropriate?
MANDATORY SENTENCES
3.95 Mandatory sentences are compulsory sentences imposed by statute
for particular offences that remove general judicial sentencing
discretion.
Mandatory sentences are imposed for a range of minor offences in New South Wales, including traffic infringements.
3.96 Mandatory sentences for property offences have been
introduced in two Australian jurisdictions. In 1996 Western Australia
a mandatory 12 month custodial sentence for young offenders
convicted of home burglary with at least one prior conviction.
In 1997 the Northern Territory introduced a mandatory 28 day custodial
sentence for young offenders convicted of certain property
with at least one prior conviction.
This law was
subsequently amended to provide for compulsory diversionary sentencing
options for more minor offences, and at police
discretion for more
serious offences.
3.97 Proponents of mandatory sentences argue that they operate as an effective deterrent.
3.98 Opponents of mandatory sentences argue that mandatory
sentences do not deter offenders. Crime prevention requires long term
strategies,
which address economic, educational, employment and social
disadvantage and drug and alcohol misuse. Opponents argue that
detention sentences which remove young offenders from their
families and communities is actually likely to promote recidivism.
the severe penalties imposed to achieve deterrence can be far
more severe than the objective criminality requires.
3.99 Proponents of mandatory sentences argue that government
intervention in judicial sentencing discretion is required to address
and inconsistency.
3.100 Opponents of mandatory sentences argue that mandatory
sentencing actually reduces the level of consistency in sentencing
the consequences of criminal behaviour hinge on charging
discretions exercised by individual police officers. For example, when
sentences were introduced in the Northern Territory, one
response was increased use of the charge of unlawful possession, which
not attract a mandatory sentence, in place of the charge of
stealing or receiving stolen property, which did (the law was
subsequently
amended so that unlawful possession also attracted a
mandatory sentence).
3.101 This transfer of discretion also reduces the level of
accountability of the criminal justice system because charging
made by police officers are not open to public scrutiny.
Justice Santow of the Supreme Court of New South Wales has argued that
the transfer of sentencing discretion from judges and magistrates
police may be unconstitutional as it amounts to a usurpation of an
essential judicial function by the executive.
3.102 It is also argued that such laws conflict with
international law principles including the prohibition on racial
discrimination
and the requirement of proportionality in sentencing, as
well as the principles referred to at paragraph 3.28 of this Chapter.
3.103 Another criticism of mandatory sentences is that they
adversely affect the administration of the criminal justice system.
sentences eliminate any incentive for offenders to admit
guilt in return for sentencing leniency. This leads to an increased
of contested hearings, increasing the resources consumed by
police, legal aid, and courts. Mandatory sentences also increase the
population of offenders in custody.
The existence of
mandatory sentences for certain offences may create pressure to plead
guilty to an offence, which does not attract
a mandatory sentence, in
order to avoid the mandatory laws.
3.104 It has also been argued that the discriminatory impact of
mandatory sentencing on young Aboriginal offenders is exacerbated
the low participation of young Aboriginal people in diversion schemes
in the Northern Territory and Western Australia.
The under representation of young Aboriginal people in diversion schemes under the
Young Offenders Act 1997
(NSW) is discussed in Chapter 2 of this Issues Paper.
3.105 The ALRC/HREOC and the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission have both recommended that the mandatory sentencing laws
operating in Western Australia and the Northern Territory should be
Should New South Wales introduce mandatory sentences for offences committed by young offenders?
SENTENCING GUIDELINE JUDGEMENTS
3.106 Guideline judgments are judgments formulated by appellate
courts that go beyond the facts of a particular case to suggest a
sentencing scale, or appropriate sentence for common factual
situations, to trial courts.
The purposes of guideline
judgments are to foster consistency, to improve public confidence in
the legal system by bringing sentences
in line with public expectations
and to deter potential offenders by raising awareness that particular
offences will attract particular
levels of sentence.
3.107 In 1998 the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal
established a formal system for formulating guideline judgments in
to public debate about the introduction of legislation
confining judicial sentencing discretion, including debate about
sentencing laws.
The Court’s guidelines judgments do not bind sentencing judges,
but a judge who does not apply a guideline judgment is expected to provide reasons for this decision.
The Court has now published guideline judgements dealing with four offences: driving causing grievous bodily harm or death,
armed robbery,
drug importation
and break, enter and steal.
The Court has also published a guideline judgment dealing with guilty pleas.
3.108 The system has been afforded statutory recognition.
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW) empowers the Attorney General to request a guideline judgement and make submissions on how guidelines should be framed.
The guideline can be delivered separately or included in an appropriate
judgement. Guidelines can apply generally or in relation
to particular
instances or classes of courts, penalties, offences or offenders.
3.109 During consultations, it was suggested that there is
uncertainty surrounding the application of guideline judgments to young
offenders and that guideline judgments may be inconsistent with the
rehabilitative focus of sentencing young offenders.
3.110 The Court of Criminal Appeal has referred to the relevance
of the age of the offender in a number of its guideline judgments.
guideline judgement on dangerous driving causing grievous bodily harm
or death refers to the earlier Court of Criminal Appeal
judgment in
where Hunt CJ at CL observed that the need for public deterrence meant
that the youth of an offender is given less weight as a subjective
matter than in other cases. The guideline judgment dealing with drug
offences committed by couriers and persons low in the hierarchy
importing organisations refers to the statutory requirement that
sentencing courts take into account the age of the offender.
The guideline judgement on armed robbery refers to the fact that an
offender is of a young age as one of the characteristics common
category of offenders to which the guideline applies.
The guideline judgment on break, enter and steal includes an
observation that juveniles and young persons are an identifiable group
of offenders in relation to this offence and considers whether the
guideline should apply to sentencing in the Children’s Court.
Should guideline judgments apply to young offenders?
RESTORATIVE JUSTICE IN COURT-BASED SENTENCING
3.111 “Restorative justice” is a term used to describe a
wide range of formal and informal ways of dealing with criminal
offences that increase the emphasis given to the role and experience of
victims of crime, encourage more discussion about the offence,
surrounding circumstances and sentencing, and expand the power to make
decisions about the outcome of offences.
often used in relation to young offenders. Proponents of restorative
justice argue that it appropriately recognises the
role and rights of
victims of crime and is an effective method of rehabilitating offenders
and reducing re-offending.
3.112 Youth justice conferencing, discussed in Chapter 2, is an
example of a sentence which emphasises restorative justice. Several
aspects of the court-based sentencing process for young offenders have
restorative justice features.
3.113 A Victim Impact Statement (“VIS”) is a
statement setting out the harm suffered by the victim of an offence or,
the victim died as a result of the offence, a statement setting
out the impact of their death on the victim’s immediate family.
VISs are admissible in criminal proceedings for certain offences after the offender has been convicted but before sentencing.
3.114 VIS’s permit victims to directly participate in the
sentencing process. Victims also indirectly participate in this process
because evidence of victims is always admitted as evidence of the
commission of an offence and its effect.
3.115 The Children’s Court may order a young offender to
pay compensation to the victim of the offence. The court must consider
the young offender’s means, income and ability to pay when
deciding whether to make a compensation order and the amount of
compensation. The maximum amount of compensation that the
Children’s Court may award is $1,000.
3.116 Parents may accompany their child to court, apologise to
the court on behalf of their child, appear as a witness or even
their child.
Courts exercising criminal jurisdiction over a young person may compel one or both of their parents to attend court.
3.117 Courts may order a young offender to submit to parental
supervision, order a young offender’s parents to guarantee that
their child will comply with a supervision order, require parents to
provide security for the good behaviour of their child, or order
offenders to attend counselling with their parents.
considering whether to impose a supervision order on a parent of a
young offender, it is important to consider whether the parent
capable of fulfilling the order. Factors such as the occurrence of
violence in the family, financial resources and cultural
factors may
influence this.
3.118 A parent who, by wilful default, contributes to the
commission of an offence for which their child has been found guilty,
guilty of an offence punishable by a fine of up to $1,100. The court
can order a parent convicted of this offence to undergo counselling
addition to, or instead of imposing a fine.
3.119 During consultations, the Aboriginal Justice Advisory
Council suggested that parents of Aboriginal young people are often
to participate in Children’s Court hearings. It was
suggested that many Aboriginal people regard the atmosphere of court as
alienating and intimidating. Some parents may be unwilling to attend
court because of outstanding warrants against themselves. Many
Aboriginal people are cared for primarily by their grandparents rather
than their parents. There are often physical barriers
to travel and
court attendance for grandparents. Due to the low life expectancy of
Aboriginal people, many young Aboriginal people
find themselves without
a parent or grandparent to participate in their court hearing.
Does court-based sentencing of young offenders adequately
emphasise the role of restorative justice? If not, how can more
be given to restorative justice?
YOUNG ABORIGINAL OFFENDERS
3.120 Young Aboriginal people are grossly over represented as
offenders. While young Aboriginal comprise 1.9% of the youth population
in New South Wales, 25% of young people serving detention sentences are
Aboriginal.
The rate of over-representation has not improved since the 1992 Royal Commission into Aboriginal deaths in Custody.
3.121 Young Aboriginal people are also likely to receive harsher
penalties and progress faster through the stages of the juvenile
justice system than other young offenders. The Royal Commission into
Aboriginal Deaths in Custody referred to this as “deviation
amplification”.
3.122 Reasons for this include that young Aboriginal people are more likely to have prior convictions at an earlier age,
both because Aboriginal people are younger when they first commit
offences than non-Aboriginal people, and because they are less
to be diverted under the
Young Offenders Act 1997
A recent report by the New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and
Research which examined the reasons for the over-representation
Aboriginal adults in prison concluded that increasing the number of
offenders efforts to reduce this over-representation should
increasing the use of diversion schemes.
The under-representation of young Aboriginal people in diversion under the
Young Offenders Act 1997
(NSW) is discussed in Chapter 2.
3.123 Another reason may be that courts sometimes discriminate
against young Aboriginal people when considering the suitability of
community-based sentencing orders. Courts assessing the stability of a
young offender’s home environment may apply Anglo-Australian
standards, disregarding the role of extended kinship networks in
Aboriginal communities.
The Commission has previously
commented that failure to appropriately consider cultural factors in
sentencing contributes to the
over representation of adult Aboriginal
people in prison.
3.124 Involvement in the criminal justice system as a young
person sets a pattern for involvement as an adult. Aboriginal adults
also over represented as offenders.
3.125 In 1997 the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
emphasised the importance of the sentencing principle that custodial
sentences should be the last resort for young indigenous offenders.
The Commission has previously emphasised the importance of this
principle in relation to adult Aboriginal offenders, and noted that
imposition of a custodial sentence on a young Aboriginal person is
likely to dislocate or alienate them from their culture, community
traditional values.
3.126 In its recent report on sentencing Aboriginal offenders,
the Commission recommended that Aboriginal customary law should be
given statutory recognition in New South Wales.
Commission accepted that customary law is relevant to Aboriginal
communities in New South Wales. Evidence that an offender has
receive punishment in accordance with customary law; that an offence
was committed as required by or in furtherance of customary
an offender’s future responsibilities under customary law are
examples of customary law which may be relevant to
sentencing.
3.127 The Commission noted that South Australia and Western
Australia have statutory provisions specifically referring to the
background of young offenders as a relevant factor in the
sentencing process.
The Commission also noted the ways
in which customary law could receive greater recognition by increasing
the involvement of Aboriginal
people in the design and delivery of
sentencing options.
3.128 The Commission has also previously noted that there are
inherent limitations in focusing purely on sentencing in addressing
over-representation of Aboriginal adults in the criminal justice
system, as economic, educational, employment, health and social
disadvantage are critical issues that need to be addressed beyond
reform of sentencing laws.
How should the over-representation of young Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander in the juvenile justice system be addressed in the
context of sentencing?
Communication
3.129 In Report 96 the Commission identified a wide range of
communication problems arising during the sentencing process which
Aboriginal offenders, including unfamiliarity with the
courtroom, language differences, which are often exacerbated by the
and formal nature of communication in court, differences in
non-verbal communication, cultural communication restrictions, the
of some Aboriginal people to gratuitously agree with persons
in authority, and hearing loss, which is extremely common among
3.130 The Commission recommended that court staff receive training to improve understanding of these issues.
The Commission also discussed the need to employ linguistic and
cultural experts for use in sentencing proceedings involving Aboriginal
The Queensland Government has published a handbook for courts on understanding Aboriginal English.
3.131 There is very little empirical research on the
relationship between the ethnicity of young offenders and sentencing,
over-representation of particular ethnic groups in detention
centres, compared to the extensive research on the over-representation
of Aboriginal people in the criminal justice system. The Commission
considers that the limited research available raises a significant
policy issue requiring further examination.
3.132 In 1998 the New South Wales Judicial Commission published
research examining disparity in sentences received by young offenders
from diverse ethnic backgrounds.
The research examined
sentences imposed on young offenders in the following ethnic groups:
Pacific Islands, Southern European, Middle
Eastern and East Asian.
3.133 The Judicial Commission found that young offenders from
Pacific Islands backgrounds received harsher penalties than young
from Anglo-Australian backgrounds, including more frequent
and longer control orders.
3.134 The Judicial Commission found that there were no
statistically significant differences in sentences for other ethnic
although the direction of the difference was consistently in
favour of Anglo- Australians.
3.135 Previous research by the Department of Juvenile Justice
examining the ethnicity of all young people detained in New South Wales
in 1994 found that young Indo-Chinese, Lebanese, Pacific Islander and
New Zealand Maori people were grossly over-represented on remand
control orders.
Do young people from particular ethnic groups or backgrounds
encounter discrimination in the sentencing process? If so, which groups
or backgrounds? How should this be addressed?
3.136 As with sentencing and ethnicity, there is very little
empirical research on the relationship between the geographical
of young offenders and sentencing, or the over-representation
of young offenders from particular geographical areas in detention
centres. The limited empirical research on this issue has found
significant regional variations in sentencing practices in New South
The Commission considers that this raises a significant policy issue requiring further investigation.
3.137 One factor contributing to this is likely to be the
limited availability of non-custodial sentencing options and alcohol
drug rehabilitation services in some areas.
Non-custodial programs in rural and remote areas also tend to involve
much less supervision and support than those in metropolitan
example, in country areas a departmental officer may only make monthly
visit to a young person on a supervised order.
3.138 Since most Aboriginal people in New South Wales live in
rural areas, these issues contribute to the over-representation of
Aboriginal people in detention discussed in paragraphs
3.120-3.128 above.
3.139 Until 2000, young offenders in regional and rural New South Wales were often dealt with by Authorised Magistrates.
Authorised Magistrates tended to impose more severe penalties on young
offenders than Children’s Magistrates, and in particular,
more likely to sentence young offenders to detention.
a preliminary submission, the Senior Public Defender, Mr John Nicholson
QC argued that this occurred because non-specialist Magistrates
routinely sentence adult offenders for similar offences and were less
likely to distinguish between young and adult offenders, less
apply the relevant sentencing principles which apply to young offenders,
and less likely to be aware of the destructive ling term impact of sentencing young Aboriginal people to custodial sentences.
3.140 The concept of Authorised Magistrates was abolished in 2000.
Effect of detention
3.141 Young offenders sentenced to detention may be accommodated
in detention centres a considerable distance from family and community.
This results in a high level of dislocation, making it more difficult
for the young person to maintain links with their family and
by visits and participation in work release and pre and post release
3.142 One response to this issue would be to build new detention
centres in regional areas. This would be expensive. Commentators
also observed that it would also result in increasing the total number
of young offenders in detention, especially young Aboriginal
3.143 Another response would be to facilitate contact between
young offenders in detention and their families and communities. For
example, a 1996 Ombudsman’s Inquiry into Juvenile Detention
centres commented that the Department of Juvenile Justice performed
well in the assistance it provided to young Aboriginal detainees to
attend important family occasions. The Report also emphasised
importance of supportiveness and flexibility in relation to family
Do young people from regional or rural New South Wales encounter
discrimination in the sentencing process? If so, how should this
INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
Over-representation
3.144 Adults with intellectual disabilities comprise 2 to 3% of
the New South Wales population yet comprise 12-13% of the prison
population.
Research also suggests that more than one
third of adults who appear in New South Wales Local Courts on criminal
charges may have
significant intellectual deficits.
Although there has been minimal research, it is reasonable to infer
that young offenders with intellectual disabilities are similarly
over-represented.
3.145 Researchers explain this over-representation on the basis
of increased vulnerability in the criminal justice process, for example
during police questioning and psychological and socio-economic
disadvantage, for example the fact that young people with an
intellectual
disability are more likely to be living in communities
where they will be suspected of committing, and commit, crimes.
3.146 The Commission has previously reported on people with intellectual disabilities and the criminal justice system.
A number of the Commission’s previous recommendations are relevant to young offenders with intellectual disabilities.
Defining and identifying intellectual disability
3.147 The Commission recommended the introduction of the
following standard statutory definition of intellectual disability:
“‘Intellectual
disability’ means a significantly
below average intellectual functioning, existing concurrently with two
or more deficits in
adaptive behaviour”.
3.148 A significant issue in the participation of young people
with an intellectual disability in the juvenile justice system is the
ability of police and courts to identify intellectual disability. The
Commission also recommended the development and adoption of
Practice for police procedures for identifying intellectual disability
and conducting criminal investigations involving
people with
intellectual disabilities.
3.149 The Hayes Ability Screening Index (“HASI”),
which identifies the possibility of intellectual disability, may be
appropriate for use by police. The HASI can be administered by
non-psychologists in around 10 minutes. The HASI was developed after
extensive testing on inmates of correctional centres in New South
Wales, including young offenders. It has been trialed in prisons,
results indicted that the index was 100% successful at predicting
intellectual disability. The HASI also identifies individuals
from psychiatric illness, substance abuse disorder, or who cannot speak
Do young offenders with intellectual disabilities encounter
discrimination in the sentencing process? If so, how can this be
3.150 The care jurisdiction of the Children’s Court is
outlined at paragraphs 3.13-3.21 of this Chapter. At June 2000, there
were 8,517 children and young people in state care in New South Wales.
Of these, 40% were placed with extended family and 31% were
foster care.
3.151 In 1996, 0.2% of the population of New South Wales were
State Wards. The New South Wales Government estimated that at that time
17% of young people involved in the juvenile justice system were State
Also in 1996, the Community Services Commission
estimated that young people who are in state care are 15 times more
likely to enter
a juvenile detention centre than other young people.
3.152 In a preliminary submission, the Positive Justice Centre
raised the issue of over representation of young people in the care
the State in the juvenile justice system.
argued that young people in state care encounter discrimination at
sentencing hearings because behavioural difficulties
attributable to being in care are rarely raised before the court in the
context of the assessment of an offender’s
It also argued that young people in state care are unlikely to have the
factors commonly used to argue mitigation such as a good
or community organisation membership, educational achievements and
strong employment history.
3.153 Young people in state care also encounter difficulty in
earlier stages of the juvenile justice system. For example, while young
people are entitled to the support of an independent adult during
police interviews,
police on occasion find it difficult to locate an independent adult for young people in state care.
3.154 The C(CP)A provides that when deciding how to sentence a
young offender, the fact that the offender is in need of care is not
be taken into account.
This section is designed to
protect young people in need of care against discrimination in
sentencing. However, it is important that
a court that identifies that
a young offender is in need of care ensures that the offender is dealt
with under the care jurisdiction
of the Children’s Court, if
necessary, by way of formal care proceedings resulting in a care order.
Do young offenders in state care encounter discrimination in the sentencing process? If so, how can this be addressed?
How are young offenders in need of state care dealt with by sentencing courts?
Terms of Reference
Participants
Submissions
List of abbreviations
List of issues
| Chapter 3
Bibliography
Table of Contents
Children’s Court Act 1987
(NSW) s 12 and C(CP)A.
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
. New South Wales, Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research,
NSW Criminal Court Statistics 1999
(2000) at Table 2.1, 2.4, 2.4a and 2.4b.
. The NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research
publishes criminal court statistics for New South Wales. The statistics
were not available at the time of going to print.
. The NSW Department of Juvenile Justice Annual
Report for 1999-2000 estimated that the number of charges heard in
1999-2000 was 12,300:
New South Wales, Department of Juvenile Justice,
Annual Report 1999-2000
The Local Courts are not permitted
to hear charges against young people that the Children’s Court
has jurisdiction over: C(CP)A
. Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research 2000 at
Table 1.13, 1.13a, 1.13b. Note that unlike the statistics for the
Court at Table 1.1, the Local Court statistics do not
distinguish between appearances finalised and persons found guilty.
See para 3.7.
(1993) 32 NSWLR 447
(Unreported, New South Wales, Court of Criminal Appeal, 2 October 1997).
Children (Detention Centres) Act
[2000] NSWCCA 436
at para 27 and
(Unreported, New South Wales, Court of Criminal Appeal, No 60823/1991, 15 June 1992). See
[2000] NSWCCA 436
at para 27 and
(Unreported, New South Wales, Court of Criminal Appeal, No 60823/1991, 15 June 1992).
[2000] NSWCCA 436
at para 27 and
(Unreported, New South Wales, Court of Criminal Appeal, No 60823/1991, 15 June 1992).
(This section applies to offenders aged under 21 when they are sentenced).
. Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research 2000 at Table 3.11.
. This Act implemented the recommendations of the New South Wales Community Welfare Legislation Review,
Review of the
Children (Care and Protection) Act 1987
: Recommendations for Law Reform
(Department of Community Services, 1997). For a summary of the Act see
P Parkinson, “Child Protection Law Reforms in NSW”
Australian Family Law Journal
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Where there is a realistic possibility of restoring
parents’ care, the Department must also develop a restoration
. New South Wales, Department of Community Services,
Annual Report 1999-2000
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
(NSW) Chapter 5
See also Chapter 6 which provides for Children’s Court procedure in care proceedings.
. C Cunneen and R White,
Juvenile Justice: An Australian Perspective
(Melbourne, Oxford University Press, 1995) at 189-197.
. See para 3.30-3.41 and Table 3.3.
(Report 79, 1996) at para 14.12.
(1991) 53 A Crim R 112
(Unreported, New South Wales, Court of Criminal Appeal, 15 June 1992;
(Unreported, New South Wales, Court of Criminal Appeal, 2 July 1992). See also
Children (Detention Centres) Act 1987
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
[1988] HCA 14
(1987) 164 CLR 465
. NSW Ombudsman,
Investigation into Kariong Juvenile Justice Centre
(2000) Chapter 6 and para 9.45 and 11.4.
(1991) 55 A Crim R 128
R v Tran (Hoai Vinh)
(Unreported, New South Wales, Court of Criminal Appeal, 12 May 1999).
. NR Cowdery QC, Director of Public Prosecutions,
Preliminary Submission
at 1; J Nicholson SC, Senior Public Defender
Preliminary Submission
C(CP)A s 33B and
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
which provide that a court sentencing a child must take into account
that the child pleaded guilty, and may reduce the sentence.
(1991) 53 A Crim R 112
(1993) 32 NSWLR 447.
. Entered into force for Australia on 16 January 1991 (CROC).
. Entered into force for Australia on 13 November 1980 (ICCPR).
. CROC, article 3.
. CROC, article 37; ICCPR, article 7 and 10.
. CROC, article 37, 40; ICCPR, article 10.
. CROC, article 37.
. CROC, article 40(2)(b)(vii); ICCPR, article 14.
. See para 3.25.
(1993) 32 NSWLR 447
(Unreported, New South Wales, Court of Criminal Appeal, 14 April 1994).
, Division 4,
. Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research 2000 at Table 2.3.
. See para 2.14-2.15.
for the power to order children to pay compensation.
. Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research 2000 at Table 2.3.
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
. Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research 2000 at Table 2.3.
. Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research 2000 at Table 2.3.
. Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research 2000 at Table 2.3.
Children (Community Service Orders) Act 1987
See para 3.37.
. Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research 2000 at Table 2.3.
. C(CP)A s 33(1)(g).
. C(CP)A s 35.
. C(CP)A s 34.
. C(CP)A s 33(1B).
. C(CP)A s 33(2). This is consistent with international law: See para 3.28.
. Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research 2000 at Table 2.3.
. C(CP)A s 33(1)(c2). This power was introduced to
enable the Youth Drug Court to adjourn proceedings and grant bail to
participants
in its program.
. C(CP)A s 33(1)(c1).
. See para 2.17-2.34.
. Preliminary consultation, Reference Group (18 December 2000). See also para 3.136-3.140.
. Preliminary consultation, Reference Group (18 December 2000).
. C(CP)A s 41,
Children (Community Service Orders) Act 1987
Leigh v Cole
(1853) 6 Cox CC 329
Dillon v O’Brien
(1887) 16 Cox CC 245.
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) s 353A(1) and (3)(D).
Crimes (Forensic Procedures) Act 2000
Summary Offences Act 1998
(NSW) s 28A-28E, inserted by the
Crimes Legislation Amendment (Police and Public Safety) Act 1998
s 3 and Schedule 1. These amendments also introduced a new offence of
carrying a knife in a public place or school without a
excuse: see para 3.55.
Summary Offences Act 1998
(NSW) s 28F, inserted by the
Crimes Legislation Amendment (Police and Public Safety) Act 1998
s 3 and Schedule 1. See C Grant and C Quayle, “Workshops at
Walgett and Bourke”, Working Out West Project (unpublished,
for a discussion of the impact of this power on young people in rural
New South Wales.
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) s 563, inserted by the
Crimes Legislation Amendment (Police and Public Safety) Act 1998
(NSW) s 4 and Schedule 2.
Summary Offences Act 1988
(NSW) s 28A(4) and s 28F(4) and
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) s 563(2).
Children (Protection and Parental Responsibility) Act 1997
A public place is declared an “operational area” by
the Attorney General on the application of a local council.
. Aboriginal Justice Advisory Committee,
Fraction More Power: Review of the Impact of the
Children (Protection
and Parental Responsibility) Act
on Aboriginal People in Moree and
. Australian Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Seen and Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal Process
(Report 84, 1997) at para 18.73-18.79 and Recommendation 204.
. S Campbell, “Reality Checks – The
Changing Relationship in the Policing of Young People and its
Implications for Legal
Practitioners”
(1999) 37(10)
Law Society Journal
at 58-59; N Hennessy,
Review of Gatekeeping Role in
Young Offenders Act 1997
(1999) at para 46, M R Liverani, “For the Disadvantaged Young, NSW is a Police State”
(1999) 37(10)
Law Society Journal
Crimes Amendment (Police and Public Safety) Act 1998
(NSW) was reviewed by the NSW Ombudsman in 1999: New South Wales, Ombudsman,
Policing Public Safety
. Preliminary consultation, Reference Group (18 December 2000).
Summary Offences Act 1988
Summary Offences Act 1988
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1900
Summary Offences Act 1988
, inserted by the
Crimes Legislation Amendment (Police and Public Safety) Act 1998
(NSW) s 3 and Schedule 1.
. New South Wales, Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research,
Race and Offensive Language Charges
(Bureau Brief, August 1999) at 1; New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Sentencing: Aboriginal Offenders
(Report 96, 2000) at para 1.7.
. Aboriginal Justice Advisory Committee,
Policing Public Order: Offensive Language and Conduct, The Impact on Aboriginal People
Police v Shannon Thomas Dunn
(Unreported, New South Wales, Dubbo Local Court, Magistrate Heilpern, 27 August 1999). See also
Police v Lance Carr
(Unreported, New South Wales, Wellington Local Court, Magistrate Heilpern, 8 June 2000).
. Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Bringing Them Home
Report of the National Inquiry into the Separation of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Children from their Families (1997)
at 511-513.
. Campbell at 58; C Cunneen, “Zero Tolerance Policing: How Will it Affect Indigenous Communities?” (March 1999) 4
Indigenous Law Bulletin
7; Liverani at 64; Hennessy at para 46 and 47.
. Preliminary consultation, Reference Group (7 November 2000).
. C(CP)A s 8.
. See para 3.7.
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985
Division 2.
Fleet v District Court
[1999] NSWCA 363.
. ALRC Report 84 at para 18.84-18.93 and Recommendation 207; Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission at 516-518.
. New South Wales, Juvenile Justice Advisory Council,
Aboriginal Over-representation and Discretionary Decisions in the NSW Juvenile Justice System
(1995) at 22, 48.
Police v Shannon Thomas Dunn
(Unreported, New South Wales, Dubbo Local Court, Magistrate Heilpern, 27 August 1999). See also
Police v Lance Carr
(Unreported, New South Wales, Wellington Local Court, Magistrate Heilpern, 8 June 2000).
. Australia, Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody,
National Report
(1991-1992) at Recommendations 87 and 239 and para 30.2.6.
. M Dennis, “The
and Young People” paper presented to Legal Aid Commission at
Continuing Legal Education Conference
, 2 December 2000 at 3.
. Preliminary consultation, Reference Group (18 December 2000).
. Preliminary consultation, Reference Group (18
December 2000); New South Wales, Parliament, Legislative Council,
Standing Committee
on Social Issues,
Juvenile Justice in NSW
(1992) at 74.
. Preliminary consultation, Reference Group (18 December 2000). See
Bail Act 1978
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) s 356N; C(CP)A s 13(1)(a)(iv).
. Law Society of NSW,
Representation Principles for Children’s Lawyers
(October 2000).
Telephone conversation with S Currie, Senior Legal Officer, Law Society of NSW, 23 April 2001.
Bail Act 1978
Bail Act 1978
Bail Act 1978
. See para 3.28.
Bail Act 1978
Bail Act 1978
. Dennis at 7.
Bail Act 1978
Bail Act 1978
. Preliminary consultation, Reference Group (18 December 2000).
Bail Act 1978
. Juvenile Justice Advisory Council at 23-24.
. Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission at 519-520.
. Australian Institute of Criminology,
Preliminary Submission
at 1. See also para 3.120-3.130.
Bail Act 1978
. ALRC Report 84 at Recommendation 228 and para 18.164 and 18.171. See the
Bail Act 1978
See also Royal Commission, Report at para 14.3.2, and
Australia, Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody,
Regional Report for New South Wales, Victoria and Tasmania
at 352. See also para 3.150-3.154.
. Positive Justice Centre,
Preliminary Submission
at 4; Preliminary consultation, Reference Group (7 November 2000). The
over-representation of young people in state care in the sentencing
process is discussed at para 3.150-3.154.
. See para 3.136-3.143.
. Positive Justice Centre,
Preliminary Submission
at 4; Preliminary consultation, Reference Group (7 November 2000).
. Telephone call with B Manyen, Case Manager,
Reiby Juvenile Detention Centre, 23 April 2001. See also S Schreiner,
Has Lost its Marbles” (17 December 1999)
Sydney Morning Herald
. ALRC Report 84 Recommendation 228 and para 18.166.
Bail Act 1978
Bail Act 1978
Bail Act 1978
Bail Act 1978
. ALRC Report 84 at Recommendation 228 and para 18.159. See also Youth Justice Coalition,
Kids In Justice – A Blueprint for the 90s
(1990) at 284-285; Royal Commission Regional Report at 129.
. See para 3.80.
. Preliminary consultation, Reference Group (7 November 2000).
Bail Act 1978
. Dennis at 4.
Bail Act 1978
. Dennis at 4.
. See para 3.57-3.59.
. ALRC Report 84 at Recommendation 130, 230 and 231.
Children’s Court Act 1987
(NSW) Part 2. See also para 3.139-3.140.
Children and Young Person’s Legislation (Repeal and Amendment) Act 1998
(NSW) Schedule 1[6], which commenced operation on 18 December 2000: NSW Government Gazette No 159, 8 December 2000 at 12781.
Children’s Court Act 1987
(NSW) s 7, as amended by the
Children and Young Person’s Legislation (Repeal and Amendment) Act 1998
(NSW) Schedule 1[2] and 1[7], which commenced operation on 18 December
2000: NSW Government Gazette No 159, 8 December 2000 at 12781.
Children And Young People Act 1999
(ACT) s 53,
Children’s Court Act 1992
Children and Young Persons Act 1989
Children’s Court of Western Australia Act 1988
Juvenile Justice Act 1996
Youth Court Act 1993
Youth Justice Act 1997
Criminal Justice Act 1991
Children, Young Persons and Their Families Act 1989
(NZ) s 272.
. www.canada.justice.gc.ca/en/dept/pub/trib/PC.html#tp (as at 9 May 2001).
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
s 14(1)(b).
This discretion operates in
addition to the discretion at law to decline to record a conviction for
any offence under s 556A of the
Crimes Act 1900
. C(CP)A s 14(2).
. C(CP)A s 15(2) and
Young Offenders Act 1997
s 68(2)(c).
See para 2.39-2.43.
. ALRC Report 84 at para 19.117-19.127.
. K Buttrum, “Juvenile Justice: What Works and What Doesn’t” in Australian Institute of Criminology,
Juvenile Crime and Justice
(1997) 63 at 64. See also J Braithwaite,
Crime, Shame and Reintegration
(Cambridge, University Press, 1989).
Criminal Records Act 1991
The penalty is a maximum fine of
$55,000 for corporations and imprisonment for a maximum of 12 months
and/or a maximum fine of $5,500
for individuals.
, (4B), (4C), (4D), (4E). The
prosecution bears the burden of proving that this test is satisfied. A
court, which makes an order authorising
the identification of a child
under these provisions, must record its reasons for doing so and
explain its reasons to the child.
Crimes Legislation Amendment (Sentencing) Act 1999
(NSW) s 6 and Sch 4.66[1] and [2].
. I Cram, “Publish and Damn” (1998) 148
New Law Journal
at 1748. See para 3.86-3.91.
. “Name and Shame Young Criminals Says Police Chief”
Daily Telegraph
(Friday 30 October 1998) at 7. But see K Gledhill, “The Naming of Juvenile Defendants”
New Law Journal
. “The Protection of Juveniles” (Editorial)
New Law Journal
. “Mandatory Sentences for Young Offenders” (Editorial)
Criminal Law Journal
. N Morgan, “Mandatory Sentences in Australia: Where Have we Been and Where are we Going?”
Criminal Law Journal
Young Offenders Act 1994
Criminal Code
(WA) s 401.
Juvenile Justice Act 1996
(NT) s 53AE-G.
. The Northern Territory mandatory sentencing
laws were amended in response to a Commonwealth Government Senate
Committee Report,
which found that the laws breached Australia’s
international law obligations and recommended federal legislation to
them: Australia, Senate Legal and Constitutional References
Inquiry into the Human Rights (Mandatory Sentencing and Juvenile Offenders) Bill 1999
(2000). The Senate inquiry arose from the introduction of the
Human Rights (Mandatory Sentencing of Juvenile Offenders) Bill 1999
(Cth) into Federal Parliament. This bill sought to override the
mandatory sentencing laws in their application to young offenders.
commentary on the impact of the amendments, see J Hardy,
“Mandatory Sentencing in the Northern Territory – A Breach
of Human Rights”
Public Law Review
. See N Morgan, “Capturing Crims or Capturing Votes? The Aims and Effects of Mandatories” (1999) 22
University of NSW Law Journal
267 at 269.
. See Morgan 1999 at 269; “Mandatory Sentences for Young Offenders” (Editorial)
Criminal Law Journal
201-202; Morgan 2000
at 171-174; R Hogg, “Mandatory
Sentencing Laws and the Symbolic Politics of Law and Order”
University of NSW Law Journal
262 at 263; G Zdenkowski, “Mandatory Imprisonment of Property Offenders in the NT” (1999) 22
University of NSW Law Journal
302 at 305.
. Morgan 2000 at 164-183.
. Morgan 2000 at 177-178; Hogg at 264; Zdenkowski at 306.
. G F K Santow, “Mandatory Sentencing: A Matter for the High Court?”
Australian Law Journal
at 298. But see Morgan 2000 at 180-182.
. Australia, Senate Legal and Constitutional References Committee,
Inquiry into the Human Rights (Mandatory Sentencing and Juvenile Offenders) Bill 1999
(2000); United Nations, Committee on the Rights of the Child,
Concluding Observations: Australia
(1997) [crc/c/15/Add.79; para 22]; United Nations, Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,
Concluding Observations: Australia
(2000) [CERD/C/56/Misc.42/rev.3, para 16]; M Flynn, “Mandatory
Sentencing, International Law and the Howard/Burke Deal”
[2000] IndigLawB 38
Indigenous Law Bulletin
at 8-9; “Mandatory Sentences for Young Offenders” (Editorial) (1998) 22
Criminal Law Journal
201 at 203-204; M Flynn, “International Law, Australian Criminal
Law and Mandatory Sentencing: The Claims, the Reality and
Possibilities”
Criminal Law Journal
188-189; Zdenkowski at 311; J Blockland, “International Law
Issues and the New NT Mandatory Sentencing Regime”, paper
delivered to the NT Criminal Lawyers Association
Sixth Biennial Conference
22-26 June 1997; H Bayes, “Punishment is Blind: Mandatory
Sentencing of Children in Western Australia and the Northern
University of NSW Law Journal
286 at 286; Santow at 299-300; M Jaskulski, “Mandatory Sentencing” (2000) 9(1)
Human Rights Defender
. “Mandatory Sentences for Young Offenders” (Editorial)
Criminal Law Journal
. Morgan 2000 at 178; C Thomson,
“Preventing Crime or ‘Warehousing’ the
Underprivileged? Mandatory Sentencing in
[2000] IndigLawB 1
(1999-2000)
Indigenous Law Bulletin
. Morgan 2000 at 179.
. See para 2.46-2.47.
. ALRC Report 84 at Recommendation 242; Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission at 528-530 and Recommendation 53b.
. J J Spigelman, “Sentencing Guideline Judgements”
Australian Law Journal
R v Jurisic
[1998] NSWSC 423
(1998) 45 NSWLR 209
220-223, 229, (but see comments by Adams J on the limitations of
assertions as to what public perceptions might be at 255-256),
Spigelman, “Sentencing Guideline Judgements”
Australian Law Journal
at 878-881.
. J J Spigelman, “Sentencing Guideline Judgements”
Australian Law Journal
R v Jurisic
[1998] NSWSC 423
(1998) 45 NSWLR 209
at 220-221.
R v Jurisic
[1998] NSWSC 423
(1998) 45 NSWLR 209
R v Jurisic
[1998] NSWSC 423
(1998) 45 NSWLR 209.
Crimes Act 1900
[1999] NSWCCA 111.
Crimes Act 1900
[1999] NSWCCA 420.
Customs Act 1901
(Cth) s 233B).
R v Ponfield
[1999] NSWCCA 435.
Crimes Act 1900
R v Thomson
[2000] NSWCCA 309.
This judgment dealt with
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW), which requires a sentencing judge to take into account the fact
that an offender has pleaded guilty. The C(CP)A s 33B imposes
requirement in relation to offences committed by young people.
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
. Preliminary consultation, Reference Group (18 December 2000). See para 3.23.
. (Unreported, NSWCCA, 30 October 1997), cited in
R v Jurisic
[1998] NSWSC 423
(1998) 45 NSWLR 209
[1999] NSWCCA 420
at para 140, referring to the
Crimes Act 1914
(NSW) s 16A(2)(m).
[1999] NSWCCA 111
at para 162.
R v Ponfield
[1999] NSWCCA 435
at para 38-41.
. Australian Institute of Criminology,
“Restorative Justice and Conferencing in Australia” (Trends
and Issues 186, 2001)
. A Ashworth, “Restorative Justice and Victims’ Rights” [2000] (March)
84 at 84 and 86; P Condliffe, “The Challenge of Conferencing:
Moving the Goal Posts for Offenders, Victims and Litigants”
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
at 144-145.
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
. In the Supreme Court and District Court, the
sentencing judge may receive and consider a VIS in relation to offences
involving actual
or threatened violence or sexual assault. Where the
victim has died, the Court must receive and consider any VIS given by
the victim’s
family: In Local Court and Children’s Court
proceedings where the victim has died, VIS given by the victim’s
family must
also be received and considered by the magistrate at the
sentencing stage
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
These provisions apply to Children’s Court proceedings s a result of the C(CP)A s 33C.
. New South Wales, Youth Justice Coalition,
Kids In Justice
(1990) at 157.
Children (Protection and Parental Responsibility) Act 1997
Children (Protection and Parental Responsibility) Act 1997
If the child does not comply with a supervision
order, the court can impose any penalty available for the original
. R White “Regulating Youth Space”
Alternative Law Journal
Children (Protection and Parental Responsibility) Act 1997
. Juvenile Justice Advisory Council at 6; New South Wales, Department of Juvenile Justice,
Juveniles in Detention: Issues of Over Representation
(1995) at 7 and 13; New South Wales, Judicial Commission,
Sentencing Disparity and the Ethnicity of Juvenile Offenders
(1998) at 17. See also Cunneen at 7.
. Royal Commission, Report at para 14.3.10-14.3.12. See also para 14.3.29-14.3.31.
. Royal Commission, Regional Report
. Royal Commission, Report at para 14.3.32-14.3.34; Juvenile Justice Advisory Council at 19-31.
. Hennessy at para 7 and 41.
. New South Wales, Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research,
The Scope for Reducing Indigenous Imprisonment Rates
. See para 2.46-2.47.
. ALRC Report 84 at para 19.112; Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission at Recommendation 46b.
. NSWLRC Report 96 at para 1.46.
. NSWLRC Report 96 at para 1.6; Royal Commission,
Regional Report at 353. For a recent examination of over representation
Aboriginal people in the New South Wales court system see
Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research 2001.
. Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Recommendation 53b. The Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in
Custody also recommended
that custodial sentences should be used only
as a last resort: Royal Commission, Report at Recommendations 62 and
92. See para 3.28.
. NSWLRC Report 96 at para 2.32-2.33.
. NSWLRC Report 96 at Recommendation 1.
Recognition of Aboriginal customary law was first recommended in 1986
by the Australian Law
Reform Commission: Australian Law Reform
Commission,
The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws Summary Report
(Report 31, 1986). This recommendation was subsequently endorsed by the
Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody: Royal
Commission,
Report at Recommendation 219 and para 29.2.39-29.2.54, and the
Australian Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and
Equal Opportunity
Commission: ALRC Report 84 at Recommendation 252.
. NSWLRC Report 96 at para 3.9 and 3.24 and 3.30.
Young Offenders Act 1993
Young Offenders Act 1994
s 46(2)(c).
. NSWLRC Report 96 at para 4.1 and 4.4.
. NSWLRC Report 96 at para 1.51.
. NSWLRC Report 96 at para 7.5.
. NSWLRC Report 96 at para 7.8.
. NSWLRC Report 96 at para 7.20-7.41.
. Queensland, Department of Justice and Attorney
General and Department of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Policy
and Development,
Aboriginal English in the Courts
. New South Wales, Judicial Commission,
Sentencing Disparity and the Ethnicity of Juvenile Offenders
. The research also examined sentences imposed on young Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people: see para 3.120-3.128.
. Judicial Commission at 18.
. Judicial Commission at 17.
Department of Juvenile Justice at 7 and 13.
. Juvenile Justice Advisory Council at 33-69; Hennessy at para 44 and 70.
. Australian Law Reform Commission and Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission at para 19.4, 19.100; S
Schreiner, “The
Law Has Lost its Marbles” (17 December
Sydney Morning Herald
at 17; J Nicholson,
Preliminary Submission
. Australian Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission at para 19.100.
. Australian Law Reform Commission and Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission at para 19.99-19.100,
2.119-2.122; New South
Wales, Ombudsman,
Inquiry into Juvenile Detention Centres
(1996) at vol 1 at 71; Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission at
535-6; NSWLRC Report 96 at para 1.46, 5.12 and 5.50. See
Commission, Report at para 14.3.35-14.3.38.
. See para 3.82.
. Juvenile Justice Advisory Council at 33. See
also Australian Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission
at para 19.99; Hennessy at para 70.
. See para 3.22-3.29.
. J Nicholson,
Preliminary Submission
. See para 3.82.
. Australian Law Reform Commission and Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission at para 19.4, 19.99,
20.117-20.118; NSW Ombudsman
at para 8.9-8.25.
. New South Wales, Ombudsman,
Inquiry into Juvenile Detention Centres
(1996) at para 8.9-8.25; J Nicholson,
Preliminary Submission
. New South Wales, Ombudsman,
Inquiry into Juvenile Detention Centres
(1996) at para 8.9-8.15.
. S C Hayes and D McIlwain
The Prevalence of Intellectual Disability in the NSW Prison Population: An Empirical Study I
(Sydney, 1998) at 48.
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System
(Research Report 4, 1993).
. New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department, Crime Prevention Division,
Juvenile Crime in New South Wales Report: Statistical Profile of Juvenile Offenders
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
People With an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System
(Report 80, 1996) at 27.
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
People With an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System
(Report 80, 1996).
. In September 1998, Attorney General’s
Department of NSW established committee to consider the
Commission’s Report and
the needs of people with an intellectual
disability within the criminal justice system. The Committee is
currently considering these
recommendations.
. NSWLRC Report 80 Recommendation 1 and 52-54.
. NSWLRC Report 80 Recommendation 5 and 6. See
also Australian Law Reform Commission and Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission
at Recommendation 217 and para 18.122-18.124.
The Importance of Identifying Intellectual Disability Amongst Juvenile Victims and Offenders,
paper presented at the conference
Legal Aid Commission of NSW – Juvenile Justice Conference
(Dubbo, 2 December 2000) at 4.
. New South Wales, Department of Community Services,
Annual Report 1999-2000
. NSW Cabinet Office,
Draft Youth Policy Statement
(1996). See also K Carrington,
Offending Girls
(Allen and Unwin, Sydney, 1993); United Kingdom, Select Committee on Health,
Children Looked After by Local Authorities
(Report 2, 1998).
. Community Services Commission,
The Drift of Children in Care into the Juvenile Justice System
(1996) at 7-8.
. Positive Justice Centre,
Preliminary Submission
. Positive Justice Centre,
Preliminary Submission
. Positive Justice Centre,
Preliminary Submission
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) s 356 and s 356N.
Issues Paper 19 (2001) - Sentencing: Young offenders
Appendix A: Reference group
History of this Reference (Digest)
Jenny Bargen, Director, Youth Justice Conferencing Directorate, New South Wales Department of Juvenile Justice
Garner Clancy, Senior Programs Officer, Youth Policy and Programs Unit, New South Wales Police Service
Marcia Ella-Duncan, Executive Officer, Aboriginal Justice Advisory Council
Richard Funston, Director, Children’s Legal Service, New South Wales Legal Aid
Bill Grant, Deputy Director-General, New South Wales Attorney General’s Department
Terms of Reference
Participants
Submissions
List of abbreviations
List of issues
Bibliography
Table of Contents
Issues Paper 19 (2001) - Sentencing: Young offenders
Bibliography
History of this Reference (Digest)
ASHWORTH, A, “Restorative Justice and Victims’ Rights” [2000] (March)
AUSTRALIA, INSTITUTE OF HEALTH AND WELFARE,
National Drug Strategy Household Survey
AUSTRALIA, ROYAL COMMISSION INTO ABORIGINAL DEATHS IN CUSTODY,
National Report
AUSTRALIA, ROYAL COMMISSION INTO ABORIGINAL DEATHS IN CUSTODY,
Regional Report for New South Wales, Victoria, and Tasmania
AUSTRALIA, SENATE LEGAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL REFERENCES COMMITTEE,
Inquiry into the Human Rights (Mandatory Sentencing and Juvenile Offenders) Bill 1999
AUSTRALIAN BUREAU OF STATISTICS,
National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Survey 1994
(AGPS, 1995)
AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF CRIMINOLOGY,
Family Conferencing and Juvenile Justice
AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF CRIMINOLOGY,
Juveniles in Australian Corrective Institutions
AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF CRIMINOLOGY,
Restorative Justice and Conferencing in Australia
(Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice, No 186, 2001)
AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF CRIMINOLOGY,
Juvenile Crime and Justice
AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF CRIMINOLOGY,
The Age of Criminal Responsibility
(Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice, No 181, 2000)
AUSTRALIA, HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION,
Bringing Them Home
, Report of the National Inquiry into the Separation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Children from Their Families (1997)
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION AND HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION,
Seen and Heard: Priority for Children in the Legal Process
(Report 84, 1997)
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws Summary Report
(Report 31, 1986)
BALL, C, “The Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999 – Part 1: A Significant Move Towards Restorative Justice, or
a Recipe for Unintended Consequences?”
Criminal Law Review
BARGEN, J, “The
Young Offenders Act 1997
– Is the Diversionary Scheme Being Diverted?” (2000) 12 (April)
Judicial Officers Bulletin
BARGEN, J, “Youth Justice Conferencing: The Debate Continues
Indigenous Law Bulletin
BARGEN, J, “Young Offenders and the New Options in Youth Justice”
(1999) 37(10)
Law Society Journal
BLOCKLAND, J “International Law Issues and the New NT Mandatory Sentencing Regime”, paper delivered to the NT Criminal
Lawyers Association
Sixth Biennial Conference
, Darwin, 22-26 June 1997
BAYES, H, “Punishment’s Blind: Mandatory Sentencing of Children in Western Australia and the Northern Territory (1999)
University of NSW Law Journal
BOROWSKI, A AND O’CONNOR, I,
Juvenile Crime, Justice and Corrections
(Sydney, Longman, 1997) at 275
BRAITHWAITE, J,
Crime, Shame and Reintegration
(Cambridge, University Press, 1989)
CAMPBELL, S, Reality Checks – The Changing Relationship in the Policing of Young People and its Implications for Legal Practitioners”
(1999) 37 (10)
Law Society Journal
CARRINGTON, K,
Offending Girls
(Sydney, Allen and Unwin, 1993)
CLANCEY, G AND JACKSON, P, “The Young Offenders Act 1998-2001: Three Years of Diverting Young People Away From Court”
(2001) 13(13)
Police Service Weekly
CONDLIFFE, P, “The Challenge of Conferencing: Moving the Goal Posts for Offenders, Victims and Litigants”
Australian Dispute Resolution Journal
CRAM, I, “Publish and Damn”
New Law Journal
CUNEEN, C, “Zero Tolerance Policing: How Will it Affect Indigenous Communities?” (March 1999) 4
Indigenous Law Bulletin
CUNNEEN, C, “Community Conferencing and the Fiction of Indigenous Control” (1997) 30
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology
CUNNEEN, C AND WHITE, R,
Juvenile Justice: An Australian Perspective”
(Melbourne, Oxford University Press, 1995)
DAVIES, G L AND RAYMOND, K M, “Do Current Sentencing Practices Work?”
Criminal Law Journal
DE FINA, D, “New Youth Drug Court – The Pilot Programme Commences”
(2000) 12 (5)
Judicial Officers Bulletin
DENNIS, M, “The
and Young People”, paper presented to Legal Aid Commission at
Continuing Legal Education Conference
(Dubbo, 2 December 2000)
DOHERTY, L, “Children Still Presumed to be Innocent – At Least Until 14”
Sydney Morning Herald
(12 February 2001) at 5
FLYNN, M, “Mandatory Sentencing, International Law and the Howard/Burke Deal”
[2000] IndigLawB 38
(2000) 4 (30)
Indigenous Law Bulletin
FLYNN, M, “International Law, Australian Criminal Law and Mandatory Sentencing: the Claims, the Reality and the Possibilities”
Criminal Law Journal
FREIBERG, A, “Australian Drug Courts”
Criminal Law Journal
GALLAGHER, P AND POLETTI, P, “Ethnic Diversity, Aboriginality and Sentencing Young Offenders” (1998) 10
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
GLEDHILL, K, “The Naming of Juvenile Defendants”
New Law Journal
GRAHAM, K, “Piloting a Youth Drug Court Program”
Law Society Journal
GRANT, C AND QUAYLE, C, “Workshops at Walgett and Bouke”, Working Out West Project (unpublished, 2001)
HALL, T, “How Many Dependent Heroin Users are there in Australia?” (2000) 173
Medical Journal of Australia
HARDY, J, “Mandatory Sentencing in the Northern Territory – A Breach of Human Rights”
Public Law Review
The Importance of Identifying Intellectual Disability Amongst Juvenile Victims and Offenders,
paper delivered to the
Legal Aid NSW – Juvenile Justice Conference
Dubbo, 2 December 2000
HAYES, S C AND MCILWAIN, D,
The Prevalence of Intellectual Disability in the NSW Prison Population: An Empirical Study
HAYES, H, PRENZLER, T AND WORTLEY, R,
Making Amends: Final Evaluation of the Queensland Community Conferencing
Pilot (Queensland Department of Justice, 1998)
HENNESSY, N
, Review of Gate Keeping Role in
Young Offenders Act 1997
HOGG, R, “Mandatory Sentencing Laws and the Symbolic Politics of Law and Order” (1999) 22
University of NSW Law Journal
“Is Naltrexone a Cure for Heroin Dependence?” (Editorial) (1999) 171
Medical Journal of Australia
JASKULSKI, M, “Mandatory Sentencing” (2000) 9(1)
Human Rights Defender
JASON-LLOYD, L, “Part 1 of the Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999”
New Law Journal
JOHNSON, D and ZDENKOWSKI, G, “Mandatory Injustice: Compulsory Imprisonment in the Northern Territory” Sydney, Australian
Centre for Independent Journalism, February 2000.
Restoring Youth Justice – New Directions in Domestic and International Law and Practice
KELLY, L AND OXLEY, E, “A Dingo in Sheep’s Clothing? The Rhetoric of Youth Justice Conferencing” (February 1999)
[1997] IndigLawB 29
Indigenous Law Bulletin
KELLY, L AND OXLEY, E, “Response to Jenny Bargen”
Indigenous Law Bulletin
LAW SOCIETY OF NSW,
Representation Principles for Children’s Lawyers
(October 2000)
LINKER, M, “Sentencing Circles and the Dilemma of Difference”
Criminal Law Quarterly
LIVERANI, M R, “For the Disadvantaged Young, NSW is a Police State”
(1999) 37 (10)
Law Society Journal
MALCOLM, D K, “Discretion in Sentencing: Mandatory Sentencing Laws”, paper presented at the
Fifth Colloquium of the Judicial Conference of Australia
(Uluru, 7-9 April 2001)
“Mandatory Sentences for Young Offenders” (Editorial)
Criminal Law Journal
MCWILLIAMS, E, “Sentencing Guidelines: Who should be the arbiter, the Judiciary or the Parliament”
Law Society Journal
MIETHE, T, LU, H AND REESE, E “Reintegrative Shaming and Recidivism Risks in Drug Court: Explanations for Some Unexpected Findings”
Crime and Delinquency
MILDREN, D, “Discretion in Sentencing”, paper presented at the
Fifth Colloquium of the Judicial Conference of Australia
(Uluru, 7-9 April 2001)
MOON, M M, SUNDT, J L, CULLEN, F T AND WRIGHT, J P, “Is Child Saving Dead? Public Support for Juvenile Rehabilitation”
Crime and Delinquency
MORGAN, N, “Capturing Crims of Capturing Votes? The Aims and Effects of Mandatories” (1999) 22
University of NSW Law Journal
MORGAN, N, “Mandatory Sentences in Australia: Where Have we Been and Where are we Going?” (2000) 24
Criminal law Journal
MULLANY, S, “The Child Offender who Turns 18”
(1997) 35(4)
Law Society Journal
“Name and Shame Young Criminals Says Police Chief”
Daily Telegraph
(Friday 30 October 1998) 7
NEW SOUTH WALES ATTORNEY GENERAL'S DEPARTMENT ABORIGINAL JUSTICE ADVISORY,
Circle Sentencing: Involving Aboriginal Communities in the Sentencing Process
(Discussion Paper, 1999)
NEW SOUTH WALES, ATTORNEY GENERAL’S DEPARTMENT, ABORIGINAL JUSTICE ADVISORY COMMITTEE,
A Fraction More Power: Review of the Impact of the
Children (Protection and Parental Responsibility) Act
on Aboriginal People in Moree and Ballina
NEW SOUTH WALES, ATTORNEY GENERAL’S DEPARTMENT, ABORIGINAL JUSTICE ADVISORY COMMITTEE,
Policing Public Order: Offensive Language and Conduct, The Impact on Aboriginal People
NEW SOUTH WALES ATTORNEY GENERAL'S DEPARTMENT, CRIME PREVENTION DIVISION
Juvenile Crime in New South Wales Report: Statistical Profile of Juvenile Offenders
NEW SOUTH WALES ATTORNEY GENERAL'S DEPARTMENT CRIMINAL LAW REVIEW DIVISION
A Review of the Law on the Age of Criminal Responsibility of Children
NEW SOUTH WALES, BUREAU OF CRIME STATISTICS AND RESEARCH,
New South Wales Criminal Court Statistics 1999
NEW SOUTH WALES, BUREAU OF CRIME STATISTICS AND RESEARCH,
Race and Offensive Language Charges
(Bureau Brief, August 1999)
NEW SOUTH WALES, BUREAU OF CRIME STATISTICS AND RESEARCH,
An Evaluation of the NSW Youth Justice Conferencing Scheme
NEW SOUTH WALES, BUREAU OF CRIME STATISTICS AND RESEARCH,
NSW Drug Court Evaluation: Program and Participant Profiles 2000
(Crime and Justice Bulletin 50)
NEW SOUTH WALES, BUREAU OF CRIME STATISTICS AND RESEARCH,
Drug Court Evaluation: Interim Report on Health and Well being of Participants 2001
(Crime and Justice Bulletin 53)
NEW SOUTH WALES, BUREAU OF CRIME STATISTICS AND RESEARCH,
The Scope for Reducing Indigenous Imprisonment Rates
NEW SOUTH WALES, BUREAU OF CRIME STATISTICS AND RESEARCH,
Drug Crime Prevention and Mitigation: A Literature Review and Research Agenda
NEW SOUTH WALES, CABINET OFFICE,
Draft Youth Policy Statement
NEW SOUTH WALES, COMMUNITY SERVICES COMMISSION,
The Drift of Children in Care into the Juvenile Justice System
NEW SOUTH WALES, COMMUNITY WELFARE LEGISLATION REVIEW,
Review of the
Children (Care and Protection) Act 1987
: Recommendations for Law Reform
(Department of Community Services, 1997)
NEW SOUTH WALES, DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY SERVICES,
Annual Report 1999-2000
NEW SOUTH WALES, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH,
The NSW Drug Treatment Services Plan: 2000-2005
NEW SOUTH WALES, DEPARTMENT OF JUVENILE JUSTICE,
Annual Report 1999-2000
NEW SOUTH WALES, DEPARTMENT OF JUVENILE JUSTICE,
Juveniles in Detention: Issues of Over Representation
NEW SOUTH WALES, DEPARTMENT OF JUVENILE JUSTICE,
Recidivism of Juvenile Offenders in NSW
NEW SOUTH WALES,
NSW Drug Summit 1999 – Government Plan of Action
NEW SOUTH WALES, JUDICIAL COMMISSION
Sentencing Disparity and the Ethnicity of Juvenile Offenders
(Report 17, 1998)
NEW SOUTH WALES, JUVENILE JUSTICE ADVISORY COUNCIL,
Aboriginal Over-representation and Discretionary Decisions in the NSW Juvenile Justice System
NEW SOUTH WALES, LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
The Right to Silence
(Report 95, 2000)
NEW SOUTH WALES, LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
(Discussion Paper 33, 1996)
NEW SOUTH WALES, LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
(Report 79, 1996)
NEW SOUTH WALES, LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Sentencing Aboriginal Offenders
(Report 96, 2000)
NEW SOUTH WALES, LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
People With an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System
(Report 80, 1996)
NEW SOUTH WALES, LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
People With an Intellectual Disability and the Criminal Justice System: Appearances before Local Courts
(Research Report 4, 1993)
NEW SOUTH WALES, OMBUDSMAN,
Investigation into Kariong Juvenile Justice Centre
NEW SOUTH WALES, OMBUDSMAN,
Inquiry into Juvenile Detention Centres
NEW SOUTH WALES, OMBUDSMAN,
Policing Public Safety
NEW SOUTH WALES, PARLIAMENT, LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL, STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL ISSUES,
Juvenile Justice in NSW
NEW SOUTH WALES, POLICE SERVICE,
Annual Report 1999-2000
NEW SOUTH WALES, YOUTH JUSTICE COALITION,
Kids In Justice: A Blueprint for the 90s
NYMAN, T, “Forget Zero Tolerance as an Option for NSW” (1999) July
Law Society Journal
PARKINSON, P, “Child Protection Law Reforms in NSW (1999) 13
Australian Family Law Journal
POLLARD, C, “Victims and the Criminal Justice System: A New Vision”
Criminal Law Review
QUEENSLAND, Department of Justice and Attorney-General and Department of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Policy and Development,
Aboriginal English in the Courts
ROBERTS, J AND LAPRAIRIE, C, “Sentencing Circles: Some Unanswered Questions”
Criminal Law Quarterly
SANTOW, G F K, “Mandatory Sentencing: A Matter for the High Court?”
Australian Law Journal
SHERMAN, L, Experiments in Restorative Policing: A Progress Report on the Canberra Reintegrative Shaming Experiments (Australian Federal
Police and Australian National University, Canberra, 1998).
SCHREINER, S, “The Law Has Lost its Marbles” (17 December 1999)
Sydney Morning Herald
SPIGELMAN, J J “Sentencing Guideline Judgements”
Australian Law Journal
SUN, M, “Drug Room Open for Business”
Daily Telegraph
(7 May 2001) at 5
“The Protection of Juveniles” (Editorial)
New Law Journal
THOMSON, C, “Preventing Crime or ‘Warehousing’ the Underprivileged? Mandatory Sentencing in the Northern Territory”
[2000] IndigLawB 1
(1999-2000) 4 (26)
Indigenous Law Bulletin
UNITED KINGDOM, SELECT COMMITTEE ON HEALTH,
Children Looked After by Local Authorities
(Report 2, 1998)
UNITED NATIONS, Committee on the Rights of the Child,
Concluding Observations: Australia
UNITED NATIONS, Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,
Concluding Observations: Australia
WHITE, R “Regulating Youth Space”
Alternative Law Journal
ZDENKOWSKI, G, “Mandatory Imprisonment of Property Offenders in the Northern Territory” (1999) 22
University of NSW Law Journal
Terms of Reference
Participants
Submissions
List of abbreviations
List of issues
Bibliography
Table of Contents
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter