URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCIP/2000/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:36:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Complaints against lawyers: Review of Part 10 - Issues Paper [2000] NSWLRCIP 18
Issues Paper 18 (2000) - Complaints against lawyers: Review of Part 10
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
1. INTRODUCTION
TERMS OF REFERENCE
The Commission’s previous review
Legal Profession Act 1987
Subsequent amendments and reviews
Reports and reviews
Legislative amendments
Legal challenges
Remedial legislation
THE COURSE OF THIS REFERENCE
Preliminary consultation
This Issues Paper
Submissions
2. OPERATION OF
LEGAL PROFESSION ACT 1987
MAKING A COMPLAINT
Withdrawal of complaints
Compensation
PARTIES TO A COMPLAINT
Complainants
Whistleblowers
Persons complained against
Complaints against individual practitioners only
Complaints against partnerships and firms
SCOPE OF COMPLAINTS
Consumer disputes and disciplinary matters
Complaints against barristers and complaints against solicitors
THE INITIAL ROLE OF THE LEGAL SERVICES COMMISSIONER
INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS
Supervisory role of the Legal Services Commissioner
DETERMINATIONS
REVIEW BY THE LEGAL SERVICES COMMISSIONER OF COUNCIL DECISIONS
THE TRIBUNAL
Composition of the Tribunal
Parties before the Tribunal
The information
Tribunal Hearings
The Tribunal’s decision
Compensation
TRIBUNAL APPEAL PANEL
APPEALS TO THE SUPREME COURT
COMPLAINTS ARISING DURING THE COURSE OF
AN INVESTIGATION
RESOLUTION OF COMPLAINTS OTHER THAN UNDER
Supreme Court
The Legal Services Commissioner’s right to appear in the Supreme Court
Internal resolution
EVALUATING THE SYSTEM
3. REGULATORY ISSUES
Self regulation
Co-regulation
Independent regulation
CO-REGULATION IN NEW SOUTH WALES
Regulatory functions
Representational functions
ISSUES ARISING FROM CO-REGULATION IN THE
DISCIPLINARY SYSTEM
Involvement of professional bodies
A legal services ombudsman?
CONSUMER PROTECTION
SETTING THE RIGHT BALANCE
4. THE LSC AND THE COUNCILS: COMPLAINTS HANDLING PROCESS
Definitions
Consequences
Are the current definitions satisfactory?
Need for further clarification
Medical Practice Act 1992
Disclosure of estimated costs
Advertising
Whistleblowing
Should there be a time limit on complaints?
Complaints initiated by the Councils
Complaints initiated by the Legal Services Commissioner
Length of time limit
When should time start to run?
COMPLAINTS AGAINST PARTNERSHIPS AND FIRMS
REFERRAL OF COMPLAINTS TO THE COUNCILS
Referral after mediation
Referral outside the time limit
INVESTIGATIONS
Independent investigations
Additional complaints
The procedure for dealing with additional complaints
Criticism of the procedure
Options for reform
Situations where a formal investigation is not necessary
Client legal privilege
Procedural fairness
Investigative powers
TRANSFER OF COMPLAINTS BETWEEN THE LEGAL SERVICES COMMISSIONER AND COUNCIL
CONSEQUENCES OF NON-COMPLIANCE WITH THE PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS OF
REVIEW BY LEGAL SERVICES COMMISSIONER OF DECISIONS OF COUNCILS
5. THE LSC AND THE COUNCILS: OUTCOME OF INVESTIGATIONS
TEST FOR REFERRAL TO THE TRIBUNAL
ENFORCEABLE UNDERTAKINGS
COMPENSATION
COSTS ASSESSMENT
CONCILIATION
6. THE TRIBUNAL
TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE
Practice rules
Dealing with less complicated matters
Application of the rules of evidence
Public hearings
Publication of names of parties and witnesses
Declaratory orders
Costs orders
TRIBUNAL OUTCOMES
Compensation orders
APPEALS FROM THE TRIBUNAL
APPENDICIES
APPENDIX A: Legal Profession Amendment (Complaints and Discipline) Act 2000 (NSW)
APPENDIX B: Preliminary Submissions
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Issues Paper 18 (2000) - Complaints against lawyers: Review of Part 10
Terms of reference
History of this Reference (Digest)
On 3 March 2000, the Attorney General, the Hon J W Shaw QC, MLC asked the Law Reform Commission:
to review the procedures for dealing with complaints against legal practitioners under
Legal Profession Act 1987
, taking into account recent case law on the operation of
and the practical experience of the operation of the statutory provisions.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 18 (2000) - Complaints against lawyers: Review of Part 10
Participants
History of this Reference (Digest)
Pursuant to
Law Reform Commission Act
(NSW) the Chairperson of the Commission constituted a Division for the purpose of conducting the reference. The members of the Division
The Hon Justice Michael Adams*
Professor Margaret Allars
His Hon Judge Christopher Armitage
Snr Deputy President Lea Drake
Professor Reg Graycar
Ms Phillipa Smith
(* denotes Commissioner-in-Charge)
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Legal Research and Writing
Ms Ailsa Goodwin
Mr Joseph Waugh
Research Assistance
Ms Sarah-jane Morris
Ms Lauren Walker
Ms Dita Kruze
Desktop Publishing
Ms Rebecca Young
Administrative Assistance
Ms Wendy Stokoe
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 18 (2000) - Complaints against lawyers: Review of Part 10
Submissions
History of this Reference (Digest)
The Commission invites submissions on the issues relevant to this review, including but not limited to the issues raised in this
issues paper.
All submissions and enquiries should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
postal addresses
GPO Box 5199, Sydney NSW 1044 or DX 1227 Sydney
street address
Level 17, 8-12 Chifley Square, Sydney NSW
nsw_lrc@agd.nsw.gov.au
telephone (02) 9228 8230
facsimile (02) 9228 8225
TTY (02) 9228 7676
There is no special form required for submissions. If it is inconvenient or impractical to make a written submission you may telephone
the Commission and either direct your comments to a Legal Officer over the telephone, or else arrange to make your submission in
The closing date for submissions is 15 December 2000.
Use of submissions and confidentiality
If you would like your submission to be treated as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Submissions made to the
Commission may be used in two ways:
Since the Commission’s process of law reform is essentially public, copies of submissions made to the Commission will normally
be made available on request to other persons or organisations. However, if you would like all or part of your submission to be treated
as confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Any request for a copy of a submission marked “confidential”
will be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
In preparing further papers on this reference, the Commission will refer to submissions made in response to this issues paper. However,
requests for confidentiality will be respected by the Commission in relation to the publication of submissions.
Other publication formats
The NSW Attorney General's Department is committed to fully meeting its obligations under State and Commonwealth anti-discrimination
legislation. These laws require all organisations to eliminate discriminatory practices which may prevent people with disabilities
from having full and equal access to our services.
This publication is available in alternative formats, if you have any difficulty in accessing this document please contact the Law
Reform Commission.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 18 (2000) - Complaints against lawyers: Review of Part 10
History of this Reference (Digest)
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
Bar Council and Law Society Council
Legal Services Commissioner
Office of the Legal Services Commissioner
Professional Standards Department of the Law Society of NSW
New South Wales Law Reform Commission, Complaints Against Lawyers – Scrutiny of the Legal Profession (Report 70, 1993)
Telecommunications Industry Ombudsman
Legal Services Division of the Administrative Decisions Tribunal (formerly the Legal Services Tribunal)
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
[Text to be inserted]
Issues Paper 18 (2000) - Complaints against lawyers: Review of Part 10
List of issues
History of this Reference (Digest)
What is the appropriate role for professional bodies in the disciplinary system?
Should consumer disputes be dealt with in the same system as disciplinary matters?
How can the needs of consumers be better addressed in the current system?
Are the current definitions of unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct satisfactory?
Should there be a time limit for making complaints?
If there should be a time limit, should it apply to all complaints, including complaints initiated by the Councils and the LSC?
If there should be a time limit, how long should it be?
If there should be a time limit, should time start to run from the date that the conduct allegedly occurred or the date that the
complainant became aware of it?
How should complaints against bodies other than individual practitioners (eg firms or incorporated firms) be dealt with?
Should the LSC be permitted to refer to a Council any conduct issues that require investigation following mediation of a consumer
Should the informal arrangement in place for the transfer of a complaint to a Council at any time by consent be given a statutory
basis under
Should s 151 be amended to provide that independent investigators should report to the LSC, and that decisions under s 155 in relation
to such complaints should be made by the LSC?
Should the procedural requirements in
for the treatment of additional complaints be modified in response to the decision of the High Court in
Barwick v Law Society of NSW
? If so, how?
Should the LSC and the Councils be able to institute Tribunal proceedings other than by conducting an investigation into a complaint?
If so, in what circumstances should this be permitted?
Should the exception to client legal privilege in s 171S be extended? If so, how?
What should be required by
in order to clarify the requirement of procedural fairness to the practitioner and the complainant in respect of a decision under
How extensive should the notice requirements of s 171J be?
Are the powers of the LSC and Councils to compel practitioners to co-operate with investigations adequate? If not, what additional
powers should the LSC and Councils have?
Are the sanctions for failure to respond to a s 152 notice adequate? If not, what additional sanctions should apply?
Should the service requirements under s 152 be amended?
Should complainants be entitled to a review of a decision to transfer a complaint from a Council to the LSC? If so, who should conduct
the review?
Should the Tribunal be given power to cure any non-compliance with the provisions of
be amended to provide for waiver of the procedural fairness requirements?
be amended to include a provision validating Tribunal proceedings regardless of procedural defects?
Should the right to a review of Council decisions be restricted in any way? If so, how?
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) prescribe a test for referral of complaints to the Tribunal? If so, is the current “reasonable likelihood” test
appropriate? If not, what should the test for referral to the Tribunal be?
Should the LSC and Councils be given the power to enter enforceable undertakings with practitioners in relation to complaints?
Should the LSC be given a power to order practitioners to pay compensation to complainants? If so, should there be a statutory maximum
amount? If so, what should it be? What other restrictions on such a power would be appropriate?
Should the LSC and Councils be given the power to impose reprimands on practitioners without their consent? If so, in what circumstances?
Should the time limit for costs assessment apply to matters referred to costs assessors by the LSC or Councils?
Should the power of the LSC to refer complaints to a costs assessor also apply when the LSC is conducting a review of a complaint
initially dealt with by a Council?
Should the LSC be given a power to compel the parties to a complaint to attend a conciliation conference?
Are the current practice rules for proceedings before the Tribunal adequate?
Should there be a means of expeditiously listing and disposing of less complex cases before the Tribunal?
Should it be possible to remove a practitioner from the roll by consent?
Should the rules of evidence apply to all Tribunal proceedings?
Should any hearings of the Tribunal be conducted in the absence of the public?
In what circumstances should the names of parties and witnesses to proceedings be disclosed to the public?
Should the Tribunal be given the power to make declaratory orders as to whether particular conduct breaches relevant standards?
Should the current provisions relating to costs before the Tribunal be altered in any way?
What powers should the Tribunal have in relation to compensation?
Who should be able to apply to the Tribunal for compensation?
Should the Supreme Court be able to hear appeals on the merits of a decision of the Tribunal and, if so, under what circumstances?
Is the appeals process from decisions of the Tribunal adequate?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 18 (2000) - Complaints against lawyers: Review of Part 10
1. Introduction
History of this Reference (Digest)
TERMS OF REFERENCE
1.1 On 3 March 2000, the Attorney General, the Hon J W Shaw QC, MLC asked the Law Reform Commission:
to review the procedures for dealing with complaints against legal practitioners under
Legal Profession Act 1987
, taking into account recent case law on the operation of
and the practical experience of the operation of the statutory provisions.
The Commission’s previous review
1.2 In 1993, the New South Wales Law Reform Commission published the Report
Scrutiny of the Legal Profession – Complaints Against Lawyers
(Report 70).
The Report found that the existing complaints handling system was inadequate. It identified a number of problems including delays,
inadequate investigations, a perception that the system lacked independence, and a failure to provide consumer redress or to address
ethical issues and professional standards.
1.3 Report 70 recommended the adoption of a more consumer-oriented complaints system. It recommended the introduction of an independent
statutory office of Legal Services Ombudsman, responsible for receiving all complaints and monitoring investigations, and a Legal
Services Tribunal, responsible for hearing misconduct complaints.
1.4 The Commission’s recommendations were implemented in 1994, although the government decided to call the new office the Legal
Services Commissioner (LSC).
Legal Profession Act 1987
1.5 The current
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW), which implemented the recommendations in Report 70, was inserted in 1993 by the
Legal Profession Reform Act 1993
1.6 An exposure draft of the bill was circulated for public comment in the first half of 1993.
Some changes were made to the exposure draft before it was introduced to Parliament.
Legal Profession Reform Bill 1993
(NSW) was first introduced to Parliament on 16 September 1993. This bill was subsequently withdrawn and a second bill, the
Legal Profession Reform Bill (No 2) 1993
(NSW) was introduced on 27 October 1993. This bill was passed with amendments and assented to on 29 November 1993. The
Legal Profession Reform Act 1993
(NSW) commenced on 1 July 1994.
Subsequent amendments and reviews
Reports and reviews
Performance Audit Report.
A “special” audit was required by the
Legal Profession Act 1987
into the activities of the LSC, the Bar Council and the Law Society Council (the Councils) that were paid for by the then Statutory
Interest Account. At the time of the review in 1997, the Statutory Interest Account held interest from some monies deposited in clients’
trust accounts.
The resulting Performance Audit Report, which was published in June 1997,
made a number of recommendations relating to the management of the various funds derived from interest on clients’ trust funds
and the apparent conflicts of interest, particularly those arising from the Law Society’s involvement in the system. Some of
the recommendations of the Performance Audit Report were addressed by legislation in 1998.
National Competition Review.
In 1998 the New South Wales Attorney General’s Department conducted a review of the
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW). The review was undertaken to meet two separate requirements:
the requirement of the Australian Governments’ Competition Principles Agreement to consider any potentially anti-competitive
restrictions in legislation and whether they are in the public interest; and
the statutory requirement that the amendments made by the
Legal Profession Reform Act 1993
(NSW), which include the whole of Part 10 of the Act, be reviewed within four years of their commencement.
1.10 An issues paper was released in August 1998 and a report was published in November 1998.
The main conclusion in relation to the complaints and disciplinary system was:
The disciplinary scheme does not have an anti-competitive effect because all members of the profession are subject to the scheme.
It is possible that the cost of the scheme affects the ability of legal practitioners to compete with non-lawyer service providers
within the legal services market. However, the scheme serves the public interest by assuring independence and impartiality, openness
and accountability, and external scrutiny and review of the profession. The review of the conduct of practitioners also serves an
educative role.
1.11 However, some more specific recommendations for change were made. These are mentioned, where appropriate, in other parts of
this Issues Paper.
Legislative amendments
1.12 There have been numerous amending Acts dealing with
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW). In summary they are:
Conveyancers Licensing Act 1995
(NSW) brought conveyancers under
February 1996).
Courts Legislation Further Amendment Act 1995
(NSW) allowed fresh evidence to be introduced on appeals from the Legal Services Division of the Administrative Decisions Tribunal
(formerly the Legal Services Tribunal) (the Tribunal) (commenced 8 March 1996).
Legal Profession Amendment Act 1996
(NSW) aimed to simplify and strengthen some of the provisions relating to mediation and the bringing of complaints to the Tribunal
(commenced 1 April 1997).
Legal Profession Amendment (National Practising Certificates) Act 1996
(NSW) made holders of National Practising Certificates subject to Part 10 (commenced 1 July 1997).
Administrative Decisions Legislation Amendment Act 1997
(NSW) abolished the Legal Services Tribunal and introduced the Legal Services Division of the Administrative Decisions Tribunal (commenced
6 October 1998).
Public Notaries Act 1997
(NSW) brought notaries under
June 1998).
Courts Legislation Further Amendment Act 1997
(NSW) allowed the Tribunal to make orders for costs (commenced 2 February 1998).
Legal Profession Amendment (Practice of Foreign Law) Act 1998
(NSW) made locally registered foreign lawyers subject to Part 10 (commenced 1 July 1999).
Legal Profession Amendment Act 1998
(NSW) implemented changes recommended by the Performance Audit Report including requiring the Councils and the LSC to develop performance
criteria (commenced 5 March 1998).
State Revenue Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1998
(NSW) allowed information gathered in the complaints process to be disclosed to the Chief Commissioner of State Revenue (commenced
2 November 1998).
Legal Profession Amendment (Complaints and Discipline) Act 2000
(NSW) dealt with problems arising from the High Court’s decision in
Barwick v Law Society of NSW
(commenced 14 July 2000).
Legal challenges
1.13 Two recent major cases that have highlighted problems with
Barwick v Law Society of NSW
Murray v Legal Services Commissioner
, the High Court examined the requirement under
that complaints must be investigated before Tribunal proceedings can be instituted. The Court looked at a situation where the Law
Society Council filed informations against a practitioner in the Tribunal which related to allegedly irregular trust account transactions.
While pursuing its investigations, the Council discovered further and later acts which were alleged to have constituted additional
instances of misconduct. Subsequently, the practitioner who was the subject of the complaints filed statutory declarations by way
of evidence in the Tribunal allegedly containing misrepresentations, a further instance of misconduct.
1.15 The Court considered how the procedure for dealing with complaints applies to new allegations against the practitioner which
arise during the course of an investigation or a hearing into other complaints. In particular, it considered the status of complaints
raised by the Councils about conduct which took place at least three years ago when the LSC had not determined that the complaint
could be raised out of time. The Court also criticised the drafting of
, finding it difficult to ascertain the legislative intention and resolve ambiguities.
, the Court of Appeal examined the obligation to accord procedural fairness to a practitioner being investigated under
, including the obligation to provide the practitioner with a copy of the complaint and an opportunity to respond to it.
Remedial legislation
1.17 The New South Wales Government introduced remedial legislation in response to the High Court’s decision in
Barwick v Law Society of NSW
This legislation, which commenced operation on 14 July 2000, has two basic aims:
to overcome some of the problems arising from the High Court’s decision; and
to make some minor changes to improve the operation of
pending the review by the New South Wales Law Reform Commission.
1.18 In relation to the problems arising from the High Court’s decision, the amending Act does three things:
Validate decisions already made (and future decisions to be made on informations already filed) by the Tribunal in relation to complaints
initiated by a Council in relation to conduct which occurred more than three years ago.
Allow the Councils to initiate and investigate complaints in relation to conduct that occurred more than three years ago so long as
they meet certain criteria.
Allow the Tribunal to vary an information to include additional complaints even if they are in relation to conduct that occurred more
than three years ago.
1.19 The minor changes, in addition to making the provisions of Division 3 of Part 10 clearer and simpler, include:
allowing a complainant to withdraw a complaint;
enhancing the power of the LSC to refer complaints to the Councils;
allowing the LSC to dismiss a complaint if it is in the public interest to do so;
giving the LSC the same powers as the Councils when conducting a review of a Council’s decision
and increasing the range of orders that can be made on review to include mediation orders and reprimands;
allowing the publication of details of disciplinary action taken against a practitioner.
1.20 Appendix A details amendments and consequent renumbering of portions of Part 10 as a result of the
Legal Profession Amendment (Complaints and Discipline) Act 2000
THE COURSE OF THIS REFERENCE
Preliminary consultation
1.21 After receiving the terms of reference and completing some preliminary research, the Commission met with the LSC, Steve Mark,
and several of his staff; and the Executive Director of the Bar Association, Philip Selth, and the Professional Affairs Director,
Helen Barrett. The Commission also had a preliminary discussion with the Chief Executive Officer of the Law Society, Mark Richardson.
1.22 The Commission also invited submissions from regulatory agencies who administer
and groups representing legal consumers. The Commission received a number of useful preliminary submissions, which are referred to
throughout this Paper and are listed at Appendix B.
1.23 The Victorian Department of Justice is currently reviewing the
Legal Practice Act 1996
(Vic), which regulates the legal profession in Victoria, including the complaints handling system. In July 2000, the Executive Director
of the Commission, Peter Hennessy, met with Peter Sallmann, Victorian Crown Counsel, and Richard Wright, Associate Director, Victorian
Civil Justice Review Project, who are conducting the review. The Executive Director also met with the Victorian Legal Ombudsman and
representatives of the Law Institute of Victoria to discuss the regulation of complaints in Victoria.
This Issues Paper
1.24 This Issues Paper consists of six chapters.
Chapter 1 is an introduction which sets out the Commission’s terms of reference for this review, background to the reference,
and the course of the review.
Chapter 2 outlines how the current system for dealing with complaints against lawyers works.
Chapter 3 considers broad regulatory and consumer issues.
Chapter 4 deals with issues relating to the procedure for dealing with complaints under Part 10.
Chapter 5 examines issues relating to the outcome of investigations into complaints against lawyers.
Chapter 6 deals with issues relating to proceedings in the Tribunal.
Submissions
1.25 The Commission is interested to receive information or views on any of the matters raised in this Paper. Chapters 3 to 6 identify
a number of issues on which the Commission is keen to receive further submissions. The deadline for receipt of submissions is
15 December 2000
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Scrutiny of the Legal Profession – Complaints Against Lawyers
(Report 70, 1993).
Legal Profession Reform Bill 1993
(NSW) (Consultation Draft).
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) s 67. This section was repealed in 1998 and is now covered by
Legal Profession Act 1987
. The Statutory Interest Account held interest from some monies deposited in the Statutory Deposit Account, while the Solicitors’
Trust Account Funds held interest from monies deposited with non-Statutory Deposit Account trust accounts. The Statutory Interest
Account and the Solicitors’ Trust Account Funds have now been combined in the Public Purpose Fund.
. New South Wales, Audit Office,
The Law Society Council, the Bar Council and the Legal Services Commissioner: A Review of Activities Funded by the Statutory Interest
(Performance Audit Report, 1997).
Legal Profession Amendment Act 1998
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) Sch 8
. New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department,
National Competition Policy Review of the
Legal Profession Act 1987
(Report, 1998).
. National Competition Policy Review
. [2000] 3 HCA.
. [2000] 3 HCA.
[1999] NSWCA 70
(1999) 46 NSWLR 224.
Legal Profession Amendment (Complaints and Discipline) Act 2000
. New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly, 31 May 2000, Second Reading Speech at 6236.
. See amendments to
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) Sch 8.
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
. But without preventing investigation should the LSC or Councils so decide:
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
This is in addition to the grounds for dismissal in
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
s 160(1)(b)
. “Disciplinary action” means the suspension or cancellation of a practicing certificate, the refusal to issue a practicing
certificate or the removal of a practitioner from the roll:
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) s 171OA.
Issues Paper 18 (2000) - Complaints against lawyers: Review of Part 10
2. Operation of Part 10 of the Legal Profession Act 1987 (NSW)
History of this Reference (Digest)
2.1 This Chapter describes the complaints system as established by
Legal Profession Act 1987
MAKING A COMPLAINT
2.2 A complaint must:
be in writing;
identify the complainant and the practitioner complained against;
provide particulars of the conduct complained of.
2.3 The complaint must be made to the Legal Services Commissioner (LSC). If a complaint is made to either the Bar Council or the
Law Society Council (the Councils), it must be forwarded to the LSC.
2.4 In 1998/9, 2,869 written complaints were received by the LSC. There were 2,668 complaints about solicitors, 167 against barristers
and 13 against licensed conveyancers. In addition to this 7,402 telephone enquiries were dealt with by legal staff of the Office
of the Legal Services Commissioner (OLSC).
2.5 Complaints must usually be made within three years of the date on which the conduct is alleged to have occurred.
However, a complaint may be received outside the three year period provided a determination is made that:
(a) it is just and fair to deal with the complaint having regard to the delay and the reasons for the delay, or
(b) the complaint involves an allegation of professional misconduct and it is in the public interest to deal with the complaint.
2.6 The LSC is responsible for determining whether to accept complaints made to him about conduct which allegedly occurred more than
three years earlier. When a complaint about conduct which allegedly occurred more than three years earlier is made to a Council,
that Council must determine whether to accept the complaint.
Determinations as to whether to accept out of time complaints cannot be challenged.
2.7 In 1998/9, 32 out of a total of 2,869 written complaints received by the LSC were rejected as being out of time.
In 1997/8, 83 out of 2,709 written complaints were rejected on this basis.
In 1996/7, 3,139 complaints were received by the LSC. One hundred and fourteen of these were out of time complaints. Of these, 94
were rejected.
2.8 Complaints must disclose one or more of the following:
unsatisfactory professional conduct;
professional misconduct;
a consumer dispute which need not necessarily amount to professional misconduct or unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Withdrawal of complaints
Legal Profession Amendment (Complaints and Discipline) Act 2000
(NSW) establishes a procedure for complainants to withdraw complaints.
The withdrawal of a complaint must be in writing. Complaints cannot be withdrawn once proceedings have been instituted in the Legal
Services Division of the Administrative Decisions Tribunal (the Tribunal). The LSC or Council to whom the complaint was referred
may reject the withdrawal of the complaint if satisfied that it may involve misconduct. The withdrawal of a complaint does not preclude
a further complaint with respect to the same allegations.
Compensation
2.10 A complainant may also seek compensation. This must be sought in writing within six years of the conduct which caused the alleged
loss and the claim may be made at any time before the “disposal of the complaint” but not once proceedings have been
instituted in the Tribunal unless the Tribunal grants leave.
PARTIES TO A COMPLAINT
Complainants
2.11 Any person (including a Council and the LSC) may make a complaint relating to the conduct of a legal practitioner.
2.12 People who make complaints fall into a wide variety of categories. The greatest number of complaints are lodged by current clients
of the legal practitioner complained against (42% of complaints against solicitors; 31% of complaints against barristers; and 50%
of complaints about licensed conveyancers). The next largest category is complaints lodged by opposing clients (10% of complaints
against solicitors; and 15% of complaints against barristers) followed by those lodged by previous clients (7% of complaints against
solicitors and 3% for complaints against barristers). Other complainants include other legal practitioners (either on their own behalf
or on behalf of clients), the LSC, judicial officers, the Law Society, people associated with the administration of a deceased estate
and witnesses.
2.13 Of the telephone enquiries received by the OLSC, approximately 70% came from clients of legal practitioners, 7.5% came from a
friend or relative of a client and 6% from an opposing client.
Whistleblowers
2.14 “Whistleblower” is a popular term used to describe a member of an organisation (usually a public sector body) who
discloses to an investigating body that another member of that organisation has engaged in, or proposes to engage in, corrupt conduct.
Protected Disclosures Act 1994
(NSW) currently governs whistleblowing in the public sector and ensures certain protections for whistleblowers, for example, anonymity.
Conceivably a whistleblower could be a complainant under
The Professional Standards Council has published a consultative paper which proposes incorporating whistleblowing principles into
the regulation of professions generally, including the legal profession.
Persons complained against
2.15 Persons whose conduct may be complained against under
include solicitors, barristers,
licensed conveyancers
and public notaries.
Judicial officers cannot be the subject of a complaint under
even in relation to conduct that occurred when they were legal practitioners,
although it is not clear where acting judges stand in this regard.
Some legal practitioners cannot currently be the subject of complaints under
in relation to conduct that took place when they were acting in a number of what could be termed “quasi-judicial” positions.
These include:
arbitrators;
commercial arbitrators;
costs assessors.
2.16 There are no, or inadequate, mechanisms for dealing with complaints for each of these categories under their respective statutes.
The OLSC has received complaints in relation to people acting in these offices, but has been unable to deal with them because they
were not acting as legal practitioners at the time and are therefore outside the LSC’s jurisdiction.
Complaints against individual practitioners only
2.17 The current system deals only with complaints against individuals. Barristers can only be sole practitioners, so this does not
present a problem in their case. However, despite being treated as individuals for the purposes of the complaints system, many solicitors
are part of partnerships or employees of firms.
2.18 The majority of complaints made against solicitors are made against sole practitioners. In 1998/9, 46.5% of complaints were made
against sole practitioners (who comprise only 18% of the practising profession). Nearly 25% of complaints in the same period were
against partners (who comprise 20% of the practising profession), while 12.7% of complaints were against employed solicitors (who
comprise 33% of the profession).
The Professional Standards Department of the Law Society (PSD) has offered some suggestions as to why sole practitioners attract
proportionately more complaints:
This may be explained by the fact that more people tend to procure the services of smaller suburban firms. It also highlights particular
problems often faced by the sole practitioner including cost and time pressures, increasing specialisation, changes to technology
in the workplace and constant changes to the law.
2.19 Similar trends may also be observed in relation to the location of solicitors’ practices. Sydney CBD practices involve
nearly half of all practising solicitors in New South Wales, yet they were the subject of only 31% of complaints. Suburban solicitors
represent 29% of the profession yet account for 37% of complaints, and rural solicitors represent 15% of solicitors but account for
25% of complaints.
Complaints against partnerships and firms
2.20 At present there is no mechanism for dealing with complaints against law firms, as opposed to complaints against individual practitioners.
Despite this fact, and notwithstanding advice to complainants to this effect, 3.3% of complaints in 1998/9 were against firms generally
rather than against particular solicitors.
The fact that there is no mechanism to deal with complaints against firms may have particular implications for legislation currently
before Parliament to allow solicitors’ practices to incorporate.
It is assumed that individual members of incorporated law firms will continue to be subject to professional regulation.
SCOPE OF COMPLAINTS
2.21 The following tables, published in the OLSC’s
Annual Report
, illustrate, in broad terms, the scope of complaints received by the LSC and dealt with by the Councils.
Table 2.1: Percentage of complaints and consumer disputes that refer to a specific type of complaint, 1998/9
complaint type
licensed conveyancers
Communication
Compliance matters
Costs agreement
Costs/bills
Ethical matters
Quality of service
TOTAL (numerical)
† One complaint may cover more than one complaint type.
Consumer disputes and disciplinary matters
2.22 The tables derived from the OLSC Annual Reports do not distinguish between complaints in relation to unsatisfactory professional
conduct and professional misconduct on the one hand, and consumer disputes on the other. Certainly at the initial stage of receiving
a written complaint no distinction is made. It is only in the process of investigating and dealing with written complaints that an
identification is ultimately made. In some cases a complaint that on its face discloses a consumer issue may turn out, on investigation,
to involve issues of unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct. In others, a matter identified as a conduct
issue by a client may, on investigation, turn out to be a consumer dispute. Some matters will, inevitably, involve both conduct and
consumer issues. Issues relating to the consumer aspect are dealt with in Chapter 3.
Complaints against barristers and complaints against solicitors
2.23 It has been suggested that, despite the fact that
essentially makes no distinction between barristers and solicitors, the conduct issues that must be dealt with by the Bar Council
are substantially different to those dealt with by the Law Society. This is said to lead to different perspectives as to what is
required from the disciplinary system, particularly in terms of procedural fairness. For example, the Bar Association argues that
the fact that solicitors usually operate trust accounts, while barristers are precluded from operating them, may lead to differences
in the usual course of action against solicitors.
For example, it is argued that:
disciplinary allegations against a solicitor often emerge in the ordinary course of the Law Society’s conduct of its affairs
(eg as a result of a routine trust account inspection) whereas allegations against a barrister usually arise only in, and by reason
of, a discrete complaint by a “lay complainant”.
2.24 This view, however, may not be borne out by the figures available. As already noted, in 1998/9 trust fund matters involved 6%
of complaints against solicitors (and 2% of those against barristers). Clients of solicitors were responsible for 42% of complaints
say that the use by solicitors of trust accounts does not, in some instances, have an impact on the way complaints against solicitors
are raised and dealt with. There is, at least, clearly a difference in volume and the nature of complaints that must be dealt with
in relation to barristers as opposed to solicitors. Indeed, some have argued that the issues facing the Bar and the Law Society in
relation to professional conduct are so different, that different regimes are justified.
Table 2.2: Number of complaints opened by Law Society, by type of complaint, 1995/6 to 1998/9
complaint type
Unethical conduct
Failure to account
Overcharging
Failure to carry out instructions
No communication
Conflict of interest
Consumer dispute
Not complying with undertaking
Failure to transfer documents
Act without/contrary to instructions
Fail to pay third party
Transfer costs without authority
No client advice
Review re-investigation
Discourtesy
No advice on progress
Lack of supervision
Communicating with a client of another solicitor
Failure to provide a detailed account
Client funds at risk
Arising from a trust account inspection
No statement available
Not complying with cost agreement
Loss of documents
Intermingling money
Total complaints opened
Table 2.3: Number of complaints opened by Bar Association, by type of complaint, 1996/7 to 1998/9 complaint type 1998/9
complaint type
Annual Report 1998/9
Annual Report 1997/8
Annual Report 1996/7
Acting contrary to/failure to carry out instructions
Acting without instructions
Alleged breach of Bar Rules 18 & 59
Breach of confidentiality
Breach of s 25 of LPA
Breach of undertaking
Breached Bar Rule 48
Breached Bar Rule 54
Breached Bar Rule 66
Breached Bar Rule 75
Breached Bar Rule 80
Conflict of interest
Conspiracy to pervert course of justice
Delay/failure to provide chamber work
Dishonesty/misleading conduct
Ethics inquiry/complaint
Exerted undue pressure
Failure to adduce available evidence
Failure to advise
Failure to advise properly or at all
Failure to appear
Failure to carry out instructions
Failure to comply with Part 2 of LPA
Failure to comply with undertaking
Failure to cross examine competently
Failure to respond to s 152 notice
Failure to return brief
Failure to use interpreter
Fees dispute
Improperly applied provisions of
Motor Vehicle Accidents Act
Incompetence (in court)
Incompetence (outside court eg advice)
Incompetence (outside & inside court)
Intoxicated when appearing or seeking to appear
Misleading the court
Obstruct/delay proceedings
Other unethical conduct
Otherwise negligent
Over zealous cross-examination
Overcharging/overservicing
Personal conduct
Pressure to change plea
Pressure to plead guilty
Pressure to settle
Rudeness/discourtesy
Total complaints opened
THE INITIAL ROLE OF THE LEGAL SERVICES COMMISSIONER
2.25 Once a complaint is received by the LSC it undergoes a process of refinement where the issues are identified and parts of the
complaint are ultimately characterised as relating to unsatisfactory professional conduct, professional misconduct or a consumer
dispute. First, the LSC may request further particulars or a statutory declaration to verify the information already provided.
If these requests are not complied with, the LSC may dismiss the complaint.
In 1998/9 185 complaints (170 against solicitors and 15 against barristers) were dismissed because further particulars were not provided.
2.26 The LSC may then decide to:
investigate the complaint – in 1998/9 this occurred with respect to 62 complaints (or 2.2% of all complaints): 51 against solicitors,
5 against barristers and 6 against licensed conveyancers;
refer the complaint to the appropriate Council (if this is done the complaint must be referred “so far as practicable”
within 21 days of the receipt of the complaint or further particulars requested by the LSC)
– in 1998/9 this occurred with respect to 849 complaints (or 29.6% of all complaints): 788 against solicitors, 59 against barristers,
and 2 against licensed conveyancers;
dismiss the complaint on the grounds that it is “vexatious, misconceived, frivolous or lacking in substance”
– in 1998/9 this occurred with respect to 197 complaints (or 6.9% of all complaints): 177 against solicitors, and 20 against
barristers;
if the complaint involves a consumer dispute, refer the consumer dispute to mediation
– in 1998/9 this occurred with respect to 1,382 complaints (or 48% of all complaints): 1,320 against solicitors, 57 against
barristers, and 5 against licensed conveyancers.
2.27 The LSC and Councils have also recently been given the power to dismiss a complaint at any stage (including after investigation)
where they are “satisfied that it is in the public interest to do so”.
Under Part 10, the circumstances under which a complaint may be dismissed on this basis include, but are not limited to, situations
where the complaint is about a legal practitioner who has retired from practice or who is already prevented from practising.
INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS
2.28 Formal investigation is most often carried out by the relevant Council once a complaint has been referred. The Councils have
the ability to delegate their powers under Part 10.
Some investigations are carried out by the OLSC when the LSC decides to retain some complaints. Of the 752 complaints referred to
the Law Society Council in 1998/9, 698 were referred for investigation by the Council, and, of the 59 complaints referred to the
Bar Council,
57 were referred for investigation.
The OLSC handled 2,057 files in the same period, but only 62 involved investigation as opposed to some type of formal or informal
2.29 At the initial stage the LSC, or the Councils (on receipt of a complaint from the LSC) may:
if the matter is a consumer dispute, refer it to mediation;
dismiss the complaint if further particulars are not supplied or the particulars are not verified;
refer matters to a costs assessor;
investigate the complaint.
2.30 The initial investigations for the Law Society Council are conducted by the PSD. The PSD makes the initial investigation and
reports the facts and evidence to the Professional Conduct Committee for decision. The investigation is usually carried out by one
of two sub-committees drawn from, and overseen by, the “joint” Professional Conduct Committee. The joint Committee usually
consists of 24 members and includes Councillors, volunteer practitioners and lay members. A quorum for the joint Committee is three
Councillors and one lay member.
2.31 Complaints referred to the Bar Council for investigation are distributed by the Professional Affairs Director to one of four
Professional Conduct Committees established by the Bar Council. Each Committee is chaired by a Senior Counsel who is a member of
the Bar Council and usually consists of around a dozen barristers, two lay members and an academic member. Each committee investigates
complaints referred to it and ultimately produces a report which usually includes a recommendation to the Bar Council as to what
action it should take.
Supervisory role of the Legal Services Commissioner
2.32 The LSC may take over the investigation of a complaint from a Council.
While the OLSC’s Annual Reports do not provide statistical information on the use of this power, in 1998/9 27 complaints at
the Law Society were “referred to, or finalised by” the LSC.
DETERMINATIONS
2.33 The Councils or LSC must ultimately form a view whether there is a “reasonable likelihood” that the Tribunal will
be “comfortably satisfied” that the practitioner is guilty of either unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct.
2.34 If there is no “reasonable likelihood” of a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct,
the complaint must be dismissed.
In 1998/9, 465 complaints were dismissed for this reason.
2.35 If there is a “reasonable likelihood” of a finding of professional misconduct, the complaint must be referred to
the Tribunal.
2.36 If there is a “reasonable likelihood” of a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct, the Council or LSC may:
dismiss the complaint because of the practitioner’s previous good record – 22 such dismissals occurred in 1998/9;
reprimand the practitioner with consent – 45 such reprimands were issued in 1998/9;
refer the complaint to the Tribunal.
2.37 In 1998/9, the Bar Council referred one complaint to the Tribunal on the basis of unsatisfactory professional conduct,
while the Law Society referred 20 such complaints. If the complaint is dismissed or the practitioner reprimanded, payment of compensation
may still be required.
The LSC issued reprimands with compensation in two instances in 1998/9.
REVIEW BY THE LEGAL SERVICES COMMISSIONER OF COUNCIL DECISIONS
2.38 If a Council dismisses a complaint, issues a reprimand or omits allegations originally made when referring a complaint to the
Tribunal, the complainant may request that the LSC review the decision.
A Council may also request a review of its own decision and the LSC may also initiate a review.
A review may also be requested if a Council does not notify the complainant of a decision within six months of the complaint being
referred to the Council (the failure to notify is deemed to be a dismissal).
However, the LSC may postpone the review if there is good reason for the Council’s delay.
2.39 In 1998/9 the Law Society made 453 reviewable decisions and the Bar Council made 72. In the same period 141 requests for reviews
were made (representing 30% of the Law Society’s decisions and 9.72% of the Bar Association’s).
2.40 The request for a review must be made in writing within two months of the decision of the Council being notified to the complainant.
2.41 The LSC has established an expert review panel, consisting of “senior practitioners, legal academics and retired judges
who provide advice on review matters”.
2.42 In conducting the review, the LSC must consult with the relevant Council.
The Council must comply with the directions of the LSC and assist in the review or re-investigation.
2.43 As a result of the review the LSC can:
confirm the Council’s decision to dismiss the complaint or issue a reprimand;
refer the matter to mediation;
direct a reinvestigation of any complaint or part of a complaint by the Council or the OLSC;
issue a reprimand if the practitioner consents to the reprimand;
institute proceedings before the Tribunal or direct the Council to do so.
2.44 Of the 308 reviews finalised in 1989, the LSC confirmed the dismissal of 249 complaints against solicitors and 17 against barristers
and the reprimand of 5 solicitors and 2 barristers; directed 9 mediations in relation to complaints against solicitors; and directed
11 reinvestigations by the Law Society. No reprimands were issued on review, nor proceedings instituted before the Tribunal.
2.45 There is a number of provisions dealing with mediation. Section 142 provides that when a complaint is referred to the appropriate
Council, the LSC can recommend that some or all of the complaint be referred to mediation. Section 144 also provides that a Council
or LSC may, when dealing with a complaint, refer a consumer dispute for mediation. Mediation of a “consumer dispute”
is stated to be:
not limited to formal mediation procedures and extends to encompass preliminary assistance in dispute resolution, such as the giving
of informal advice designed to ensure that the parties are fully aware of their rights and obligations and that there is full and
open communication between the parties concerning the dispute.
2.46 If the consumer dispute is mediated, the matter goes no further in relation to the consumer dispute. However, any part of the
investigation relating to unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct must continue notwithstanding the mediation
and the mediator may, in any case, recommend an investigation by the Council or LSC (without disclosing any information obtained
in the course of the mediation).
Further, there is provision that a complaint may be referred to mediation following a review of a Council’s decision by the
2.47 In 1998/9 56 complaints against legal practitioners were referred to the relevant Council for mediation (54 in relation to solicitors
and 2 in relation to barristers).
In the same period some 1,342 complaints against practitioners
handled by the OLSC were involved in some form of formal or informal mediation.
THE TRIBUNAL
2.48 A complaint must be referred to the Tribunal if the relevant Council or the LSC decides that there is a “reasonable likelihood”
of a finding of professional misconduct. Referral to the Tribunal is also an option when it is decided that there is a “reasonable
likelihood” of unsatisfactory professional conduct. In 1998/9 the LSC referred 13 practitioners
to the Tribunal, the Law Society Council referred 20 solicitors
and the Bar Council referred one barrister.
When the Legal Services Division of the Administrative Decisions Tribunal was established on 6 October 1998, there were already 59
matters from the old Legal Services Tribunal. A further 23 new matters (21 concerning solicitors and 2 concerning barristers) were
received between then and 30 June 1999. Twenty six of the 82 outstanding matters were disposed of by 30 June 1999.
Composition of the Tribunal
2.49 The composition of the Tribunal varies depending on whether the legal practitioner complained against is a barrister or solicitor.
The Tribunal consists of one judicial member, one barrister member and one lay member in the case of complaint against barristers.
In relation to complaints against solicitors, the Tribunal consists of a one judicial member, a solicitor member and a lay member.
The judicial members and barrister members for complaints against barristers appear to be drawn from a pool of practitioners referred
to as “non presidential judicial (barrister) members” and the judicial members and solicitor members for complaints against
solicitors appear to be drawn from a pool of “non presidential judicial (solicitor) members”.
The lay members are drawn from a pool of “non presidential judicial (lay) members”.
In judgments of the Tribunal, the members are often referred to as the “presiding judicial member”, “the judicial
member” and “member” respectively.
The presiding judicial member is sometimes the Deputy President (Legal Services).
Parties before the Tribunal
2.50 When a complaint is brought to the Tribunal the LSC or the relevant Council becomes the informant.
The complainant is not a party to the matter. However, the following are entitled to appear before the Tribunal: the legal practitioner
complained against, the relevant Council, the LSC, the Attorney General and the complainant.
Complainants are entitled to appear subject to leave, unless they are making a submission with respect to compensation, in which
case they may appear as of right.
Anyone else may only appear subject to leave from the Tribunal. Those appearing may do so personally or they may be represented by
a legal practitioner.
The information
2.51 When the information is filed in the Tribunal the practitioner must then file a reply to the allegations in the information.
The Tribunal may, on application of the LSC or Council who laid the information, vary the information to omit or add allegations.
Tribunal Hearings
2.52 Hearings before the Tribunal are generally to be conducted in public
except that the hearing of a matter relating to unsatisfactory professional conduct will usually be conducted in private unless the
presence of the public is found to be “in the public interest or the interests of justice”.
The Tribunal’s decision
2.53 If the practitioner is found not guilty the Tribunal must dismiss the information. In 1998/9, of the 33 Tribunal outcomes, three
complaints were dismissed and one was withdrawn and dismissed.
2.54 If the practitioner is found guilty of professional misconduct, the Tribunal can order that the practitioner be removed from
the roll of practitioners.
Nine solicitors were removed from the roll of practitioners in 1998/9.
In addition, if the practitioner is found guilty of either professional misconduct or unsatisfactory professional conduct, the Tribunal
order that the practitioner’s practising certificate be cancelled;
order that the practitioner not be issued with a practising certificate until a specified time has elapsed;
fine the practitioner up to $50,000 for professional misconduct and up to $5,000 for unsatisfactory professional conduct (to be paid
to the Public Purpose Fund
issue a public or private reprimand;
require the practitioner to undertake and complete a specified legal education course.
Results from matters before the Tribunal in 1998/9 are outlined in the following table.
Table 2.4: Results of Tribunal proceedings, 1 July 1998 to 30 June 1999
Reprimanded (private)
Removed from roll
Reprimanded
Reprimanded and fined (ranging from $1,000 to $25,000)
Reprimanded, fined $10,000 and restricted practising certificate for 3 years
Restricted practising certificate
Suspended, practice restrictions, continuing legal education
Withdrawn and dismissed
Withdrawn/discontinued
Application approved
2.55 The low number of dismissals is probably the result of the requirement that there be a “reasonable likelihood” of
a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct before Tribunal proceedings can be initiated by the relevant
Council or LSC.
Compensation
2.56 Compensation in the form of payment, waiver or repayment may be ordered against the practitioner if found guilty, but the evidence
must be provided by the complainant (the Councils and LSC have no standing in relation to compensation). The compensation can be
up to $10,000 or more if the practitioner and complainant both consent.
No compensation need be paid if the complainant has received or is entitled to receive compensation by court order or from the Fidelity
2.57 Costs orders can be made against a practitioner who is found guilty of professional misconduct or unsatisfactory professional
If the practitioner is found not guilty, the practitioner’s costs may be met (but only if “special circumstances so warrant”)
from the Public Purpose Fund.
TRIBUNAL APPEAL PANEL
2.58 Any order or decision of the Tribunal may be appealed to a Tribunal Appeal Panel:
on a question of law, as of right; and
in relation to the merits of a decision, by leave from the Appeal Panel.
2.59 An Appeal Panel must consist of one presidential judicial member, one other judicial member and one non-judicial member.
In practice these will most likely be the Deputy President (Legal Services), a member who is a legal practitioner, and a lay member
of the Tribunal.
2.60 The appeal must be made within 28 days of the Tribunal furnishing the parties with written reasons.
As at 30 June 1999, only one appeal had been lodged from the Tribunal to the Appeal Panel.
APPEALS TO THE SUPREME COURT
2.61 An appeal to the Supreme Court lies against a decision of the Appeal Panel, but only in relation to a question of law.
COMPLAINTS ARISING DURING THE COURSE OF AN INVESTIGATION
2.62 Under the current scheme the same procedural requirements must be followed in relation to additional complaints that arise during
the course of an investigation as are followed with respect to the initial complaint. An additional complaint that arises during
an investigation of a legal practitioner must therefore be separately initiated, investigated and a decision made about whether to
refer it to the Tribunal, before it can be included with an already existing complaint or set of complaints. A formal investigative
stage, between initiation of the a complaint and referral to the Tribunal, must take place to satisfy the requirements of Part 10
in relation to the investigation of complaints.
RESOLUTION OF COMPLAINTS OTHER THAN UNDER PART 10
2.63 Not all complaints against lawyers are handled by the LSC. Complaints can also be handled by the courts or within the relevant
organisation.
Supreme Court
2.64 The Supreme Court retains an inherent jurisdiction as well as a general role in deciding negligence claims. Indeed, the Supreme
Court’s inherent jurisdiction is expressly preserved by Part 10.
The Bar Council decided to apply to the Supreme Court to strike off one barrister in 1998/9.
The Supreme Court is strongly in favour of retaining its ultimate authority in relation to fitness for practice by determining who
should be on the roll of legal practitioners.
The Legal Services Commissioner’s right to appear in the Supreme Court
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) allows the Bar Association and the Law Society to appear, by legal representative, before the Supreme Court when it exercises
any of its functions in relation to barristers and solicitors respectively.
This includes appeals from the disciplinary process to the Court of Appeal as well as the exercise of the Supreme Court’s residual
to the LSC as is currently made with respect to the Bar Association and Law Society.
Internal resolution
2.66 Some major organisations that employ solicitors have internal complaints management systems which may keep some matters out of
the system established by
For example, the Legal Aid Commission has a mechanism for dealing with and resolving complaints from its clients. This mechanism
has been described by the Audit Office as “comprehensive” and includes systems for monitoring client satisfaction.
The Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions has a Service Relations Office which provides a point of contact for complaints
and suggestions and “seeks to identify the causes of dissatisfactions and tries to eliminate them”.
EVALUATING THE SYSTEM
2.67 This chapter has outlined the operation of the system for handling complaints against lawyers established by
One of the ways of evaluating the system is to measure its various components against criteria considered necessary for effective
complaints handling. The following criteria have been adapted from a guide to good complaints handling practice prepared by the Commonwealth
Ombudsman to assist government agencies with the establishment and maintenance of complaints handling systems.
They have particular relevance to the handling of consumer complaints, but can also apply to complaints relating to conduct:
Commitment.
This refers to the commitment of the relevant organisations to the complaints handling system and deals with such questions as whether
appropriate and adequate resources (financial and other, including training and development) are devoted to the system.
A complaints handling system must be seen to be fair to all participants. Some of the necessary components of a fair system are that
the system be:
– transparent;
– impartial (that is, without prejudice or bias);
– confidential (including considerations of privacy); and
– capable of offering appropriate outcomes or remedies.
Important aspects of fairness include, for example, the provision of reasons for decisions and giving participants in the system the
opportunity to respond and seek review.
Accessibility.
The term “accessibility” covers a wide range of issues including providing information (in different forms where appropriate)
– complainants’ rights and responsibilities;
– how to complain;
– details of the process itself; and
– what outcomes can be expected.
Use of the system should also be encouraged by, for example, visibility, providing assistance in making complaints and eliminating,
where possible, barriers to entering the system, such as complex language and obscurity.
Responsiveness.
This is about how complaints are dealt with and includes consideration of such matters as setting targets for the timely completion
of various stages, establishing and documenting procedures and collecting relevant data.
Effectiveness.
This refers to reviewing the ability of a complaints handling body to address complaints and about the use of data to improve processes.
Input relevant to such reviews will come from complainants, practitioners, the complaints handling bodies and the public.
Accountability.
A complaints handling system must be open and accountable and allow the participants and the public to judge whether the system works
effectively. Reporting is an important part of this aspect and can involve publication of details of activities, including data about
complaints made, time taken, remedies granted, levels of satisfaction achieved and action taken to improve the system.
2.68 In 1998, the New South Wales Audit Office noted that the Legal Aid Commission’s complaint handling system would benefit
from assessment against standards similar to the one listed above.
The Commission welcomes submissions on how the process operating under
measures up to these criteria and what can be done to improve matters. Chapters 4, 5 and 6 identify a number of specific issues about
the operation of the complaints system.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
s 136(2)(a).
Legal Profession Act 1987
s 136(2)(b).
Legal Profession Act 1987
Annual Report 1998/9
at 55 and 57.
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
, as amended by the
Legal Profession Amendment (Complaints and Discipline) Act 2000
(NSW) Sch1[1].
Legal Profession Act 1987
Annual Report 1998/9
Annual Report 1997/8
Annual Report 1996/7
at 14 and 18.
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
, inserted by the
Legal Profession Amendment (Complaints and Discipline) Act 2000
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Annual Report 1998/9
Annual Report 1998/9
Protected Disclosures Act 1994
. New South Wales, Professional Standards Council,
Whistleblowing in the Professions
(Consultative Paper, April 2000). See para 4.22-4.23.
Legal Profession Act 1987
. As part of a system jointly administered by the OLSC and the Department of Fair Trading: See
Conveyancers Licensing Act 1995
The Department of Fair Trading is currently conducting a review of the regulation of conveyancers, including the operation and application
in respect of conveyancers: New South Wales, Department of Fair Trading,
Review of the
Conveyancers Licensing Act 1995
(Issues Paper, 2000).
Public Notaries Act 1997
Legal Profession Act 1987
Complaints against Judicial Officers in New South Wales are dealt with in accordance with
Judicial Officers Act 1986
Bruce v Cole
(1998) 45 NSWLR 163.
Preliminary Submission
Arbitration (Civil Actions) Act 1983
Commercial Arbitration Act 1984
. See, for example,
District Court Act 1973
(NSW) s 164E;
Fair Trading Tribunal Act 1998
(NSW) Sch 3;
Land and Environment Court Act 1979
(NSW) s 61H; and
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) s 110K.
Supreme Court Rules 1970
Legal Profession Act 1987
Div 6, especially
. A number of submissions have suggested extending the scope of the complaints system to cover various people including judges, costs
assessors and legal practitioners acting as arbitrators, mediators and referees: see, for example, B Golder,
Preliminary Submission
at 1-2; and NSW Legal Reform Group,
Preliminary Submission
at para 6.3; W Lawrence,
Preliminary Submissions
; while others have suggested the powers of the Judicial Commission might be extended to cover such situations: NSW Bar Association,
Preliminary Submission 1
at para 66.
. Law Society of NSW, Professional Standards Department,
Annual Report 1998/9
. Law Society of NSW, Professional Standards Department,
Annual Report 1998/9
. Law Society of NSW, Professional Standards Department,
Annual Report 1998/9
. Law Society of NSW, Professional Standards Department,
Annual Report 1998/9
Legal Profession Amendment (Incorporated Legal Practices) Bill 2000
See also New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department, Legal Profession Advisory Council,
Incorporation of Solicitor’s Practices Under the Corporations Law
(Report, 1988); and J W Shaw, “Incorporation of legal practices under the Corporations Law”
(1999) 37(10)
Law Society Journal
This issue was also raised by the OLSC during preliminary consultations.
. P Rosier (letter to the Editor), “Incorporation makes sense”
Australian Financial Review
(7 June 2000) at 59.
Annual Report 1998/9
. NSW Bar Association,
Preliminary Submission 2
. NSW Bar Association,
Preliminary Submission 2
. A separate regime for the Bar may have some political support: See New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly (10 November 1993) Whelan, Debate on the second reading at 5097.
. Law Society of NSW Professional Standards Department,
Annual Report 1998/9
Annual Report 1998/9
Annual Report 1997/8
Annual Report 1996/7
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Annual Report 1998/9
Annual Report 1998/9
Legal Profession Act 1987
Annual Report 1998/9
Legal Profession Act 1987
Annual Report 1998/9
Legal Profession Act 1987
Annual Report 1998/9
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) s 157. NB – the power of the Bar Council to delegate generally under the Act has been extended by
Legal Profession Act 1987
Annual Report 1998/9
Annual Report 1998/9
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
. Law Society of NSW, Professional Standards Department,
Annual Report 1998/9
. J Gormly, “Conduct of Complaints Against Barristers” [1998]
(No 48) at 1; NSW Bar Association,
Annual Report 1999
Legal Profession Act 1987
Annual Report 1998/9
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
s 155(3)(b).
Legal Profession Act 1987
s 155(3)(a).
Legal Profession Act 1987
. Information supplied by the NSW Bar Association (26 June 2000).
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Annual Report 1998/9
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
s 160(1)(a).
Legal Profession Act 1987
s 160(1)(b).
Legal Profession Act 1987
s 160(1)(c)
, (c1) and (c2).
Legal Profession Act 1987
s 160(1)(c3).
Legal Profession Act 1987
s 160(1)(d).
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
s 160(1)(b).
Annual Report 1998/9
. 1,281 in relation to solicitors; 56 in relation to barristers; and 5 in relation to licensed conveyancers: OLSC,
Annual Report 1998/9
Annual Report 1998/9
Annual Report 1998/9
at 57. But see Law Society of NSW, Professional Standards Department,
Annual Report 1998/9
at 11 and 23, where it is stated that the Law Society Council resolved to refer 12 matters to the ADT in 1998/9 – this may be
because other cases were referred to the old Legal Services Tribunal in the early part of the same period.
. Information supplied by the NSW Bar Association (26 June 2000).
Annual Report 1998/9
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
(NSW) Sch 2
Div 3 cl 4.
. The current membership of these pools is detailed in New South Wales,
Law Almanac 2000
(LBC Information Services, Sydney, 2000) at 83.
. Law Almanac 2000 at 83.
. See, for example,
Law Society of NSW v Hurley
[1999] NSWADT 140.
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
. In accordance with
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Annual Report 1998/9
Legal Profession Act 1987
s 171C(1)(a).
Annual Report 1998/9
Legal Profession Act 1987
s 171C(1)(b).
Legal Profession Act 1987
s 171C(1)(c).
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
s 171C(1)(d).
Legal Profession Act 1987
s 171C(1)(e)
Legal Profession Act 1987
s 171C(1)(f).
. This includes decisions taken by the old Legal Services Tribunal as well as the new Legal Services Division of the ADT: OLSC,
Annual Report 1998/9
at 59. See ADT,
Annual Report 1998/9
at 23 for figures relating only to the new Tribunal.
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Annual Report 1998/9
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
. Contained in Div 5. See
Barwick v Law Society of NSW
[2000] HCA 2
at para 61-64.
Legal Profession Act 1987
Barwick v Law Society of NSW
[2000] HCA 2
at para 118.
. Information supplied by the NSW Bar Association (26 June 2000).
. J Spigelman,
Preliminary Submission
at 1; But see para
6.28-6.29 in relation to appeals from decisions of the Tribunal.
Legal Profession Act 1987
Preliminary Submission
Appendix, item 2.
. New South Wales, Audit Office,
Key Performance Indicators
(Performance Audit Report, 1998) at 54. As at the end of June 1999 there has been no external reporting of this system.
. New South Wales, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions,
Annual Report 1998/9
. Australia, Commonwealth Ombudsman’s Office,
A Good Practice Guide for Effective Complaint Handling
(2nd edition, 1999). It should be noted that the system under
is more complex than a simple model of a client complaining to a government agency about that agency’s activities in that the
participants in the system (practitioners, complainants, the professional associations, the LSC and the public) have various, and
often overlapping, interests in the operation of the system and its outcomes. See also Alaska, Ombudsman, “Devising a Government
Complaint System: Guide to Good Practice”
(as at 21 July 2000) �
www.state.ak.us/ombud/complsys.htm
�; and Performance Audit Report 1998 at 54.
. Performance Audit Report 1998 at 54.
Issues Paper 18 (2000) - Complaints against lawyers: Review of Part 10
3. Regulatory issues
History of this Reference (Digest)
3.1 As outlined in the previous chapter, the system of complaints management involves, at various stages, the Legal Services Commissioner
(LSC), the Bar Council and/or the Law Society Council (the Councils). The LSC and the Councils each have varying roles and responsibilities.
The system currently in operation can be described as one of co-regulation and lies somewhere along the spectrum between professional
self regulation and full independent regulation.
Self regulation
3.2 Self regulation, which essentially involves a group of people regulating or controlling their own activities,
is a common attribute of professional groups. Self regulation can be found across a range of activities of various groups and can
involve any combination of, for example, control of admission to the group, the setting of professional standards, and the disciplining
of members. Some groups will also have some measure of external control alongside their self-regulating aspects.
3.3 An important characteristic of a self regulatory regime is the primacy it gives to the idea of professional independence free
from interference. However, there are also some public interest aspects, for example, the professionalism of the legal profession
is seen to have strong public interest aspects, given the importance placed on accessibility to legal representation and due process
as well as other legal services. Nevertheless, factors such as public accountability and more specific consumer concerns may not
be so easily accommodated in predominantly self regulatory models.
3.4 Originally the legal profession in New South Wales was essentially self regulatory so far as disciplinary procedures went (but
with the Supreme Court exercising a supervisory function). Another example of a self regulatory scheme is the Australian Banking
Industry Ombudsman scheme established by the Australian Bankers’ Association. This scheme operates with respect to member banks
in accordance with terms of reference adopted by the Australian Banking Industry Ombudsman Ltd.
However, some mechanisms have been included to ensure a certain degree of independence between the Ombudsman and the member banks.
Co-regulation
3.5 Co-regulatory regimes allow the involvement of organisations other than the professional group. These are usually government and
(sometimes) community bodies. This involvement allows other considerations to compete with those of the profession – such as
public interest issues (for example, against anti-competitive practices) and (more specific) consumer concerns. There are a range
of regimes that can be termed “co-regulatory”. Before the current co-regulatory system was introduced, the Councils used
the term “co-regulatory” to describe the then current system even though it involved all but effective control of the
complaint handling system by the legal profession.
3.6 The term “co-regulatory” has been used in contexts outside the legal profession to describe, for example, the Telecommunications
Industry Ombudsman (the TIO). The membership, powers and terms of reference of the TIO are guided by legislation,
but the scheme itself is funded by industry.
Independent regulation
3.7 At the opposite end of the scale from self regulatory regimes lie independent regulatory regimes which involve regulation of a
profession being taken completely out of the hands of the professional bodies and placed in the hands of an independent body (often
established by the government).
CO-REGULATION IN NEW SOUTH WALES
3.8 The role of the professional associations in the current system of regulation of lawyers can be divided into two main aspects
– regulatory functions and representational functions.
Regulatory functions
3.9 The regulatory functions can be divided into two parts: setting rules and enforcing them. The setting of rules (which is not the
concern of this review) involves the associations in making regulations that govern their respective parts of the profession, subject
to disallowance by the Attorney General.
These regulations will cover such matters as accreditation, practice standards and professional conduct. The enforcement aspect (which
is the focus of this review) involves the associations and the LSC in investigating complaints, dealing with consumer issues and
disciplining members, with serious matters ultimately being dealt with by the Legal Services Division of the Administrative Decisions
Tribunal (the Tribunal). The general community is also involved through lay members on the associations’ conduct committees
and lay members on the Tribunal.
Representational functions
3.10 The Law Society and Bar Association represent their respective branches of the legal profession in various ways. As well as the
involvement outlined in the previous paragraph, the representative capacity takes the professional associations into other areas
closely related to the disciplinary system. For example, the Law Society is involved in determining the funding for the Office of
the Legal Services Commissioner (OLSC) from the Public Purpose Fund
and also owns LawCover which indemnifies negligent lawyers.
These involvements have caused some concern about the appearance of independence within the disciplinary system.
ISSUES ARISING FROM CO-REGULATION IN THE DISCIPLINARY SYSTEM
3.11 There is strong support for co-regulation among the OLSC and the Councils. For example, the Professional Regulation Task Force
of the Law Society of NSW has observed that:
the current situation with joint responsibility for discipline is advantageous for the profession and the public. It continues the
professional responsibility of ensuring that members are of a proper standard and behave in a proper manner with the supervisory
role given to “a legal ombudsman” resulting in enhanced public confidence that justice is both done and seen to be done.
However, there is also strong opposition to the co-regulatory regime from outside the professional bodies.
Involvement of professional bodies
3.12 One major concern for some is the issue of whether it is appropriate for the profession to be involved in the disciplinary system
through its elected bodies.
Some people consider that there is an “inherent conflict of interests between the Society as the advocate for its members’
interest and that of a policeman”.
Similar concerns were noted by the Law Reform Commission in 1993.
The issue is essentially about the appearance of independence and there are also some particular concerns so far as the consumer
aspects of the system go. It is argued that consumers do not see the system as independent because the Councils and the LSC are seen
as agencies for lawyers.
This, combined with concerns about the professional associations’ representative functions,
has led to statements like the following:
The system was designed by the legal profession to protect lawyers and is dominated by the lawyers’ trade unions which assist
lawyers to defend complaints.
3.13 However, it can be argued that the involvement of the profession is important because it:
“preserves independence from control by the Government of the day”;
makes available the expertise of senior members of the profession through, for example, the Professional Conduct Committees.
3.14 It can also be said that the current system tempers the involvement of the profession by allowing some (albeit limited) input
from members of the community through lay representatives.
What is the appropriate role for professional bodies in the disciplinary system?
A legal services ombudsman?
3.15 An alternative model might be a more independent regulatory system with respect to disciplining the legal profession.
Choices include maintaining a form of co-regulation by putting an ombudsman in a supervisory role over the current system
or moving to a completely independent system by replacing the LSC and Councils with an independent ombudsman
to handle all matters previously dealt with under Part 10.
CONSUMER PROTECTION
3.16 The current regime deals with a broad spectrum of complaints from consumer disputes to matters relating strictly to professional
conduct. Some complaints will involve both aspects. The system before 1994 was thought to be aimed only at ensuring “diligence
and competence” of individual practitioners. The Law Reform Commission in 1993 identified some further aims of “setting
and maintaining high standards of ethics and practice for the legal profession generally” and providing for the redress of
consumer complaints against practitioners (referred to as the “consumer dimension”).
The “consumer dimension” is now accommodated in the objects of Part 10.
3.17 The multiple aims of the system continue to sit together somewhat uneasily. Some consider that the aims of ensuring compliance
with professional standards are different from those concerned with looking after the needs of law consumers.
Indeed, a number of US jurisdictions have separated the two systems. Others, however, see the two as interlinked so that the setting
of rules relating to consumer issues will ultimately lead to enforcement of consumer-oriented standards as part of the regulatory
system. The treatment of consumer issues together with conduct issues also allows the monitoring of all complaints so that reviews
can be undertaken and the patterns of consumer complaints observed may point to more serious conduct issues that should be addressed.
For example, discourtesy by practitioners, which may not generally be considered misconduct or unsatisfactory professional conduct,
could become so if it were identified and then proscribed by the relevant rules of conduct.
3.18 There is also said to be consumer confusion about the division of responsibilities between the Councils and the LSC.
This problem was identified by the Law Reform Commission in 1993 when it recorded the American Bar Association’s warning of
the confusion that may result from expanding the number of mechanisms available and the “consequent need to ensure that the
entire system is efficient, effective and well-co-ordinated, with a single point of entry”.
A particular problem occurs in cases where a solicitor and barrister are both implicated in the same course of conduct,
so that facts relating to the same course of conduct may be brought before both the Law Society and Bar Councils.
3.19 Some of the issues concerning consumer confusion have been addressed by s 171MA which was inserted by the
Legal Profession Amendment Act 1998
(NSW). It provides:
Each Council and the Commissioner must produce information about the procedure for dealing with complaints under this Act and ensure
that such information is made available to members of the public on request.
The Commission welcomes submissions on the effectiveness of this section.
Should consumer disputes be dealt with in the same system as disciplinary matters?
How can the needs of consumers be better addressed in the current system?
SETTING THE RIGHT BALANCE
3.20 Addressing the interests of the profession, government and stakeholders in the system for dealing with complaints against lawyers
involves setting the right balance between “ownership of the profession” and professional standards, developed against
community expectations of transparency, accountability and responsiveness to community needs and expectations. The Commission welcomes
submissions concerning the extent to which this balance has been achieved and what can be done to improve current arrangements.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
. See W H Hurlburt,
The Self-Regulation of the Legal Profession in Canada and in England and Wales
(Law Society of Alberta and Alberta Law Reform Institute, 2000) at 1.
. Hurlburt at 3-4.
. See Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before the Law: Women’s Equality
(Report 69 Part 2, 1994) at para 13.32 and 13.43-13.45; and Australian Banking Industry Ombudsman Ltd,
Annual Report 1998/9
. A council and independent chairperson have been established to stand between the Ombudsman’s office and the member banks.
The council consists of an equal number of bank and consumer representatives.
. Notwithstanding the presence of a statutory tribunal and the Conduct Review Panel: see New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Scrutiny of the Legal Profession – Complaints Against Lawyers
(Report 70, 1993) at para 3.15.
Telecommunications (Consumer Protection and Service Standards) Act 1999
. Some distinction may need to be drawn between the establishment of a body independent of the professional bodies and one that is
also independent of members of the profession.
. This terminology is derived from New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department,
National Competition Policy Review of the
Legal Profession Act 1987
(Report, 1998) at 41.
. The LSC has been lobbying for more input into the process of setting practice rules for some time: See, for example, National Competition
Policy Review
Legal Profession Act 1987
Div 2. Some have even questioned whether the complaints system should be funded from the Public Purpose Fund: See, for example, the
concerns of the Council of Social Services NSW raised by Cohen MLC in New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Council (21 October 1998) at 8699. See also New South Wales, Audit Office,
The Law Society Council, the Bar Council and the Legal Services Commissioner: A Review of Activities Funded by the Statutory Interest
(Performance Audit Report, 1997) which notes that with computers and modern banking practice it is easier to identify interest earned
by individual trust accounts.
. Performance Audit Report 1997 at 9. There is also said to be a problem in that LawCover may become aware of conduct which may be
conduct requiring disciplinary action but may not refer that conduct to the Councils/OLSC.
. Law Society of NSW, “Discipline Function” in
Professional Regulation Task Force Report
(May 1997) (as at 28 June 2000) �
www.lawsocnsw.asn.au/about/papers/regulations/regs18.htm
�. See also Law Society of NSW, Professional Standards Department,
Annual Report 1998/9
at 4 and 5.
. See V Drakeford (letter to the Editor), “Legal whistling into the wind”
Australian Financial Review
(17 May 2000) at 24.
. See, for example, N Carson, “Self-regulation a big issue for profession”
Australian Financial Review
(17 March 2000) at 32; The Hon Peter Breen MLC,
Preliminary Submission
at para 1.1, 3.1, 3.2, 3.3; and NSW Legal Reform Group,
Preliminary Submission
. Professional Regulation Task Force Report.
. NSWLRC Report 70 at para 3.7-2.23.
. The Hon Peter Breen MLC,
Preliminary Submission
at para 1.3.
. The Hon Peter Breen MLC,
Preliminary Submission
at para 2.1 and 3.1; For Legally Abused Citizens, Submission to National Competition Policy Review at para 2.18 and 2.21; Performance
Audit Report 1997 at 9.
. V Drakeford (letter to the Editor), “Legal whistling into the wind”
Australian Financial Review
(17 May 2000) at 24.
. Law Society of NSW, “About the Law Society of NSW: Maintaining Professional Standards” (as at 28 June 2000) �
lawsocnsw.asn.au/about/handbook/handbook-Maintain.html
. About the Law Society of NSW: Maintaining Professional Standards.
. About the Law Society of NSW: Maintaining Professional Standards.
. See New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly (21 October 1998) J Hannaford, Speech on the second reading at 8698; Professional Regulation Task Force Report.
. There was some support for the title “Legal Services Ombudsman” when the bill inserting Part 10 was debated in Parliament
in 1993: see, for example, New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
Legislative Assembly (10 November 1993) Whelan, Debate on the second reading at 5097.
. With “proper funding, expertise, resources and power to effectively oversee the conduct of the legal profession and the integrity
of the legal system”: NSW Legal Reform Group,
Preliminary Submission
at para 6.1.
. NSWLRC Report 70 at para 4.2 and also para 3.24-3.31 and 4.8-4.13.
Legal Profession Act 1987
. The Hon Peter Breen MLC,
Preliminary Submission
. See OLSC,
Preliminary Submission
at 12. See also OLSC,
Annual Report 1998/9
. Performance Audit Report 1997 at 60; The Hon Peter Breen MLC,
Preliminary Submission
at para 1.5.
. NSWLRC Report 70 at para 3.46.
. The Hon Peter Breen MLC,
Preliminary Submission
at para 1.4.
Issues Paper 18 (2000) - Complaints against lawyers: Review of Part 10
4. The LSC and the Councils: Complaints handling process
History of this Reference (Digest)
4.1 This Chapter examines the involvement of the Legal Services Commissioner (LSC), the Bar Council and the Law Society Council (the
Councils) in the complaints system and identifies a number of issues.
Definitions
provides that the LSC has the power to receive and investigate complaints about professional misconduct and unsatisfactory professional
These terms are partially defined in
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) which provides that:
unsatisfactory professional conduct includes conduct (whether consisting of an act or omission) occurring in connection with the practice
of law that falls short of the standard of competence and diligence that a member of the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably
competent practitioner or interstate practitioner.
Section 127(1)
provides that professional misconduct includes:
unsatisfactory professional conduct that involves a substantial or consistent failure to reach reasonable standards of competence
and diligence;
conduct not in connection with legal practice which would justify a finding that a legal practitioner is not of good fame and character,
or is not a fit and proper person to remain on the roll of legal practitioners.
4.4 A number of other provisions of the Act declare particular conduct to be professional misconduct.
These include:
Deliberate charging of grossly excessive amounts of costs, and deliberate misrepresentation as to costs.
Having an associate whom the legal practitioner knows has been disqualified from practice, or knows has been convicted of an indictable
offence and does not hold a current practising certificate (in certain circumstances).
Non-compliance with a notice from the LSC or a Council under s 152 requiring information, documents or other cooperation with an investigation
(unless the practitioner has a reasonable excuse).
Non-compliance with a notice from the LSC under s 159 requiring information, documents or other cooperation with a review of a Council
decision (unless the practitioner has a reasonable excuse).
Wilful failure to hold money received on behalf of others in a trust account and to deposit trust account money with the Law Society
as required by Part 6.
Wilful failure to keep accounting records as required by Part 6.
Wilful failure to produce accounting records or other information in connection with an audit under Part 6.
Practising as a solicitor or barrister without holding a current practising certificate as required by Part 3, without a reasonable
Non-compliance with a notice from a costs assessor requiring the production of documents in relation to a costs assessment (unless
the practitioner has a reasonable excuse).
Non-compliance with a notice from a panel convened under Part 11 Subdivision 4A to review a costs assessment, requiring the production
of documents (unless the practitioner has a reasonable excuse).
4.5 Other provisions provide that particular conduct
amount to misconduct. For example, misleading or obstructing an investigation by the LSC or a Council may amount to professional misconduct.
Non-disclosure of estimated costs in accordance with Part 11 of the Act may amount to either professional misconduct or unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Breach of Bar Council or Law Society Council Rules made under Part 4 may also amount to either form of misconduct.
Consequences
4.6 The categorisation of misconduct as either unsatisfactory professional conduct on the one hand, or professional misconduct on
the other hand, has a number of procedural and substantive consequences for the investigation and resolution of complaints made under
Part 10, in particular:
determinations in relation to out of time complaints;
the power of the LSC and Councils to issue reprimands rather than refer complaints to the Legal Services Division of the Administrative
Decisions Tribunal (the Tribunal);
the rules of evidence that apply before the Tribunal;
whether Tribunal hearings are held in public;
the ability of the Tribunal to remove a practitioner from the roll of practitioners;
the maximum fine that may be imposed on a practitioner by the Tribunal.
Are the current definitions satisfactory?
Need for further clarification
4.7 The submissions received so far have raised a number of issues about whether the current definitions of misconduct in Part 10
require further clarification. The Law Society has questioned whether it is necessary to have two categories of misconduct, or whether
one category would be sufficient.
4.8 Other submissions criticised the current definitions as being confusing and limiting.
The Office of the Legal Services Commissioner (OLSC) argued that this leads to uncertainty about whether a practitioner’s conduct
falls within the scope of Part 10. It was argued that this makes it difficult for legal practitioners to know whether particular
conduct is acceptable and for consumers to know whether specific conduct is unacceptable and a complaint should be made.
4.9 Another submission argued that the definitions should be clarified by the incorporation of the relevant common law, and criticised
the divergence between the New South Wales and Victorian definitions of misconduct.
4.10 The National Competition Policy Review of the
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) conducted by the New South Wales Attorney General’s Department concluded that further codification of these definitions
was not necessary.
Medical Practice Act 1992
4.11 The OLSC supports further codification of the standards for unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct,
using as a model the definitions sections in the system for dealing with complaints against medical practitioners in
Medical Practice Act 1992
Medical Practice Act 1992
(NSW) partially defines unsatisfactory professional conduct as including:
Lack of adequate knowledge, skill, judgement or care in the practice of medicine.
Any contravention of the
Medical Practice Act 1992
(NSW) or regulations made under it.
Contravention of any restrictions on a practitioner’s registration.
Convictions for a number of specified offences.
Permitting an employee who is not a medical practitioner to perform work requiring professional skill in some circumstances.
Enabling or assisting an unregistered practitioner to practice medicine in some circumstances.
Using false qualifications.
Failing to render urgent attention.
Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to medical practice.
4.12 The OLSC argued that the definition of unsatisfactory professional conduct in
could be codified to include lack of adequate skill, knowledge, judgement or care; contravention of any provision of the
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW), regulations or any professional rules; contravention of any conditions on the practitioner’s practising certificate;
and any other improper or unethical conduct relating to legal practice.
Medical Practice Act
(NSW) defines professional misconduct as unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to justify the suspension
of the practitioner’s registration or the removal of the practitioner from the roll of medical practitioners.
4.14 Under the
Medical Practice Act 1992
(NSW), the Medical Tribunal has the power to suspend or deregister a medical practitioner if satisfied of any one of the following:
that the person is not competent to practise medicine;
that the person is guilty of professional misconduct;
that the person has been convicted of an offence in circumstances that render the person unfit in the public interest to practise
medicine; or
that the person is not of good character.
Disclosure of estimated costs
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) requires legal practitioners to disclose the estimated costs of services to clients.
The OLSC submitted that a significant proportion of complaints it receives relate to failure by practitioners to comply with these
requirements.
The OLSC submitted that it is difficult to resolve these complaints because the relationship between the disclosure requirements
and the complaints system is not clear.
provides that failure to comply with the costs disclosure requirements does not amount to a breach of the
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW), but is capable of being misconduct.
Although the OLSC has issued a consent reprimand to a practitioner for repeated failure to comply with the requirements,
there is no authority on when non-disclosure of costs amounts to misconduct. The OLSC submitted that the
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) should be amended to clarify that non-disclosure of costs amounts to misconduct.
Advertising
Section 38J
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) provides that legal practitioners must not breach fair trading legislation when advertising their services. In a submission
to the National Competition Policy Review of the
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW), the OLSC suggested that
should be amended to provide that a breach of the section is capable of amounting to unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct.
4.18 Submissions from the OLSC, the Law Society and individuals also dealt with the relationship between professional negligence and
chp4_33" href="#fnip18chp4_33">
Under the current law, negligence will not necessarily constitute unsatisfactory professional conduct unless it demonstrates indifference
to the basic standards of practice.
These submissions argued that
should be amended to clarify that negligence is capable of constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct. This would arguably
give consumers a degree of certainty about what actions constitute negligence.
4.19 The only redress for consumers who have suffered as a result of negligence by a practitioner is to commence civil proceedings.
The OLSC noted that many consumers are reluctant to take this step, because they perceive that it will be difficult and expensive
to win a case against a lawyer, and because they are averse to the idea of hiring another lawyer and to the legal profession in general.
For many consumers, the cost of commencing a civil action is also prohibitive.
The OLSC submitted that complainants find it difficult to understand the difference between misconduct and negligence or to accept
that there will be no disciplinary action against a negligent practitioner. The OLSC also argued that current law allows practitioners
who are negligent to continue to practice unchecked, and this has a negative impact on the standards of the profession generally.
4.20 Some submissions suggest that an independent statutory officer be established to be responsible for deciding from the outset
whether a particular set of circumstances is misconduct or negligence. This is to counter confusion and ensure that separate claims
can be made.
4.21 The definition of unsatisfactory professional conduct refers to conduct that falls short of the “standard of competence
and diligence that a member of the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably competent legal practitioner”.
In its submission to the National Competition Policy Review of the
Legal Profession Act
, the OLSC argued that this standard should be based on the reasonable expectations of a member of the public, rather than those of
a reasonably competent legal practitioner.
The review concluded that the standard should be based on the standard expected of a reasonable person. However the standard of diligence
that a reasonable person would expect of a competent practitioner is a relevant factor in establishing a finding of misconduct.
Whistleblowing
Protected Disclosures Act 1994
(NSW) provides a number of protections to public servants who disclose information about corruption, maladministration or serious
and substantial waste in the public sector. The
Protected Disclosures Act 1994
(NSW) also applies outside the public service in relation to government work performed under contract by private practitioners.
The Professional Standards Council has proposed the extension of whistleblowing principles to the regulation of the private sector,
including the legal profession.
Protected Disclosures Act 1994
(NSW) makes it clear that a person who makes a protected disclosure is not liable to disciplinary action because of the disclosure,
and makes it an offence to take disciplinary proceedings against a person in reprisal against the person making a protected disclosure.
Public Sector Management Act 1988
(NSW) also states that this is a breach of discipline.
If the Professional Standard Council’s proposal is implemented, it may be necessary to clarify that these provisions also apply
in relation to whistleblowing in the legal profession.
Are the current definitions of unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct satisfactory?
, complaints about the conduct of a legal practitioner may be made at any time. However, a complaint cannot be made more than 3 years
after the conduct is alleged to have occurred unless a determination is made to deal with the complaint.
Determinations are made by the LSC, except in respect of complaints made by a Council, in which case the Council is also responsible
for the determination.
4.25 The time limit provision was amended in response to the High Court’s decision in
Barwick v Law Society of NSW
the Court considered the status of a complaint initiated by the Law Society Council about conduct which took place outside the time
limit. The Law Society Council had not obtained a determination from the LSC waiving the time limit. The Council argued that the
time limit should not apply to complaints initiated by the LSC or a Council because the very fact that the complaint was initiated
by the LSC or Council was sufficient to ensure that it was properly brought
. The Court rejected this argument, holding that complaints initiated by the Law Society Council are subject to the time limit.
Should there be a time limit on complaints?
4.26 Arguably, misconduct is always relevant to a practitioner’s fitness to practise, regardless of when it occurred. On this
view, the time lapse between the alleged misconduct and the complaint should not affect the power to conduct an investigation, although
it may be relevant to the sanction imposed if the complaint is upheld.
4.27 On the other hand, the time limit provides certainty and a guard against abuse of the complaints process. There may also be practical
problems investigating complaints about conduct which is alleged to have occurred a very long time earlier, because of difficulties
gathering and assessing the reliability of evidence in such circumstances.
Complaints initiated by the Councils
4.28 The Law Society submitted that no time limit should apply to complaints initiated by the Law Society Council, as such complaints
usually only occur as a result of trust account inspections or existing investigations.
The Law Society also supports the response to the time limit issue adopted by the Government in the
Legal Profession Amendment (Complaints and Discipline) Act 2000
(NSW) after the decision of the High Court in
Barwick v Law Society of NSW
. This Act validates investigations and decisions of the LSC, the Councils, the Tribunal and the courts, rendered invalid as a result
of the High Court’s decision in
, and provides that where a complaint initiated by a Council or the LSC is out of time, the Council or LSC must make a determination
to waive the time limit.
Complaints initiated by the Legal Services Commissioner
4.29 The OLSC submitted that the LSC should not be required to comply with the time limit provision, describing it as peculiar to
require the LSC to determine whether to accept his own complaints out of time.
On the other hand, it is arguable that the recent modifications to the time limit for making complaints under Part 10 reflect the
Government’s intention to require the Councils and the LSC specifically to consider whether to accept out of time complaints
and apply the test set out in the new section.
Length of time limit
4.30 Several submissions argued that the time limit should be increased to six years from the date that the alleged conduct occurred,
to bring it in line with the limitations period for civil proceedings for negligence.
These submissions argued that the time limit creates practical problems because in many instances, for example protracted litigation,
misconduct may not become apparent within three years. There has been some concern that the present time limit does not allow for
misconduct that has occurred over a period of time forming a pattern of behaviour requiring discipline.
Additionally, clients of non-English-speaking background, clients with an intellectual disability or a lay person not familiar with
the options for recourse, may be particularly affected by the operation of s 137.
4.31 The exposure draft version of the bill to introduce Part 10 into the
Legal Profession Act
included a six year time limit.
This was based on the Law Reform Commission’s recommendation in its 1993 report
Complaints Against Lawyers – Scrutiny of the Legal Profession
(Report 70).
When should time start to run?
4.32 Another option would be for the time limit to run from the time the complainant became aware of the alleged misconduct, rather
than the time that the conduct allegedly occurred. The Law Reform Commission also considered this option in Report 70.
Should there be a time limit for making complaints?
If there should be a time limit, should it apply to all complaints, including complaints initiated by the Councils and the LSC?
If there should be a time limit, how long should it be?
If there should be a time limit, should time start to run from the date that the conduct allegedly occurred or the date that the complainant
became aware of it?
COMPLAINTS AGAINST PARTNERSHIPS AND FIRMS
4.33 The OLSC submitted that
should be expanded to cover complaints against firms of practitioners as well as individual practitioners.
The Victorian system, for example, essentially treats firms in the same way as individual practitioners.
Legal Profession Amendment (Incorporated Legal Practices) Bill 2000
(NSW), currently before the Legislative Council, enables solicitors to incorporate their legal practices. If this bill is passed,
the question also arises whether
should apply to incorporated firms.
How should complaints against bodies other than individual practitioners (eg firms or incorporated firms) be dealt with?
REFERRAL OF COMPLAINTS TO THE COUNCILS
Referral after mediation
4.35 Division 4 of
provides for the mediation of consumer disputes. At present,
does not allow the LSC to refer to a Council any conduct issues which require investigation following the completion of a mediation.
The OLSC submitted that the LSC should be given the power to refer complaints to a Council in this situation.
Should the LSC be permitted to refer to a Council any conduct issues that require investigation following mediation of a consumer
Referral outside the time limit
4.36 There is no provision for the referral of a complaint by the LSC to a Council outside the time limit by consent. At present,
the LSC and Councils have an informal arrangement in place for the transfer of a complaint to a Council at any time with the consent
of the Council. The OLSC submitted that this practice should be given a statutory basis under
chp4_64" href="#fnip18chp4_64">
Should the informal arrangement in place for the transfer of a complaint to a Council at any time by consent be given a statutory
basis under
INVESTIGATIONS
Independent investigations
4.37 Ordinarily, complaints are investigated by the Councils, or, in some cases, by the LSC. However,
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) provides for the appointment of an independent investigator by the LSC on the request of a Council. The independent investigator
is to report to the Council, which is then required to make a decision on the complaint. The Bar Association submitted that in this
situation, the Council has no input into the investigation and no monitoring role.
It was submitted that
should be amended to provide for the independent investigator to report to the LSC and for the LSC to decide on the outcome of the
complaint under
be amended to provide that independent investigators should report to the LSC, and that decisions under
in relation to such complaints should be made by the LSC?
Additional complaints
The procedure for dealing with additional complaints
, informations laid in the Tribunal must contain allegations specifically nominated in a complaint and investigated in accordance
with Division 5 of
chp4_66" href="#fnip18chp4_66">
Therefore, whenever an additional complaint arises during the course of an investigation or a Tribunal hearing, the LSC or relevant
Council is required to initiate a further complaint, and conduct a further investigation. An additional complaint may relate to alleged
conduct which occurred more than three years earlier. In this situation, for the additional complaint to proceed, the LSC or Council
must also make a determination to waive the 3 year time limit.
4.39 The Tribunal has the power to vary an information to include additional allegations.
Variation is not precluded because the alleged conduct which is sought to be added occurred more than three years earlier.
This provision was enacted in response to the decision of the High Court in
Barwick v Law Society of NSW
the High Court held that the Tribunal’s power of variation cannot be used to vary an information to add allegations relating
to conduct which occurred more than three years earlier, as this would undermine the time limit.
Justice Callinan criticised the Tribunal’s power to vary the information to join fresh allegations.
Criticism of the procedure
4.40 The OLSC, the Law Society and the Bar Association argued that the Councils and the LSC should be relieved from the necessity
of repeatedly initiating complaints and conducting separate investigations whenever conduct is discovered which departs somewhat
from the terms of the original complaint.
The OLSC submitted that the requirements create procedural difficulties for the administration of
The Bar Association submitted that the procedure is highly technical and sometimes artificial. In
, Justice Kirby also criticised the procedures.
4.41 The OLSC also submitted that compliance with these procedures causes delays in the disposal of complaints. In
, Justice Kirby also expressed “grave concern” at the delays in disposing of the allegations in the complaint before the
High Court and further observed that “unhappily, the recent experience of this Court suggests that such delays may represent
the norm, not an exception.”
Compliance also consumes the resources of the Councils and the LSC.
Options for reform
4.42 The OLSC argued for the insertion of a new section in
stating that an investigation into alleged conduct the subject of a complaint may also extend to any other matter arising out of
the initial investigation that may involve misconduct by the practitioner concerned.
4.43 An alternative way of addressing this issue, according to the OLSC, is to amend the provisions of
dealing with complaints, investigations and the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, to effect a clear division between these aspects of
the complaints process.
The Law Society supports this option.
4.44 Under this approach, a complaint would trigger an investigation into the alleged conduct of a legal practitioner. The investigation
would not be confined to the matters identified in the original complaint.
The LSC or Council conducting the investigation would not be required to repeatedly initiate complaints if further allegations of
misconduct arose.
4.45 The powers of the Tribunal would also be expanded. The Tribunal would be permitted to examine and determine issues outside the
original complaint which arise during an investigation or hearing.
This would ensure that it is not necessary to demonstrate a clear connection between a complaint and an information filed in the
Should the procedural requirements in
for the treatment of additional complaints be modified in response to the decision of the High Court in
Barwick v Law Society of NSW
? If so, how?
Situations where a formal investigation is not necessary
4.46 The OLSC submitted that situations arise where the LSC or relevant Council may be satisfied that there is sufficient evidence
to institute Tribunal proceedings against a practitioner, without having to undertake a formal investigation into a complaint.
For example, a trust accountant’s report may identify sufficient evidence of wilful breaches of the trust account requirements
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW), or a practitioner may be convicted of fraud in criminal proceedings.
4.47 The OLSC submitted that the LSC and the Councils could be satisfied that there is sufficient evidence to institute Tribunal proceedings
by means other than by way of an investigation into a complaint, to avoid having to conduct unnecessary investigations in such circumstances.
Should the LSC and the Councils be able to institute Tribunal proceedings other than by conducting an investigation into a complaint?
If so, in what circumstances should this be permitted?
Client legal privilege
4.48 Under the doctrine of client legal privilege, confidential communications between a legal practitioner and client are not admissible
as evidence in court.
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) provides for limited exceptions to client legal privilege. Under
, practitioners must comply with a requirement under
to answer questions or produce information or documents despite client legal privilege, but only if the client is the complainant
or consents to the disclosure. Practitioners may also disclose information to the LSC, a Council or the Tribunal in breach of client
legal privilege if it is necessary to rebut an allegation in the complaint.
4.49 The OLSC and the Law Society submitted that this exception to client legal privilege should be extended.
It was submitted that because a legal practitioner can avoid the production of documents where the client does not consent to waive
client legal privilege, it is not possible to investigate complaints where it is alleged that a practitioner and client have been
jointly involved in misconduct. The OLSC and the Law Society submitted that practitioners should be required to cooperate with investigations,
despite client legal privilege, even where the client does not consent.
4.50 It was also argued that the exception to client legal privilege is not wide enough to obtain information from practitioners other
than a practitioner against whom a complaint has been made. The OLSC submitted that the exception should be expanded to require a
practitioner to disclose information in breach of client legal privilege if the LSC, Council or Tribunal is satisfied that it is
necessary in the course of an investigation.
4.51 It was submitted that the effect of client legal privilege could be preserved by preventing the LSC and Councils from disclosing
information or documents obtained pursuant to
to the complainant.
Should the exception to client legal privilege in
be extended? If so, how?
Procedural fairness
4.52 One of the express objects of the complaints system set up by
is to ensure that the rules of procedural fairness are applied to all disciplinary proceedings against lawyers.
It is uncontentious that practitioners should be afforded procedural fairness throughout the complaints process – the common
law would require this even if the
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) was silent. The threshold question is what aspects of procedural fairness should be specified in
for the purpose of clarity.
Murray v Legal Services Commissioner
the New South Wales Court of Appeal considered the application of procedural fairness to the investigation of complaints under
chp4_86" href="#fnip18chp4_86">
The Court of Appeal held that procedural fairness requires that before a decision is made under
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW), the legal practitioner who is the subject of the complaint must be given a copy of the complaint and an opportunity to respond
Failure to do so vitiates the institution of Tribunal proceedings.
4.54 In its submission, the OLSC criticised the requirement that the practitioner be provided with a copy of the complaint.
The OLSC submitted that this requirement places undue emphasis on the form of the complaint. The OLSC noted that most complaints
the LSC receives are made by lay persons. In many instances, the complainant is not aware of, or able to describe accurately, all
the misconduct issues arising from the allegations against the legal practitioner. Frequently, the substance of the complaint is
only ascertained during the course of the investigation.
4.55 The OLSC also submitted that in some cases the complaint contains inflammatory or defamatory statements which, if provided to
the practitioner, will escalate the dispute, making it more difficult to resolve. In other situations, where the complaint contains
material which is irrelevant or lacking in substance, providing the practitioner with a copy results in the practitioner wasting
resources responding to allegations which will not be pursued. The OLSC also pointed out that this requirement may prejudice investigations
relating to alleged trust account defalcation.
4.56 The OLSC submitted that the legal practitioner should be entitled to receive, in writing, the substance of the allegations which
are the subject of the investigation. The Law Society supported this submission.
Section 156
Legal Profession Act
(NSW) provides that the LSC or relevant Council must keep a record of its decision in respect of every investigation. Under
, the LSC or relevant Council must notify the complainant and legal practitioner, in writing, of its decision under
, together with the reasons for the decision. The Law Society and the OLSC submitted that this notice requirement should not apply
where the outcome of the investigation is a decision to refer the complaint to the Tribunal.
The Bar Association also submitted that consideration should be given to this issue.
It was argued that substantial resources are wasted complying with the notice requirement in this situation, because the parties
will already be fully aware of the reasons for referral.
4.58 The OLSC argued that where the LSC or Council decides to refer a complaint to the Tribunal, providing the parties with copies
of the draft information and affidavits to be filed in the Tribunal should be sufficient to satisfy the notice requirement under
4.59 The Bar Association submitted that the LSC or Council should only be required to provide written notice of its reasons if it
dismissed the complaint.
4.60 On the other hand, one submission argued that the Law Society should be required to provide more information about its decisions
to the parties.
This submission noted that the Bar Association provides the parties with a copy of the report prepared by the Professional Conduct
Committee which is used to determine complaints. This submission argued that the Law Society should also adopt this practice.
What should be required by
in order to clarify the requirement of procedural fairness to the practitioner and the complainant in respect of a decision under
How extensive should the notice requirements of
Investigative powers
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW), the LSC and Councils have the power to issue notices compelling a legal practitioner whose conduct is the subject of a complaint
to co-operate with an investigation.
This power also applies to reviews of Council decisions by the LSC under Division 6.
Non-compliance with a notice issued under
, without reasonable excuse, is itself professional misconduct, while misleading or obstructing an investigation is capable of amounting
to professional misconduct.
4.62 The Law Society observed that solicitors do not always respond to notices to produce under
chp4_98" href="#fnip18chp4_98">
The OLSC criticised
, observing that it is a source of significant dissatisfaction to both complainants and OLSC staff.
It was submitted that the procedure is time and resource intensive, as well as inefficient. The OLSC estimates that it may be a year
or more before it is able to obtain sufficient information from the practitioner in order to undertake an investigation of a complaint.
4.63 The OLSC submitted that the effectiveness and efficiency of the complaints system would be significantly improved if its powers
to obtain information from practitioners were more flexible. The OLSC argued that the LSC or a delegate should be permitted to attend
a practitioner’s office and inspect files or interview a practitioner who failed to comply with a notice to produce under
4.64 Solicitors are permitted to withhold all files, documents and personal property of a client until the client pays their costs
in full, unless the Supreme Court orders the solicitor to give up the documents.
Sometimes a solicitor will claim this lien over the file of a client who has complained about the solicitor, preventing the client
from gaining access to the file.
4.65 The Councils and the LSC can compel a practitioner to waive this lien if satisfied that it is “necessary for the orderly
transaction of the client’s business”.
The OLSC submitted that it is not clear whether this test covers the situation where a complainant requires the file in order to
determine any possible causes of action against a practitioner. It was submitted that a broader test, such as whether the Council
or LSC is satisfied that waiver is fair and just in all the circumstances, would be more appropriate.
4.66 The Law Society submitted that Councils should have the power to resolve to suspend a practitioner’s practising certificate
until he or she complies with a notice to produce.
4.67 Another submission suggested that the real delays in the complaints system occur after the practitioner has responded to a
4.68 The Bar Association submitted that consideration should be given to amending
to provide that a notice need not be served on the practitioner personally but can be served at his or her last known place of business,
or otherwise in a manner reasonably calculated to bring the notice to the attention of the practitioner.
Are the powers of the LSC and Councils to compel practitioners to co-operate with investigations adequate? If not, what additional
powers should the LSC and Councils have?
Are the sanctions for failure to respond to a
notice adequate? If not, what additional sanctions should apply?
Should the service requirements under
be amended?
TRANSFER OF COMPLAINTS BETWEEN THE LEGAL SERVICES COMMISSIONER AND COUNCILS
4.69 The LSC may take over the investigation of a complaint from a Council if he considers it appropriate to do so,
and may refer a complaint to a Council after commencing an investigation into the complaint.
The LSC may also, with the consent of a Council, refer a complaint to the Council after completing an investigation into the complaint
(including after the institution of Tribunal proceedings).
4.70 One submission argued that complainants should be entitled to a review of a decision to transfer a complaint between the LSC
and relevant Council.
A disadvantage of this is that it increases the length of the complaints handling process.
Should complainants be entitled to a review of a decision to transfer a complaint from a Council to the LSC? If so, who should conduct
the review?
CONSEQUENCES OF NON-COMPLIANCE WITH THE PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS OF
Murray v Legal Services Commissioner
the New South Wales Court of Appeal held that the effect of a breach of the procedural requirements for investigations and decisions
is to invalidate the investigation and any proceedings commenced in the Tribunal.
4.72 The Law Society submitted that non-compliance with the procedural requirements of
should not invalidate Tribunal proceedings. It was submitted that the Tribunal and the Supreme Court should be given remedial power
to cure procedural irregularities in investigation of complaints and the initiation of Tribunal proceedings. The Bar Association
also submitted that consideration should be given to this issue.
4.73 Section 81 of the
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) provides a model for this power. Section 81 provides that procedural defects do not nullify Supreme Court proceedings, and
permits the Supreme Court to cure procedural irregularities rather than setting aside proceedings, or any step taken in proceedings,
or any document, judgment or order.
4.74 The Law Society also submitted that
should be amended to provide that the parties may waive rights arising from non-compliance with the requirements of procedural fairness
, and that failure to object is deemed to amount to waiver.
The Bar Association also submitted that consideration should be given to this issue.
4.75 An alternative approach to this issue, which would cover non-compliance with all the procedural requirements of
, would be to include a validating provision in
providing that the decisions of the Tribunal are deemed to be valid regardless of any procedural irregularities occurring in the
course of investigating and determining a complaint.
Should the Tribunal be given power to cure any non-compliance with the provisions of
be amended to provide for waiver of the procedural fairness requirements?
be amended to include a provision validating Tribunal proceedings regardless of procedural defects?
REVIEW BY LEGAL SERVICES COMMISSIONER OF DECISIONS OF COUNCILS
4.76 Complainants are entitled to have the LSC review decisions about complaints made by the Councils.
This is the only review mechanism available to complainants under
The vast majority of reviews undertaken by the LSC confirm the initial decision of the relevant Council.
The Law Society and the Bar Association submitted that in these circumstances, the right to a review often wastes considerable resources.
It was argued that the right to a review should be restricted to create a disincentive for frivolous applications for review.
4.77 The Law Society submitted either that a small fee should be introduced for conducting reviews, or that a complainant seeking
a review should be required to complete a detailed statutory declaration setting out the reasons the review is requested.
The Bar Association also submitted that consideration should be given to imposing a fee for conducting a review of Council decisions.
The Bar Association also submitted that the review process should be amended to provide that an application for review not determined
within a particular time limit shall be deemed to have been dismissed.
Another approach to this issue would be to give the LSC a power to summarily dismiss an application for review which did not disclose
any basis for reconsideration of the Council’s decision.
Should the right to a review of Council decisions be restricted in any way? If so, how?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) s 131.
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
See para 4.61-4.68.
Legal Profession Act 1987
, inserted by the
Legal Profession Amendment (Complaints and Discipline) Act 2000
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
s 208KD(5).
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
, which regulate the entitlement of interstate legal practitioners to practice in New South Wales under the national practising certificates
scheme, and local registration of foreign lawyers; s 172X, dealing with misconduct by solicitors corporations, and
. See para 2.5-2.7 and 4.24-4.32.
. See para 2.36 and 5.13-5.14.
. See para 6.9-6.12.
. See para 2.52 and 6.13-6.18.
. See paa 2.54.
. See para 2.54.
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary Submission
Issue 1; The Hon Peter Breen MLC,
Preliminary Submission
at para 2.4.
Preliminary Submission
at 8; The Hon Peter Breen MLC,
Preliminary Submission
at para 2.4; S Cuddy,
Preliminary Submission
at 3; NSW Legal Reform Group,
Preliminary Submission
at para 2.2.
Preliminary Submission
. New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department,
National Competition Review of the
Legal Profession Act 1987
(Report, 1998) at Recommendation 9.5.
Legal Profession Act 1987
Preliminary Submission
Legal Profession Act 1987
Preliminary Submission
Preliminary Submission
. OLSC, Submission to National Competition Policy Review at 9-10.
Preliminary Submission
at 15-16; Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary Submission
Issue 12; The Hon Peter Breen MLC,
Preliminary Submission
at para 1.5, 2.2, 2.4.
(1995) 1 LPDR 5.
. The Hon Peter Breen MLC,
Preliminary Submission
at para 2.4.
Preliminary Submission
at 14; G Taylor,
Preliminary Submission
(Oral Submission).
. The Hon Peter Breen MLC,
Preliminary Submission
at para 2.2.
. See para 4.2.
. OLSC, Submission to National Competition Policy Review at 15.
. New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department,
National Competition Policy Review of the
Legal Profession Act 1987
(Report, 1998) at para 9.4, 9.5.
. Professional Standards Council,
Whistleblowing in the Professions
(Consultative Paper, April 2000) at 7.
. Professional Standards Council.
Protected Disclosures Act 1994
Protected Disclosures Act 1994
Public Sector Management Act 1988
Legal Profession Act 1987
, as amended by the
Legal Profession Amendment (Complaints and Discipline) Act 2000
and Sch 1. See para 2.5-2.7.
Barwick v Law Society of NSW
[2000] HCA 2
(3 February 2000).
Barwick v Law Society of NSW
[2000] HCA 2
(3 February 2000) at para 88 per Kirby J.
Barwick v Law Society of NSW
[2000] HCA 2
(3 February 2000) at para 72 per Gleeson CJ, Gaudron and McHugh JJ; at para 97 per Kirby J; at para 143, 171 per Callinan J.
. New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Scrutiny of the Legal Profession – Complaints Against Lawyers
(Report 70, 1993) at para 4.68-4.69.
. NSWLRC Report 70 at para 4.69.
. See also Kirby J’s detailed consideration of the Law Society’s submissions on this point in
Barwick v Law Society of NSW
[2000] HCA 2
(3 February 2000) at para 87-96. Issues arising from the discovery of additional complaints in the course of existing investigations
are dealt with at para 4.38-4.45.
Preliminary Submission
, Appendix at 2.
. B Golder,
Preliminary Submission
at 2; G Taylor,
Preliminary Submission
(Oral Submission). This is the general time limit for civil actions for negligence:
Limitations Act 1969
(NSW) s 14. The time limit for personal injury actions is 3 years: s 18A. See also Part 3, Division 3.
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary Consultation
. B Golder,
Preliminary Submission
Legal Profession Reform Bill 1993
Legal Profession Reform Bill 1993
(NSW) cl 139(1).
. NSWLRC Report 70 Recommendation 12.
. NSWLRC Report 70 at para 4.67.
Preliminary Submission
at 10. See para 2.20.
. See, for example,
Legal Practice Act 1996
(Vic) s 122, 137 and 151.
Preliminary Submission
, Appendix at 3.
Preliminary Submission
, Appendix at 3. See also s 141(4), which provides that the LSC may refer a complaint to a Council even though the LSC commenced but
has not completed an investigation; and s 147A, which is discussed at para 4.69-4.70.
. NSW Bar Association,
Preliminary Submission 2
Barwick v Law Society of NSW
[2000] HCA 2
(3 February 2000) at para 60-64 per Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, McHugh JJ; at para 115 per Kirby J; at para 156 per Callinan J.
. See para 2.5-2.7 and 4.24-4.32.
Legal Profession Act 1987
. Inserted by the
Legal Profession Amendment (Complaints and Discipline) Act 2000
, Sch 1[8].
Barwick v Law Society of NSW
[2000] HCA 2
(3 February 2000) at para 74-76 per Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, McHugh JJ; at para 100 per Kirby J; at para 162 per Callinan J. While Kirby
J ultimately dissented on this point, holding that the variation was valid because Barwick did not object to it when the Law Society
Council applied for it, he also held that in the face of an objection, the variation would have been invalid (at para 108).
Barwick v Law Society of NSW
[2000] HCA 2
(3 February 2000) at para 159-162.
Preliminary Submission
at 3-4; Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary Submission
Issue 3; NSW Bar Association,
Preliminary Submission 1
at para 4 and 18-28.
Barwick v Law Society of NSW
[2000] HCA 2
(3 February 2000) at para 113, 115 per Kirby J.
Barwick v Law Society of NSW
[2000] HCA 2
(3 February 2000) at para 80 per Kirby J. See also para 113.
Preliminary Submission
at 4. The OLSC emphasised that this submission is linked to its submissions in relation to procedural fairness under
, which are discussed at para 4.52-4.60.
Preliminary Submission
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary Submission
. This would require an amendment to s 148 which deals with the investigation of complaints.
. This would require an amendment to s 167 which deals with the institution of proceedings and hearings.
Preliminary Submission
, Appendix at 8.
Evidence Act 1995
Preliminary Submission
at 11; Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary Submission
Legal Profession Act 1987
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550.
[1999] NSWCA 70
(1999) 46 NSWLR 224.
. See also para 4.71 and 5.2.
Murray v Legal Services Commissioner
[1999] NSWCA 70
(1999) 46 NSWLR 224.
Murray v Legal Services Commissioner
[1999] NSWCA 70
(1999) 46 NSWLR 224.
Preliminary Submission
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary Submission
Issues 3 and 4.
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary Submission
Issue 5; OLSC,
Preliminary Submission
, Appendix at 8.
. NSW Bar Association,
Preliminary Submission 1
at para 22-23.
. Note that the practitioner must be served with initiating documents under the
Administrative
Tribunal (Interim) Rules 1998
(NSW), made pursuant to the
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Rules (Transitional) Regulation 1998
(NSW) Rule 14, sub-rule 3.
Preliminary Submission
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
, inserted by the
Legal Profession Amendment (Complaints and Discipline) Act 2000
Legal Profession Act 1987
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary Submission
Preliminary Submission
. For a discussion of the scope of the solicitor’s lien, see
Halsbury’s Laws of Australia
(Butterworths, 1997) Volume 16 at [250-1030]-[250-1065].
Legal Profession Act 1987
Preliminary Submission
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary Submission
Preliminary Submission
. NSW Bar Association,
Preliminary Submission 1
at para 57.
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
, inserted by the
Legal Profession Amendment (Complaints and Discipline) Act 2000
Legal Profession Act 1987
, inserted by the
Legal Profession Amendment (Complaints and Discipline) Act 2000
and Sch 1. Section 167B, also inserted by the
Legal Profession Amendment (Complaints and Discipline) Act 2000
and Sch 1, provides for the substitution of informants.
Preliminary Submission
[1999] NSWCA 70
(1999) 46 NSWLR 224.
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary Submission
Issue 7; NSW Bar Association,
Preliminary Submission 1
at para 12, 29-30, 33.
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary Submission
. NSW Bar Association,
Preliminary Submission 1
at para 32.
Legal Profession Act 1987
, Division 6 as amended by the
Legal Profession Amendment (Complaints and Discipline) Act 2000
. See Law Society of NSW, Professional Standards Department,
Annual Report 1998/9
at 20; Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary Submission
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary Submission
. NSW Bar Association,
Preliminary Submission 1
at para 44-45.
. NSW Bar Association,
Preliminary Submission 1
at para 44-46.
Issues Paper 18 (2000) - Complaints against lawyers: Review of Part 10
5. The LSC and the Councils: Outcome of investigations
History of this Reference (Digest)
5.1 This Chapter deals with the options available to the Legal Services Commissioner (LSC), the Bar Council and the Law Society Council
(the Councils) once an investigation into a complaint has been carried out. The next Chapter deals with the options available to
the Legal Services Division of the Administrative Decisions Tribunal (the Tribunal).
TEST FOR REFERRAL TO THE TRIBUNAL
5.2 After completing an investigation into a complaint, the LSC or relevant Council must institute proceedings in the Tribunal, if
satisfied that there is a reasonable likelihood that the practitioner will be found guilty by the Tribunal of unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct.
Murray v Legal Services Commissioner
Sheller JA commented that this test imposes a duty on the Council or LSC to attempt to predict the outcome of a hearing in the Tribunal.
5.3 Like committal hearings in criminal proceedings, this aspect of the complaints process has a number of purposes. The process acts
as a filter to ensure that insubstantial complaints do not proceed to the Tribunal for hearing. This saves resources as well as providing
a level of protection to practitioners. The process is also closely linked to procedural fairness under the complaints system.
5.4 In its preliminary submission to this review, the Office of the Legal Services Commissioner (OLSC) criticised the test for referral
of complaints to the Tribunal.
The OLSC submitted that in attempting to assess what the Tribunal may decide, the LSC relies heavily on the Tribunal’s previous
decisions in relation to particular issues. Therefore, it was submitted, it is difficult to determine whether there is a “reasonable
likelihood” that the Tribunal will find a practitioner guilty of misconduct where the matter involves new issues that have
not previously been determined by the Tribunal.
5.5 The OLSC submitted that the test for referral to the Tribunal is also problematic when a complaint comes down to a conflict in
evidence between the complainant and the practitioner. The OLSC noted that often a complaint depends on the respective credibility
of the parties and observed that in such cases, without the ability to test the evidence, these complaints are usually dismissed
rather than referred to the Tribunal.
5.6 The OLSC submitted that the test for referral to the Tribunal is too onerous. It was argued that an appropriate test would be
whether or not the evidence establishes a “case to answer” against the practitioner, which is the test used by analogous
prosecuting bodies.
The Bar Association also submitted that there is a need to consider whether there should be a statutory test for determining how
complaints should be dealt with and whether the current test for referral to the Tribunal is appropriate.
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) prescribe a test for referral of complaints to the Tribunal? If so, is the current “reasonable likelihood” test
appropriate? If not, what should the test for referral to the Tribunal be?
ENFORCEABLE UNDERTAKINGS
5.7 The OLSC submitted that the resolution of many consumer or conduct complaints by the Councils and the LSC involves the practitioner
agreeing to take specific steps, such as transferring a file or lodging court documents.
It was argued that there should be an effective mechanism for the enforcement of such agreements.
Section 87B
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) provides that the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) may accept a written undertaking in connection with
its functions. The undertaking may only be varied or withdrawn with the consent of the ACCC. If the ACCC considers that the terms
of an undertaking have been breached, it can apply for a court order requiring compliance or compensation. The OLSC suggested this
provision as a model for an enforceable undertakings power that could be used for the LSC and the Councils in dealing with complaints
against lawyers.
Should the LSC and Councils be given the power to enter enforceable undertakings with practitioners in relation to complaints?
COMPENSATION
5.9 The LSC and Councils do not have any enforceable power to order practitioners to pay compensation to complainants. Compensation
orders may be made as part of the mediation of consumer disputes,
or by the Tribunal.
The OLSC criticised the current provision for the award of compensation to complainants under
chp5_11" href="#fnip18chp5_11">
It was argued that the Tribunal’s powers to make compensation orders are inadequate.
5.10 The other option for a complainant seeking compensation are to bring civil proceedings against the practitioner, either in a
court or in the Consumer Claims Tribunal, or to apply to the Fidelity Fund. The OLSC argued that these options are inadequate in
terms of cost and complexity. The OLSC also argued that complainants are often reluctant to pursue compensation claims through the
legal system as they have lost faith in the legal profession, and perceive that it is not possible to sue a lawyer successfully.
5.11 The OLSC submitted that consideration should be given to empowering the LSC to order practitioners to pay compensation to complainants.
The Commission notes that the powers of the Tribunal to make compensation orders are restricted – the Tribunal can only award
compensation if it finds the practitioner guilty of misconduct; there is a statutory maximum of $10,000 of compensation; and a compensation
order cannot be made if the complainant has or is entitled to receive other compensation.
If the LSC was empowered to make compensation orders, it may be appropriate to impose similar restrictions. In addition, it may be
desirable to provide a review process for compensation orders made by the LSC.
5.12 Legal practitioners in New South Wales are required to hold an approved indemnity insurance policy.
Compulsory professional insurance relates to professional negligence and does not cover compensation orders made under
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW). One submission argued that it is preferable that complainants should be compensated by way of civil negligence actions since
insurance, which covers practitioners for liability for professional negligence, is compulsory.
Should the LSC be given a power to order practitioners to pay compensation to complainants?
If so, should there be a statutory maximum amount?
If so, what should it be? What other restrictions on such a power would be appropriate?
gives the LSC and Councils the power to reprimand practitioners in certain circumstances.
Reprimands can only be issued where the LSC or relevant Council, after completing an investigation into a complaint, is satisfied
that there is a reasonable likelihood that the practitioner will be found guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct, but not
professional misconduct. The practitioner must consent to the reprimand.
5.14 The Law Society submitted that this power should be enhanced.
It was argued that the LSC and Councils should be given the power to impose reprimands on practitioners without consent and that
this power should apply to instances of professional misconduct of a “less substantial nature”.
Should the LSC and Councils be given the power to impose reprimands on practitioners without their consent? If so, in what circumstances?
COSTS ASSESSMENT
5.15 The LSC and Councils can refer complaints for costs assessment.
Costs assessment is regulated by
Legal Profession Act 1987
, applications for costs assessment must be made within 12 months after the bill was given to the complainant.
The OLSC submitted that the time limit should not apply to matters referred to costs assessors by the LSC or the Councils.
5.16 There is no provision in
for the LSC to refer a complaint to a costs assessor when the LSC is reviewing the decision of a Council.
This means that in order to refer a complaint to a costs assessor during a review, the LSC must first re-investigate the complaint.
The OLSC submitted that separate provision should be made for referral of complaints to costs assessors as part of a review.
Should the time limit for costs assessment apply to matters referred to costs assessors by the LSC or Councils?
Should the power of the LSC to refer complaints to a costs assessor also apply when the LSC is conducting a review of a complaint
initially dealt with by a Council?
, legal practitioners are required to disclose to clients an estimate of the likely costs of services provided, including revised
disclosure of any significant increases in costs.
The Commission received a number of other submissions in relation to legal costs.
5.18 The OLSC submitted that a substantial number of complaints it receives relate to the failure of practitioners to advise their
clients of significant increases in estimated costs. It was argued that the costs disclosure regime should be more prescriptive,
with compulsory revised estimates being required at specified stages of a matter, particularly in relation to litigation services.
The OLSC also suggested that costs assessors should be required to disallow any costs which are more than 10% above the most recent
costs estimate provided to the client.
5.19 Another submission criticised the costs assessment system, arguing that the remedies available to clients who are dissatisfied
with a costs assessment are inadequate.
5.20 Costs are regulated by
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) and are therefore not within the Commission’s terms of reference.
CONCILIATION
5.21 The OLSC submitted that the LSC should be given a power to require the parties to a complaint to attend a compulsory conciliation
conference.
It was argued that this would enable the LSC to resolve disputes more efficiently.
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
(NSW) is a model for a conciliation power. Under
, the President of the Anti-Discrimination Board can require the parties to a complaint to attend a conciliation conference and failure
to comply is an offence.
Should the LSC be given a power to compel the parties to a complaint to attend a conciliation conference?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Legal Profession Act 1987
Murray v Legal Services Commissioner
[1999] NSWCA 70
(1999) 46 NSWLR 224.
Murray v Legal Services Commissioner
[1999] NSWCA 70
(1999) 46 NSWLR 224
. See para 4.52-4.60.
Preliminary Submission
. Note that the test in New South Wales for committing defendants charged with criminal offences to trial is whether the evidence
is capable of satisfying a jury beyond reasonable doubt that the defendant has committed an indictable offence:
Justices Act 1902
. NSW Bar Association,
Preliminary Submission 1
at para 27.
Preliminary Submission
. The mediation of consumer disputes is dealt with in the
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
. OLSC, Preliminary Submission at 14-15.
. See para 6.22-6.27.
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
(barristers) and
(solicitors).
Preliminary Submission
Legal Profession Act 1987
s 155(3)(a).
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary Submission
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Act 1987
, Division 6.
Legal Profession Act 1987
Legal Profession Regulation 1994
(NSW) cl 25.
Preliminary Submission
Appendix at item 11.
Legal Profession Act 1987
Preliminary Submission
Appendix at item 12.
Legal Profession Act 1987
Preliminary Submission
. W Lawrence,
Preliminary Submission
Preliminary Submission
Issues Paper 18 (2000) - Complaints against lawyers: Review of Part 10
6. The Tribunal
History of this Reference (Digest)
6.1 The Legal Services Division of the Administrative Decisions Tribunal was established on 6 October 1998
when it replaced the former Legal Services Tribunal. In this Chapter, the Legal Services Division of the Administrative Decisions
Tribunal is referred to as the Tribunal, while the Administrative Decisions Tribunal as a whole is referred to as the ADT.
This Chapter deals with particular issues relating to the operation of the Tribunal.
TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE
Practice rules
6.2 Since the new Tribunal commenced operation on 6 October 1998 its procedure has been governed by interim rules set out in the
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Rules (Transitional) Regulation 1998
(NSW) which incorporates the rules which were formerly part of the now repealed
Legal Profession Tribunal Rules 1995
(NSW). Some simple forms have also been available.
6.3 The various divisions of the ADT are able to “adopt their own procedures by way of rules or informally, through directions
or guidelines”.
A Rules Committee has also been established to make rules with respect to practice and procedure.
6.4 One submission has suggested that the Tribunal should urgently adopt rules and forms for the guidance of those appearing before
The Commission welcomes submissions on the adequacy of the existing rules and what more can be done to improve procedures before
the Tribunal.
6.5 Some particular omissions from the Tribunal’s express powers include the ability to:
deal with proceedings summarily;
adjourn proceedings for mediation;
make costs orders generally;
make orders for a formal apology to the complainant; and
make orders for counselling as to the legal practitioner’s professional obligations.
Are the current practice rules for proceedings before the Tribunal adequate?
Dealing with less complicated matters
6.6 Directions hearings are held every six to eight weeks to set timetables for the preparation of matters for hearing before the
This time-frame may be too long for some less complex matters.
6.7 It has been said that, prior to the formation of the ADT, the preparation of matters was dealt with on an individual basis, rather
than by means of a series of fixed directions hearings.
Informal individual treatment worked well because both practitioners and the Bar Council or Law Society Council (the Councils) were
represented by experienced practitioners who were able to identify issues, sort out evidence between themselves, and prepare the
matters for hearing on an informal basis.
6.8 It has been suggested that there should be a means of expeditiously listing and disposing of less complex cases – for example
where there is substantial agreement on facts and only legal argument is involved, or where the only argument is as to penalty. Even
where legal practitioners admit the facts of the case against them, the process of removing them from the roll remains the same.
The Law Society has asked for a provision that allows the Tribunal to order that a practitioner be struck from the roll with that
practitioner’s consent “without the need for a detailed enquiry by the Tribunal”.
The simplified process could perhaps be conducted before a registrar
or a single member of the Tribunal.
Should there be a means of expeditiously listing and disposing of less complex cases before the Tribunal?
Should it be possible to remove a practitioner from the roll by consent?
Application of the rules of evidence
6.9 Section 168 provides that the rules of evidence apply to proceedings that involve a question of professional misconduct. In all
other cases, including those relating only to unsatisfactory professional conduct, the general position under
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
(NSW) applies. That is, the Tribunal, subject to the rules of natural justice, is not bound by the rules of evidence except that the
privilege against self incrimination in other proceedings is preserved.
6.10 The issue of whether the rules of evidence apply to all Tribunal proceedings was canvassed extensively in relation to the National
Competition Policy Review in 1998. The Office of the Legal Services Commissioner submitted that the rules of evidence should not
apply to matters before the Tribunal.
The Bar Association suggested that the rules of evidence be retained subject to some exceptions relating to legal professional privilege
and confidentiality.
The Law Society’s position was that “the Tribunal should not be subject to the rules of evidence in any matter”.
The Report of the National Competition Policy Review merely noted that “consideration should be given to removing the distinction
in the application of evidentiary rules” without saying which result would be preferred.
6.11 Certainly, it may be readily acknowledged that the distinction between matters involving professional misconduct as opposed to
unsatisfactory professional conduct is largely irrelevant in practice, given that most matters are pleaded in the alternative as
either professional misconduct or unsatisfactory professional conduct.
The Law Society, in its preliminary submission to this review, has said that, given the “nature of the determination of the
Tribunal”, it might be “more appropriate for the rules of evidence to be applied in all instances”.
6.12 The ADT, in its Annual Report, has suggested that there is scope for making its procedures more flexible by, for example, departing
from the rules of evidence and summoning witnesses to give evidence or produce documents.
However, given that the parties before the Tribunal will mostly be lawyers represented by lawyers, the system is much more likely
to resemble an adversarial one. This is likely to be the reason behind the suggestion of the Law Society that the Tribunal might
be given (express) inquisitorial powers.
Should the rules of evidence apply to all Tribunal proceedings?
Public hearings
6.13 Generally, hearings before the ADT are open to the public.
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) provides that “a hearing (or part of a hearing) relating only to a question of unsatisfactory professional conduct”
is to be held in the absence of the public unless the Tribunal “is of the opinion that the presence of the public is in the
public interest or the interests of justice”.
6.14 It was submitted that to hold Tribunal proceedings in the absence of the public is a denial of procedural fairness to consumers.
ICAC v Chaffey
the New South Wales Court of Appeal considered the obligation to comply with the rules of procedural fairness where legislation confers
an open discretion on a tribunal to hold hearings in private. The Court observed that while procedural fairness must be accorded
to all parties in deciding whether to exercise this discretion, this does not mean that no party will suffer harm.
6.15 In 1998 the Law Society supported giving the Tribunal an unfettered discretion to close hearings. The Bar Association also supported
the retention of the Tribunal’s discretion in this area on a number of grounds, including that “the damage done to a
barrister’s reputation by adverse publicity could not be reversed, even by a favourable decision by the Tribunal”.
6.16 On the other hand it has been suggested that there is no justification for the current distinction and that Tribunal proceedings
should be open to the public unless the Tribunal finds a specific reason to order a closed hearing.
This was the conclusion reached by the National Competition Policy Review in 1998.
Should any hearings of the Tribunal be conducted in the absence of the public?
Publication of names of parties and witnesses
6.17 Until recent amendments to the
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
(NSW) there was a restriction on the publication of names of parties and witnesses. However, this restriction is now limited to proceedings
in the Community Services Division of the ADT; appeals from a decision of the Community Services Division to an Appeal Panel; and
such other proceedings as may be prescribed.
This has removed a number of difficulties which had the potential to hinder the conduct of matters before the Tribunal.
6.18 On the other hand, one submission has suggested that the publication of decisions of the Tribunal in full on the internet should
be reconsidered because “in the course of giving judgment the Tribunal often refers to third parties and former clients of
solicitors the display of whose names could be a source of embarrassment to them”. It has been suggested that initials be used
to protect anonymity.
However, the embarrassment would, presumably, be no more than that encountered by witnesses and third parties to any kind of proceedings,
including negligence actions in the Supreme Court.
In what circumstances should the names of parties and witnesses to proceedings be disclosed to the public?
Declaratory orders
6.19 The stringent test for referral to the Tribunal, the “reasonable likelihood test”, makes it necessary for the Councils
or LSC to refer to previous decisions of the Tribunal for guidance in relation to pending matters. Because there are not many decisions
of the Tribunal and their range cannot cover all possible situations, the Councils and LSC may be left with little assistance in
determining whether a particular situation can satisfy the reasonable likelihood test. To remedy this situation, it has been suggested
that it be possible to bring “test cases” before the Tribunal and that the Tribunal be empowered to make declaratory
orders as to whether particular conduct breaches relevant standards.
It has not been suggested who would bear the costs of such proceedings.
Should the Tribunal be given the power to make declaratory orders as to whether particular conduct breaches relevant standards?
Costs orders
6.20 At present, costs orders may be made by the Tribunal against a practitioner who is found guilty of professional misconduct or
unsatisfactory professional conduct or (if special circumstances so warrant) against the public purpose fund if the Tribunal is satisfied
the practitioner is not guilty.
6.21 A number of issues were raised by the Bar Association in preliminary submissions which generally relate to the position of practitioners
who are found by the Tribunal to be not guilty of professional misconduct or unsatisfactory professional conduct, including whether:
the Tribunal should be given the power to award costs against the LSC or the Law Society or Bar Association;
the Tribunal’s powers with respect to costs should extend to interlocutory proceedings;
the power to award costs when a practitioner is found not guilty should not be limited to “special circumstances”;
the amount of costs to be awarded should be determined by an assessor rather than the Tribunal.
Should the current provisions relating to costs before the Tribunal be altered in any way?
TRIBUNAL OUTCOMES
Compensation orders
6.22 Currently the Tribunal may, in limited circumstances, order compensation of up to $10,000 or more if the practitioner consents.
This power is limited to situations where the practitioner is found guilty of professional misconduct or unsatisfactory professional
conduct and where compensation is not available from other sources. A greater amount of compensation may be awarded but only if the
practitioner consents.
This means that consumers may have to pursue compensation by other processes, such as by way of: an action in the Supreme Court for
professional negligence; an application to the Fidelity Fund (in the case of solicitors); mediation as a consumer dispute by the
LSC or the relevant Council; or an application to the Consumer Claims Tribunal. This may explain why compensation orders are rarely
made by the Tribunal.
Obviously, some consumers will not have the resources to pursue many of the alternative avenues and may find it frustrating that
compensation can be claimed through the complaints system only in very limited circumstances.
6.23 It has been suggested that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to make compensation orders could be increased by:
giving the Tribunal a small claims jurisdiction without, if necessary, the need to commence proceedings for professional misconduct
and unsatisfactory professional conduct (that is, in relation to small costs disputes and minor claims concerning poor service or
negligence);
allowing compensation in favour of a person who otherwise has no standing to be a complainant before the Tribunal (because, for example,
their complaint has been dismissed, but the relevant Council has pursued a different but related matter before the Tribunal).
6.24 The final point may be related to problems caused for the Tribunal’s compensation jurisdiction by the fact that the “complainant”
in some matters before the Tribunal is technically either one of the Councils or the LSC. It seems to be the case that neither the
LSC nor the Councils will be involved in or promote claims for compensation by an original complainant.
6.25 The Law Society in 1998 supported no change to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, noting that there were already “several
other avenues of civil remedy”.
The Bar Association has previously suggested that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction should remain unchanged but that the monetary
limit for compensation should be increased from $10,000 to $50,000.
On the other hand, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission supported increasing the Tribunal’s power with respect
to compensation on the grounds that “a complaints system must provide effective redress for consumers as an alternative to
civil action”.
6.26 The National Competition Policy Review noted the availability of the Consumer Claims Tribunal which could order compensation
for clients after a dispute with a legal practitioner, but also noted suggestions that members of the Tribunal might have considerable
expertise in assessing costs of legal services.
In any case, there will be, as already noted, some inconvenience to clients seeking to pursue a complaint with the LSC and also compensation
from a separate system through the Consumer Claims Tribunal.
6.27 It has further been suggested that the current method of dealing with compensation orders before the Tribunal is inconvenient
because the consideration of compensation is postponed until the completion of the hearing before the Tribunal.
But on the other hand it is suggested that combining the issue of compensation with matters of conduct is unfair to practitioners
and it is suggested that evidence (in form of admissions discharging onus in disciplinary proceedings) given before the Tribunal
in relation to conduct should be excluded from consideration of compensation.
What powers should the Tribunal have in relation to compensation?
Who should be able to apply to the Tribunal for compensation?
APPEALS FROM THE TRIBUNAL
6.28 An appeal on the merits to an Appeal Panel of the Tribunal is by leave only, not as of right, while an appeal to the Supreme
Court from the decision of an Appeal Panel is available only in relation to a question of law. This arrangement, under the
Administrative Decisions Act 1997
which effectively prevents the Supreme Court from hearing appeals on the merits of a Tribunal decision,
has been identified as cutting across the Court’s ultimate authority in relation to individual practitioners’ fitness
to practice. The Chief Justice has requested that consideration be given to restoring the Supreme Court’s ability to determine
questions of fitness to practice in this context, by at least allowing appeals on the merits by leave of the Court.
Should the Supreme Court be able to hear appeals on the merits of a decision of the Tribunal and, if so, under what circumstances?
6.29 When appeals are available from a first instance decision of the Tribunal they are made to a similarly constituted Appeal Panel
of the Tribunal. Between October 1998 and June 1999 only one appeal was lodged with the Appeal Panel.
It has been questioned whether this form of appeal to a similarly constituted review panel is necessary.
Is the appeals process from decisions of the Tribunal adequate?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Administrative Decisions Legislation Amendment Act 1997
(NSW) took effect.
. The Legal Services Tribunal was established under the now repealed Part 10 Div 7 of the
Legal Profession Act 1987
Div 7 was originally inserted by Sch 2(2) of the
Legal Profession Reform Act 1993
(NSW). It was repealed when the
Administrative Decisions Legislation Amendment Act 1997
(NSW) took effect.
. For example, there is a form for replies in the Legal Services Division: ADT,
Annual Report 1998/9
Annual Report 1998/9
. Its first meeting was on 26 May 1999: ADT,
Annual Report 1998/9
Preliminary Submission
. NSW Bar Association,
Preliminary Submission 1
at para 37-38.
Annual Report 1998/9
Preliminary Submission
Preliminary Submission
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary Submission
Preliminary Submission
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
, inserted by
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Legislation Amendment Act 2000
(NSW) Sch 1[10].
. New South Wales, Attorney General’s Department,
National Competition Policy Review of the
Legal Profession Act 1987
(Report, 1998) at 53; OLSC Submission to the National Competition Policy Review
. National Competition Policy Review
. National Competition Policy Review
. National Competition Policy Review
. National Competition Policy Review
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary Submission
Annual Report 1998/9
. Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary Submission
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
. NSW Legal Reform Group,
Preliminary Submission
at para 2.3.
(1993) 30 NSWLR 21.
. National Competition Policy Review
Preliminary Submission
. National Competition Policy Review
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
, inserted by
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Legislation Amendment Act 2000
(NSW) Sch 1[13].
Preliminary Submission
at 5. See also C Merritt (ed), “Hearsay”
Australian Financial Review
(30 June 2000) at 36-37; and C Merritt (ed), “Hearsay”
Australian Financial Review
(9 June 2000) at 30-31.
Preliminary Submission
. National Competition Policy Review
at 56; OLSC Submission to National Competition Policy Review at 23.
. See also para 5.2-5.6.
. NSW Bar Association,
Preliminary Submission 1
at para 37.
. Section 171D.
Preliminary Submission
Annual Report 1998/9
Annual Report 1997/8
at 23; OLSC
Annual Report 1998/9
at 23; OLSC,
Preliminary Submission
at 15; Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary Submission
Issue 14; National Competition Policy Review at 55. See also NSW Bar Association,
Preliminary Submission 1
at para 39.
. See Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary Submission
. Law Society of NSW, Professional Standards Department,
Annual Report 1998/9
at 9; S Cuddy,
Preliminary Submission
. National Competition Policy Review
. National Competition Policy Review
. National Competition Policy Review
. National Competition Policy Review
. See S Cuddy,
Preliminary Submission
. See S Cuddy,
Preliminary Submission
. Sections 113(2) and 119.
. It seems that there may be appeals in certain circumstances from first instance decisions of the Tribunal to the Court of Appeal:
Walsh v Law Society of NSW
[1999] HCA 33.
. J Spigelman,
Preliminary Submission
Annual Report 1998/9
at 37. But see
Walsh v Law Society of NSW
[1999] HCA 33.
. See Law Society of NSW,
Preliminary Submission
Issues Paper 18 (2000) - Complaints against lawyers: Review of Part 10
Appendix A: Legal Profession Amendment (Complaints and Discipline) Act 2000 (NSW)
History of this Reference (Digest)
Comparative Table 1
New provisions of
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) introduced by the
Legal Profession Amendment (Complaints and Discipline) Act 2000
(NSW) cross–referenced to previous provisions.
Previous provision
Nature of change
substantive change
drafting change
new section
new subsection
substantive change
incorporated in new subsection
with substantive changes
drafting change
new subsection
drafting change
new subsection
drafting change
drafting change
drafting change
s 136(2)(a)
drafting change
s 136(2)(b)
drafting change
substantive change
new subsection
substantive change
new subsection
new subsection
drafting change
drafting change
substantive change
drafting change
new subsection
new section
drafting change
substantive change
new subsection
new section
new subsection
drafting change
new section
new subsection
s 160(1)(b)
s 160(1)(b)
substantive change
s 160(1)(c3)
new subsection
new subsection
new section
substantive change
new section
Comparative Table 2
Previous provisions of
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW) cross-referenced to new provisions introduced by the
Legal Profession Amendment (Complaints and Discipline) Act 2000
Previous provision
Nature of change
substantive change
s 127(1)(b1)
drafting change
s 134(2)(c)
substantive change
drafting change
drafting change
s 134(2)(a)
substantive change
drafting change
drafting change
s 134(2)(b)
substantive change
drafting change
s 136(2)(a)
drafting change
s 136(2)(b)
drafting change
substantive change
drafting change
drafting change
s 136(3)(c)
substantive change
substantive change
drafting change
drafting change
substantive change
drafting change
s 160(1)(b)
s 160(1)(b)
substantive change
substantive change
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 18 (2000) - Complaints against lawyers: Review of Part 10
Appendix B: Preliminary submissions
History of this Reference (Digest)
Breen, The Hon Peter, MLC
Corbishley, Mr G (Oral Submissions)
Cuddy, Mr S
Far North Coast Law Society
Golder, Mr B
Hughes, Mr C
Insurance Council of Australia
Lawrence, Mr W
Law Society of NSW
McKeown, Mr M
NSW Bar Association,
Preliminary Submission 1
NSW Bar Association,
Preliminary Submission 2
NSW Legal Reform Group
Office of the Legal Services Commissioner
Professional Standards Council
Needham, Ms C, SC, Deputy President (Legal Services), Administrative Decisions Tribunal
Spigelman, The Hon Chief Justice J
Stenberg, Mr M
Taylor, Mr G (Oral Submission)
White, Mr N (Oral Submission)
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Issues Paper 18 (2000) - Complaints against lawyers: Review of Part 10
Select bibliography
History of this Reference (Digest)
Select bibliography
ALASKA, OMBUDSMAN, “Devising a Government Complaint System: Guide to Good Practice”
(as at 21 July 2000) �
www.state.ak.us/ombud/complsys.htm
AUSTRALIA, COMMONWEALTH OMBUDSMAN’S OFFICE,
A Good Practice Guide for Effective Complaint Handling
(2nd edition, 1999)
AUSTRALIAN BANKING INDUSTRY OMBUDSMAN LTD,
Annual Report 1998/9
AUSTRALIAN LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Equality Before the Law: Women’s Equality
(Report 69, 1994)
CARSON, N, “Self-regulation a big issue for profession”
Australian Financial Review
(17 March 2000) at 32
DRAKEFORD, V, (letter to the Editor), “Legal whistling into the wind”
Australian Financial Review
(17 May 2000) at 24
FOR LEGALLY ABUSED CITIZENS (FLAC), Submission to National Competition Policy Review of
Legal Profession Act
GORMLY, J, “Conduct of Complaints Against Barristers” [1998]
HALSBURY’S LAWS OF AUSTRALIA (Butterworths, 1997) Volume 16
HURLBURT, W H,
The Self-Regulation of the Legal Profession in Canada and in England and Wales
(Law Society of Alberta and Alberta Law Reform Institute, 2000)
LAW SOCIETY OF NSW, “About the Law Society of NSW: Maintaining Professional Standards” (as at 28 June 2000) �
lawsocnsw.asn.au/about/handbook/handbook-Maintain.html
LAW SOCIETY OF NSW, “Discipline Function” in
Professional Regulation Task Force Report
(May 1997) (as at 28 June 2000) �
www.lawsocnsw.asn.au/about/papers/regulations/regs18.htm
LAW SOCIETY OF NSW, Professional Standards Department,
Annual Report 1998/9
MERRITT, C (ed), “Hearsay”
Australian Financial Review
(9 June 2000) at 30-31
MERRITT, C (ed), “Hearsay”
Australian Financial Review
(30 June 2000) at 36-37
NEW SOUTH WALES, ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS TRIBUNAL,
Annual Report 1998/9
NEW SOUTH WALES, ATTORNEY GENERAL’S DEPARTMENT, LEGAL PROFESSION ADVISORY COUNCIL,
Incorporation of Solicitor’s Practices Under the Corporations Law
(Report, 1988)
NEW SOUTH WALES, ATTORNEY GENERAL’S DEPARTMENT,
National Competition Policy Review of the
Legal Profession Act 1987
(Report, 1998)
NEW SOUTH WALES, AUDIT OFFICE,
Key Performance Indicators
(Performance Audit Report, 1998)
NEW SOUTH WALES, AUDIT OFFICE,
The Law Society Council, the Bar Council and the Legal Services Commissioner: A Review of Activities Funded by the Statutory Interest
(Performance Audit Report, 1997)
NEW SOUTH WALES BAR ASSOCIATION,
Annual Report 1999
NEW SOUTH WALES, DEPARTMENT OF FAIR TRADING,
Review of the
Conveyancers Licensing Act 1995
(Issues Paper, 2000)
NEW SOUTH WALES,
Law Almanac 2000
(LBC Information Services, Sydney, 2000)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Complaints Against Lawyers
(Discussion Paper 26, 1993)
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION,
Scrutiny of the Legal Profession – Complaints Against Lawyers
(Report 70, 1993)
NEW SOUTH WALES, OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS,
Annual Report 1998/9
NEW SOUTH WALES, PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES (HANSARD), Legislative Assembly (10 November 1993)
NEW SOUTH WALES, PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES (HANSARD),
Legislative Assembly (21 October 1998)
NEW SOUTH WALES, PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES (HANSARD),
Legislative Council (21 October 1998)
NEW SOUTH WALES, PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COUNCIL,
Whistleblowing in the Professions
(Consultative Paper, April 2000)
OFFICE OF THE LEGAL SERVICES COMMISSIONER,
Annual Report 1996/7
OFFICE OF THE LEGAL SERVICES COMMISSIONER,
Annual Report 1997/8
OFFICE OF THE LEGAL SERVICES COMMISSIONER,
Annual Report 1998/9
OFFICE OF THE LEGAL SERVICES COMMISSIONER, Submission to National Competition Policy Review of
Legal Profession Act
ROSIER, P (letter to the Editor), “Incorporation makes sense”
Australian Financial Review
(7 June 2000) at 59
SHAW, J W, QC, “Incorporation of legal practices under the Corporations Law”
(1999) 37(10)
Law Society Journal
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
List of issues
Select bibliography
Table of contents
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter