URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/ALRCDRP/1996/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:32:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Complaints Against the AFP and NCA [1996] ALRCDRP 2
Complaints against the AFP and NCA
to make comments and submissions
is a draft recommendations paper?
1. INTRODUCTION
AFP inquiry
NCA inquiry
systems and disciplinary systems
Expectations
for the current AFP complaints and disciplinary systems
Commission's
draft recommendations
Commission's review process
of this paper
2. ASSESSING THE
CURRENT COMPLAINTS SYSTEMS
Introduction
of the AFP and the NCA
current AFP complaints system
current NCA complaints process
Inadequacies
of the AFP complaints system
defects in the NCA complaints process
3. INVESTIGATIVE
Introduction
1. An internal investigation model
2. An external investigation model
3. Internal investigation with external oversight
4. Combination of internal and external investigations
NSW Police Integrity Commission
Commission's favoured option
4. SPECIAL ISSUES
FOR THE NCA
Introduction
need for a formal complaints system including external
should be subject to the NCA complaints system?
external agency
the IGC be part of the NCA complaints system?
the PJC be part of the NCA complaints system?
secrecy provision
internal unit unnecessary
5. NATIONAL INTEGRITY
AND INVESTIGATIONS COMMISSION
Introduction
functions and structure
Accountability
Investigative
with Category C complaints (minor)
with Category B complaints (serious misconduct)
with Category A complaints (serious criminality, corruption
or significant public interest)
Intelligence
research and policy role and related reporting obligations
extensions to the NIIC's work and jurisdiction
6. DISCIPLINARY
MODELS AND PROCESSES
Introduction
non-disciplinary responses to misconduct or poor performance
AFP disciplinary process
with the current AFP disciplinary process
new approach: managerial responsibility and administrative
lack of a uniform NCA disciplinary process
Consequences
of AAT review
on the availability of AAT review
to disciplinary proceedings
the complainant
Information
7. ANTI-FRAUD AND
ANTI-CORRUPTION PLANS AND MEASURES
Introduction
for planning
anti-corruption measures
anti-corruption measures
of the NIIC
and education
of conduct and mission statements
Possibilities
of a national or regional anti-corruption strategy
8. SCOPE OF COMPLAINTS
Introduction
of complaint
of the distinction between 'allegations' and 'complaints'
not to investigate
may be subject to a complaint?
should be able to complain?
of offences to achieve proper scope of complaints system
and encouragement of whistleblowers
9. PROCESSING COMPLAINTS
Introduction
Information
and advertising
10. THE TERRITORIES
Introduction
external territories
11. GROUPS WHO
MAY HAVE SPECIAL NEEDS
Introduction
EEO policy and grievance systems
EEO policies and grievance procedures
and Torres Strait Islanders
from non-English speaking backgrounds
and lesbians
with disabilities
12. OTHER POLICE
POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Introduction
disciplinary action
of an AFP member's name and address upon request
of medical examinations for complainants
APPENDIX A: TERMS
OF REFERENCES
Federal Police
Crime Authority
APPENDIX B: PARTICIPANTS
Consultants
APPENDIX C: ABBREVIATIONS
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
TABLE OF CASES
TABLE OF LEGISLATION
Commonwealth
Capital Territory
South Wales
ISBN 0 642 25078 2
ALRC Reference: ALRC DRP 2
is a draft recommendations paper?
This paper sets out the Commission's draft recommendations.
It also identifies areas where the Commission is seeking
further information.
Unlike a discussion paper or a final report, this paper
does not contain detailed summaries of the research
and submissions. It
is a working paper designed to
indicate the preliminary views of the Commission and
to form the basis for further consultations.
The draft recommendations have been developed in light
of the submissions the Commission has received on Issues
Paper 16, the
comments made at public hearings and
consultations and the Commission's own research. The
Commission's review process is described
in more detail
in chapter 1.
The Commission has not formed any final views on the
matters raised in this paper. The Commission will be
settling its final recommendations
in light of the
responses to this paper and of the submissions, evidence
and other material it has obtained in the course of
the review. The Commission's final report is due by
30 September 1996.
The Commission seeks the views of all interested persons
and organisations on the draft recommendations contained
in this paper
and on any matters that may not have
been addressed.
Submissions invited on current inquiries
Draft Recommendations
against the AFP and NCA
How to make comments and submissions
You are invited
to make comments and submissions on the draft recommendations
in this Paper.
Written comments and submissions
should be sent to
Australian Law Reform Commission
Closing date:
9 September 1996
It would be helpful if comments addressed specific
draft recommendations or paragraphs in the Paper.
Confidentiality
Unless a submission is marked confidential, it will
be made available to any person or organisation on
If you want your submission, or any part of it, to
be treated as confidential, please indicate this clearly.
A request for a submission
marked 'confidential' will
be determined in accordance with the
Freedom of Information
The Commission will include in its final report on
this project a list of submissions received in response
to this Paper. It may
also refer to those submissions
in the text of the report and other Commission publications.
It may decide to publish them. If
you do not want your
submission or any part of it to be used in any one
of these ways please indicate this clearly.
ALRC reference:
0 642 25078 2
Children and the legal process
. This issues paper
has been prepared in two versions:
for ourselves: Children and the legal process
( written especially for children and young people
for ourselves: Children and the legal process
( the extended version )
Both versions were released in March 1996. Public consultations
are taking place across Australia from April until
August. The
aim of this inquiry is to make the Australian
legal system more accessible to children and more sensitive
to their needs.
Other current ALRC inquiries are
disability services
review of the adversarial system of litigation.
For more information about these inquiries see Recent
notices and events or contact
1. Introduction
AFP inquiry
to the AFP inquiry
NCA inquiry
systems and disciplinary systems
Expectations
for the current AFP complaints and disciplinary systems
Expectations
Commission's
draft recommendations
Commission's review process
of this paper
These inquiries
1.1 In 1995 the
then federal Attorney-General, Michael Lavarch referred
to the Commission two related inquiries - one concerning
the complaints and disciplinary systems of the Australian
Federal Police (AFP) and the other the complaints and
disciplinary
systems of the National Crime Authority
(NCA). The Commission received the AFP reference on
29 March 1995 and the NCA reference
on 26 July 1995.
The terms of the references are set out in Appendix
The AFP inquiry
1.2 The Commission
is asked to report on the
Complaints (Australian Federal
Police) Act
1981 (the Complaints Act) and the AFP's
complaints and disciplinary system in their entirety.
The Complaints Act
provides for the complaints process
while the disciplinary process is provided for under
the AFP Act and its regulations and
the Complaints
Act. The Commission is to consider whether the legislation
meets the expectations of the public in terms of police
accountability, effectiveness and efficiency.
to the AFP inquiry
1.3 This is the
first extensive review of the legislation. It arises
because of a concern to ensure that the systems for
and discipline of the AFP are appropriate,
fair and effective for the 1990s and the future.
The NCA inquiry
.4 The terms of
the NCA inquiry are similar to those for the AFP. The
Commission is required to inquire into and report on
for the investigation and resolution of
complaints against the NCA and staff members of the
NCA or police officers seconded to
the NCA. It is asked
to consider whether the system meets the expectations
of the public in terms of accountability, effectiveness
and efficiency. In doing this the Commission is to
have regard to its reference on the AFP and to carry
out the two references
in conjunction.
1.5 There is currently
no legislatively based complaints system for the NCA,
its staff or those seconded to it. Instead there
an internal administrative arrangement for complaints
to be forwarded immediately to the Chairperson of the
NCA. The Chairperson
then directs officers of the NCA
to conduct inquiries and to compile reports. The Chairperson
considers these reports and decides
upon appropriate
1.6 The current
lack of any formal external review is widely regarded
as highly undesirable.
The major issues have been who should provide the
review and to which groups of the NCA's mixed workforce
should it apply. The Commission discusses the implications
for the efficiency and accountability of the current
mixed employment
regime in chapter 4. The Commission
suggests in that chapter that consideration should
be given to the NCA having a single employment
There have been two major attempts to introduce legislation
to introduce a formal complaints system but they have
unsuccessful.
1.7 There is also
no formal NCA disciplinary system except for those
NCA staff who are employed under the
Public Service
(Cth) and who are subject to the Australian
Public Service disciplinary procedures.
In their case the Chairperson of the NCA has all the
powers of a Permanent Secretary.
systems and disciplinary systems
1.8 This paper distinguishes
between complaints systems and disciplinary systems.
1.9 Complaints systems
concern the lodging, processing and investigation of
complaints. Complaints may be made by people outside
the particular agency or by members of it. The key
element is the investigation stage, particularly who
conducts the investigation
and according to what processes.
The final stage of the investigation process is usually
the making of a report which contains
information relevant
to deciding whether there has been a breach of the
criminal law and/or a breach of a disciplinary rule.
1.10 Disciplinary
systems involve the application of internal rules adopted
by an agency
to ensure laws, instructions and procedures are complied
to maintain proper standards of conduct
to protect the integrity and reputation of the agency.
1.11 The disciplinary
process is often invoked after a complaint has been
investigated and there is evidence to suggest that
a disciplinary rule has been breached. The head of
the agency then makes a decision about whether a person
should be charged
with a disciplinary offence on the
basis of the investigation of the complaint. However,
disciplinary action might be considered
without any
formal complaint being lodged by any person.
Expectations
for the current AFP complaints and disciplinary systems
1.12 The current
AFP complaints and disciplinary systems are based upon
two earlier Commission reports.
In the second of those reports the Commission accepted
the need for an 'independent police complaints mechanism'.
The Ombudsman was expected to play a pivotal role
in this to ensure the integrity and independence of
investigation of complaints
against the police.
The Commission was of the view that
ex post facto review after an investigation and determination
is made would be an ineffectual response... that would
police and most citizens unsatisfied, indeed
cynical about the effectiveness of the independent
scrutiny provided.
1.13 The report
envisaged that the majority of investigations would
be carried out by the proposed police Internal Investigations
Unit but that in exceptional cases the Ombudsman could
conduct his or her own investigations where of the
opinion that this
option was in the public interest.
The Commission envisaged that the Internal Investigations
Unit would have a charter of rights
and duties, would
have internal and external educative functions and
undertake research directed at the maintenance and
improvement
of discipline codes and allied police education.
1.14 The Commission
also argued that while ensuring public confidence in
the integrity of the complaints system was essential,
there was also a need for the chief officer of the
police to have responsibility for the discipline of
the force including
the capacity to deal promptly,
but justly with members of the force.
1.15 The Commission
proposed the establishment of a separate and independent
tribunal to be the medium for the determination of
the more intractable and serious of the public complaints
as well as the appeal tribunal for most internal disciplinary
The tribunal could also be requested to hold a general
inquiry in the nature of a Royal Commission to permit
complicated and
involved questions connected with the
force to be resolved.
Expectations
1.16 It would be
reasonable to assume that the current systems 15 years
after the introduction of the AFP Complaints Act would
be able to achieve to at least a minimally satisfactory
level the broad aims identified by the Commission in
those earlier
reports. That is, an AFP complaints system
where the Ombudsman provides independent and effective
scrutiny of the complaints
process, a system in respect
of which the public have confidence and a process of
determining disciplinary outcomes that is timely,
and fair and gives to the Commissioner of the AFP the
capacity to discipline his or her force.
1.17 However, the
Commission's inquiry thus far has not demonstrated
that any of these basic objectives are being met to
acceptable level. The current systems do not deliver
sufficient independent scrutiny, accountability, credibility,
effectiveness
or timeliness. They lack coherence, clarity
and vigour. When these systems have responded to perceived
problems since the introduction
of the Complaints Act
they have done so on the basis of ad hoc responses
and expediency. Specific failings of the AFP complaints
systems are discussed in chapter 2 and chapter 6 deals
with problems with the AFP disciplinary system.
Commission's
draft recommendations
1.18 The Commission's
recommendations are designed to rectify these inadequacies
and in particular to ensure that the AFP and
NCA complaints
and disciplinary processes will meet those objectives
identified almost 20 years ago. There will be a clear
chain of accountability and transparency. There will
be a measured and appropriate response to the full
range of complaints and
other forms of information
objectives can best be achieved by a significant
from the current systems that have significantly failed
to achieve the desired objectives as demonstated in
1.19 The Commission
recommends the introduction of a National Integrity
and Investigations Commission (NIIC) to manage, oversee
or directly investigate complaints against the AFP
and the NCA. It would tailor its response to the nature
of the complaint,
particularly the level of seriousness.
It would also have primary responsibility for the detection
and investigation of corruption.
It would have ultimate
and clear responsibility to ensure that the basic objectives
of complaints systems are being met. The
would be relieved of any direct responsibility in the
complaints handling process.
1.20 The Commission
also recommends significant changes to the disciplinary
process to ensure that the AFP and NCA managements
are given primary responsibility for disciplining their
organisations but subject to administrative review
of disciplinary
decisions by the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal instead of the current review in the case
of the AFP provided by the Federal
Disciplinary Police
Tribunal which would be abolished.
The Commission's
review process
In mid 1995 the Commission sent a short summary of
its preliminary views on the major issues in these
inquiries to organisations
and individuals with a special
interest or expertise in this area. The Commission
received 29 submissions in response.
The Commission appointed 19 honorary consultants with
a wide range of experience and expertise who have met
with the Commission
to discuss major issues.
In November 1995 the Commission published and distributed
an Issues Paper
Under the spotlight. Complaints against
the AFP and the NCA
. The Commission has currently received
over fifty submissions in response.
Throughout the Inquiry but particularly in February,
March and April 1996 the Commission has consulted with
a number of organisations
with a special interest in
these references including the AFP, the NCA, State
and Territory police services and Ombudsmen, the
Criminal Justice Commission (CJC), the South Australian
Police Complaints Authority and the NSW Royal Commission
into the Police. During February and March 1996 the
Commission also held public meetings in the Australian
capital cities, Norfolk
Island and Jervis Bay.
1.21 This paper
is the next step in the development of the Commission's
final recommendations.
1.22 This paper
sets out the Commission's preliminary conclusions,
its draft recommendations and the reasons for them.
indicates where the Commission is seeking additional
information or comment. Responses to this paper will
assist the Commission
in preparing its final recommendations
and report.
of this paper
Chapter 2 assesses the current AFP and NCA complaints
Chapter 3 compares investigation models and discusses
the Commission's preferred option, the establishment
of a National Integrity
and Investigations Commission
Chapter 4 analyses special issues for an NCA complaints
Chapter 5 explains the suggested role and functions
of the NIIC.
Chapter 6 discusses current disciplinary systems and
suggests an alternative approach based on increased
managerial responsibility
and then the avenue of administrative
review by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT).
Chapter 7 concerns the role of the AFP, the NCA and
the NIIC in strategies and measures to prevent complaints,
fraud and corruption.
Chapter 8 considers the scope of the complaints systems
for the AFP and the NCA including the definition of
complaint and discretions
not to investigate.
Chapter 9 examines the processing of complaints including
their receipt and recording.
Chapter 10 discusses some special issues for the AFP
in its community policing role in the Australian Capital
Territory (ACT),
Jervis Bay and the external territories.
Chapter 11 examines some personnel in the AFP and the
NCA who may have special needs in relation to complaints
systems and groups
external to these agencies who also
may have special needs.
Chapter 12 deals with some police powers and responsibilities
that are connected to complaints and disciplinary systems,
the obligation of AFP personnel to provide
identifying details to members of the public upon request.
Comments sought
The Commission welcomes the views of interested persons
or organisations on
the draft recommendations in this paper and on any
other relevant issues.
The deadline for submissions and comments is 9 September
See ch 2 para 2.65-6.
The NCA's mixed workforce is discussed in ch 4. It
comprises the Chairperson, members, persons employed
Australian Public Service Act 1922
consultants, seconded personnel, legal counsel and
members of joint task forces.
The first attempt in 1984 conferred jurisdiction on
the Commonwealth Ombudsman but was rejected by a Senate
Committee on the
ground that the Ombudsman may face
difficulties in dealing with organised crime. The second
attempt in 1992 was part of a wider
amending Bill to
the NCA Act and would have conferred jurisdiction on
the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
the Bill was not proceeded with on grounds unrelated
to this issue.
The NCA has advised the Commission that there are 285
public servants out of a staff of 399.
Complaints Against Police
Complaints Against
Police: Supplementary Repor
ALRC 9 para 7.
id para 10.
ALRC 1 para 155.
id para 166.
2. Assessing the current complaints systems
Introduction
of the AFP and the NCA
Articulating
these objectives
current AFP complaints system
is a complaint?
and allegations
of complaints and allegations
Conciliation
of some complaints
investigations
Ombudsman's role in investigations
role in investigations
current NCA complaints process
of complaints
Inadequacies
of the AFP complaints system
of clear responsibility for integrity of the system
distinction between complaints and allegations
of accessibility
of common or comprehensive database
defects in the NCA complaints process
Introduction
2.1 This chapter
has four parts
describing the respective roles of the AFP and the
identifying the major objectives of the AFP and NCA
complaints systems
outlining the current AFP and NCA complaints systems
assessing the record of the current approaches in the
light of the identified objectives.
2.2 The conclusion
is that the current records of the complaints systems
reveal significant inadequacies. Chapter 6 assesses
the current disciplinary systems and recommends that
the NCA have its own disciplinary proceedings.
the AFP and the NCA
2.3 The AFP is a
federal law enforcement agency which
investigates breaches or potential breaches of Commonwealth
laws on a national basis
liaises and co-operates with international and overseas
law enforcement agencies
provides community policing in the ACT and Jervis Bay
Territory and the following external territories -
Norfolk Island, Cocos
(Keeling) Islands and Christmas
provides services in relation to protecting VIPs and
2.4 The AFP's primary
national role is the conduct of investigations. In
that context it has similarities with the United States
Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI). The AFP does
not have general jurisdiction in relation to State
and Northern Territory
laws. Generally it does not
have daily contact and interaction with the broad community
in a community policing role. The only
places where
it performs that role are in those territories mentioned
2.5 The NCA is a
national law enforcement body whose main mission is
to counteract organised crime often by working in partnership
with other agencies. The NCA's working definition of
organised crime is 'a systematic conspiracy to commit
serious offences'.
Generally, the NCA investigates
relevant criminal activities and collects, analyses
and disseminates information and intelligence
to those activities. Where appropriate it establishes
and co-ordinates task forces with other law enforcement
for the investigation of those matters. It may
also make recommendations for legal and administrative
2.6 The NCA uses
multi-disciplinary teams of lawyers, police, financial
investigators, intelligence analysts and support staff
to investigate organised crime. The Act gives the NCA
coercive powers to compel people to produce documents
and to give sworn
evidence. Those powers are not available
to traditional police services. The NCA can only exercise
its coercive powers in matters
which have been formally
referred to it for investigation. These characteristics
are meant to enable the NCA to co-ordinate national
investigations against major organised crime by complementing
the efforts of other law enforcement agencies and by
co-operatively with them.
Major objectives
2.7 The Commission
considers that the main objectives for the AFP and
NCA complaints systems are to:
ensure public confidence in these agencies and their
complaints systems
achieve proper accountability of the agencies and their
be fair to complainants and to AFP and NCA officers
including taking into account the requirements of natural
justice and privacy
considerations
be credible to the agencies and their officers
be accessible to the community
promote appropriate standards of conduct, ethics and
integrity from officers and their agencies
provide the appropriate response, particularly the
appropriate level of investigation, to the full range
of complaints, from minor
to serious, including those
involving corruption
provide feedback to the agency about individual officers,
agency practices, procedures and operations
take into account appropriately other agency priorities
such as law enforcement operations
be timely in process and outcome
use resources efficiently.
2.8 The Commission
does not propose to try to rate these objectives in
importance as a fully effective and integrated system
should endeavour to meet each of them. However, it
is clear that ensuring credibility with the public
and the agencies themselves
is a very significant objective.
The general public should be able to see how complaints
are dealt with and whether the outcomes
satisfy general
community standards and expectations. A failure to
ensure public confidence may lead to public mistrust
the police. This mistrust can taint the whole administration
of justice. It may deter people from reporting crimes,
from seeking
the assistance of the police or assisting
them, from giving evidence or appearing as witnesses.
Furthermore, this public mistrust
can spill over and
affect public perceptions of other aspects of administration
and government, sometimes leading to widespread
and distortion and providing sustenance to all-enveloping
conspiracy theories.
Articulating
these objectives
2.9 The Commission
considers that the major objectives of the complaints
systems should be included in the new legislation.
The objectives are likely to remain the same for the
foreseeable future and should therefore be enshrined
in legislation. This
will assist in the understanding
of the fundamental objectives of the legislation and
will be useful to those who use it. It
will also serve
an educative function. The objectives should also be
incorporated in AFP and NCA codes of conduct, management
goals and practices.
Draft recommendation
Articulating these objectives
Draft recommendation 2.1.
The objectives listed above
should be included in an objects clause in the new
legislation. They should also be incorporated
and NCA codes of conduct and corporate goals and practice.
The current
AFP complaints system
is a complaint?
2.10 There is no
definition of complaint in the Complaints Act but a
complaint must relate to 'action taken by an AFP appointee'.
That expression is defined as:
action that the appointee takes or purports to take:
(a) because of his or her being an AFP appointee; or
(b) in the exercise of powers, or the performance of
functions, given to him or her as an AFP appointee
by this Act or by another
2.11 The term 'AFP
appointee' includes members of the AFP ( that is, the
Commissioner, Deputy Commissioners, senior executive
commissioned police officers and commissioned and non-commissioned
police officers), staff members and special members
by the Commissioner.
Each of these is subject to the Complaints Act.
and allegations
2.12 Complaints
- complaints and allegations. Complaints by members
of the public against the AFP or its personnel are
made under the Complaints Act. Allegations are provided
for under subsidiary
AFP legislation
and deal with internal complaints, that is, by one
AFP appointee in respect of another and other complaints
concerning non-operational
police matters. This distinction
between complaints and allegations is further discussed
in chapter 8.
of complaints and allegations
2.13 During 1994-95
the AFP's Internal Investigations Division (IID) recorded
900 new complaints made by 596 complainants. Of
1101 complaints finalised by the Ombudsman, 70 or 6.4%
were substantiated and 41.1% were unsubstantiated.
Of the remainder
42.9% were reconciled, withdrawn or
otherwise did not require a full investigation.
2.14 There were
also 109 allegations made which represented a slight
decrease in allegations from the previous year.
2.15 Complaints
may be lodged with the Ombudsman or the AFP each of
whom is to record them and to notify the other of each
Conciliation
of some complaints
2.16 The Act provides
for a special procedure for the conciliation of minor
complaints.
The Commissioner may also make a decision that conciliation
should be attempted for those complaints which are
not dealt with
under the minor complaints procedure
but which are received either by the IID or by the
2.17 On 3 April
1995, a more detailed arrangement for the conciliation
of complaints was introduced in the ACT as a pilot
resolution scheme. It is based on an agreement
between the AFP and the Commonwealth Ombudsman and
allows sergeants and work-level
3's and above to resolve
non-serious complaints and non-serious allegations
internally through conciliation.These workplace resolutions
are reviewed by IID and the Ombudsman. The results
of workplace resolution may include counselling, apologies
and explanations.
investigations
2.18 The IID is
created by the Complaints Act.
Its functions are set out in the Act:
to investigate complaints concerning action taken by
AFP appointees that are referred to it by an AFP appointee
who has received
a complaint or by the Ombudsman;
to investigate special matters referred to it by the
Commissioner.
2.19 The IID has
power under the Complaints Act to
investigate complaints
further investigate complaints if this is requested
by the Ombudsman
compel answers and the provision of information.
2.20 The investigative
powers of the IID are limited to investigation of AFP
members only.
The IID investigates almost all complaints against
the police which are made under the Complaints Act
other than minor complaints,
complaints which the Ombudsman
decides to investigate herself, or the small number
which are referred to a special investigator
s 46. At the conclusion of its investigation the IID
must provide a report to the Ombudsman.
In addition to investigating complaints the IID investigates
most allegations (other than minor allegations) which
are made pursuant
to General Order 6.
2.21 Due to lack
of staffing, remote locations and cost effectiveness,
the IID refers approximately 80 complaints each year
to 'authorised officers'
who conduct an investigation under the supervision
of the officer-in-charge of IID.
2.22 The IID is
directly responsible to a Deputy Commissioner. Members
are appointed to the IID by the Deputy Commissioner
a period of two years.
Presently there are 19 members and 3 staff members
in the IID.
When transferring an officer to the IID the Commissioner
is required to have regard to the nature of the functions
and the need to ensure that there is a member
in the IID with experience in criminal investigations
and a member with experience
in general police duties.
Ombudsman's role in investigations
2.23 The primary
role undertaken by the Ombudsman under the Complaints
Act has been to review complaint investigations by
IID. In 1994-5, 276 complaints were investigated
by the IID, 8 by the Ombudsman and 2 by special investigation.
2.24 According
to the Ombudsman when she receives a complaint or is
notified by the AFP of a complaint, she writes to the
complainant
to explain her role. She then monitors
the progress of the investigation, following up with
the IID when there is undue delay.
Her office discusses
with the Director of IID any particular issues that
require attention. On receipt of the investigation
report the Ombudsman examines the evidence and identifies
any further action that is necessary. The Ombudsman
may request interim reports of the police investigation
may provide progress reports about complaints to complainants
may determine that a complaint should not be investigated
may conduct his/her own investigations following an
IID investigation.
In limited circumstances, when conducting her own investigation
the Ombudsman
has power to obtain information and documents and any
person who is summonsed to provide information does
not retain the right
has the power to enter premises of the AFP or a government
department or prescribed authority.
The Ombudsman has the power to conduct four types of
independent investigations.
Complaints about 'practices and procedures' referring
to complaints that are about administrative matters,
and are very similar
to the administrative investigations
conducted under the
Ombudsman Act
Special investigations, conducted after agreement between
the Ombudsman and the Commissioner in cases where it
is not appropriate
for the IID to investigate. These
are cases usually involving complaints about IID personnel.
There is also an agreement between the Ombudsman and
the Commissioner that the Ombudsman will conduct a
special investigation
into any complaint relating to
a death or serious injury of an Aborigine or Torres
Strait Islander in AFP custody.
Further investigations where the Ombudsman can conduct
investigations following IID investigations. The Ombudsman
has only occasionally
exercised this power.
'Own motion' investigations where the Ombudsman has
the power to investigate actions of AFP appointees
on her own initiative.
role in investigations
2.25 Internal Security
and Audit (ISA)
was established by the AFP Commissioner in April 1990.
It has no legislative basis and was an internal response
by the AFP to
the type of problems that the Fitzgerald
exposed in Queensland. Its objectives are to:
change the culture of the AFP so as to engender an
ethos of personal and organisational integrity
establish and maintain preventive policies, practices
and procedures
maintain a pro-active capacity to investigate corruption,
including any link between corrupt conduct and organised
2.26 ISA has 50
personnel, comprising 28 members and 22 staff members.
It has three branches: investigations, audit and internal
Investigations.
ISA is intended to investigate serious
criminal and corrupt conduct within the AFP and in
particular any links between AFP personnel
and organised
crime. If ISA is to investigate a complaint under the
Complaints Act then it must be authorised to do so.
ISA's Internal Audit Branch (IAB) functions
are to reform policy and practices in the AFP. It conducts
regular audits of different
areas of the AFP, particularly
high risk areas such as drug holding, cash holdings
and financial accounts.
Internal security.
This focuses on security policy
and training, vetting of staff and ethics education.
It also includes the pro-active gathering
of information
and intelligence on the identity, capabilities, intentions
and methods of organisations and individuals who pose,
or may pose, a threat to the security of the AFP. It
also implements protective security policies, procedures
and provides
security support.
2.27 In 1994-95,
ISA investigated 87 references and completed 60 with
the following outcomes
47 allegations substantiated
59 allegations not substantiated
39 criminal charges recommended (comprising a few cases
that result in multiple charges)
5 disciplinary charges recommended
4 recommendations that fixed term appointments not
be renewed or be terminated
7 other administrative actions
2 references resulted in laying of serious criminal
charges against two AFP investigators.
The current
NCA complaints process
2.28 The NCA has
a mixed workforce consisting of
the Chairperson and members
persons employed under the
Public Service Act 1922
consultants
seconded staff from federal, State or Territory law
enforcement and other agencies
members of Commonwealth, State or joint Commonwealth
and State Task Forces arranged by the NCA.
2.29 Since the
establishment of the NCA in 1984 none of its mixed
workforce has been subject to a uniform, legislatively
NCA complaints system. There is no provision
in the NCA Act for a process of making and investigating
complaints against the
NCA or members of its staff.
The current administrative procedure is that all complaints
are forwarded to the Chairperson who
then directs officers
to undertake inquiries on his or her behalf. Where
allegations against the NCA or its staff have been
deemed to be serious enough to warrant it, either the
NCA or the Minister has appointed an independent inquirer
to investigate
2.30 Current accountability
for the general activities of the NCA resides in two
bodies: the Inter-Governmental Committee (IGC)
the Parliamentary Joint Committee on the NCA (PJC).
2.31 The IGC is
established under the NCA Act and consists of Commonwealth,
State and Territory Ministers responsible for administering
the NCA Act in their jurisdictions. It is chaired by
the Commonwealth Minister.
2.32 The PJC is
made up of five Members of the House of Representatives
and five Senators. It monitors and reviews the performance
by the NCA of its functions and reports to both Houses
of Parliament.
2.33 The IGC and
the PJC do not investigate or resolve individual complaints
against the NCA. Neither body would be appropriate
or has the structure and resources to perform that
of complaints
2.34 The NCA received
17 complaints in 1994-95, 18 the year before and 15
in 1992-93. Some were not investigated because there
were no objective facts or circumstances in support
of them, a few related to recruitment matters, others
related to the alleged
unauthorised use or release
of information or to allegations that investigations
or investigative techniques were illegal or
Inadequacies
of the AFP complaints system
2.35 The AFP complaints
system has a number of deficiencies.
of clear responsibility for integrity of the system
2.36 The major
problem is that there is no one entity who accepts
responsibility for the integrity of the system or who
be identified as satisfying that responsibility.
The Ombudsman has provided only a limited form of scrutiny
that has rarely extended
beyond a review of IID investigations
after they have commenced or after they are concluded.
The Ombudsman has therefore been
unable in any unequivocal
way to vouch for the integrity and independence of
the process. There are many weaknesses in a reliance
on the Ombudsman's current limited role as a guarantee
of independence. They concern the credibility and effectiveness
2.37 A complaints
system must be perceived by complainants, potential
complainants and the general public as credible. They
must have confidence that complaints will be properly
and impartially handled and investigated. However there
is increasing evidence
that many complainants and the
general public feel unease about the police investigating
other police. The Ombudsman has said
that feedback
from complainants and community groups and evidence
to the Senate Committee examining amendments to the
Act in 1994 indicate that the public is
not confident about the AFP's internal investigations.
2.38 A consistent
theme in many of the Commission's consultations and
the submissions it has received is that the police,
particularly
in respect to serious complaints, should
not be conducting these investigations. This theme
is echoed in the NSW Royal Commission
into the Police's
Interim Report and the submissions made to it. It is
a concern heightened by the focus on police corruption
and misconduct not only in NSW but in other Australian
2.39 It is clear
that there have been many cases under the current AFP
complaints system where primary investigation by an
agency and not by the IID would have been
much more preferable if not demanded by the circumstances.
These include cases of significant
public interest
or media attention, where there appear to be particularly
vulnerable complainants or where there are suspicions
of extensive police involvement in misconduct and allegations
of cover-up. The Ombudsman has identified cases where
much greater
input from her office would have been
preferable.
2.40 One graphic
illustration is provided by the response to the 169
complaints against the AFP arising from the Australian
International Defence Exhibition (AIDEX) demonstrations.
This was a highly publicised incident resulting in
a broad range of
complaints including serious police
brutality, assault or excessive force. Primary investigation
of the complaints was conducted
by the IID. The Ombudsman's
office did not conduct one primary investigation.
2.41 The Commission
is unable to comment on the substance of these 169
complaints. That is not the point here. What is at
is the very significant damage that can be done
to the credibility of the complaints system when there
is no adequate response
that will satisfy the expectations
of complainants or the community.
2.42 The Ombudsman
only occasionally re-investigates IID investigations
and she does so in cases where she is particularly
dissatisfied
with the IID investigation. She has given
the Commission the following examples where she has
re-investigated: misconduct involved
in search warrants;
a complaint in relation to property; inadequate investigations
of a motor vehicle accident; improperly accessing
releasing information; and drinking on duty at a night
club. However, she acknowledges that re-investigation
effective because of the time that has usually
elapsed before it occurs.
The trail of evidence is lost or tainted.
2.43 The Ombudsman
has advised the Commission that the failure of her
office to carry out her own investigations or to effectively
supervise the IID in these types of matters is due
to a lack of resources and the restrictions imposed
upon her role by the
Complaints Act. The issue of resources
is further considered in chapter 5. The Ombudsman argues
that the following interpretation
of the Complaints
Act has restricted her role:
The Ombudsman is unable to make the initial assessment
The Ombudsman has no power to supervise IID investigations
because apart from the power to obtain progress reports
the Ombudsman
has no statutory power to influence the
IID investigation in any way.
The Act gives the Officer-in-Charge of the IID the
power to conduct the investigation as she or he thinks
The power for the Ombudsman to conduct special investigations
where it is not 'appropriate' for investigation by
the IID is a
power that must be interpreted in the
context of the philosophy and mandate provided by ALRC
Report 9 to the effect that it would
a rare case where
the IID would not be conducting the investigation.
Moreover the Ombudsman's power to conduct special
investigations in appropriate cases requires agreement
by the AFP Commissioner
or failing that a report to
the Minister.
2.44 The Commission
considers that these views are unnecessarily restrictive.
As far as the Commission has been able to ascertain
the full scope of the Ombudsman's investigatory powers
has not been subject to expert legal opinion, particularly
Attorney-General's Department. The Ombudsman
has not taken the opportunity to test the extent of
those powers when it has been
clear for some considerable
time that the system has not achieved its objectives.
2.45 The legislation
should be considered in the clear context that the
Ombudsman is to provide effective external review of
the AFP complaints system. For example, it is the Ombudsman
who may determine that a complaint should not be investigated
and it is the Ombudsman who can make reports and recommendations
after investigations are carried out.
It is also the Ombudsman who has the reporting role
to the complainant.
The key role of the Ombudsman as the external agency
is manifest.
2.46 The Commission
is not convinced that the Act prevents the Ombudsman
from taking a more active role. For example, the AFP
is under a duty to notify the Ombudsman of every complaint
received by it.
It should be possible for the Ombudsman to obtain
a reasonably early view about which complaints require
greater involvement
or supervision. Under s 46 there
is power for the Ombudsman to request that her office
or another person undertake an investigation
an IID investigation would be inappropriate. It would
be open to the Ombudsman to use this power to investigate
or to get others to investigate a far greater
number and range of matters than has been investigated
by that means. Also under
s 23(1) (a) the Ombudsman
is to investigate a complaint that is in substance
power could be construed quite widely to allow much
more involvement from the Ombudsman.
2.47 In addition
s 35 enables the Ombudsman when the IID is investigating
not only to request progress reports but also to discuss
the complaint with the complainant and to request the
Commissioner for access to any documents and to interview
a person other
than the complainant in relation to
the complaint. Also since 1995 the Ombudsman has had
an 'own motion' power which has been
used three times.
2.48 The Commission
considers that the Ombudsman could have tried to use
his or her powers more robustly than the record of
activity since the introduction of the Act indicates.
distinction between complaints and allegations
2.49 The distinction
between complaints and allegations is artificial and
creates difficulties. Allegations are currently not
subject to review by the Ombudsman or by any other
external agency but yet it is internal complaints that
are most likely to
allege or suggest corruption.
2.50 Under the
current system the IID has a central role in the investigation
of complaints. The Ombudsman has expressed doubts
the current capacity of the IID to perform this role
to a consistently high standard.
She has advised that in the past year she has reinvestigated
three complaints following investigation by the IID.
that in all three cases her office was able
to identify and gather significant evidence not identified
by the IID. In each case
the investigation by the IID
was found to be inadequate. She claims that the record
of IID investigations is uneven, ranging
poor to very good. The Ombudsman has also expressed
concern about inadequate training of IID investigators,
that there is no requirement that IID recruits
have experience in investigations and that there is
no formal training program
for those who may need it.
2.51 It is disquieting
to receive such comments from the Ombudsman who provides
oversight of the IID and should therefore be well
to make informed and detailed comments on the record
and competence of the IID. The reinvestigation of three
cases appears
to be to be a fairly small sample to
sample is a cause for concern in
itself. However, that
limited sample suggests that there are significant
problems with IID investigations. The Commission is
concerned that currently the Ombudsman appears to have
been unable to provide any comprehensive or effective
quality control
of the performance of the IID.
2.52 The Commission
is also concerned about the apparent lack of established
guidelines and standards agreed upon by the AFP and
the Ombudsman about the staffing, training of the IID
and the conduct of investigations. There is an administrative
arrangement
that the Ombudsman and the IID meet regularly
to discuss cases and broader issues but there does
not appear to be any established
case management process
nor an established manual of procedure and practice,
nor any formal record of meetings. Matters appear
be dealt with largely on a case by case, ad hoc basis.
This is a significant problem when the experience and
skills of staff
may vary and where consistency and
timeliness are key objectives.
2.53 ISA was introduced
not by legislation but by internal arrangement by the
AFP in 1990. The Commission acknowledges that its
was a desirable step and a recognition by the AFP that
it must respond vigorously to corruption and potential
corruption.
However, the Commission is concerned that
ISA has not received any legislative recognition but
yet operates as the AFP's major
anti-corruption force
with significant powers and responsibilities. It uses
the full range of investigative tools including listening
devices, telephone intercepts and surveillance. However,
there is no external monitoring of its activities in
the same fashion
as the IID is oversighted by the Ombudsman.
2.54 Another problem
is that there appears to be no clear delineation between
the respective roles of the IID and ISA in investigating
complaints. While in general terms ISA has as its stated
role the investigation of serious criminal and corrupt
activity, as
far as the Commission has been able to
ascertain, serious criminal conduct is not necessarily
investigated by ISA. For example,
a complaint arising
from a murder or rape may be investigated by a team
of investigators with specific skills in those areas
managed or oversighted by members of IID or ISA. IID
is likely to be involved in those investigations unless
there are additional
elements involved such as an allegation
of corruption, an abuse of office, the involvement
of non-AFP personnel or the need for
surveillance or
other sophisticated means of investigation.
2.55 Currently
the decision as to whether IID or ISA will investigate
a particular matter is a 'judgment call' that is determined
generally by conferences between ISA and the IID and
the relevant Deputy Commissioner on an ad hoc basis.
These decisions can
have considerable ramifications.
ISA 's investigations are very thorough and often require
considerable resources and time. There
are 26 ISA investigators
who between them investigate about 80 matters per year.
Of this range of about 80 matters only about
cent will result in serious criminal charges.
2.56 The Commission
believes that this current ad hoc arrangement is inadequate
and should be replaced by an appropriate system
risk assessment and the application of criteria to
determine whether a matter is likely to concern serious
or systemic corruption
or might be best dealt with
at least initially by some form of preliminary inquiry
before launching a full scale investigation.
the Commission acknowledges that there are difficulties
in determining how a particular matter will develop
it is essential
that a form of risk management is adopted
that is based upon experience and precedents and an
established database of information.
2.57 The Commission
is also concerned that having two separate investigative
units is an inefficient use of resources that leads
to unnecessary arguments about demarcation and the
likelihood of duplication. There is a risk that it
can also lead to internal
jealousies and empire building
with the danger of both bodies seeking to justify their
positions, funding and staffing rather
than acting
on the realities of the task. The general public may
also have difficulties in understanding the difference
the bodies and the reasoning behind decisions
2.58 The Ombudsman
has criticised the current response to complaints as
being too slow. She says that the average time to finalise
complaints against the AFP is almost six months. This
includes cases handled quickly by conciliation and
those not investigated.
She adds that this is by far
the longest average of all agencies investigated by
the Commonwealth Ombudsman - for most of them
less than two months to finalise complaints. Therefore,
there are a large number of investigated cases involving
AFP that take more than six months to finalise.
The Ombudsman has advised that in respect of complaints
closed in 1994-5, 16.8%
took 6 to 12 months to finalise,
12.7% took one to two years and 3% took more than two
2.59 The AFP acknowledges
that delays do occur from time to time but states that
the majority of complaints handled by the AFP
are completed
and reports forwarded to the Ombudsman within a reasonable
time. The AFP claims that lengthy delays sometimes
occur when awaiting reviews by the Ombudsman. These
delays can occur, for example, if the Ombudsman requires
the AFP to take
additional action. The AFP advises
that for the reporting year 1994-95 the average time
taken by the IID to complete investigations
For the same period the average time taken by the
Ombudsman to review and finalise work on complaints
was 114.2 days.
According to the AFP another factor that contributes
to delay is where there is a protracted court or tribunal
2.60 The Commission
considers that the current system is clearly too slow.
Survey evidence
and the Commission's consultations and submissions
show that delay is one of the most consistent criticisms
made of complaints
systems by complainants and by those
who are the subject of complaints.
of accessibility
2.61 To achieve
an effective complaints system members of the public
and officers of the agencies should have ready access
finding out about how they can complain and have
the confidence to use the procedures available. The
research available suggests
that there is a lack of
awareness and knowledge about complaints systems particularly
by people from a non-English speaking background,
and Torres Strait Islanders and youth. The Commission
would expect that ACT residents may have a much greater
of the AFP complaints mechanism compared
to other communities. The Commission's consultations
in Norfolk Island suggest that
there is little awareness
in that community about the role of the Commonwealth
2.62 The Ombudsman
and the AFP have taken measures to improve the awareness
and accessibility of the system. The Ombudsman has
advised that limited resources have restricted her
capacity to implement programs to promote awareness.
of common or comprehensive database
2.63 There is not
after 14 years a common complaints database used by
both the AFP and the Ombudsman. Thus, for example,
employ different methods in assessing the number
of complaints from any one incident. This means that
at the most basic level
there is no agreement on the
total number of complaints. Nor do the Ombudsman and
the AFP have any common information technology
would enable them to record and pass on information
to each other virtually simultaneously.
2.64 Nor is there
any comprehensive system available to the AFP or the
Ombudsman for classifying complaints as to their seriousness
or their nature. For example, the AFP data on the classification
of complaints contained in its Annual Reports have
the classifications
'assault' and 'use excessive force'
with no explanation as to the difference between these
two categories. The Ombudsman has
provided the Commission
with statistics on the number of matters conciliated
but has not provided data on other types of complaints
in terms of seriousness or other characteristics. The
Ombudsman has advised the Commission that her office
has in the last
18 months developed a system that can
provide some classification of complaints, for example,
using categories such as assault,
excessive force,
racism, rudeness and sexual harassment.
defects in the NCA complaints process
2.65 The current
ad hoc arrangement for complaints against the NCA is
grossly deficient in that it lacks any publicly known
or recognised process and any consistent external scrutiny.
The system does little if anything to create public
confidence in
the accountability or integrity of the
NCA. The current system is particularly inadequate
for the majority of citizens who do
not have the resources
and time to mount expensive court challenges to the
exercise of NCA powers.
2.66 In its 1991
Who is to Guard the Guards. An evaluation of
the National Crime Authority
the Parliamentary Joint
Committee on the NCA (PJC ) considered that the complaints
system needed to be improved and canvassed
such as the Commonwealth Ombudsman, the Inspector-General
of Intelligence and Security or a new agency.
The then Chairperson of the NCA, Justice Phillips
told the PJC that he favoured a system of inquiry outside
the NCA for handling
serious complaints.
A further report by the PJC in October 1994 again
drew the Parliament's attention to the lack of a fully
adequate avenue available
for investigations of complaints
brought against the NCA.
It commented that the continuing lack of a complaints
mechanism was unacceptable. The PJC itself had received
complaints from
individuals about the NCA but the PJC
commented that it lacked the time and the resources
to investigate the more complex complaints.
commented that the lack of a formal system was unsatisfactory
for both complainants and the NCA.
AFP Act s 6(2), (3) and s 27.
General Order 6.
s 6A. An AFP appointee is a member of the AFP or a
staff member of the AFP or a special member of the
AFP appointed under s 27.
See Part II Division 3 particularly s 14.
The Act allows a maximum of three years: s 17.
Submission 29
The Complaints Act
the Commissioner to ensure that at all times there
are a minimum of two Federal police officers serving
in the IID.
Annual Report 1994-5
AGPS Canberra 1995,
s 23(1)(a).
ISA was until recently the Internal Security and Audit
Division (ISAD) but it is no longer a division under
the new organisational
structure of the AFP. Similarly
the IID is also now referred to as II. However, the
Complaints Act has not been amended to reflect
change so the Commission still refers to the stipulated
statutory title of IID.
Fitzgerald report Brisbane 1989.
Submission 29
The number of convictions is further discussed in para
Commonwealth Ombudsman
Annual Report 1994-5,
Complaints Act s 6, 7, 23 and s 25(5).
Commonwealth Ombudsman
Information provided to the Commission by the Commonwealth
That is, from the receipt of the complaint by the IID
until the file is first referred to the Ombudsman for
review purposes.
Calculated from when the IID refers a complaint for
review to the Ombudsman and concluding when the Ombudsman
advises the AFP
that the matter is considered finalised
by her office.
Submission 17
to the issues paper and see
issues paper ch 10 para 10.6
Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia
to Guard the Guards? An evaluation of the National
Crime Authority.
Report by the Parliamentary Joint
Committee on the National Crime Authority November
1991, 131-2.
Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia 37th Parliament.
A report of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on the
National Crime Authority
October 1994.
3. Investigative models
Introduction
1. An internal investigation model
2. An external investigation model
3. Internal investigation with external oversight
4. Combination of internal and external investigations
Queensland CJC model
of the ICAC model
role for the Commonwealth Ombudsman
NSW Police Integrity Commission
Commission's favoured option
Introduction
3.1 Chapter 2 exposed
the major defects in the operation of the current AFP
and NCA complaints systems. This chapter discusses
investigative models. It reveals some basic flaws in
the current AFP complaints model which relies on internal
investigation
with external oversight. It suggests
that a new body with responsibility for investigating
or controlling the investigation of
both AFP and NCA
complaints and corruption is the most suitable investigative
model. The fundamental issue is to determine the
appropriate
combination of internal and external investigation.
The major options for investigating complaints are
as follows.
1. An internal investigation model
3.2 This model would
mean that the particular law enforcement agency would
have sole responsibility for investigating complaints
against itself or its staff.
3.3 This is an outdated
concept in Australia and increasingly so in countries
with comparable legal systems to Australia such
New Zealand, England, Northern Ireland, Wales, Canada
and the United States.
The concept lacks credibility with the public and
a number of inquiries have demonstrated the likelihood
of ineffectiveness of
internal investigations where
there is insufficient external scrutiny.
There is very little support for a return to this
format in Australia. This is borne out in the Commission's
consultations and
the submissions it has received.
The Commission considers that there is no further need
to consider it in this inquiry.
2. An external investigation model
3.4 Under this option
an external agency would carry out all the main functions
of the complaints system. This would mean that
external agency would have its own investigation unit
which would conduct all investigations or the vast
majority of them.
The AFP or the NCA would have no
role or be limited to passing on information to the
external agency.
3.5 This model has
considerable superficial attraction as it is the model
most likely to engender the greatest initial public
confidence. It gives as much power and responsibility
as possible to an external agency. It therefore deals
with concerns about
the lack of effectiveness or objectivity
of internal investigations.
3.6 The Commission
does not support this option because it regards it
as neither desirable in principle nor practical. Before
discussing those arguments it should be noted that
a completely external system is probably illusory.
There is always likely
to be a need for some degree
of liaison and co-operation with the police and for
some police filtering of complaints for the
agency to be effective.
The Commission is unaware of any police complaints
system that could be characterised as completely external.
3.7 The most important
reason for ensuring that a law enforcement agency continues
to have some role in the investigation and
of complaints is that the agency must be given managerial
responsibility to deal with complaints that are generated
by its own officers. This is clearly so for complaints
that can be categorised as customer service or internal
management complaints.
The law enforcement agency must
have the primary role for resolving these types of
complaints because they are by their very
nature matters
that concern managerial responsibility.
3.8 A purely external
investigation will weaken the responsibility of the
agency to maintain discipline within the service. The
task should be to engage the agency at all levels in
the need for active responsibility for effective discipline
and a changed
culture which values complaints as a
source of information, that is as a management tool
for identifying where changes in policy
and practices
may be necessary. Faced with a completely external
complaints and discipline authority it is likely that
enforcement agencies, particularly their middle
managers, will simply absolve themselves of responsibility
for making the system
It is also possible that they may actively work against
it, for example by being unco-operative or withholding
information. The
law enforcement agency may not become
engaged or committed to the process. A completely external
body might also reduce the chances
of internal institutional
reforms designed to reduce complaints in the first
Moreover a completely external unit would become in
effect an alternative police force and may itself develop
some undesirable
aspects of culture such as defensiveness
and insularity.
3.9 There are also
the following practical difficulties in trying to use
this model.
3.10 It would be
difficult to ensure that there are sufficiently experienced
and trained civilian staff to investigate all complaints
that warrant investigation. While the Commission does
not subscribe to the view that only experienced and
trained police officers
or ex-police officers can conduct
high quality investigations into complaints against
the police it may be difficult logistically
costly to have sufficient civilian staff with the requisite
qualities to investigate all complaints that require
investigation.
These logistical and resource difficulties
are especially significant in relation to the AFP and
the NCA because both are national
bodies with a presence
in the States and Territories. The geographical spread
of the jurisdiction means that it would be costly
have a completely external investigation unit with
sufficient resources and expertise to service the whole
of Australia.
3.11 Another practical
problem is that a completely external process will
create delays and duplication because it is likely
that the police will still have to conduct at least
some preliminary inquiries to establish the nature
of the complaint and
to process it. This is especially
so for the lower end of complaints concerning, for
example, rudeness or incivility. To remove
these types
of complaints from the police would mean that it would
be much more difficult and time consuming to use informal
resolution and mediation. The external body would have
to contact the relevant law enforcement officers in
each of these matters,
ascertain what happened and
then order or conduct the informal resolution. It would
be adding another layer to the resolution
matters where informality and speed are essential goals.
3.12 The Commission
is also of the view that the AFP and the NCA should
continue to have a role in investigating the medium
range of complaints and in some circumstances serious
complaints. However, their role in these investigations
should either be
managed or supervised by one external
body with a wide range of powers and ultimate responsibility
for the working of the whole
system. This would enable
the AFP and the NCA to have a significant role in the
investigations aspect of the complaints system
the parameters of that role generally and in the particular
case would be determined by the external agency. This
achieve the objectives of credibility and effectiveness.
It establishes a system whereby each complaint receives
the most appropriate
response that is tailored to its
particular circumstances. Moreover, the AFP and the
NCA would continue to have a primary role
in the disciplining
of their personnel. In fact under the Commission's
proposals in relation to the AFP and NCA disciplinary
systems, these agencies' responsibilities would be
3. Internal investigation with external oversight
3.13 This model
broadly describes the current AFP complaints system
and those of the Australian States and the Northern
The Queensland CJC has a different approach
which is discussed at paragraphs 3.27-33. However,
for the Commonwealth, Victoria,
Western Australia,
the Northern Territory and Tasmania review of complaints
against the police is part of the responsibility
an Ombudsman's Office or similar body which has wider
responsibilities to review government activity. South
Australia has
a Police Complaints Authority who can
be described as a specialist Police Ombudsman. Chapter
6 of the issues paper describes
these Australian systems.
3.14 In these jurisdictions
other than Queensland the majority of investigations
are carried out by the internal investigation
of the respective police services. In general terms
the external agency has a power to conduct its own
independent investigations
the complaint concerns a police officer senior to all
members of the internal unit
the complaint concerns a member of the unit
the complaint relates to a matter the external agency
is already investigating
the external agency is of the view that it is in the
public interest that the complaint be investigated
by the agency.
3.15 These external
agencies may also monitor and review initial investigations
by the police, directing them to conduct further
investigations.
However a common observation by external agencies in
Australia is that they lack the resources to conduct
investigations
themselves into as many of the complaints
as they would like. In particular, they are unable
to initiate and conduct investigations
in cases where
the complaints involve serious allegations, where there
are particularly vulnerable complainants, for example,
youth or people from a non-English speaking background
or where matters of significant public interest are
3.16 In the Australian
to discipline rests in the first instance with the
Commissioner of the particular police service and on
appeal by the particular police officer complained
against to an independent
disciplinary tribunal or
board. The external agency may make recommendations
criminal or disciplinary charges should be laid but
it is limited to recommendatory powers only.
3.17 This basic
model is used widely overseas in comparable countries
to Australia including New Zealand, England, Northern
Ireland, Republic of Ireland, Scotland, Wales and a
number of jurisdictions in Canada and the United States.
Chapter 7 of the
issues paper describes some of these
overseas systems.
3.18 The specific
defects in the AFP complaints version of this model
have been dealt with in detail in chapter 2. The Commission
is of the view that, while this model was innovative
in the 1970's, it is now ill equipped to cope with
the increasing demands
for greater accountability of
the police and for an effective response to police
corruption.
3.19 The model
relies on the internal investigation unit investigating
the bulk of complaints and for the external overseer
to investigate in exceptional cases. However, the number
of cases that are actually investigated by the external
agency appear
on the whole to be inadequate for the
effective and credible working of the system. Many
of these external oversight agencies
do not or cannot
fund their operations so that they are able to conduct
their own investigations in anything but a few cases
and their monitoring of internal investigations tends
to be patchy and often confined to a review of the
papers. Moreover,
because the agency has the task of
reviewing or monitoring the whole range of complaints,
scarce resources are often allocated
to the minimal
task of maintaining the system without any strategic
targeting of serious or 'high risk' cases.
3.20 The effectiveness
of a system that mainly relies on police conducting
and controlling investigations is also open to serious
question. Major inquiries such as Royal Commissions
in Australia that have closely examined these issues
and used significant
powers to do so indicate that
there are very significant problems in relying on police
internal investigation units and police
to ensure accountability and consistently appropriate
standards of conduct.
3.21 The performance
of internal investigations has received considerable
criticism in Australia.
Criticisms usually concern inadequacy, bias or excessive
delays. The prevailing police culture means that there
are strong risks
that they will not be able to conduct
thorough and fair investigations.
A number of inquiries in Australia have discussed
corrupt or inefficient police internal investigation
units. The Fitzgerald
report of 1989 in Queensland
commented that the Queensland Internal Investigations
Unit had been 'woefully ineffective' and recommended
its abolition.
The NSW Royal Commission into Police Interim Report
also found deficiencies in a number of significant
NSW police internal investigations.
There was also a police culture where reporting misconduct
was discouraged and where those who did were ostracised
and persecuted.
3.22 These types
of criticisms are not limited to Australia. The Fitzgerald
inquiry reviewed overseas experiences and made the
following comment on the problem of relying on police
internal investigations:
To a large extent, attempts all over the world to combat
police misconduct locally [ie internally] have revealed
similar and recurrent
problems: police culture, lack
of effective control of internal investigative procedures,
lack of investigative resources, organizations
procedures which inhibit honest police and lack of
public confidence in the Police Force's ability to
investigate complaints
against its members.
Lord Scarman in his report on the Brixton disorders
in 1981 wrote:
My own view is that if public confidence in the complaints
procedure is to be achieved any solution falling short
of a system
of independent investigation available
for all complainants (other than the frivolous) which
are not withdrawn is unlikely to
be successful.
One London study on the basis of observing operational
police work concluded that police officers will normally
tell lies to prevent
another officer from being disciplined
or prosecuted.
A commentary on the American experience made similar
points. According to this commentary American police
officers will rarely
complain or give evidence about
another's brutality or corruption. If an officer does
come forward with a complaint of brutality
or corruption
by a fellow officer, he or she is shunned and the entire
police force closes ranks in silence and denial.
3.23 The pervasive
influence of a defensive or antagonistic police culture
has greatly contributed to doubts about the effectiveness
of complaints systems that rely on police control of
complaints investigations. Police culture describes
the operation of informal
rules that prescribe or modify
police behaviour and that will affect police attitudes
to defining and dealing with misconduct.
Police cultures
are often regarded as defensive and antagonistic towards
complainants and their complaints. Police will protect
each other and reinforce the informal rules in the
face of perceived external and internal challenges
including those arising
from complaints. Codes of silence
are recognised as difficulties in law enforcement cultures
around the world. These 'negative'
police cultures
can permeate the entire organisation or can prevent
relevant information from being received by senior
management.
There are clear examples of the gross failures
in accountability that can develop. The NSW Royal Commission
into Police Interim
Report commented that the NSW police
senior management appeared to be unaware of the extent
of the problem of serious misconduct
in NSW or if aware,
have failed to adequately respond to it.
3.24 Another significant
limitation is that this investigative model does not
provide any effective mechanisms to prevent or detect
corruption. Nor could it. Complaints will not often
provide information about corruption and corruption
prevention and detection
is about pro-active measures
and not waiting for complaints to expose misconduct.
The work of the NSW Royal Commission into the
demonstrates that extensive and sophisticated surveillance
may be needed to detect and gather sufficient evidence
police corruption.
3.25 In response
to these types of problems the overall trend in countries
comparable to Australia is to systems of increasing
external review. In Queensland the level of external
input has gone beyond the model of internal investigations
with external
oversight to a combination of internal
and external investigations. The introduction of the
Police Integrity Commission (PIC)
in NSW will mean
that NSW would also go beyond that model. The approaches
in Queensland and NSW are discussed below.
4. Combination of internal and external investigations
3.26 Queensland
and NSW have developed models which combine internal
and external investigations.
Queensland CJC model
3.27 Review of
complaints against the Queensland Police is conducted
by the Criminal Justice Commission (CJC) which was
established
in 1990 following upon the recommendations
of the Fitzgerald Inquiry. The CJC is not a body solely
concerned with police complaints,
but instead has various
functions and responsibilities in criminal justice.
There are five main divisions: the Official Misconduct
Division; the Witness Protection Division; the Research
and Co-ordination Division; the Intelligence Division
and the Corruption
Prevention Division. The CJC's functions
investigating official conduct in units of public administration
and alleged or suspected misconduct by members of the
Police Service (QPS)
monitoring, reviewing, co-ordinating and initiating
reform of the administration of criminal justice
overseeing criminal intelligence matters and managing
criminal intelligence
providing witness protection
in certain situations, investigating organised or major
overseeing and reporting of reform of the QPS
providing policy directives and recommendations with
respect to law enforcement priorities, education and
3.28 The Official
Misconduct Division (OMD) is the investigative unit
within the CJC and it investigates cases of alleged
suspected misconduct by members of the QPS. It also
reviews minor complaints that are investigated and
dealt with internally
by the QPS. The QPS must report
all complaints of misconduct to the CJC.
3.29 Complaints
against members of the QPS are divided into three categories:
A breach of discipline
is a breach of any provision
Police Service Administration Act 1990
or directions of the Police Commissioner. These can
commonly be described as a violation or dereliction
Misconduct matters
are more serious and are defined
as disgraceful, improper or other conduct unbecoming
an officer; or conduct that does not meet
the standard
of conduct reasonably expected by the community of
a police officer.
Official misconduct
is the most serious category and
involves conduct that constitutes or could constitute,
a criminal offence or disciplinary breach
dismissal. The conduct must involve the officer acting
in his or her capacity as a police officer in a manner
is not honest or impartial, involves a breach
of trust or a misuse of information.
3.30 The QPS is
responsible for dealing with complaints involving breaches
of discipline. Most of these are handled within the
region where the officer who is subject of the complaint
is located. The QPS will notify the CJC of all complaints
it considers
involve breaches of discipline. The CJC
assesses all complaints to determine whether they involve
breaches of discipline or misconduct.
If a complaint
is assessed as a breach of discipline it is referred
to the QPS for action and the CJC has no further interest
3.31 If the complaint
is assessed as a misconduct matter, the CJC is responsible
for its investigation. The OMD can refer cases
misconduct back to the QPS for investigation on behalf
of the CJC. When the investigation has been concluded,
CJC reviews the investigation report, examines
the recommendations and determines if the complaint
has been substantiated. In
certain cases, the CJC may
request that the QPS investigate a complaint alleging
serious misconduct or conduct part of the investigation.
This is particularly likely to happen where the complaint
relates to events outside Brisbane and CJC investigators
be in the area for some time. The investigation
is always overviewed by a CJC police officer of the
rank of inspector or above.
On the basis of the report
provided by the QPS in such cases the CJC decides if
further action and investigation are necessary.
3.32 If a complaint
is assessed as alleging serious misconduct, official
misconduct or is criminal in nature, the CJC retains
carriage of the investigation. Such cases are usually
referred to multi-disciplinary teams for investigation.
The teams comprise
seconded police, civilian investigators
(former police) and civilian lawyers. On occasions
the CJC will have the QPS conduct
a preliminary investigation
into a complaint that has been assessed as possibly
constituting criminal or official misconduct.
in such instances the CJC retains responsibility for
the investigation. The OMD's complaints section closely
these matters. The police officers follow
detailed guidelines laid down by the CJC. The officers
are told who the CJC wants interviewed
and what the
report is to include. When the report is received by
the CJC the complaint goes through the normal assessment
process. The officer, or officers, who are the subject
of the complaint are interviewed by CJC personnel.
Allegations which involve
major or organised crime
where the CJC has jurisdiction, or serious complaints
against police of a more complex nature are also
to a multi-disciplinary team for investigation.
3.33 The Commission
would not recommend the introduction of the CJC model
in its entirety at the federal level. The adoption
of a model essentially similar to the CJC would require
a major restructuring of the federal criminal justice
system. It would
involve combining many of the essential
elements and agencies responsible for the administration
of criminal justice. There appears
to be little reason
at present to justify such a radical restructuring.
The CJC model was a response to findings of systemic
failings in the Queensland justice system which were
not limited to the police force. The same findings
have not been made
in respect of the federal system
of criminal justice. There are also concerns about
the breadth of the Queensland CJC's involvement
the investigation of organised crime and the fact that
the Misconduct Tribunals are linked even administratively
investigative division of the CJC.
of the ICAC model
3.34 The NSW ICAC's
charter is to expose and minimise corruption in the
public sector including the NSW Police Service. Its
three main functions are:
exposing and deterring corrupt conduct by investigating
and reporting on allegations of corruption
corruption prevention
education about the detrimental effects of corruption
and ways to prevent it.
3.35 ICAC can investigate
on its own initiative or on a complaint by any person.
One of its central features is its holding of
hearings. It can require witnesses to make self incriminating
statements. A public authority or public official may
be required to produce a statement of information and
any person may be required to produce specific documents
or things. It
can search public premises and may obtain
warrants to search other places. It can issue summonses
to attend hearings and then
provide reports to Parliament.
3.36 The NSW Royal
Commission examined whether the ICAC should have a
dedicated police corruption division within it. It
this option for a number of reasons including:
there is a public perception that the ICAC has failed
to tackle police corruption
a real difficulty exists in structuring a division
of the ICAC which could be kept separate and independent
from the rest of the
organisation
the other functions of ICAC might mean that competing
demands for resources could result in a lack of proper
resourcing and attention
for the police corruption
3.37 The NSW ICAC
has a broad charter to deal with corruption in the
public sector. In that sense it extends far beyond
with police corruption or complaints. The question
of whether an ICAC with such a broad ranging responsibility
is necessary at
the federal level is beyond the Commission's
terms of reference for this inquiry. However, as noted
above, in the context of
the NSW ICAC's role in dealing
with police corruption the NSW Royal Commission into
the Police did not favour a dedicated Police
division within the NSW ICAC. The effect of this recommendation
is that the ICAC would play no active role in investigating
corruption within the NSW Police Service.
role for the Commonwealth Ombudsman
3.38 The Commonwealth
Ombudsman has submitted that the most effective response
in terms of outcome and costs would be to provide
office with
the general power to determine who should investigate
a matter, for example, the power to investigate herself
when it is in the
public interest
the resources to conduct between 40 to 50 independent
investigations of police complaints per year
enhanced powers and resources to supervise effectively
IID investigations (eg the power to attend interviews,
to veto or approve
an investigating officer and to
give directions about the investigation such as interviewing
in respect of alleged criminal or corrupt activities
the capacity to conduct joint investigations with ISA
or with other law enforcement
agencies under the Ombudsman's
supervision
and the power to determine for any complaint that no
further action is warranted (a current power).
3.39 The Commission
is of the view that one new agency would be preferable
to the Ombudsman undertaking an enhanced role as she
has suggested.
3.40 Currently
the Ombudsman in assessing her priorities has only
been able to assign very limited resources to conducting
own investigations or providing concerted management
or oversight of IID investigations. The very broad
nature of the Ombudsman's
is more difficult for that office to provide a single
focus on police complaints particularly those
are serious. However, it is the proper investigation
and response to these complaints that are crucial to
the effectiveness
and credibility of the system. These
are the complaints that are most likely to raise significant
public interest and to be the
subject of media publicity.
It is these complaints that are most likely to involve
suggestions of cover-up or misconduct by
one officer. The Commission considers that there is
always the difficulty with a generalist Ombudsman's
office that
resources will be spread too thinly to
the detriment of appropriate funding and attention
to very vital and in some respects
more exacting areas
such as police complaints. In addition, there is always
the prospect that the broad jurisdiction of an Ombudsman's
office will be further expanded into new areas thus
compounding the risk of insufficient responses.
3.41 Investigations
into the police as opposed to other public officers
are often more complex and difficult as the NSW Royal
Commission into the Police has indicated. In the Commission's
view such complaints in the broad context of complaints
public agencies and their officers must receive
priority and an uninterrupted focus.
3.42 The Commission
considers that the external agency must have available
to it and the mandate and confidence to use the full
range of coercive powers that may be required, especially
for some very serious complaints such as those involving
corruption.
What will be necessary are the powers available
to a royal commission such as demonstrated with the
NSW Royal Commission into
the NSW Police. To have the
Ombudsman regularly using that range of powers would
be moving the role of the Ombudsman into unfamiliar
areas and beyond the generally accepted view of an
Ombudsman's office that it is concerned with defective
administration.
3.43 The Commission
is also concerned that the Ombudsman's office is unlikely
to have ordinarily available to her the expertise
consistently investigate serious police complaints
and corruption that in many cases will be complex and
difficult to investigate.
Some of these complaints
will concern experienced law enforcement officers determined
to avoid detection or prosecution. Some
will require a range of surveillance and intelligence
techniques and forensic skills that may be difficult
generalist Ombudsman's office to acquire or maintain
or to be fully conversant with.
3.44 A final difficulty
with relying on the Ombudsman's office is that it does
not have as a normal part of its work the preparation
of briefs for use in criminal proceedings. In the Commission's
view the preparation of briefs by the external body
is an essential
element. Criminal matters must be detected
and acted upon with the greatest speed possible and
with early consideration of the
available evidence
and what needs to be done to prepare the prosecution
3.45 The Commission
has considered the option of having the Ombudsman restricted
to investigating or overseeing non-serious complaints
but has rejected it for the reasons set out below in
its discussion of the NSW Royal Commission into the
Police Interim Report
and its proposed Police Integrity
Commission.
Police Integrity Commission
3.46 The NSW Royal
Commission's Interim Report found that a new complaints
and corruption investigation system was necessary in
NSW and should be determined according to the following
circumstances:
within the NSW Police Service there is a pattern of
corruption which must be urgently addressed, so that
public confidence is
the handling of complaints and the detection and investigation
of serious corruption demand different approaches
complaints alone do not provide an adequate measure
of the existence or extent of police corruption
corruption is insidiously difficult to detect and amounts
to serious criminal conduct which requires the application
of sophisticated
and determined investigative techniques;
the Police Service is a disciplined service which must
accept ownership of and responsibility for its problems.
3.47 The draft
exposure NSW Police Corruption Commission Bill provides
that the Police Corruption Commission (now known as
Police Integrity Commission as provided by a recent
new draft Bill) would have as a principal objective
the detection and investigation
of police corruption
and other serious police misconduct. The Bill does
not define what serious police misconduct is. The PIC
would be able to investigate itself or manage or supervise
the investigation conducted by other agencies. The
PIC and the NSW
Ombudsman can agree that Category 1
complaints, that is those which are likely to be considered
as involving allegations of serious
misconduct, should
be referred to the PIC.
The Ombudsman is to forward copies of all Category
1 complaints to the PIC. The PIC can investigate the
complaint itself or send
it to the Ombudsman. The general
scheme is that Category 1 complaints will be investigated
or managed by the PIC while other
categories will be
dealt with by the police with oversight or audit by
the Ombudsman. The majority of complaints will still
be dealt with by the NSW Ombudsman.
3.48 A key function
of the PIC would be to assemble admissible evidence
when investigations reveal criminal conduct and to
such evidence to the NSW Director of Public
Prosecutions. It would have the resources to be able
to conduct its own investigations
with a full range
of coercive powers similar to those of a Royal Commission
or the ICAC.
3.49 The model
proposed by the NSW Royal Commission and provided for
in the draft exposure Bill places the PIC at the apex
the complaints system but still envisages the Ombudsman
providing oversight and auditing of less serious complaints.
significantly different approach to the CJC
which is a single external agency with sole responsibility
for determining the investigation
of complaints.
3.50 The Commission
prefers that a single agency should have full responsibility
for external review. The advantages of a single
are that it
encourages a co-ordinated and systematic approach to
criminal justice issues that by their nature involve
many issues and systemic
ensures that cases do not fall through the cracks existing
where there is more than one agency involved
avoids duplication of resources and effort
centralise records and databases
heightens public awareness on the problems of corruption
and official misconduct because it is clearly the peak
makes it clear who has ultimate responsibility for
ensuring accountability and transparency.
3.51 Some possible
disadvantages are that the model could
lose focus on dealing with serious complaints and corruption
because it is also handling less serious complaints,
particularly
if there is a large volume of complaints
and a variety of other tasks
be unable to provide the necessary delineation between
on the one hand its pro-active, generally secretive
response to corruption
with, on the other hand, its
largely reactive, consumer focused response to complaints
lessen the responsibility and capacity of the law enforcement
agency to deal with its own problems, particularly
through prevention
and effective management.
3.52 The Commission
considers that one of the reasons for the serious problems
in the NSW police complaints and disciplinary systems
has been that there have been too many agencies with
some role to play. The NSW police complaints system
has input from the
NSW police as follows: the Office
of Professional Responsibility with its constituents
of the Professional Integrity Branch and
of Internal Affairs; the Corruption Prevention Unit;
the Comprehensive Audit Section and the Operational
Audit Section. The NSW Ombudsman has an oversight
role in relation to police complaints and the ICAC
could investigate police
corruption. Other bodies with
a role to play include the Ministry for Police, the
NSW Crime Commission and the Police Board of
NSW disciplinary structure can involve the
Commissioner of Police
Police Tribunal
Police Board
Government and Related Employees Appeal Tribunal
Minister for Police
3.53 In the Commission's
view a multiplicity of agencies increases the potential
for fragmented responsibility, for duplication
and resources and for individual cases not receiving
appropriate levels of attention.
3.54 The NSW Royal
Commission, while acknowledging that a single agency
would have the attraction of simplifying and integrating
the process, did not favour a single agency because
the different approaches needed for the complaints
system as opposed to corruption investigation
the need for a specific focus on corruption with an
aggressive and sophisticated investigative capacity,
the resources needed for effective monitoring of the
complaints system.
3.55 The Commission
does not consider that these concerns outweigh the
benefits of single external body in the context of
AFP and the NCA. This does not mean that the recommendations
of the NSW Royal Commission were not the most appropriate
As the Royal Commission noted the selection
of the appropriate model depends heavily on factors
specific to the particular jurisdiction
at the particular
3.56 In relation
to complaints against the AFP and the NCA the suggested
difficulties of a single external agency can be overcome
with proper planning and commitment to the objectives.
3.57 The Commission
acknowledges that complaints and corruption require
different approaches but this can be accommodated within
a single agency. The Commission proposes that the National
Integrity and Investigations Commission (NIIC) as discussed
5 should have two separate divisions, one
dealing with complaints and one with corruption. The
Chairperson of the NIIC would
have responsibility for
overseeing both divisions' work and any co-ordination
between them including the movement of matters
one division to another if there was a change in the
nature and requirements of the particular matter. However,
majority of cases matters would be dealt with
by the one division.
3.58 The NSW Royal
Commission was concerned that the sheer number of police
complaints in NSW would swamp a single agency and
the focus on serious misconduct and corruption. In
its Annual Report 1994-95 the NSW Police Service stated
that during
that financial year it received 5 537 written
complaints containing a total number of 10 172 complaints.
The AFP in the same
period reported 900 complaints
made by 596 complainants. The potential problem of
swamping does not appear to be so significant
federal level. Moreover with the introduction of a
national system of streamlined informal resolution
for customer service
and internal management complaints
the input required from the external agency will be
considerably less for those types of complaints.
should constitute about 70% of all complaints.
3.59 The Commission
proposes that the AFP and the NCA would still play
a major role in investigating complaints but that role
would be at the formal request of the external agency
particularly whenever there was a doubt or conflict
of an investigation. The experience
of the CJC does not suggest that discipline in the
Queensland Police Service has been detrimentally
by the powers of the CJC in respect of investigating
complaints against the police. It is important here
mind that complaints and discipline are
related but nevertheless two different processes. The
Commission is advocating a reduced
role for the AFP
and the NCA in the control of the investigation of
complaints but an increased role for these agencies
imposing discipline.
3.60 The Commission
is of the view that the AFP and the NCA can discharge
their disciplinary functions responsibly and effectively
with a new disciplinary process as proposed in chapter
6. As discussed in that chapter it would appear that
the current AFP
disciplinary process has a number of
major faults but there is no suggestion that AFP senior
management has a record of leniency
with officers when
imposing penalties for breaches of discipline. On the
contrary, the Commission considers that the AFP senior
management has demonstrated a commitment to impose
appropriate penalties that will act as a deterrent
to police misconduct.
The major problems of the current
disciplinary system relate to its characterisation
as quasi-criminal with a review and appeal
that has full adversarial hearings with their attendant
procedures and technicalities. In effect the current
has hamstrung the AFP in its efforts to achieve
effective discipline.
3.61 The Commission
does not consider that the introduction of the NIIC
will weaken the responsibility or commitment of the
NCA or the AFP to take a pro-active stand against misconduct
and corruption. The AFP and the NCA will still have
primary responsibility
for their own internal audit
and security, vetting and training of personnel and
the conduct of integrity testing and assessment.
will work in co-operation with the NIIC in detecting
and investigating corruption and misconduct but there
question that final control and decision
making rests with the NIIC once it is involved in an
investigation.
3.62 The NIIC will
be able to make recommendations about AFP and NCA policies
and procedures in relation to corruption and other
misconduct. The NIIC will also have a research and
policy division providing information and data about
the effectiveness of
the systems. These measures should
assist the AFP and the NCA in their capacity to be
pro-active and take effective preventive
The Commission's
favoured option
3.63 The Commission
favours the introduction of a new single external agency
to deal with serious complaints and corruption but
with the capacity and responsibility to manage or oversight
the complete AFP and NCA complaints process. An integrated
with one body assuming primary responsibility
is necessary.
3.64 The current
AFP and NCA systems have proved to be so inadequate
that merely fine tuning or restructuring the current
is unlikely to be sufficient particularly
given the need to ensure public credibility and credibility
with the agencies concerned.
3.65 If defective
systems are allowed to continue there is always the
danger that misconduct will be encouraged and will
flourish. Maintaining and improving the
integrity of law enforcement agencies is an area where
relying on a static response or
a sense of complacency
is fraught with risks. Both Australian and overseas
developments reinforce that view.
3.66 The Commission
has not received advice from any organisation or an
individual in an informed position to comment that
AFP or the NCA currently has problems with corruption
and misconduct of the same significance as some other
Australian law enforcement
bodies. In relation to the
AFP, the Commonwealth Ombudsman has submitted that
there is no evidence of the type of wide ranging
that led to the establishment of the CJC in Queensland.
The AFP has submitted that corruption within it is
not systemic
or widespread. It does concede that recent
allegations of corruption are of concern. The NCA has
advised that the opportunity
for corruption or serious
misconduct within its activities are limited.
3.67 The Commission
does not consider that these comments should be the
basis for any complacency. Nor were they intended to
be by the agencies concerned. Both the AFP and the
NCA are closely involved in the detection and investigation
of serious drug
and fraud matters. These are areas
where there is significant potential for serious corruption.
That potential is likely to increase
rather than decrease
because there is a growing acknowledgment, including
from the AFP and the NCA, that global crime is presenting
new and demanding challenges that are having an impact
on Australia especially in these areas. Wishful thinking
or platitudes
will not make the problems or potential
problems go away. Opportunities for corruption and
other forms of misconduct will not
totally disappear
not even with significant improvements to police integrity
and culture.
[T]he potential for corruption is an intrinsic and
indivisible feature of modern policing, closely linked
to, and deriving from,
the essential role of the police
in society.
3.68 Indeed there
is evidence that corruption and its forms can adapt
to and indeed co-opt intended anti-corruption strategies.
3.69 What is needed
is to sustain vigilance and attention to the issue
and to adapt policies and strategies and structures
accordingly.
Corruption and other serious misconduct have to be
met by a co-ordinated and systematic response that
monitors and improves law
enforcement cultures, practices
and procedures but also has in place an effective,
credible and responsive system for investigating
and corruption. The Commission believes that the issues
are of such importance that the best possible response
demanded. The Commission considers that the NIIC
as discussed in detail in chapter 5 constitutes the
optimal response in terms
of effectiveness, credibility
and cost efficiency.
3.70 The Commission
proposes that the NIIC should have a dedicated anti-corruption
division which is devoted to detecting and
investigating
corruption. That is, it must have a substantial pro-active
stance. It should have the power to audit or review
any AFP or NCA office and to gain full access to information.
The anti-corruption division should be established
by the NIIC
Act and its charter should be to detect
and investigate corruption. It should act to discover
corruption, potential corruption
or likely avenues
for the development of corruption. This work would
be done in conjunction with the AFP particularly with
IID and its Audit and Security Branch and also with
the NCA. Risk management strategies could be developed
to identify, change
or monitor high risk corruption
areas, personnel and processes.
3.71 The NIIC would
have access to the complete flow of information about
complaints to enable it to provide comprehensive responses
to individual complaints but also to clearly identify
trends and issues of policy and procedure. It would
streamline administrative
arrangements. It would clearly
be at the apex of the complaints systems for the AFP
and the NCA. The system would be holistic
the fragmentation and divided responsibility under
the current system.
eg see A Goldsmith 'Introduction' in A Goldsmith ed
Complaints Against the Police. The Trend to External
Clarendon Press Oxford 1991 1-11.
eg NSW Royal Commission into the Police Interim Report
and the Fitzgerald Report - see para 3.21.
eg D Bayley 'Accountability and Control of Police'
in T Bennett ed
The Future of Policing
no 15 Cropwood
Conference Series Institute of Criminology University
of Cambridge, Cambridge 1983 146 158 quoted by I Freckelton
& H Selby 'Piercing the Blue Veil: An Assessment
of External Review of Police' in D Chappell & P
Australian Policing Contemporary Issues
Butterworths
North Ryde 1989, 24.
Justice Michael Kirby
Submission 6
A Goldsmith 'External Review and Self-Regulation: Police
Accountability and the Dialectic of Complaints Procedures'
in A Goldsmith
Complaints Against the Police. The
Trend to External Review
Clarendon Press Oxford 1991,
For a discussion of the notion of police accountability
see R Sarre 'Towards the Notion of Policing 'By Consent'
and its Implications
for Police Accountability' in
D Chappell & P Wilson ed
Australian Policing Contemporary
Butterworths North Ryde 1989 102-19. For a discussion
of the police environment of the 1990's and beyond
including demands for
greater accountability of police
see M Palmer 'The Likely Environment in the Year 2000
and Beyond' in B Etter & M Palmer
Police Leadership
in Australasia
The Federation Press Sydney 1995 1-39.
I Freckelton & H Selby 'Piercing the Blue Veil
D Chappell & P Wilson
Australian Policing Contemporary
Butterworths Sydney 1989 16-20, 23.
Fitzgerald report 289.
NSW Royal Commission Interim Report 36, 39.
Fitzgerald report 285.
Lord Scarman
The Brixton Disorders
Cmnd 8247 HMSO London
A Goldsmith 'External Review and Self-Regulation: Police
Accountability and the Dialectic of Complaints Procedures'
in A Goldsmith
Complaints Against the Police. The
Trend to External Review
Clarendon Press Oxford 1991
W Petterson 'Police Accountability and Civilian Oversight
of Policing: An American Perspective' in A Goldsmith
Complaints Against the Police The Trend to External
Clarendon Press Oxford 1991 272.
NSW Royal Commission into Police Interim Report 3.
Police Service Administration Act 1990
For a review of the organisation of the CJC see Legislative
Assembly of Queensland The Parliamentary Criminal
Justice Committee
A report of a review of the Criminal
Justice Commission pursuant to
s 118(1)(f)
of the Criminal
Justice Act 1989
Report No 26 6 February 1995. That
report recommended that the Misconduct Tribunals should
not be associated with the CJC's structure
NSW Royal Commission into the Police Interim Report
NSW Royal Commission Interim Report 85.
V Henry 'Police Corruption: Tradition and Evolution'
in K Bryett and C Lewis eds
Un-peeling Tradition: Contemporary
Centre for Australian Public Sector Management
Brisbane Australia 1994 160-180.
4. Special issues for the NCA
Introduction
need for a formal complaints system including external
should be subject to the NCA complaints system?
Chairperson
and members
of NCA staff
uniform system of investigations desirable
external agency
the IGC be part of the NCA complaints system?
the PJC be part of the NCA complaints system?
secrecy provision
internal unit unnecessary
Introduction
4.1 This chapter
discusses some special issues that arise when considering
complaints against the NCA. Those issues relate to
its mixed and changing workforce and its joint operations
with other law enforcement agencies. The chapter also
discusses which
agency should provide external review
of complaints against the NCA and, in particular, considers
the arguments for the Inspector-General
of Intelligence
and Security, the Commonwealth Ombudsman or the Commission's
proposed National Integrity and Investigations Commission
(NIIC). The NCA's disciplinary process is discussed
in chapter 6 where a separate disciplinary code for
the NCA is recommended.
for a formal complaints system including external review
4.2 The Commission
is strongly of the view that there must be a formal
complaints system for the NCA that includes effective
external review. This view has been overwhelmingly
endorsed during the Commission's consultations and
in submissions received.
The NCA's submission has said
that such a system is necessary to ensure public confidence
and accountability.
Draft recommendation
The need for a formal complaints system including external
Draft recommendation 4.1.
The NCA should have a formal
complaints system established under legislation and
providing effective external participation and
be subject to the NCA complaints system?
4.3 The NCA has
a mixed workforce consisting of a number of categories
of personnel. Each category is defined under the Act
to mean a member of staff
primarily to ensure that the secrecy provisions for
the unauthorised disclosure of information apply in
every case.
Chairperson
and members
4.4 The NCA is constituted
by the Chairperson and members who are statutory office
holders. Members and the Chairperson hold office
a maximum of four years.
4.5 Under the NCA
Act, staff of the Authority fall within one of the
following categories.
(a) Those employed under the Public Service Act
A majority of NCA staff are appointed and employed
Public Service Act 1922 (
and the NCA Chairperson has all the powers of a Departmental
Secretary under that Act.
(b) Consultants
The Chairperson may employ consultants according to
terms and conditions as determined from time to time.
The argument for making consultants subject to an
NCA complaints regime is that if they are not included
there may be no alternative
method of complaint and
discipline in relation to them. In some cases where
the person is a member of a professional organisation
there may be a system of complaint and discipline but
this system may be removed from the control and responsibility
(c) Seconded personnel
Some personnel may be seconded to the NCA from federal,
State or Territory police services and other agencies
such as the Australian
Securities Commission, the Australian
Taxation Office, AUSTRAC, the Australian Customs Service
and State revenue agencies for
varying periods of time.
All police seconded to the NCA have the status of 'members
of staff of the Authority' under the Act. The NCA has
entered into
memoranda of understanding with the AFP,
the Northern Territory and all States except South
The Memoranda cover staffing and the continuation
of the Commissioner's and members' legislative and
operational responsibilities,
including discipline.
A common period of secondment is two years.
All State Police seconded to the NCA are subject to
the discipline and internal investigation procedures
of their home forces.
The Queensland, WA, NSW, Victorian
and Tasmanian Police Commissioners have agreed that
complaints against members seconded to
the NCA will
be forwarded to the Chairperson in the first instance.
Where the matter warrants formal investigation, the
Chairperson
will forward the details of the complaint
to the relevant police service. This means that the
NCA Chairperson is responsible
for making an initial
decision about whether a complaint warrants further
investigation.
Northern Territory (NT) seconded police are subject
to the internal investigation procedures of the NCA
or the State Police in
the jurisdiction where the complaint
was made. The results of the investigation are then
forwarded to the NT Police for any disciplinary
other action. The NT Commissioner has agreed that complaints
against members of NT police seconded to the NCA in
to their duties with the NCA are forwarded
to the Chairperson of the NCA in the first instance.
A copy of the initial complaint
is also forwarded to
the Commander Internal Audit and Review Division in
the NT Police. Complaints are investigated by either
officers of the NCA or by police officers from the
investigation has
been finalised, details of the outcome
and a copy of the investigation file are forwarded
to the Commander Internal Audit and
Review Division.
(d) Legal counsel
Some legal practitioners assisting the NCA may be appointed
as consultants.
It is possible that during litigation, counsel may
be the subject of complaint. If the complaint concerns
an aspect of professional
practice then the relevant
Bar Association and/or Law Society may become involved
and investigation of the complaint and disciplinary
action may ensue.
(e) Task forces
Officers of the AFP, State and Territory police services
and other agencies may be members of an NCA task force
under the NCA
and are consequently defined as members of staff of
Task forces are often established to investigate allegations
of significant and wide-scale organised criminal activity
that crosses
State and Territory boundaries and involves
a variety of criminal activity such as drugs, money
laundering, extortion and violence.
The NCA has advised
that it keeps a list of the membership of a task force
for each operation but there is no consolidated register
of members of all task forces. The total number changes
frequently as members are added or removed and as operations
or end. The total might be in the range of
No formal arrangements have been made with these agencies
who are task force
members. It has been the NCA's practice
to request the home forces of police against whom complaints
have been made to conduct
investigations.
Task force members remain under the control and direction
of their home agency and may not be subject to the
day to day control
of the NCA. Some task forces may
last for long periods of time, for example, for three
years. Some members of a task force may
have only intermittent
roles (for example, passing on information) and no
routine contact with the operation. For some individual
operations there may be federal, State or Territory
police or other professionals who are involved but
who are not officially
members of the task force.
of NCA staff
4.6 NCA staff are
currently in categories (a), (b), (c) and (e) as described
above. As at 30 June 1995 there was a total of 399
staff including the Chairperson and members. This total
included 112 seconded police with 50 of those AFP members.
uniform system of investigations desirable
4.7 Under the current
fragmented approach complainants may well be confused
the NCA is 'passing the buck' if the NCA refers matters
to the home agency. There is also potential duplication
of investigation
by federal and State or Territory
bodies. For example, one complaint may concern officers
from a large number of agencies scattered
across Australia.
Under the current approach it is possible that for
such a complaint each agency will conduct its own separate
investigation including interviewing the same witnesses
and gathering the same evidence with attendant extensive
accommodation costs.
4.8 The Commission
is of the view that the Chairperson, NCA members and
all staff members should be subject to the NCA complaints
system. This single system would provide the clearest
line of procedure, accountability and consistency.
Seconded police, consultants,
legal practitioners and
task force members would only be subject to the NCA
complaints procedure in relation to their work for
the NCA. For example, Task Force members from a State
or Territory agency would only be subject to the NCA
complaints procedure
in their capacity as a member
of that Task Force. The legislation could specify the
range of conduct covered by providing that
that may be subject to the operation of the NCA complaints
provisions is that action in performance or purported
performance of the person's powers or functions under
the NCA Act or action arising directly or indirectly
in the course of
the person's employment or engagement
under the NCA Act. 'Employment or engagement' would
be defined to cover all possible categories
'Action' would include a failure to act. The relevant
State and Territory home agencies could introduce complementary
legislation to make it clear that their officers who
are staff members of the NCA by virtue of the NCA Act
are, while performing
their NCA functions, covered
by the NCA complaints legislation.
4.9 If a uniform
system were implemented all personnel including seconded
staff, consultants, legal counsel and task force members
should be advised as soon as practicable that they
are subject to the NCA complaints system. This should
be done where possible
before people become staff under
the NCA Act. Their obligations should be made clear
to them before they join. Where there is
of engagement then a term of the contract should be
that the person acknowledges that he or she is subject
NCA complaints procedure. In other cases this
could be readily achieved by a simple information sheet
designed for each category
Draft recommendation
A uniform system of investigations desirable
Draft recommendation 4.2.
There should be one uniform
NCA complaints system applying to NCA members and all
its staff that is, to (a) members and the Chairperson,
(b) staff employed under the Public Service Act, (b)
seconded staff, (c) consultants, (d) legal practitioners,
(e) members
of task forces.
The external
4.10 The issues
paper identified the Commonwealth Ombudsman or the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security or as
two of the main choices for providing external
overview. The current role of the Ombudsman in complaints
against the AFP is discussed
in chapter 2.
4.11 Under the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act
(Cth) the Inspector-General investigates complaints
against Australia's five intelligence and security
agencies with broadly
similar powers of investigation
and recommendation as the Commonwealth Ombudsman.
4.12 The Commission
considers that neither the Ombudsman nor the Inspector-General
is the most appropriate agency to deal with
against the NCA. Instead the Commission prefers that
the Commission's proposed National Integrity and Investigations
Commission (NIIC) should have this responsibility to
deal with both complaints against the AFP and the NCA.
The general reasons
for this preference are discussed
in chapter 3. The broad issues raised and the objectives
for the AFP complaints system and
the NCA complaints
system are essentially the same. The AFP and the NCA
have differences in composition, focus and powers but
there are also some broad similarities. Both are national
law enforcement agencies with a primary function being
the investigation
of organised crime. However there
are also specific reasons why the NIIC should be the
external agency to investigate and review
against the NCA.
4.13 The NCA is
a body with significant coercive powers and a broad
charter of responsibility. Any agency that provides
review of complaints against it must have
the status, investigative powers and capacity to be
able to provide effective review.
Community confidence
is most likely to be increased by the introduction
of a specialist and focussed external agency that can
provide searching and thorough scrutiny. The Commission
considers that it is the NIIC that is most likely to
have those characteristics.
Moreover, if it is accepted
that the AFP requires the introduction of the NIIC
it means that there are efficiency and cost effectiveness
factors that support the NIIC also providing external
review of the NCA.
4.14 The Ombudsman
may experience difficulties in devoting sufficient
resources to complaints against the NCA. The Ombudsman's
record in relation to the AFP suggests that this would
be a significant concern. Moreover, as explained in
chapter 3 the Commission
considers that the Ombudsman
with her traditional role of reviewing defective administration
is not the most appropriate agency
to be investigating
complaints against the NCA where some complaints may
concern actions taken by police officers or the improper
use of coercive powers.
4.15 The limitations
of the Inspector-General's office in this context are
that it is a small agency with currently little resourcing
for the conduct of intensive investigations. It would
require additional resources to undertake supervision
of complaints against
the NCA. Moreover, its current
role has been limited to complaints against the intelligence
organisations. While it is true that
the NCA has an
intelligence gathering role it also has similarities
with the role of the AFP. The NCA is not a specialist
intelligence
agency in the nature of ASIO or ASIS.
It is primarily concerned with organised crime and
law enforcement and, for example, has
personnel who
are police or others who are experienced and trained
in aspects of law enforcement, not espionage or national
security. It could be broadly said that the NCA is
an organisation falling somewhere between an intelligence
agency and a police
4.16 The Commission
considers that the NIIC would be able to build up reasonably
quickly a high profile in the community for independent
monitoring and review of federal law enforcement activity.
In contrast the Inspector-General of Intelligence and
Security may
be less widely known and is more likely
to be regarded as specialising in security and espionage
and not in investigating a wider
range of complaints.
The NIIC with its separate divisions relating to complaints
and corruption would be able to offer greater
accessibility
to the general community for the full range of complaints
than the Inspector-General.
4.17 The Commission
also considers that the NIIC with its specific focus
on complaints and corruption in relation to law enforcement
and with its public status as a standing royal commission
is less likely than either the Ombudsman or the Inspector-General
to have difficulties in handling attempts at abuse
of its process. It may also be better placed than the
Ombudsman or the Inspector-General
to respond to any
attempt by organised crime to use threats, intimidation
or inducements for corruption.
Draft recommendation
The external agency
Draft recommendation 4.3.
The National Integrity and
Investigations Commission should provide external scrutiny
and participation in the system of complaints
the NCA and its staff.
the IGC be part of the NCA complaints system?
4.18 The Inter-Governmental
Committee (IGC) comprises Commonwealth, State and Territory
Ministers responsible for administering
the NCA Act
in their jurisdictions. The Commission considers that
it would be inappropriate for the IGC to be part of
complaints system. Those Ministers are accountable
to their respective Parliaments.
the PJC be part of the NCA complaints system?
4.19 The Parliamentary
Joint Committee on the NCA (PJC) is made up of five
Members of the House of Representatives and five Senators.
Its main role is to monitor and review the performance
by the Authority of its functions and to report to
both Houses of Parliament.
It is possible that in fulfilling
this role that the PJC or its members could be the
subject of a complaint. The possibility
being the subject of complaints may be increased if
the PJC were to monitor and review the NIIC as recommended
the Commission in chapter 5. The Commission does
not propose that the PJC should be part of the NCA
complaints system. It should
not be regarded as part
of the NCA. The question of whether any complaints
handling process is necessary for the PJC is a matter
for Parliament.
Draft recommendation
Should the IGC and the PJC be part of the NCA complaints
Draft recommendation 4.4.
The IGC and the PJC should
not be part of the NCA complaints system.
The secrecy
4.20 The secrecy
provision of the NCA Act makes it an offence to directly
or indirectly disclose information relating to the
performance of duties. This provision might be construed
to apply to cases where an NCA officer wishes to make
a complaint about
the activities of the NCA or a member
of its staff. This would seem to be an unwarranted
extension of the basic policy behind
the secrecy provision.
To prevent complaints by the use of the secrecy provision
might actually allow wrong-doers to escape investigation
and penalty.
4.21 The Commission
considers that an exception should be made to the NCA
Act secrecy provision so that it does not apply to
a person making a complaint to the NCA or to the NIIC
or any person designated to be able to receive complaints
the appointed investigator of the complaint so that
the investigator has full access to relevant information.
Draft recommendation
Exceptions to the secrecy provision
Draft recommendation 4.5.
There should be an exception
to the NCA Act secrecy provision so that it does not
a person making a complaint to the NCA or to the NIIC
or to any person designated to be able to receive complaints
the appointed investigator of a complaint so that the
investigator has full access to relevant information.
internal unit unnecessary
4.22 Unlike the
AFP the NCA does not have an internal investigations
division. The Commission does not consider that it
establish one. Given the small number and the
nature of the complaints a separate unit would not
be cost effective. What will
be necessary is for some
NCA officers to be designated as 'Complaints officers'
whose primary task in relation to complaints
be to liaise with the NIIC and to arrange 'in-house'
resolution of minor complaints.
Draft recommendation
Dedicated internal unit unnecessary
Draft recommendation 4.6.
The NCA should not establish
an internal investigations unit or division but may
need to designate some officers as those who
accept and record complaints, to arrange informal resolution
of minor complaints and to liaise with the NIIC.
s 47. The NCA has advised the Commission that 285 out
of 399 NCA staff are public servants.
s 49 and 58.
According to the NCA the memorandum with South Australia
is in draft form and is likely to be formally entered
s 11(1)(c).
Annual Report 1994-95
, 88. Information about the
number of AFP seconded officers was provided to the
Commission by the NCA.
Ch 5 deals with the proposed procedures for dealing
with complaints concerning the NCA and ch 6 discusses
the proposed disciplinary
regime for the NCA.
5. National Integrity and Investigations Commission
Introduction
functions and structure
divisions: complaints and corruption
Legislation
from the Ombudsman's current role
and efficiencies from the AFP
from the FPDT
related funding
likely workload
Commission's
assessment of NIIC's funding
Investigative
and inquisitorial powers
to recommend action after investigations
in relation to complainant's remedies
power to examine policies and procedures and make recommendations
Accountability
Accountability
to the Government and Parliament
on AFP and NCA officers to report misconduct and evidence
of misconduct
against the NIIC
Investigative
Amalgamation
of IID and ISA
of complaints
with Category C complaints (minor)
with Category B complaints (serious misconduct)
B complaints involving the AFP
B complaints against the NCA
with Category A complaints (serious criminality, corruption
or significant public interest)
A Complaints concerning the AFP
A complaints against the NCA
Intelligence
research and policy role and related reporting obligations
extensions to the NIIC's work and jurisdiction
approach to investigations
for further federal jurisdiction
uniform Australian law enforcement complaints and disciplinary
Introduction
5.1 This chapter
examines the role, functions and resources of the National
Integrity and Investigations Commission (NIIC), the
proposed new body to investigate or manage/supervise
the investigation of complaints against the AFP and
the NCA. The chapter
concludes by considering a number
of possible initiatives that would complement the NIIC's
role and jurisdiction. One initiative
would involve
a national resourcing arrangement for federal, State
and Territory investigations involving law enforcement
including accreditation for investigators
and arrangements for the sharing of information and
facilities. Another possible initiative
would be for
the NIIC to have jurisdiction about complaints and
corruption in respect of other federal agencies which
law enforcement functions. This would be a very
significant extension of its role.
functions and structure
5.2 Two key functions
of the NIIC would be to investigate serious complaints
against the AFP and the NCA and to detect and investigate
corruption within those two agencies. It would be able
to conduct or order investigations in response to a
complaint, report
or other form of information or on
its own initiative.
5.3 It would receive
information about all complaints made against the AFP
and the NCA and would then make decisions about the
most appropriate means of investigation and the most
appropriate persons or agencies to conduct those investigations.
have wide investigative and review functions
in respect of complaints and information about corruption.
The NIIC would have the
ultimate power in determining
who should investigate and would in every case have
available to it the power of control and direction
of the investigation.
5.4 The NIIC would
also produce and analyse data about complaints and
corruption and provide reports about trends.
divisions: complaints and corruption
5.5 There would
be two main divisions within the NIIC
the Office of the Commissioner for Complaints and
the Office for Anti-Corruption.
5.6 This organisational
distinction between complaints and corruption is necessary
because the two require different approaches.
5.7 The handling
of complaints is likely to
be reactive to individual complainants
be concerned with day to day policing
have a significant focus on accessibility and service
provision to complainants.
5.8 Anti-corruption
is likely to
be pro-active to be effective
rely on diverse intelligence information and not merely
a formal complaint
be secretive
require surveillance and sophisticated methods of investigation,
often conducted on a covert basis.
5.9 The Commission
envisages that these two divisions would be physically
separated within the NIIC but share infrastructure
and an information system. Both divisions would have
access to the NIIC database subject to any special
security requirements,
particularly those relating
to the Office for Anti-Corruption.
Legislation
5.10 The NIIC would
be established by its own Act and that Act would provide
that the NIIC has its own corporate personality.
Commission considers that the complaints provisions
for both the AFP and the NCA should be included in
this Act. This would
mean that all the main elements
of the complaints systems would be included in the
one piece of legislation making it easier
to locate the relevant law and to understand how the
systems work. The Act should be drafted in plain English
should ensure that it is easy for a reader to identify
and follow the complaints process.
5.11 The NIIC would
have a full-time Chairperson, a full-time Commissioner
for Complaints and at least one part-time Commissioner.
The legislation should allow the Chairperson to determine
the exact number of part-time Commissioners according
to the demands
of work and the available skills and
interests of the Commissioners.
5.12 The Chairperson
should be a retired or seconded superior court judge
or a person qualified for appointment as a judge who
has special relevant experience. The Commission considers
that the position of Chairperson requires a person
with judicial
or extensive legal experience and qualifications
because of the coercive powers available to the NIIC
and the great responsibility
placed on it to be effective
and to act according to the law. The Chairperson should
be able to delegate to the full-time Commissioner
a part-time Commissioner any of his or her functions
5.13 The Commissioner
for Complaints should desirably be a person with extensive
experience in human rights or broad based experience
in community affairs such as community legal centres
or consumer advocacy. The part-time Commissioner should
desirably have
extensive experience in police or other
investigative work.
5.14 The NIIC would
be based in Canberra since the bulk of its work would
relate to local AFP community policing. However, the
NIIC should have arrangements with the AFP and the
NCA to use their regional facilities where appropriate
and consideration
should be given to establishing arrangements
for the use of facilities and resources with other
Commonwealth, State and Territory
law enforcement and
review agencies.
Draft recommendations
Role, functions and structure
Draft recommendation 5.1.
A National Integrity and
Investigations Commission (NIIC) should be established
to investigate or manage/supervise the investigation
of complaints against the AFP and the NCA.
Draft recommendation 5.2.
The new legislation to establish
the NIIC should include the complaints provisions for
both the AFP and the NCA. The Act should
the National Integrity and Investigations Commission
(Australian Federal Police and National Crime Authority
Complaints)
Draft recommendation 5.3.
The Act should be drafted
in plain English and should ensure that it is easy
for a reader to identify and follow the complaints
Draft recommendation 5.4.
The NIIC should have two
main divisions
the Office of the Commissioner for Complaints and
the Office for Anti-Corruption.
Draft recommendation 5.5.
The NIIC would have a full-time
Chairperson, a full-time Commissioner for Complaints
and at least one part-time Commissioner.
5.15 The Commission
envisages a staff of about 30 people. There would be
a modest Secretariat and a core of people with extensive
investigative and legal experience in policing or other
investigative work. The current estimate of the Commission
would have the capacity to conduct their own investigations
or manage or supervise
other agencies' investigations.
All staff would be engaged on fixed term contracts
with staggered exits to promote a clear focus
organisation's key objectives, to avoid 'bureaucratisation'
and to foster staff independence from the agencies
are investigated. The NIIC would be able to second
personnel and to engage consultants. All staff would
be subject to initial
integrity tests and then subject
to subsequent checks.
5.16 The NIIC would
be federally funded. The Commission's preliminary estimate
is that funding would be in the order of three
a half to four million dollars annually. This amount
includes any additional resources for the AAT if it
were to provide
review of disciplinary decisions instead
of the Federal Police Disciplinary Tribunal (FPDT).
The Commission considers that that amount would be
in the order of the current expenditure in relation
to the FPDT.
5.17 The Commission
considers that a substantial part of the NIIC's funding
could be obtained from off-sets from the current system,
by greater efficiencies and appropriate contributions
by the NCA and the States and Territories in relation
to the operations
of the NCA. Off-sets would be available
by removing the Ombudsman's supervisory role in this
area, some reduction in the AFP's
role and the abolition
of the FPDT. Efficiencies would result from the consolidation
of the complaints and investigative functions
AFP's IID and ISA, the more effective use of informal
resolution and a more streamlined system of review
of disciplinary
decisions. The NCA and the States and
Territories should make contributions to funding according
to the expected role of the
NIIC in relation to the
5.18 The Commission
in attempting to estimate funding and off-sets has
sought information from the Ombudsman and the AFP about
their current levels of staffing and resources for
dealing with complaints against the AFP. The Commission
considers that the
information so far provided and
as described immediately below is not sufficient to
provide a completely accurate account of
current spending.
from the Ombudsman's current role
5.19 The Ombudsman
receives a single line appropriation from the Commonwealth
Government that does not break down the amounts
be spent on specific functions. Her total budget for
1994-95 was approximately $7.6 million.
The Ombudsman has advised the Commission that she
is unable to break down the expenditure against parts
of her jurisdiction.
The best estimate that the Ombudsman
could provide in relation to the AFP was as follows:
5.20 The Ombudsman
also advised that the reduction in 1994/95 reflects
the more streamlined approach to AFP complaints not
investigation including the use of informal
resolution.
5.21 The Ombudsman
has about seven staff who work regularly in the area
although no person works exclusively on these matters.
The Ombudsman believes that working across more than
one area encourages multi-skilling. One section of
those who work on AFP
complaints specialises in complaints
originating in the ACT and the other on national policing
and Customs and Defence.
5.22 The Ombudsman
has also advised that her office has recently been
able to conduct more of her own primary investigations
because she has been able to draw from a major projects
fund granted to her office. However, she says that
in the past there
have not been the resources available
to conduct her own investigations. For example, to
review investigations carried out by
the IID in relation
to the AIDEX demonstration she had to request a special
grant for a two year period of $175 000.
5.23 The Commission
considers that, as a preliminary estimate which is
based on the information currently provided, 95% of
Ombudsman's average expenditure on the AFP complaints
system over the last three years, that is, approximately
$590 000 could
be made available to the NIIC.
5.24 The Commission
also notes that the ACT Government contributes to the
operation of the AFP complaints system in relation
to complaints arising in the ACT. The amount is paid
into consolidated revenue. The Ombudsman has advised
that this amount is
approximately $380 000 annually.
The Commission is currently unable to estimate the
total amount that is actually spent on the
AFP complaints
function in relation to the ACT policing and how much
for the rest of the AFP complaints function. The Commission
considers that it may be possible that some funding
from the ACT contribution of $380 000 could be available
for the NIIC.
This is a matter that would require further
examination.
and efficiencies from the AFP
5.25 The Commission
is seeking from the AFP estimates of its total expendiure
in relation to its complaints and disciplinary functions.
The AFP has provided the following partial information
(IID) and Internal Security and Audit (ISA)
for the financial year 1995-96. Table 1 shows current
IID funding*
Administrative expenses
ISA Funding*
Admistrative expenses
The AFP advises that the employer's contribution to
superannuation is 16.1% of salary expense.
5.26 According
to the information provided by the AFP the combined
funding for IID and ISA is $4 806 872. As noted above
may under-estimate the total cost because it does
not include employer contributions to superannuation.
5.27 The Commission
considers that significant off-sets could be found
from the AFP. This assessment is based upon a number
of considerations. The main consideration is the extent
to which investigations conducted by the NIIC staff
in cases of very
serious misconduct and corruption
would relieve the AFP of a significant part of its
current investigative role. The management
or oversight
by the NIIC of the AFP's investigations into complaints
or allegations of corruption would also reduce the
on AFP resources. The adoption of an effective
workplace resolution scheme across Australia would
also significantly reduce IID
expenditure because for
those matters the IID should have no role. The NIIC
would provide any auditing or review of that process.
There are other areas of the AFP system that could
contribute to the NIIC's funding.
5.28 The proposed
amalgamation of ISA and the IID would result in a saving
of funds by reducing administrative costs. The Commission
notes that there are now currently about 50 personnel
in ISA of whom 24 are involved in investigative roles
and 22 personnel
in the IID.
The Commission is of the view that
prima facie
appears to be a larger number of staff than should
be necessary to perform the allotted tasks.
5.29 Another factor
which should reduce IID and ISA costs and use of resources
would be the effective implementation of a comprehensive
anti-fraud and anti-corruption plan as recommended
in chapter 7. In addition, an effective pro-active
plan with integrity testing,
risk assessment and regular
review should reduce the scope for fraud and corruption.
An effective and comprehensive risk management
for IID investigations should result in a more cost
efficient use of investigative resources with strategic
of high risk cases.
5.30 The Commission's
draft recommendations for reform to the disciplinary
process should result in savings to the AFP. Fewer
matters should proceed to fully contested hearings
and those that do should be determined more quickly.
5.31 The total
availability of funds from the AFP, a figure which
the Commission considers to be conservative if the
of the current system were to be audited,
is approximately $1.2 million.
from the FPDT
5.32 The 1994-5
Annual Report of the FPDT indicates that its budget
is about $30 000. The whole of this amount should be
as an off-set to the NIIC. The Commission
considers that this amount under-estimates the total
costs of the Tribunal as it does
not include the full
costs of judges and personnel (eg salaries including
superannuation, allowances and administrative costs).
Savings from the abolition of the FPDT should cover
any additional resourcing of the AAT necessitated by
the Commission's draft
recommendations.
related funding
5.33 The NCA would
contribute some of the funding according to the expected
proportion of the NIIC's work that is generated in
relation to the NCA. The Commission's initial estimate
is that this should be in the order of $150 000 per
year. That amount
takes into account a likely rise
in the number of complaints concerning the NCA if the
Commission's suggested system were established
the likelihood that some of the complaints involving
the NCA would be complex and require extensive input.
It is an amount
that represents what the Commission
believes the NCA ought to be spending to operate a
fully effective complaints and disciplinary
together with proper anti-fraud and anti-corruption
5.34 The Commission
also considers that the States and the Territories
could make some contribution to funding in relation
complaints concerning NCA activities. The making
of these contributions would be appropriate and fair
given that under the Commission's
draft recommendations
the NIIC would be conducting or managing investigations
concerning State and Territory officers in their
related activities and the NCA would have its own disciplinary
code that could apply to these officers in the context
their work for the NCA. In that sense the proposed
new system would provide a service for the State and
Territory agencies.
5.35 The Commission
considers that the amount the State and Territories
would contribute would not be excessive. There are
number of possible methods for determining appropriate
contributions. Some major alternatives are as follows.
Each jurisdiction could contribute the same amount
on the basis that each benefits from NCA activities
against organised crime
in the sense that organised
crime is a national problem and that in the longer
term each jurisdiction will have cause to be involved
in NCA operations.
Each jurisdiction could contribute on a direct user
pays basis. That is, if the NIIC was investigating
a complaint in relation
to a State or Territory officer,
the relevant home agency would pay for that investigation
or a proportion of it.
A formula that differentiates according to the particular
could be introduced.
One possibility is that the States
and Territories contribute in proportion to their respective
populations as at July 1 each
year. This is the formula
agreed upon in relation to the establishment of the
Standing Committee on Organised Crime and Criminal
Intelligence (SCOCCI).
An alternative formula that might more accurately
reflect use of resources would be to base the contribution
upon relative police
strengths. For example, as at
July 1 of each previous year the combined strengths
of all police forces excluding the AFP could
be determined
and each jurisdiction would contribute in proportion
to its own police force strength as a fraction of the
A combination of these options.
5.36 The Commission's
initial estimate for the combined total of State and
Territory contribution would be about $150 000 per
likely workload
5.37 It is important
to try to assess the likely workload of the NIIC in
estimating its staffing and resources. There are a
number of reasons to suggest that the workload of the
NIIC will not be as heavy as a cursory consideration
might suggest.
5.38 The latest
AFP statistics for 1994-95 indicate that there were
900 complaints made by 596 complainants and 109 allegations.
There were only 596 complainants but 900 complaints
because many complaints and allegations arise out of
the one incident.
The task of investigating and resolving
these related complaints and allegations is thus reduced.
Many in practical terms will
involve the one investigation
and the consideration of the same evidence.
5.39 The level
of complaints about the NCA is about 18 per year, although
this may well increase with the introduction of a formal
system. Nevertheless the workload of the NIIC in connection
with the NCA is unlikely to be significant in terms
of raw numbers
of complaints.
5.40 Only about
half the number of complaints lodged will be investigated
at all. Some will be formally withdrawn and in relation
to others there will be a decision not to investigate
because the complaint lacks substance or credibility,
is trivial or is
too old. Moreover a significant number
of complaints will be dealt with by informal resolution
without the need for investigation.
The Commission
would expect that with the introduction of a national
system for the informal resolution of customer service
or internal management types of complaints the number
of investigated complaints should be reduced with resulting
benefits to
the efficiency of the complaints system.
The Commission anticipates that about 70% of all complaints
and allegations should be
capable of being resolved
informally. In relation to these informally resolved
matters the NIIC will essentially take a monitoring
and auditing role. It will be sent a record of the
matter and will check to see whether the complainant
was satisfied with
the process. Its only other general
function in relation to these matters will be to conduct
random audits to ensure quality
5.41 At the more
serious end of the spectrum where the NIIC involvement
will be at its most significant the available information
suggests the following range of investigations - IID
investigated 276 matters in 1994-5 and ISAD was given
87 references. The
total of investigated matters at
its highest was thus about 370. The Ombudsman's estimate
for a effective complaints system is
that 40 to 50
complaints each year should be investigated externally
and not by the AFP. In approximately 320 cases the
would not be providing the primary input into
the investigation. It would either be managing or oversighting.
In many cases this
would be oversighting which would
mean that the bulk of the 'legwork' and interviewing
would be carried out by the AFP or the
NCA possibly
in co-operation with other agencies. These investigations
would be carried out according to detailed guidelines
determined by the NIIC and the AFP or the NCA. The
NIIC would not be duplicating the investigative facilities
and resources
of the AFP or the NCA. It would not require
its own surveillance equipment. It would direct the
use of AFP and NCA resources
and equipment.
Commission's
assessment of NIIC's funding
5.42 The Commission
considers that a more detailed analysis of the expenditure
of the current system and the proposed NIIC would
necessary to assess more accurately relative costs.
5.43 However, a
summary of the off-sets and efficiencies that the Commission
considers from this initial examination are reasonable
is as follows
States and Territories (excluding the ACT)
5.44 There are
also other cost factors that are more difficult to
quantify but nonetheless necessary to consider. They
to effectiveness and credibility.
5.45 An effective
complaints and anti-corruption system may be much more
cost efficient in the mid to long term than current
approaches because it should reduce the incidence of
corruption and misconduct. Dealing with these problems
after they occur,
particularly when royal commissions
or special inquiries become necessary, rather than
having systems that can prevent, deter
or identify
them early is a false economy at best.
5.46 A credible
complaints, corruption and disciplinary process may
also be cost efficient at the macro level. Effective
enforcement and crime prevention rely heavily on
the co-operation and assistance of the public. Having
a credible complaints
and disciplinary system is an
essential part of ensuring that confidence. An absence
of this co-operation and assistance means
resources must be pumped into investigating crimes
committed and dealing with the consequences of crime.
5.47 The Commission
believes that it is possible that the system that it
proposes could be cost neutral if a thorough analysis
of the operation of the expenditure of the current
system is undertaken and appropriate off-sets and savings
are made. However,
if it were to be found that some
additional funding was necessary either on a regular
basis or in response to special circumstances
as a very extensive investigation involving a high
level of investigative resources, the Commission is
still of the view
that its draft recommendations for
a new system are clearly justified. The defects of
the current systems
and the undoubted importance of the integrity and
accountability of the AFP and the NCA
demonstrate the need for these suggested changes.
The Commission invites comments on staffing and funding
issues in relation to the NIIC.
Investigative
and inquisitorial powers
5.48 The NIIC should
have conferred on it the full range of investigative
and inquisitorial powers of a royal commission. This
should include powers to
enter and search public premises and seize material
summon witnesses to give evidence
pursue contempt of its procedures
obtain and execute listening device warrants
intercept and record telephone conversations and electronic
communications
hold public and private hearings
gain access to taxation records.
5.49 The NIIC would
conduct, manage or supervise three major types of investigations
a full investigation conducted by itself and where
necessary using its range of coercive powers
joint investigations with the AFP or NCA (and where
appropriate and practical including members of other
Commonwealth or State
agencies, particularly law enforcement
agencies) - these investigations would normally be
under the direction and control of
the NIIC and where
necessary the NIIC could use its coercive powers
AFP or NCA conducting internal investigations but those
investigations being managed or supervised
by the NIIC with no use of the NIIC's coercive powers.
5.50 The NIIC would
have the power to make inquiries to determine whether
to undertake an investigation. The NIIC would be able
to change the type of investigation being carried out
where it considered that it was necessary. Thus, for
example, if the
AFP or the NCA were conducting an investigation
the NIIC could at any stage alter that to a joint investigation
or a full NIIC
investigation. This might occur where
the NIIC considered that it was necessary to have its
coercive powers available.
5.51 The NIIC Act
should provide that the NIIC has the power of control
and direction of any investigation. It would have a
discretion in the particular case as to the appropriate
level of its involvement. In some cases it might manage
the investigation,
that is, provide detailed guidance
in the planning and execution of detection or investigation,
including selecting the personnel
involved, the method
of detection or investigation, the witnesses to be
interviewed and the evidence to be gathered. In other
cases it might provide a lower level of guidance, relying
on a system of guidelines prepared by it and progress
reports and
final reports furnished to it. In most
cases the Commission envisages that the level of management
or oversight would be achieved
by agreement with the
AFP or the NCA and that no formal use of the NIIC's
directive powers would be necessary.
5.52 Where the
NIIC finds a person guilty of contempt it would be
able to apply to the Federal Court for that Court to
into the matter and the Court, if satisfied
that the person is guilty of contempt, would punish
the person in the same manner
and to the same extent
if the person was found guilty of that contempt in
relation to proceedings before the Federal Court.
Audit powers
5.53 The NIIC would
have the power to undertake inquiries, examine or audit
any aspect of the AFP or the NCA for the purpose of
discovering whether there is misconduct or circumstances
that may lead to misconduct. This would include examining
and other data.
to recommend action after investigations
5.54 The NIIC would
have the power to make recommendations, give opinions
and make assessments to the AFP or the NCA on the basis
of its investigations or those of agencies which it
has managed or directed. This would include recommendations
for the prosecution
of a person for a criminal offence
or the taking of disciplinary action. The NIIC would
also have the power to go directly to
the DPP with
a brief for a criminal prosecution.
in relation to complainant's remedies
5.55 The Commission
considers that generally it should be a matter for
the complainant to pursue a specific remedy by means
other than the disciplinary proceeding. The main rationale
for investigations into complaints and disciplinary
proceedings is
to ensure the suitability of officers
and to maintain appropriate levels of conduct within
the NCA and the AFP. It is not to
provide redress to
complainants. However, it is clear that there will
be cases where the complainant is unable or unwilling
to pursue an action where nevertheless some form of
redress is appropriate. To take account of this the
Chairperson of the NIIC
should be able to recommend
to the Commissioner of the AFP, the Chairperson of
the NCA or the Attorney-General, where he or she
of the opinion that action should be taken in relation
to a complaint to rectify, mitigate or alter the effects
or omission by the officers of the AFP or
the NCA. This would be a similar power to that of the
Ombudsman under the
Ombudsman Act 1976
and (3), This action may include:
an apology or explanation
financial compensation or restitution of property
a change in decision or course of action.
5.56 Where the
NIIC makes such a recommendation and the AFP Commissioner
or the NCA Chairperson disagrees in the case of the
AFP or the NCA respectively the NIIC should be able
to make a report to the Attorney-General on the matter.
power to examine policies and procedures and make recommendations
5.57 Under the
Complaints Act the Disciplinary Tribunal may inquire
into a matter relating to the AFP that is referred
by the Attorney-General.
This power has not been used. The Commission is of
the view that the NIIC should have a similar power
as the new peak body for
investigating complaints against
the AFP and the NCA. The NIIC legislation should also
specify that the NIIC may make recommendations
Commissioner of the AFP, the Chairperson of the NCA
and the Attorney-General on principles and practice
for these organisations,
including recommendations
AFP or NCA misconduct.
5.58 The NIIC would
not be bound by the rules of evidence and could inform
itself on any matter as it sees fit.
Draft recommendations
Draft recommendation 5.6.
The NIIC should have conferred
on it the full range of investigative and inquisitorial
powers of a royal commission.
Draft recommendation 5.7.
The NIIC Act should provide
that the NIIC has the power of control and direction
of any investigation about the AFP or the NCA
in relation
to a complaint or corruption.
Draft recommendation 5.8.
The NIIC would have the power
to make recommendations, give opinions and make assessments
to the AFP or the NCA on the basis
of its investigations
or those of agencies which it has managed or directed.
Draft recommendation 5.9.
The NIIC may inquire into
a matter relating to the AFP or the NCA that is referred
to it by the Attorney-General.
Accountability
Accountability
to the Government and Parliament
5.59 There is clearly
a need for a body with the NIIC's coercive powers and
with its anti-corruption and complaints functions
have a clear line of accountability to the federal
Government and Parliament. Therefore, in respect of
its overall activities,
the NIIC should be accountable
to the federal Attorney-General who would have portfolio
responsibility for NIIC thus complementing
the Attorney's
portfolio responsibility for the AFP and NCA. The NIIC
should be subject to oversight by the Parliamentary
Committee on the NCA regarding its activities
in relation to the AFP and the NCA.
5.60 The NIIC would
also be required to provide Annual Reports to Parliament
on its operations and effectiveness. It would also
have the power to make a special report to Parliament
at any time.
5.61 Additional
accountability is necessary in relation to complaints
against the NCA as they touch upon members of State
Territory personnel who are members of staff of
the NCA under the NCA Act. In such cases the NIIC should
be required to report
regularly to the Australasian
Council of Police Ministers. In relation to NCA complaints
as they touch generally upon the members
of State or
Territory public services and police forces the NIIC
should also be required to report regularly to the
5.62 The NSW Royal
Commission into the Police has recommended that there
should be an Inspector of the PIC to be a watchdog
to audit functions of the PIC, to deal with complaints
of abuse of power and other forms of misconduct on
the part of its employees
and to report to Parliament
on matters affecting the PIC and its operational effectiveness
5.63 The Commission
does not consider that an Inspector is necessary in
the context of the NIIC. Having an Inspector above
NIIC would be adding an additional layer of review
with its attendant costs and delays and where the ultimate
source of accountability
should be and must be the
Government and Parliament. The NIIC will be required
to report to those institutions on its effectiveness
and on the probity and legitimacy of its conduct. There
would also be review available under the
Administrative
Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
(Cth) of appropriate
NIIC decisions and judicial scrutiny of its coercive
on AFP and NCA officers to report misconduct and evidence
of misconduct
5.64 Every AFP
appointee other than the AFP Commissioner and every
NCA staff member other than the NCA Chairperson would
obliged to report a 'reportable matter' as soon
as practicable to the Commissioner of the AFP or the
Chairperson of the NCA respectively
and to the NIIC.
A 'reportable matter' would mean any information derived
from any source (including a complaint, report, audit,
intelligence source, informant or record) concerning
the commission of, or a reasonable suspicion of, the
commission of a criminal offence by an AFP or NCA officer
a breach of, or the reasonable suspicion of, the breach
of a disciplinary rule by an AFP or NCA officer
conduct, or the reasonable suspicion of conduct, by
an AFP officer or NCA officer that is otherwise contrary
5.65 A wilful or
intentional failure to report such information would
constitute a criminal offence. A negligent or careless
failure would constitute a breach of discipline.
5.66 The Commissioner
of the AFP and the Chairperson of the NCA would be
under the same obligation but must report the matter
only to the NIIC.
5.67 The only exceptions
to these reporting obligations would be those cases
where the officer knew that the matter had already
been reported or it was a matter to be dealt with under
Category C (Customer Service) or D (Internal Management)
where there
would be other reporting obligations to
the designated supervisor.
against the NIIC
5.68 There must
be a clear procedure to deal with complaints made against
the NIIC or its officers. The NIIC Act should provide
that the Chairperson of the NIIC must report to the
PJC any complaint of misconduct against the NIIC or
its officers. The Act
should also provide that the
require a report from the Chairperson of the NIIC on
choose not to investigate the matter
refer the matter to the NIIC for investigation
appoint its own investigators
refer the matter to the AFP, the NCA or any other agency
to investigate
take any other action it deems appropriate.
Draft recommendations
Accountability
Draft recommendation 5.10.
The NIIC should be accountable
to the federal Attorney-General who would have portfolio
responsibility for NIIC thus complementing
the Attorney's
portfolio responsibility for the AFP and NCA. The NIIC
should be subject to oversight by the Parliamentary
Committee on the NCA regarding its activities
in relation to the AFP and the NCA.
Draft recommendation 5.11.
Every AFP appointee other
than the AFP Commissioner and every NCA staff member
other than the NCA Chairperson would be obliged
report a 'reportable matter' as soon as practicable
to the Commissioner of the AFP or the Chairperson of
the NCA respectively
and to the NIIC.
Draft recommendation 5.12.
The NIIC Act should provide
that the Chairperson of the NIIC must report to the
PJC any complaint of misconduct against the NIIC
its officers.
Investigative
Amalgamation
of IID and ISA
5.69 In chapter
2 the deficencies of the current demarcation between
the IID and ISA in relation to the AFP's complaints
were discussed.
Accordingly the Commission proposes that the two bodies
be amalgamated to form a new IID.
Draft recommendation
Draft recommendation 5.13
. The IID and ISA should be
amalgamated to form a new IID.
of complaints
5.70 Classifying
complaints is an essential element in developing appropriate
responses to the full range of complaints. Classifications
should not be used to try to provide rigid definitions
nor in practice could they be. Their main purpose is
to provide effective
streaming of matters so that resources,
particularly investigative resources, are allocated
efficiently and, for example, target
serious matters
for greater attention.
5.71 The characteristics
or criteria for determining which is the appropriate
category for a particular complaint would not be
in the legislation. The legislation would refer to
the NIIC issuing guidelines about categories and refer
to the four
main categories. The NIIC would have the
power to determine the appropriate category for any
particular complaint. Both the AFP
and the NCA would
be under a statutory obligation to give full access
to the NIIC to all its records relevant to the complaint
and the NIIC would have power to interview all personnel
involved. The NIIC would also have power to reclassify
the complaint
to another category or redirect as to
the manner of handling.
5.72 The NIIC would
consult with the AFP and the NCA about the content
of the guidelines. There would be four main categories:
Category A - serious criminality, corruption or significant
public interest
Category B - serious misconduct
Category C - customer service matters
Category D - internal management matters.
- Serious criminality, corruption or significant public
This would include matters
involving serious criminality such as those matters
that would constitute an indictable offence, for example,
murder, the infliction
of grievous bodily harm or serious
injury (eg involving fractured or broken bones or otherwise
requiring hospitalisation), serious
fraud or theft,
blackmail, bribery, dangerous conduct with a firearm,
perjury and falsifying evidence
where the public interest may require an investigation
completely external to the subject agency or with limited
input from the
subject agency.
- Serious misconduct.
These are matters where a less
serious criminal action or significant disciplinary
action might be warranted - for example, assault,
theft, significant dereliction of duty, misdirected
of a warrant.
- Customer service complaints (minor).
This category
constitutes the majority of complaints and includes
minor breaches of police rules and procedures, rudeness,
incivility, technical assault, a perception of threat
or menace, and misunderstandings as to facts and law.
- Internal management matters (minor).
These are matters
where there is no allegation or implication of misconduct
but managerial action is called for.
This would include minor incidents of loss or damage
to police property and absence from duty. Under the
Commission's draft recommendations
for an increasing
managerial role these internal management matters should
be dealt with by management including by performance
appraisal rather than the misconduct process. Few matters
of this nature should come to the direct attention
of the NIIC. However
if they do the NIIC should be
able to refer them back to the respective management
for appropriate action and be able to review
any decision
taken. Procedures for dealing with Category C, B and
A complaints are discussed below in that order which
the increasing level of seriousness.
5.77 The NIIC promulgated
guidelines would prescribe strict time limits to be
complied with and reporting processes to the NIIC
be followed. The Commission considers that a complaint
should be recorded immediately it is received and the
complainant
should be contacted within 24 hours of
the receipt of the complaint. If informal resolution
is appropriate it should be completed
within 14 days.
Mediation should be completed and reported on within
30 days. Preliminary enquiries and a report should
be available within 30
days and full investigations
must be completed and reported on within 90 days.
5.78 A failure
to comply with a time limit should be reported to the
NIIC within 24 hours of that failure unless the NIIC
granted an extension of time. The NIIC would provide
comment in its reports to Parliament on failures to
meet time limits.
with Category C complaints (minor)
5.79 These matters
should be suitable for informal resolution by conciliation
or mediation.
The current guidelines of the AFP pilot workplace resolution
scheme in the ACT are a starting point for considering
the content
of the guidelines for dealing with Category
C complaints. The ACT pilot workplace resolution guidelines
provide that workplace
resolution should be used for:
complaints relating to acts of incivility such as demeanour,
discourtesy, rudeness or abruptness
complaints relating to misunderstandings of facts or
of law that may be resolved by explanation
complaints based on a misunderstanding of police practices
or procedures that may be resolved by explanation
a complaint made by a person who has an apparent mental
dysfunction or is otherwise disturbed or obsessive
and, the complaint
has either been made before or appears,
by its nature, to be without substance and consistent
with the complainant's apparent
state of mind
a complaint alleging a less than serious neglect of
duty, including loss or misuse of property or equipment,
failure to respond
promptly or to provide adequate
service, and other like matters
less than serious traffic complaints
with the approval of the IID, complaints concerning
the use of minor force associated with an arrest or
other lawful police conduct
that may include mere jostling,
pushing and shoving in the execution of duty - without
any intended features such as intimidation
or attempts
to obtain a confession - but excludes intentional assaults.
5.80 A major goal
of these Category C guidelines would be to ensure that
minor complaints are immediately acted upon by supervisors
and put on a fast track to a mediated outcome.
5.81 Minor complaints
would not await registration with the NIIC or confirmation
by the NIIC of a classification as a Category
C complaint
before informal resolution is commenced.
5.82 The NIIC would
receive a record of all Category C complaints including
a description of the nature of the complaint and the
results of the informal resolution. It would also have
power to review the process and outcome but would rarely
conduct any
of its own enquiries or investigations
into individual complaints in this Category except
for routinely contacting complainants
to see if they
were satisfied with the outcomes. The NIIC would conduct
random audits to test the effectiveness and probity
of the system.
with Category B complaints (serious misconduct)
5.83 Where a complaint
received directly by the AFP or NCA appears under the
guidelines to be a Category B complaint, the AFP
NCA would take no action in relation to the complaint
until the complaint has been registered with the NIIC
and the NIIC
has given directions as to its handling.
This would be subject to any requirements on the AFP
and the NCA to preserve evidence.
Where a delay in
handling a Category B complaint until registration
and consideration by NIIC might prejudice the outcome
the complaint, the AFP or NCA should be able to
seek directions from the NIIC regarding immediate interim
B complaints involving the AFP
5.84 The NIIC would
have the following main options for these complaints
requiring the AFP Commissioner to conduct an internal
investigation with no use of the NIIC's coercive powers
but subject to the
management or supervision of the
establishing a joint investigation with the AFP and
where appropriate including members of other Commonwealth
or State agencies,
particularly law enforcement agencies
- these investigations would be subject to the appropriate
level of either management or
oversight by the NIIC
and where necessary the NIIC could use its coercive
investigating the matter directly itself (with its
full range of coercive powers available) where it considers
that the nature
of the complaint is such that it ought
to conduct the entire investigation by itself - this
would be the only option available
if the complaint
concerned the Commissioner of the AFP or a Deputy Commissioner
referring a complaint that concerns the AFP generally
to the Commissioner of the AFP for consideration and
5.85 The majority
of B complaints are likely to be dealt with by the
AFP conducting an internal investigation but under
management or supervision of the NIIC. The IID
would still have its current statutory roles and powers.
The Commission proposes
that the investigation function
of the AFP's Internal Security and Audit (ISA) would
be consolidated into the IID.
5.86 If at any
stage during the course of an NIIC investigation the
NIIC believed that a criminal offence may have been
it would immediately begin to prepare a brief
of evidence seeking, where appropriate, the advice
of the Commonwealth DPP, particularly
in relation to
evidentiary requirements.
5.87 The report
of the IID or the NIIC's own staff into a complaint
would be considered by the full Commission of the NIIC
may direct that
the report and any accompanying brief be sent to the
DPP for consideration and appropriate action
the report be sent to the AFP Commissioner for consideration
and appropriate action
the matter not be proceeded with.
5.88 The NIIC would
regularly review progress in an investigation of a
Category B matter up to submission of the report to
and would be able to, where it considers it appropriate,
reclassify the complaint as a Category A or Category
C complaint and
give an appropriate direction as to
its future handling.
5.89 As with Category
C complaints, NIIC guidelines will specify time limits
for the completion of various phases of the investigation
by IID and its own staff. Both the IID and investigative
staff of NIIC will be required to provide timely written
reports explaining
why time limits have not been adhered
B complaints against the NCA
5.90 The NIIC would
have the following main options
referring a complaint about the actions of a staff
member to the Chairperson of the NCA for investigation
conducting a joint investigation (with the availability
of the NIIC's coercive powers) with the Chairperson
of the NCA or with
officers of the NCA and/or with
other persons from other agencies including the AFP
investigating the matter directly itself (with its
full range of coercive powers available) where it considers
that the nature
of the complaint is such that it ought
not be investigated internally by the NCA in the first
instance - this would be the only
option available
if the complaint concerned the Chairperson of the NCA
or a member
referring a complaint that concerns the NCA generally
to the Chairperson of the NCA for consideration and
5.91 If at any
stage the Chairperson of the NCA believes that a criminal
offence may have been committed the matter should be
remitted to NIIC. If the NIIC agrees with that view
it would investigate the matter directly itself where
it considers that
the nature of the complaint is such
that it ought not be considered or investigated internally
by the NCA in the first instance.
If at any stage the
NIIC believes that a criminal offence may have been
committed it should then follow the same course as
for Category A complaints against the NCA as described
5.92 Where a complaint
concerns a seconded officer, particularly a State or
Territory police officer, or a member of a task force
it would be open to the NIIC to request or invite appropriate
representation from the officer's home agency to play
in the investigation of the complaint. The
NCA and the relevant home agencies could enter into
a memorandum of understanding
If the complaint concerned a legal practitioner or
a consultant who was a member of a professional body
with responsibility for discipline and ethics then
the NIIC could request or invite representation from
that body in the investigation
of the complaint.
5.93 The draft
recommendations concerning the investigation of complaints
against the NCA's seconded staff or joint task force
staff might require complementary State and Territory
legislation to render State and Territory personnel
subject to the proposed
complaints regime. Such legislation
might be necessary to enable the NIIC to fully investigate
complaints as they touch on State
or Territory personnel.
with Category A complaints (serious criminality, corruption
or significant public interest)
5.94 As with Category
B complaints, where a complaint is received directly
by the AFP or NCA and it appears to be a Category A
complaint, the AFP or NCA should take no action in
relation to the complaint (subject to preserving evidence)
until the complaint
has been registered with the NIIC
and the NIIC has given directions as to its handling.
Where delay in handling a Category A
complaint until
registration and consideration by the NIIC might prejudice
the outcome of the complaint, the AFP or NCA may seek
direction from the NIIC regarding immediate interim
Category A Complaints concerning the AFP
5.95 Where a complaint
appears to the NIIC to be a Category A complaint it
direct that the matter be investigated by the IID,
with or without NIIC staff involvement or the involvement
of others or
investigate the matter itself in the first instance
in the event that the nature of the complaint suggests
that, in the public
interest, or for other reason,
the AFP should not have responsibility for the investigation
- this would be the only option available
if the complaint
concerned the Commissioner of the AFP or a Deputy Commissioner.
5.96 Where the
NIIC decides to conduct the investigation itself, this
may include the Chairperson exercising the inquisitorial
powers of NIIC alone or with one or more Commissioners.
Alternatively the NIIC may appoint a special investigator,
be a suitably qualified legal practitioner
or a current or former judge to exercise these inquisitorial
powers on its behalf
with or without the assistance
of one or more NIIC Commissioners.
5.97 Where the
NIIC conducts an inquiry it should consult appropriately
with the DPP to ensure that it is properly resourced
and advised regarding the preparation of a brief of
evidence for any prosecution that may follow.
5.98 The NIIC would
publish general guidelines for the handling of Category
A investigations by IID and special investigators.
The guidelines would deal particularly with the matter
of regular reporting to NIIC of progress on investigations.
In addition
to the guidelines, the NIIC should, in
consultation with IID or the special investigator establish
a timetable for the conduct
of a particular investigation
and require timely reasons in writing where adherence
cannot be achieved.
5.99 Where the
IID conducts an inquiry it should furnish its report
to the NIIC together with a brief of evidence with
any findings
that point to the commission of a criminal
5.100 Upon the
completion of an investigation (either by the IID or
the NIIC itself) the NIIC would
direct that the report and any relevant brief of evidence
be transmitted to the DPP with any recommendations
that the NIIC may
wish to make, or
direct that the report or any part of it be referred
to the AFP Commissioner for consideration of any recommendations
for disciplinary
or other action as the NIIC considers
appropriate, or
direct that no further action be taken.
5.101 Where the
NIIC considers it appropriate it may remit an IID report
that the matter be further investigated by itself.
A complaints against the NCA
5.102 The NIIC
would be able to
refer a complaint about the actions of a staff member
or member to the Chairperson of the NCA for investigation
conduct a joint investigation (with the availability
of the NIIC's coercive powers) with the Chairperson
of the NCA or with officers
of the NCA and/or with
other persons from other agencies including the AFP
investigate the matter directly itself (with its full
range of coercive powers available) where it considers
that the nature of
the complaint is such that it ought
not be investigated internally by the NCA in the first
instance - this would be the only
option available
if the complaint concerned the Chairperson of the NCA
or a member
refer a complaint that concerns the NCA generally to
the Chairperson of the NCA for consideration and response
5.103 Where it
appears to the NIIC that a complaint against the NCA
or a staff member is a Category A complaint that relates
exclusively
to the conduct of AFP seconded personnel,
it would ordinarily deal with the complaint in the
same way as other Category A complaints
against the
AFP subject, however, to consulting with the Chairperson
of the NCA in relation to:
whether the matter ought to be referred to IID or be
investigated by the NIIC itself, or a special investigator
appointed by the
the conduct of the investigation generally as it may
impact on ongoing operations of the NCA.
5.104 Where it
appears to the NIIC that a complaint against the NCA
or a staff member is a Category A complaint that goes
beyond the conduct of AFP
seconded personnel, the NIIC
would consult with any State or Territory agency whose
staff were involved as to the appropriate
action including the matter's investigation. Preferably
the NIIC and all relevant State and Territory agencies
develop a memorandum of understanding on the
process of investigation of complaints involving the
NCA and seconded staff, consultants
or joint task force
members. One option that should be available and specified
in the legislation is the NIIC establishing an
Investigatory
Board to investigate the complaint.
5.105 A Board
should consist of
the Chairperson, or a Special Investigator appointed
by the NIIC as convenor
such expert investigators as the NIIC determines -
these might be AFP investigators
where the complaint relates to the conduct of a public
servant or a police officer seconded from a State or
Territory public service
or police force, a person
selected by the NIIC from a standing panel of experts
proposed by the State or Territory Minister responsible
for that public service or police force and agreed
to by the NIIC, being a panel of persons qualified
to advise on the preparation
of any brief of evidence
of the commission of any offence against the laws of
that jurisdiction or the disciplinary regime applying
to public servants or police officers of that jurisdiction
where the complaint relates to a staff member of the
Australian Public Service, a person selected by the
NIIC from a panel of
experts proposed by the Public
Service and Merit Protection Commission and agreed
by the NIIC, being a panel of experts in the
APS disciplinary
where the complaint relates to a staff member who is
a trade or professional consultant (not being a member
of a Commonwealth/State/Territory
public service or
police force), a person selected by the NIIC from a
panel of experts proposed by the professional or trade
body having professional disciplinary responsibility
for that person's conduct and agreed by the NIIC, being
a panel of persons
expert in the relevant disciplinary
regime relating to that trade or profession
such other experts as the Commission considers necessary
to ensure that the panel has expertise in relation
to the preparation
of any brief of evidence that might
arise as a result of its investigations.
5.106 An Investigatory
Board should, through the Chairperson or the Special
Investigator who is convenor of the Board, exercise
all the investigating powers of the NIIC necessary
to facilitate the investigation by an Investigatory
5.107 An Investigatory
Board should report the outcome of its investigation
to the NIIC together with any brief of evidence it
has completed relating to possible breaches of Commonwealth
or State law or disciplinary regimes applicable to
affected members
of the staff of the NCA.
5.108 The NIIC
may, after considering the report of the Board
refer any brief of evidence to the appropriate DPP,
propose to take disciplinary action itself under its
own disciplinary laws
as proposed in chapter 6 or send
the matter to the Commonwealth, State or Territory
direct that further investigations be carried out
determine that no action should be taken.
Draft recommendations
Dealing with complaints by use of categories
Draft recommendation 5.14.
The NIIC would issue guidelines
of complaints. The main categories would
Category A - serious criminality, corruption or significant
public interest
Category B - serious misconduct
Category C - customer service matters
Category D - internal management matters.
Draft recommendation 5.15.
The NIIC would have different
investigative procedures depending on the category
of the matter.
For Category A complaints involving the AFP the NIIC
direct that the matter be investigated by the IID,
with or without NIIC staff involvement or the involvement
of others, or
investigate the matter itself in the first instance
in the event that the nature of the complaint suggests
that, in the public
interest, or for other reasons,
the AFP should not have responsibility for the investigation
- this would be the only option
available if the complaint
concerned the Commissioner of the AFP or a Deputy Commissioner.
For Category A complaints involving the NCA the NIIC
refer a complaint about the actions of a staff member
or member to the Chairperson of the NCA for investigation
and report, or
conduct a joint investigation (with the availability
of the NIIC's coercive powers) with the Chairperson
of the NCA or with officers
of the NCA and/or with
other persons from other agencies including the AFP,
investigate the matter directly itself (with its full
range of coercive powers available) where it considers
that the nature of
the complaint is such that it ought
not be investigated internally by the NCA in the first
instance - this would be the only
option available
if the complaint concerned the Chairperson of the NCA
or a member, or
refer a complaint that concerns the NCA generally to
the Chairperson of the NCA for consideration and response.
For Category B complaints involving the AFP the NIIC
require the AFP Commissioner to conduct an internal
investigation with no use of the NIIC's coercive powers
but subject to the
management or supervision of the
establish a joint investigation with the AFP and where
appropriate including members of other Commonwealth
or State agencies,
particularly law enforcement agencies
- these investigations would be subject to the appropriate
level of either management or
oversight by the NIIC
and where necessary the NIIC could use its coercive
investigate the matter directly itself (with its full
range of coercive powers available) where it considers
that the nature of
the complaint is such that it ought
to conduct the entire investigation by itself - this
would be the only option available if
the complaint
concerned the Commissioner of the AFP or a Deputy Commissioner
refer a complaint that concerns the AFP generally to
the Commissioner of the AFP for consideration and response.
For Category B complaints involving the NCA the NIIC
refer a complaint about the actions of a staff member
to the Chairperson of the NCA for investigation and
conduct a joint investigation (with the availability
of the NIIC's coercive powers) with the Chairperson
of the NCA or with officers
of the NCA and/or with
other persons from other agencies including the AFP,
investigate the matter directly itself (with its full
range of coercive powers available) where it considers
that the nature of
the complaint is such that it ought
not be investigated internally by the NCA in the first
instance - this would be the only
option available
if the complaint concerned the Chairperson of the NCA
or a member, or
refer a complaint that concerns the NCA generally to
the Chairperson of the NCA for consideration and response.
Category C complaints (customer service) would be dealt
with by informal resolution provided by the AFP or
Category D complaints (internal management matters)
would, if they came to the attention of the NIIC, be
referred back to the
respective management for appropriate
action. The NIIC would be able to review any decision
taken by management.
Draft recommendation
Time limits
Draft recommendation 5.16.
There would be time limits
for action in relation to complaints.
Intelligence
5.109 The NIIC
would have an intelligence database that would collect,
analyse and disseminate information particularly about
criminal activities including corruption. There must
be internal security guidelines to ensure that material
is secure. Appropriate
liaison and protocols with law
enforcement agencies would be necessary about the exchange
of information. The Federal Privacy
Commissioner should
be able to conduct audits and review of the collection
of data and report to the PJC. The intelligence data
should be exempt from the provisions of the
of Information Act 1982
Draft recommendation
Intelligence data
Draft recommendation 5.17.
The NIIC would have an intelligence
information particularly about criminal
including corruption.
research and policy role and related reporting obligations
5.110 A key statutory
function of the NIIC would be to keep under continuous
review trends relating to relevant aspects of AFP
NCA conduct coming to its notice and in particular
trends relating to
the incidence of particular types of complaint
timeliness in the handling of complaints by the AFP
disciplinary outcomes.
The legislation should also require the NIIC to consider
formulating policy recommendations in regard to action
that might be
taken by governments, the AFP and the
NCA in response to established and emerging trends.
This would include identifying systemic
problems. The NIIC should also conduct research into
probity and ethical issues relevant to the exercise
of investigative
powers by Commonwealth agencies including
the AFP and the NCA.
5.111 The NIIC
should also be obliged to report relevant trends, data
and policy recommendations (including in confidence
appropriate) to the federal Government and State
governments and relevant Commonwealth and State agencies
including the AFP,
the NCA, Commonwealth Law Enforcement
Board (CLEB) and the Parliamentary Joint Committee
on the NCA and the NIIC.
5.112 The outcomes
of the research and policy work of the NIIC should
be required to be published at large except where operational
security or privacy laws dictate otherwise.
Draft recommendations
NIIC research and policy role and related reporting
obligations
Draft recommendation 5.18.
The NIIC would keep under
continuous review trends relating to relevant aspects
of AFP and NCA conduct coming to its notice and
particular trends relating to complaints and corruption.
Draft recommendation 5.19.
The NIIC should also be
obliged to report relevant trends, data and policy
recommendations (including in confidence where appropriate)
to the federal Government and State governments and
relevant Commonwealth and State agencies including
the AFP, the NCA, Commonwealth
Law Enforcement Board
(CLEB) and the Parliamentary Joint Committee on the
NCA and the NIIC.
Draft recommendation 5.20.
The outcomes of the research
and policy work of the NIIC should be required to be
published at large except where operational
or privacy laws dictate otherwise.
extensions to the NIIC's work and jurisdiction
approach to investigations
5.113 It is increasingly
common in Australian jurisdictions for one police service
to request the assistance of other police services
in the conduct of a major investigations concerning
serious police misconduct within that service. For
example, the AFP is
assisting the Western Australian
Police in the investigation of WA police internal investigations
into the Argyle diamond case.
This external input into
investigations can be very valuable because it gives
greater credibility to the independence of the
investigation.
Every service in some circumstances might want to consider
or use this option. At the moment these arrangements
are entered into on an ad hoc, informal basis.
5.114 The Commission
is of the view that this process of interchange should
be given a more formal basis. The Commission proposes
that a body such as the Australian Police Ministers
Council could develop a national scheme for investigations
including accreditation
for investigators with appropriate
skills and integrity checks and arrangements for the
interchange or sharing of information,
facilities,
equipment and other resources. Leasing agreements as
to equipment and facilities might be one option. The
as a major federal investigator should have a
consultative role in the development and implementation
of this process.
Draft recommendation
Possible extensions to the NIIC's work and jurisdiction
Draft recommendation 5.21.
A body such as the Australian
Police Ministers Council could develop a national scheme
for investigations including accreditation
for investigators
with appropriate skills and integrity checks and arrangements
for the interchange or sharing of information,
facilities,
equipment and other resources. The NIIC should have
a consultative role in the development and implementation
this process.
for further federal jurisdiction
5.115 A number
of federal agencies other than the NCA and the AFP
are involved in aspects of law enforcement and may
similar investigative and enforcement functions.
For example, the Australian Securities Commission has
responsibility for investigating
offences under the
corporations legislation. It conducts investigations,
including surveillance and public hearings. Other agencies
with investigative powers and a role in dealing with
criminal offences include the Australian Customs Service,
the Australian
Taxation Office, the Department of Social
Security, the Health Insurance Commission and the Australian
Competition and Consumer
Commission.
5.116 The Commission's
terms of reference extend only to a consideration of
systems for the AFP and the NCA. However, it may be
that consideration should be given to the NIIC having
all of these other
agencies when they exercise any
law enforcement powers. This would be on the basis
that the same general issues are raised in
considering individual civil liberties and the need
for practical and effective law enforcement. Each agency
contribute to the NIIC's funding in proportion
to its likely involvement with the NIIC's functions.
This extended federal role
for the NIIC might assist
to achieving an appropriate and consistent federal
approach to complaints and corruption and do so
the most cost efficient way.
The Commission welcomes comments on possible extensions
of the NIIC's jurisdiction.
uniform Australian law enforcement complaints and disciplinary
5.117 Each Australian
with complaints against its law enforcement agencies.
It is argued in chapter 7 in the context of preventing
the causes of complaints and corruption that a national
standard and
system for many aspects of law enforcement
might be desirable. A system that provided one uniform
complaints and disciplinary
system might well have
advantages in providing a cost effective and integrated
response to problems that often transcend State
Territory borders. This system would be more feasible
if there was in place a national standard for recruitment
and training
and for core professional competencies
as discussed in chapter 7. The introduction of one
uniform complaints and disciplinary
system would require
considerable consultation and agreement between the
federal, State and Territory Governments and their
law enforcement agencies together with the need for
uniform legislation. The Commission in the context
of this inquiry is simply
highlighting it as a potential
option for the future.
The Commission invites comments on the possibility
of a uniform Australian law enforcement complaints
and disciplinary system.
Commonwealth Ombudsman
Annual Report 1994-95
The Commission has settled on 95% because the Ombudsman
would still have a small role to play in forwarding
on complaints that
are lodged with her offices - see
ch 9. The figure $590 000 is derived from the average
yearly expenditure by the Ombudsman over
the last three
years ie 1992-3 $618 000, 1993-4 $769 000 and 1994-5
Information provided by the AFP.
SCOCCI is designed to enhance the strategic role and
effectiveness of the NCA with State and Territory law
enforcement systems.
The funding arrangement is that
the Commonwealth through the NCA will pay for all establishment
costs and annual recurrent costs
to the approximate
value of $100 000 per annum and the States and Territories
will contribute $200 000 to be contributed by them
in proportion to their respective populations as at
1 July each year.
See ch 3, para 3.63-71.
The Fitzgerald Inquiry investigators had access to
federal tax records.
The Exposure Draft of the NSW Police Integrity Commission
uses this distinction between 'managing ' and 'supervising'.
This mirrors cl 124 of the Exposure Draft of the NSW
Police Corruption Bill 1996
NSW Royal Commission into the Police Interim Report
ch 2 para 2.53-7.
NSW Royal Commission into the Police Interim Report
Police Complaints Authority
7th, 8th & 9th Annual
58 records that the Authority has adopted these
time limits in relation to complaints against the South
Australian Police.
ibid 73. These periods have been agreed upon by the
South Australian Police Complaints Authority and the
South Australian Police.
A copy of the guidelines was given to the Commission
by the AFP.
See para 5.69.
Butterworths
Federal Criminal Law Vol 1
- 1-500, 2025-2039.
6. Disciplinary models and processes
Introduction
non-disciplinary responses to misconduct or poor performance
term appointments
Performance
Commission's
views on fixed term appointments and performance appraisal
changes to s 26E
Application
AFP disciplinary process
after investigation
of the Ombudsman after investigation
Disciplinary
role of the Federal Police Disciplinary Tribunal
with the current AFP disciplinary process
Difficulties
with the underlying philosophy
difficulties with the operation of the disciplinary
by the President of the FPDT
Commission's
new approach: managerial responsibility and administrative
responsibility
Administrative
to provide administrative review
Disciplinary
Appeal Committees not favoured
lack of a uniform NCA disciplinary process
Consequences
of AAT review
standard of proof
right to silence
Proceedings
normally to be public
to a decision
on the availability of AAT review
liability for costs
from the Tribunal
to disciplinary proceedings
of inappropriate terminology
for negligence proceeding
scope for Alternative Dispute Resolution
ADR be compulsory in any case?
Admissibility
of statements
and official records
with minor misconduct without a misconduct proceeding
after a misconduct proceeding
superannuation orders be available?
Commission's
there be a power of expungement?
the complainant
requirements in relation to investigations
on misconduct proceedings
Information
Legislative
structure of the disciplinary systems
use of evidence and information from disciplinary proceedings
Introduction
6.1 This chapter
discusses the current disciplinary processes of the
AFP and the NCA and other options available to management
to deal with poor or inadequate performance or misconduct.
It proposes a significantly different approach to disciplinary
proceedings.
This would involve a change from the current
quasi-criminal, para-military model to a new approach
based on managerial responsibility
and administrative
review. As a consequence the Federal Police Disciplinary
Tribunal would be abolished and merits review would
be provided by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(AAT). The chapter also examines the use of ADR, disciplinary
sanctions and providing information to complainants.
non-disciplinary responses to misconduct or poor performance
6.2 Currently there
are a number of non-disciplinary options available
to the AFP Commissioner to respond to employee unsuitability,
poor or inadequate performance or misconduct. The failure
to re-appoint and the early ending of appointments
can be relevant
to cases where an AFP appointee is
subject to complaints whether substantiated or unsubstantiated.
term appointments
6.3 Since 1990 the
AFP has had a legislative system of fixed term appointments
of generally five years. This provides a means
the AFP can assess an employee's suitability as the
date for consideration of re-appointment approaches.
AFP Regulation
5 prescribes the minimum standards for
appointment or re-appointment. For re-appointment to
occur the Commissioner must be positively
that the person is suitable for re-appointment. The
person must meet the requirements of competence and
qualifications
to hold a position including that the
person is of 'good character and reputation' and meets
other relevant criteria for suitability
for the position.
Performance
6.4 The AFP also
has a performance appraisal system for all staff. The
Commission's consultations indicate that the current
performance appraisal system is not being used as effectively
as it might be so that it does provide a genuine and
appraisal of performance. It is suggested
that some supervisors have tended not to formally rate
a person's performance as inadequate
in a particular
area when objectively that was the appropriate conclusion.
The Commission understands that the performance appraisal
system is now under review by the AFP.
Commission's
views on fixed term appointments and performance appraisal
6.5 Fixed term appointments
and performance appraisal are each valuable tools for
AFP management. They can be used to ensure that
suitable persons are employed and that performance
is effectively monitored and appropriate management
responses are made.
6.6 The AFP should
be able to use fixed term appointments and an effective
performance appraisal system to provide effective incentives
and disincentives to ensure high standards of performance
and employee suitability. For example, re-appointments
in cases where
there are specific problems may be made
for a lesser period and include a probationary period.
The Commission acknowledges that
fixed term appointments
and s 26E have improved work practices and attitudes
in the AFP.
6.7 However, the
Commission is not convinced that the older AFP cultural
attitude that appointment to the AFP is a 'job for
life' has changed sufficiently. Nor is the Commission
convinced that the AFP's older management style that
made decisions on
the assumption of the permanency
of staff has been completely replaced by one that a
member must annually justify his or her
employment.
6.8 The Commissioner
has the power under s 26E of the AFP Act to end an
appointment before its due expiry. The Commissioner
must not make such a determination merely because of
the existence of acts or omissions in respect of which
disciplinary charges
have or could be laid.
6.9 Section 26E
has been used as an alternative to disciplinary proceedings.
Currently s 26E can be used only where non-disciplinary
factors are also evident. Some of the advantages of
using s 26E when compared to the current disciplinary
process are that
it is quicker, more reliable and less
expensive. The Commission's draft recommendations about
the disciplinary process in this
chapter are designed
to improve the speed and effectiveness of that process
and reduce its costs. However, the Commission considers
that the AFP Commissioner should have a wide range
of responses available to deal with poor or inadequate
performance and misconduct.
Management must decide
the appropriate response to a particular case but any
action taken must be according to the relevant provisions
of the legislation and subject to any administrative
review available.
changes to s 26E
6.10 At the time
of writing of this paper the federal Government has
introduced the
Australian Federal Police Amendment
This Bill would amend s 26E with the purpose
of allowing the Commissioner to respond quickly and
effectively to matters involving
serious misconduct.
The Bill defines 'serious misconduct' to mean
corruption, a serious abuse of power, or a serious
dereliction of duty; or
any other seriously reprehensible act or behaviour
by a person, whether acting, or purporting to act,
in the course of his or
her duties as a member or staff
member or not.
The Bill enables the Commissioner to declare that a
person is retired under s 26E because of serious misconduct
that is having,
or is likely to have, a damaging effect
on the morale or self-respect of AFP personnel or the
reputation of the AFP. The Commissioner
must have reasonable
grounds to make such a declaration. The declaration
excludes such a person from the operation of the procedures
for termination of employment provided by the
Relations Act 1988
It is the Government's intention that all other retirees
under s 26E will have access to merits review for unfair
dismissal before
the Industrial Relations Commission
and the Industrial Relations Court (IRC).
6.11 The Commission
supports the proposed amendments to s 26E so that the
Commissioner can provide a quick response to corruption
and other gross misconduct without having to wait for
the outcome of disciplinary or criminal proceedings.
The provision as
amended is part of the 'necessary
armour to combat corruption within the AFP'.
6.12 The Commission
considers that the effectiveness of s 26E might be
increased by two additional changes.
6.13 The first
change is in relation to cases of 'serious misconduct'
under s 26E which
involve a serious abuse by the person of his or her
are committed for a purpose that involved corruption
are committed for the purpose of perverting or attempting
to pervert the course of justice.
6.14 The Commission
is of the view that in those cases the Commissioner
should have the discretion, when satisfied upon reasonable
grounds that the case is appropriate, to seek a reduction
of the employer's contribution to superannuation and
interest on
that amount. A retirement under s 26E for
cases involving serious misconduct that satisfy the
above criteria should not result
automatically, as
at present in the absence of a conviction for a corruption
offence or for certain prescribed disciplinary offences,
in the retiree receiving a full redundancy package.
The view of the Commission is that in such a case the
retiree has forfeited
the right to the total employer
contribution and that the benefit should be reduced
either wholly or partly. It is this employer
contribution
that can be clearly identified as a benefit that the
retiree has derived from the office rather than the
own contributions. The obvious example where
this change would be desirable is where the serious
misconduct has resulted in an
unjust enrichment such
as taking bribes.
This clearly constitutes a serious abuse of the person's
office for illegal gain. The discretion to deduct a
part and not merely
the whole of the employer's contribution
and interest thereon allows the order to be specifically
tailored to the gravity and
circumstances of the particular
6.15 The second
change to s 26E that the Commission favours is for
the merits review for decisions under that section
provided by the AAT rather than as currently
proposed in the Bill before Parliament by the Industrial
Relations Commission and
the Industrial Relations Court
(IRC). This change proposed by the Commission would
include the availability of AAT merits review
decision by the Commissioner to seek a reduction of
the employer contribution to superannuation as discussed
above. Under
the current proposed amendment the Industrial
Relations Commission and the IRC would provide merits
review of all retirements
under s 26E except for those
involving serious misconduct where there would be no
merits review available.
6.16 In the deliberations
did not have the benefit of the Commission's discussion
of AAT review of disciplinary decisions contained in
this paper. The Commission considers that administrative
review by the
AAT would be also be more appropriate
6.17 At paragraphs
6.50-65 of this chapter the Commission explains why
administrative review by the AAT is the most appropriate
mechanism generally for review of disciplinary decisions
by the Commissioner. Decisions by the Commissioner
under s 26E are
similar in process and result to the
Commissioner's disciplinary decisions. They are both
integral aspects of the AFP's managerial
responsibilities.
They both concern the Commissioner assessing facts
and circumstances and considering an officer's suitability
for employment.
6.18 The AFP is
significantly different to many public sector organisations.
It is constituted by a workforce which is engaged
fixed contracts. In the case of the AFP disciplinary
breaches and a failure to perform satisfactorily should
be regarded
fundamentally as breaches of these contracts
of appointment. The industrial relations legal process
with its emphasis on arbitration
and decision-making
across the broad spectrum of employees does not sit
well with the specific statutory appointments for AFP
staff. The adoption of an industrial relations approach
might tend to obscure the basic objectives of the disciplinary
managerial process and perhaps maintain a quasi-criminal
approach with, for the serious cases, the application
of something akin
to the criminal standard of proof.
The Commission is of the view that the attitude that
disciplinary and employment suitability
decisions are
quasi-criminal is more likely to affect an industrial
relations approach than the application of administrative
6.19 The Commission
also considers that the use of the AAT in relation
to s 26E may be more consistent with the Government's
concerns about the law and procedures for unfair dismissal.
The Commission understands that the Government is considering
to these laws and procedures.
6.20 The Commission
is also concerned about duplication of decision making
that might occur with the IRC having jurisdiction.
Under its jurisdiction unlawful terminations are heard
by judicial registrars. A party to the decision may
ask the Court to
review the decision by the judicial
registrar and that review is conducted by a judge.
The rate of applications for review of
unlawful termination
decisions was 27% nationally although in many cases
applications for review are abandoned before being
heard by a judge. The IRC comments that it is too early
to assess accurately the true level or reviews.
The Commission is concerned that this system may add
on another layer of decision making and may encourage
dubious applications
for review.
6.21 The Commission
is also concerned that an industrial relations process
could increase delays and costs. The Commission notes
that the IRC has been unable to achieve a stable workload
level or certainty about the number of judicial officers
The number of claims for unlawful termination is increasing.
6.22 Moreover,
the IRC in response to the large number of unrepresented
claimants that seek an order for unfair dismissal has
opted for a preference for oral evidence rather than
written evidence in the form of affidavits or statements
of evidence.
This is on the basis that the preparation of written
evidence is a skilled process not easily undertaken
by non-lawyers. The
Commission does not anticipate
that personnel of the AFP or the NCA are likely to
be unrepresented or will lack the skill to
written material.
A reliance on oral evidence is likely to prolong hearings
and increase the likelihood of matters running because
each party is
not fully aware of the other party's
case before the hearing has commenced.
Application
6.23 Fixed term
appointments for all staff, a similar power to s 26E
and effective performance appraisal would be valuable
for the NCA. In particular, fixed term appointments
are very important in the law enforcement area to ensure
commitment to the
objectives of the organisation, to
minimise bureaucratisation, to reduce the opportunity
for long term relationships that can
foster corruption
and to give management sufficient flexibility to allocate
staff and resources to meet changing needs. The record
of the AFP with fixed term appointments demonstrates
its value for law enforcement agencies. The introduction
of fixed term
appointments would mean that the NCA
would have an employment regime totally separate from
the Australian Public Service.
Draft recommendations
AFP non-disciplinary responses to misconduct or poor
performance
Draft recommendation 6.1.
The AFP management should
continue to have a wide range of options available
to deal with inadequate or poor performance or misconduct.
This should include fixed term appointments, an effective
performance appraisal system and the capacity to retire
as provided for under s 26E. The Commission
is particularly interested in comments on the AFP and
NCA performance appraisal system
and how, if necessary,
they can be made a more accurate and effective assessment
of performance.
Draft recommendation 6.2.
The Commission endorses the
proposed amendments to s 26E to allow the Commissioner
to declare that a person is retired because
misconduct that is having, or is likely to have, a
damaging effect on the morale or self-respect of AFP
or the reputation of the AFP.
Draft recommendation 6.3.
Section 26E should be amended
so that in cases of serious misconduct involving a
serious abuse by the person of his or her office,
committed for a purpose that involved corruption or
for the purpose of perverting or attempting to pervert
the course of
justice, the Commissioner should have
the discretion to seek a reduction, total or partial,
of the employer's contribution to
superannuation and
interest on that amount. The exercise of this discretion
should be reviewable on the merits by the AAT.
Draft recommendation 6.4.
Section 26E should also be
amended so that merits review for decisions under that
section would be provided by the AAT.
Draft recommendation 6.5.
Consideration should be given
to the NCA having its own employment regime including
fixed term appointments, a power similar
to s 26E and
effective performance appraisal.
disciplinary process
6.24 The following
section describes the AFP's current disciplinary process.
after investigation
6.25 The AFP makes
a decision about what action to take after considering
investigation reports concerning complaints and allegations.
The AFP has recently established a legal branch which
currently provides in-house legal advice in relation
to discipline. If
there is evidence to support a criminal
action it is common practice to refer the matter to
the DPP. If the evidence supports
a disciplinary charge
the AFP may proceed to take disciplinary action or
refer the matter to the Australian Government Solicitor
(AGS) for a formal legal advising. There may be an
exception to this common practice where the potential
criminal matter is
bound up with disciplinary matters
and it would be preferable for them to be heard as
a package of disciplinary charges. This
is a matter
for consultation between the Ombudsman, AFP, DPP and
AGS. The DPP prosecutes criminal charges and the AGS
a disciplinary matter before the Disciplinary
Tribunal. Where the DPP considers there is insufficient
evidence for a criminal
charge, then a disciplinary
charge should be considered.
Action may also be taken as noted above by the AFP
to terminate or not renew a member's fixed term appointment
or to retire a
person under s 26E.
of the Ombudsman after investigation
6.26 The Ombudsman
has certain powers to make recommendations and reports
to the Commissioner after an investigation of a complaint
whether the investigation has been conducted by the
IID, her office or by a special investigator. Where
the Ombudsman has conducted
a special investigation
herself, because it concerns a member of the IID or
for some other reason it is inappropriate for the
to investigate, the Ombudsman can report and can recommend
that an AFP appointee be charged with an offence or
of discipline or be cautioned or admonished.
The same applies to cases where the Ombudsman proposes
to conduct a further investigation after the IID has
conducted an investigation.
6.27 Following
an investigation by IID or the Ombudsman, the Commissioner
may propose that the AFP member be charged, cautioned
or admonished under the Complaints Act.
Where the Ombudsman disagrees with the Commissioner's
proposed action, the Commissioner must refer the matter
to the Attorney-General
to determine what action is
appropriate in the circumstances.
Disciplinary
6.28 The AFP disciplinary
offences are provided for in the AFP (Discipline) Regulations.
AFP appointees are guilty of a disciplinary
if they contravene duties and responsibilities as provided
for in the AFP (Discipline) Regulations. Specific offences
failing to behave with courtesy to the public and failure
to comply with the law and relevant General Orders
and Instructions
disobeying or failing to carry out orders
making deliberately false entries or statements
failing to report loss or damage to property or to
account for property
unauthorised use of firearms
drinking or taking drugs while performing duties
intentionally prejudicing police services by failing
to give prompt attention to one's duties or being absent
from duty without
improperly disclosing information about complaints
or allegations
unauthorised communication of information including
computer programs or information stored in computer
seeking influence to obtain a benefit
soliciting or accepting gifts or gratuities
performing work outside the AFP
failing to give notice of bankruptcy.
6.29 Many of the
charges that are proceeded with are of a general nature,
alleging improper conduct. There are the following
general disciplinary offences
being guilty of disgraceful or improper conduct, either
in an official capacity or otherwise
acting in a disorderly manner or in a manner unbecoming
an AFP appointee
acting in a manner prejudicial to the good order and
discipline of the AFP
acting in a manner that brings, or is likely to bring,
discredit to the reputation of the AFP
being charged with a criminal offence and the court
is satisfied that the charge is proved.
6.30 AFP appointees
who aid or abet the commission of any disciplinary
offence are also deemed guilty of that offence.
role of the Federal Police Disciplinary Tribunal
6.31 The Federal
Police Disciplinary Tribunal (FPDT) was established
Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act
on 1 May 1982. It consists of a President and
a number of deputy presidents and other members as
appointed by the Governor-General.
The President and
Deputy President must be holders of a judicial office
while other members must either be a magistrate or
a legal practitioner of at least five years standing.
The positions may be part-time.
The Disciplinary Tribunal when sitting is constituted
by one member.
6.32 The Tribunal's
role is to determine promptly and effectively proceedings
instituted in respect of breaches of discipline
members of the AFP and appeals arising out of findings
made or penalties imposed by the Commissioner of Police.
6.33 The Tribunal
may also inquire into a matter relating to the AFP
that is referred to it by the Attorney-General. In
circumstances, the Tribunal may be assisted by
counsel, a member of IID or the AFP. The Tribunal then
reports to the Attorney-General
on its findings. This
broad power of review could be very useful in reviewing
controversial aspects of the AFP's operations or
that raise significant public interest. However, the
Commission understands that no such reference has ever
6.34 The Tribunal
may determine its own procedure subject to the Act
and Regulations.
The Tribunal is required to conduct its proceedings
with as little formality and technicality as possible
as a proper consideration
of the matter permits.
with the current AFP disciplinary process
Difficulties
with the underlying philosophy
6.35 The Commission
considers that the current philosophy underpinning
the disciplinary process is inappropriate and outdated
for law enforcement agencies such as the NCA and the
AFP. Complaints and resulting disciplinary proceedings
have been dealt
with by the application of a largely
inflexible, formal process that tends to be adversarial
in character. Modern police management
has changed
substantially but the disciplinary process has not
kept pace with those changes.
6.36 Historically
the police have tended to regard themselves as a para-military
force with an emphasis on hierarchy and the imposition
of discipline through formal channels such as laying
disciplinary charges for infractions, whether minor
or serious. To a large
extent this approach removes
responsibility for discipline from line managers of
Its main defect is that it does not focus on what
the Commission considers to be the fundamental issue
which is that of employment
suitability in the light
of the findings in the disciplinary proceeding. It
is the Commission's view that disciplinary proceedings
should not be regarded or dealt with as criminal matters
and that they do not require the criminal process and
trial. The Federal
Court has distinguished between
the objectives of disciplinary matters and those of
the criminal law:
[t]he object of disciplinary proceedings under the
Discipline Regulations is to protect the public, to
maintain proper standards
of conduct by members of
the Australian Federal Police and to protect the reputation
of that body. The object of disciplinary
proceedings
is not to punish.
6.37 The current
inflexible disciplinary process encourages some supervisors
to use it in cases where other management responses
would be more appropriate and useful. This is especially
so for minor infractions of rules and procedures where
there is no
suggestion of wilful misconduct and no
serious consequences flow from the breach. The same
inflexible, adversarial process may
lead to some officers
who have made a mistake or who have breached a disciplinary
rule to try to 'tough it out' and hope that
the complexity
or delays in the system may assist their cause.
difficulties with the operation of the disciplinary
6.38 Some of the
Commission's consultations and submissions suggest
that an overly adversarial, criminal style process
and lenient
penalties are significant problems under
the current AFP disciplinary process. The most obvious
and serious examples discussed
are where officers are
dismissed from the agency for significant misconduct
such as serious assault but are then reinstated by
the appeals mechanism. This concern is not unique to
the AFP disciplinary process. Other Australian police
services are concerned
with the same issue.
According to the NSW Royal Commission into the Police,
courts and tribunals generally have shown a reluctance
to find police
officers guilty of offences or to impose
significant penalties when they do so.
6.39 To impose
lenient penalties on an officer who is guilty of significant
misconduct may lead to a demoralising cynicism and
a loss of faith within the organisation. Good, professional
officers concerned with the health and standing of
their agency
may become frustrated and apathetic about
improving police culture. Officers who are 'let off
the hook' may become a liability
within the agency
and there is often an understandable reluctance to
trust them in the performance of ordinary law enforcement
tasks or for them to have access to any confidential
information. Individual complainants and members of
the general public
who become aware of lenient penalties
may also become sceptical about the commitment of the
police to maintain appropriate standards
of conduct.
6.40 Part of these
doubts about the effectiveness of disciplinary proceedings
may stem from concerns about the standard of proof
and its application to particular cases. There is a
concern that courts and tribunals in disciplinary matters
tend to require
a satisfaction of proof that is too
onerous given the nature of the proceedings and the
facts of the particular case. The current
of proof for AFP disciplinary proceedings is the balance
of probabilities.
Prior to 1993 it was the criminal one of 'beyond reasonable
The current standard is based on the principle that
disciplinary decisions should not be punitive but instead
protect the community
and the reputation of the AFP.
As a result of the common law standard laid down in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
the balance of probabilities test works on a sliding
scale depending on a number of factors including the
severity of the offence
and the gravity of the consequences.
The standard approaches the criminal test as the issue
becomes more serious in nature or
consequences, such
as assault or use of excessive force.
6.41 Mr Justice
Foster, President of the FPDT and a consultant to this
Inquiry, has advised the Commission that since the
'inappropriate'
criminal standard of proof was removed
in 1993 different results are observable by the Tribunal.
According to his Honour, while
the criminal standard
in the past may have led to decisions that were regarded
as 'lenient', when assessed by the ordinary civil
of proof, the situation is now different. The Commission
is interested in views on the effects of the change
standard of proof since 1993.
6.42 Other possible
reasons for the suggested leniency by courts and tribunals
may be that there has been too great a focus on
decisions that may affect an individual's livelihood
and a belief that to mete out significant penalties
where they would nevertheless be appropriate
will tarnish the reputation of the police force. Justice
Foster has advised the
Commission that it is quite
incorrect to suggest that these considerations would
enter into the actual decision making process
FPDT. The Commission invites comment on the influence,
if any, of such beliefs in the context of the AFP disciplinary
6.43 Some of the
Commission's consultations and submissions have expressed
concern with the role of the FPDT. These criticisms
have been levelled at the decision-making process of
the FPDT and have not impugned the integrity, skill
or capacity of any
of its members past or present.
These criticisms suggest that the Tribunal's decision
making process results in some inappropriate
and lenient penalties. According to the AFP and the
Ombudsman the process is too formal, legalistic and
The AFP has submitted that the average period from
notice to the Tribunal to a hearing by the Tribunal
has been six months.
According to the AFP the Tribunal has taken a quasi-criminal
approach, in that its procedures and formality approach
a criminal trial. While the Tribunal has a
discretion to dispense with formality and technicality,
it may feel constrained in
its capacity to use this
discretion widely. Technical, adversarial proceedings
may also involve greater costs not only to the
involved but also to the Tribunal's resources and the
administration of justice.
by the President of the FPDT
6.44 Mr Justice
Foster has advised the Commission that the Complaints
Act 'envisages' that hearings should at least approximate
to curial hearings in the ordinary sense. Matters before
the Tribunal are hotly contested and it has necessarily
adopted procedures
that are appropriate to essentially
adversarial litigation. In response to the suggestion
that the Tribunal has been too 'legalistic'
Foster advised that the Tribunal's proceedings have
the formality necessary to attach public credibility
to the proceedings,
such as is accorded to a hearing
of a charge before a Magistrate. The Tribunal also
rejected criticisms of delay. Justice Foster
that once the Tribunal is notified that the parties
are ready to proceed the Tribunal is able to arrange
suitable hearing
dates at the first reasonable time.
The Tribunal has never received any complaints of delay
in the conduct of its proceedings.
It has succeeded
in assigning early hearing dates, notwithstanding an
18 month delay in filling a vacancy after the retirement
of a member.
6.45 Justice Foster
has also emphasised the following matters.
6.46 The Tribunal
is independent. It is not part of the internal investigation
machinery of the AFP. It does not exist to enforce
any particular disciplinary policy. It has no inquisitorial
role. It has no conciliatory role. Its only role is
to adjudicate
upon the charges brought before it, ie
to hear and determine them on the evidence placed before
it, giving a reasoned decision
in accordance with law.
Its hearings are conducted in public (except where
considerations of security demand otherwise). Its
determinations,
both on the question of guilt and appropriate penalty,
depend upon evidence placed before it. It is, of course,
necessary that such evidence be tested by cross-examination.
Common justice requires that it only hear evidence
in the presence
of both parties. If the Commissioner
is of the opinion that the re-instatement of a dismissed
officer produces problems in relation
to employability
and general morale, then the Tribunal needs to hear
evidence of these matters in the presence of the officer
charged. Evidence of good character and conduct is
frequently given on behalf of officers charged with
disciplinary offences,
frequently from responsible
senior officers. In accordance with accepted legal
principle, such evidence is received and considered
both in relation to guilt and penalty. If no countervailing
evidence is given, the Tribunal may well give a decision,
by some to be 'lenient'.
6.47 The Tribunal
was intended to be and is composed of experienced lawyers.
The President and Deputy-President are Federal Court
Judges, with previous experience in the common law
and criminal jurisdictions of Supreme Courts. Other
members have been and
are practising Queen's Counsel
and retired Magistrates. The Deputy-President is also
a member of the AAT. They have had extensive
in the evaluation of evidence in contested cases. Most
cases before the Tribunal are contested, frequently
numerous witnesses giving conflicting accounts.
Apart from the expertise which the members past and
present have brought with
them, they have, of course,
gained further experience in the course of hearing
and determining cases before the Tribunal.
6.48 Obviously,
the interests of the public and the police force and
its officers require that careful consideration be
to the question of whether an independent Tribunal
should be retained and, if so, whether it should be
retained in its present
form. It should not be lightly
abandoned in favour of some untried system.
Commission's
6.49 The lack of
confidence expressed by the AFP and the Ombudsman in
the current disciplinary process does provide additional
support to the need for a significant change in approach
that in the Commission's view is supported by other
fundamental policy
considerations identified in this
The Commission welcomes further comments on the role
of the Federal Police Disciplinary Tribunal including
whether it ought to
be abolished or retained subject
to any changes to improve its efficiency. Specific
comments are also welcomed on the effect
of the standard
of proof, the Tribunal's procedures, case management
and speed of dealing with matters.
approach: managerial responsibility and administrative
6.50 The Commission
considers that a new and significantly different approach
to the disciplinary process will be better able
achieve its fundamental objectives of ensuring high
standards of performance and conduct, with consistent
and fair decision-making
provided in a cost-effective
and timely manner.
responsibility
6.51 The Commission
proposes that the current AFP disciplinary system be
replaced with a managerial decision-making model taking
the following format.
6.52 After a matter
has been appropriately investigated the AFP Commissioner
would be required to consider any relevant information
include the investigator's report containing responses
from the officer
and a transcript of interview with
the investigator. If the Commissioner or delegate is
satisfied that an allegation of misconduct
substantiated the Commissioner or delegate may commence
misconduct proceedings against the appointee.
6.53 The action
for misconduct must be in writing, contain particulars
of the alleged misconduct and contain the Commissioner's
proposed course of action in response to the misconduct.
The action for misconduct must also advise that she
or he may respond
in writing to the misconduct action
and the Commissioner's proposed course of action. The
legislation should specify the date
by which the appointee
must respond. Twenty eight days might be an appropriate
period. The Commissioner or delegate must consider
any response by the appointee in making a decision
by the Commissioner would
be reviewable by the AAT.
The whole misconduct process would be open to judicial
review under the
Administrative Decisions Judicial
Review Act 1977
(Cth) on the basis of an error of law.
Administrative
6.54 The Issues
Paper asked whether administrative review would be
preferable to the current quasi-criminal disciplinary
that in serious matters approaches a criminal
trial. The Commission's view is that administrative
review is clearly the most
appropriate decision-making
process when the fundamental objectives and circumstances
of the disciplinary process for law enforcement
are considered. The key objectives are employee suitability
and the achievement of appropriate standards of conduct.
The law enforcement agency must have primary responsibility
for the imposition of a penalty. This principle is
generally agreed
upon. However, there must be external
review of this internal decision-making process to
ensure effective accountability and
transparency and
to protect the rights of officers to natural justice
and a fair hearing. Administrative review meets each
of these requirements.
6.55 It also might
be argued that the AFP with administrative review would
be subject to a disciplinary process to which no other
public sector organisation was subject. The Commission
considers that there is a strong case to argue that
all public sector
agencies should have disciplinary
processes that are based upon managerial responsibility
and administrative review. However
that broad issue
is beyond the Commission's current terms of reference.
Nevertheless, when the specific case of law enforcement
discipline is considered the Commission's view is that
there are compelling reasons for administrative review.
6.56 Law enforcement
is one of the most crucial areas of the interface of
the citizen and the State. The actions of the police
have great potential to affect the rights and liberties
of citizens.
Moreover, it is the police and law enforcement agencies
generally who have the ability to use force. They have
the right to use
force in certain circumstances to
carry out their duties. They are almost unique in this
regard. Law enforcement officers may
also have greater
potential for significant corruption and other forms
of misconduct than most other members of groups in
community. The nature of their work and the people
they deal with, for example, criminal suspects who
may have access to large
amounts of money or drugs,
increases the risk of significant corruption and often
in circumstances where it is difficult to detect
where police cultures have tended to condone or at
least failed to bring to notice misconduct.
6.57 The NSW Royal
Commission into Police's Interim Report identified
special difficulties in investigating police misconduct:
police know the system and are likely to have early
warning of any interest in their activities
they are skilled in investigation techniques and counter
surveillance
they are likely to have corrupt associates willing
to cover for them
they are experienced in being interviewed, in being
cross examined and in giving evidence
their good credibility and character are readily assumed
by jurors, courts and tribunals
they can exert considerable personal influence over
internal informants and internal investigators particularly
if they hold senior
6.58 In summary,
law enforcement officers are in a special position
of trust and responsibility with the community because
their capacity to use force, the wide scope for
the exercise of individual discretion from officers
even low in rank, the significant
potential for misconduct
or corruption and the difficulties in proving misconduct.
They are in this special position of trust
when compared
to the vast majority of other occupations within the
community. There is a vital public interest in ensuring
that only people of high repute and performance remain
in law enforcement agencies. In all these circumstances
it is imperative
that the basic objectives of the disciplinary
process are effectively met. Administrative review
offers the greatest opportunity
for that to occur.
to provide administrative review
6.59 The Commission
considers that if administrative review is the appropriate
form of review then the AAT is the obvious body
provide it. The AAT is the principal federal agency
for the provision of administrative review on the merits.
It is an independent
body which reviews on the merits
a wide range of administrative decisions made by Commonwealth
departments, Ministers and other
tribunals. It can
only review decisions where it is given specific power
to do so under the relevant legislation. It currently
reviews decisions relating, for example, to taxation,
social security, veterans affairs, civil aviation,
customs and FOI.
6.60 It already
has jurisdiction in reviewing matters that involve
similar considerations as would arise under the AFP
disciplinary
process. Much of the AAT's work concerns
review of the giving, suspension or revocation of licences
or authorisations to carry
out activities in the commercial
area and in community activities. For example, the
AAT has review of the grant of export licences
civil aviation licences. In other words the AAT frequently
reviews decisions relating to the fitness of individuals
organisations to carry out complex or significant
tasks that involve broad community interests. These
matters can involve safety
and revenue issues and the
right of the community to have access to information
6.61 The AAT also
has some current jurisdiction concerning criminal or
disciplinary matters. This includes hearing appeals
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) relating to deportations
on the basis of criminal record and the review of decisions
involving the Health Insurance Commission.
6.62 The Commission
considers that the AAT has the personnel and procedures
necessary to deal effectively with review of disciplinary
decisions by the AFP. It is true that disciplinary
matters will often be hotly contested but the AAT often
hears matters that
are rigorously argued. There are
also other advantages in having the AAT provide the
6.63 The AAT is
a permanent, established full-time body that could
reduce delays in having AFP and NCA matters heard.
also provide input from a membership with a
broader range of experience than the legal expertise
of the Police Disciplinary Tribunal
and it already
has an established process of informality and administrative
review rather than the focus and tradition of a criminal
law tribunal. The AAT has developed flexible procedures,
including a discretion to admit evidence, to take an
inquisitorial
position in investigating matters, to
mediate and conciliate matters pre-trial, to employ
alternative dispute resolution and
to control pre-trial
preparation of cases.
6.64 If it were
given jurisdiction in this area the AAT may require
some new appointments of specialist and/or part time
and targeted professional development for some
current members with the potential to build up experience
in the area. A specialist
division within the AAT may
be appropriate given that it would be a new area of
review and that it involves consideration of
law enforcement
law and policy.
6.65 The Commission
does not consider that review of the AFP Commissioner's
disciplinary decisions and those of the Chairperson
of the NCA would require any significant increase in
resources for the AAT. The Commission expects that
under its draft recommendations
relatively few cases
would proceed to the AAT. This is especially so given
the intended limitations on the capacity to seek review
for minor sanctions.
Moreover, many disciplinary decisions are unlikely
to involve complex legal issues that might be raised,
for example, in the
administrative review of decisions
made by the Commissioner of Taxation. The real core
of the issue in many misconduct matters
determine the adequacy of the performance of the officer.
That involves as much as anything a consideration of
expectations about acceptable standards of conduct
by law enforcement officers. Much of the current technical
argument arises
because disciplinary matters tend to
be treated as criminal trials. The role of the AAT
should be to use its accepted administrative
law approach
and not to try to deal with these matters as quasi-criminal
or criminal.
Disciplinary
Appeal Committees not favoured
6.66 The Issues
Paper discussed the option of giving Public Service
Disciplinary Appeal Committees (DACs) jurisdiction
of the AAT. Under the
Public Service Act 1922
(Cth) there is provision made for disciplinary action
against officers of the Australian public service.
There is also provision to appeal to a Disciplinary
Appeal Committee in cases where dismissal has not resulted.
Review of cases
where dismissal has been based upon
misconduct are now vested in the Industrial Relations
Commission (IRC) under the unfair dismissal
Industrial Relations Act
(Cth). These changes
came into effect on 22 September 1995. In the Commission's
view this is not the preferable approach. Discipline,
in the context under consideration, should not be seen
as an industrial matter.
6.67 The Commission
considers that for the reasons expressed above the
AAT is the most suitable body to exercise review. However,
there are also some specific difficulties with DACs
having review powers. To use the DACs would mean having
two different processes,
with the IRC hearing dismissal
cases and the DACs other matters. This is likely to
produce a fragmented and overly complex system
context of AFP and NCA complaints. The Commission prefers
that one body be vested with the responsibility of
administrative review according to the merits
of the case. Moreover the record of the Disciplinary
Appeals Committees is the
subject of some concern.
Their decisions apparently are often challenged in
other forums by unions and management perhaps reflecting
also a lack of confidence in the Committees.
Draft recommendation
Disciplinary Appeal Committees not favoured
Draft recommendation 6.6.
The AAT should provide review
on the merits of disciplinary decisions by the AFP.
It may be necessary to establish a specialist
within the AAT to provide this review.
of a uniform NCA disciplinary process
6.68 The NCA does
not have its own disciplinary code. Staff who are employed
Public Service Act 1922
(Cth) are subject
to Australian Public Service disciplinary proceedings
and rights of review. They exercise their rights by
lodging an application for review with the Public Service
and Merit Protection Commission
. However, no other categories of staff of the NCA
come within the Public Service Act disciplinary code
and review process. The
current options for disciplining
other NCA staff members are essentially informal. Thus
for example, the major sanction open
to the Chairperson
in relation to seconded officers is to terminate the
secondment and return the officer to the home agency.
In addition an adverse report may be made on the officer.
There is no particular sanction available in respect
of consultants
except for terminating their contracts.
6.69 The Commission
considers that it is fundamental to the effective management
of the NCA that it should have a formal misconduct
code that applies to staff members in their work for
the NCA. The NCA should have its own code of misconduct
with procedures
for making findings as to liability
and determining penalties. The Commission considers
that the misconduct code of the AFP as
amended according
to the draft recommendations in this paper would be
a good starting point for determining the content of
the NCA's misconduct process.
6.70 Where an NCA
staff member is a State or Territory seconded officer
or a member of a joint task then agreements could be
entered into with the relevant home agency for the
NCA to determine appropriate disciplinary action where
the Chairperson is
satisfied that a breach has occurred.
The NCA would report the result of the action to the
be part of the officer's
continuous service record. The home agency could decide
that further action was necessary as a consequence
of the NCA's determination but would have to take into
account any penalty already imposed by the NCA. These
suggestions might
require some amendment to home agency
legislation about discipline.
6.71 The Commission
also proposes that the any disciplinary decisions made
by the NCA should be subject to administrative review
by the AAT in similar fashion to the AFP process. The
Commission can see no reason why this should not be
the case. Both the
AFP and the NCA are federal law
enforcement bodies with similar agendas and objectives.
6.72 An alternative
approach that the Commission regards less favourably
is for the NCA complaints system to apply to all NCA
staff but not the NCA disciplinary system. The NCA
or the NIIC would be limited to making reports to the
officers or joint task force
members with recommendations about whether criminal
or disciplinary action should be taken. It would
then a matter for the home agency to determine the
course of action including any disciplinary action.
The home agency would
then report the result back to
the NCA and the NIIC.
Draft recommendations
The lack of a formal NCA disciplinary process
Draft recommendation 6.7.
The NCA should have its own
misconduct code that applies to all NCA members and
staff. The preferable method for achieving this
for the NCA to enter into agreements with the relevant
enable those officers to be subject to the
disciplinary system of the NCA in relation to their
actions or purported actions under
the NCA Act or the
exercise of their powers and functions under the NCA
AAT merits review
Draft recommendation 6.8.
The AAT should provide merits
review of NCA disciplinary decisions.
Consequences
of AAT review
6.73 If the AAT
provides administrative review the following consequences
and changes would follow.
standard of proof
6.74 As noted in
paragraph 6.40 the current standard of proof for AFP
disciplinary proceedings is the balance of probabilities.
However, as a result of the common law standard laid
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
the balance of probabilities test works on a sliding
6.75 The standard
of proof for decisions reviewed by the AAT where the
conduct of a person is the basis for a decision involving
that person is the balance of probabilities.
The Commission considers that this test is appropriate
for the AAT reviewing AFP and NCA disciplinary decisions.
principle is applicable to AAT review.
Draft recommendation
The standard of proof
Draft recommendation 6.9.
The standard of proof should
be the usual standard adopted by the AAT, that is,
on the balance of probabilities.The
would be applicable under AAT review.
right to silence
6.76 There are
two different situations to consider: the right to
silence during investigation; and the right during
investigation.
The IID and ISA currently have power
to compel answers from a member of the AFP.
There is no general right to refuse to answer on the
ground of self-incrimination, but there is a proviso
that the information
so obtained will not be used against
the person in any criminal proceedings arising out
of the investigation. In the course of
investigations,
any evidence so obtained is only admissible in disciplinary
proceedings and not in any subsequent proceedings
other than a prosecution for failing to provide information
or giving false information
or in an application by the Ombudsman to the Federal
Court for an order compelling production.
The Ombudsman has the same power to compel answers
when investigating an AFP matter, although this provision
applies generally
to any relevant witness.
However AFP appointees are cautioned and have the
right to silence when questioned about a criminal offence.
6.78 The Commission
does not support there being an unmodified right to
silence during investigations concerning possible disciplinary
matters. The right to silence in the course of investigations
is a traditional aspect of criminal investigation and
proceedings.
However, as already argued above, disciplinary
proceedings, particularly in relation to law enforcement
officers, are different
in purpose and result from
criminal proceedings. Moreover, the absence of a right
to silence in misconduct investigations helps
an environment where AFP appointees believe they have
a duty to report misconduct and to tell the truth when
are investigated.
During a hearing.
A person appearing as a witness before the Police Disciplinary
Tribunal must answer questions that are required to
be answered
by the Tribunal and produce any document
required to be produced. The penalty for non compliance
is six months imprisonment.
However there is a defence
of reasonable excuse for non-compliance which includes
the case where the answer or the production
document may tend to prove that the person has committed
an offence against a law or in the case of an AFP appointee,
that the appointee has been guilty of a breach of discipline.
6.80 The Commission
considers that the NIIC when conducting a hearing should
have the power to compel answers and the production
of documents. Such information should not be admissible
in evidence against the person in criminal or civil
proceedings but
should be admissible in disciplinary
proceedings.
6.81 Under the
AAT Act a refusal or failure to answer questions that
a person is required to answer is an offence.
However, the privilege to refuse to incriminate oneself
in respect of a criminal matter is accepted by the
AAT to be applicable
in its jurisdiction.
Each of these principles should apply to review of
AFP and NCA disciplinary decisions.
Draft recommendations
Modified right to silence
Draft recommendation 6.10.
There would be no right
to silence during investigations by the NIIC. However,
as is currently the case for investigations by
IID no information obtained should be able to be used
in any criminal proceedings arising out of the investigation.
IID's power to compel answers from a member of
the AFP during an investigation should continue. During
investigations the normal
requirement for a caution
if there is a belief that a criminal offence may have
been committed should apply.
Draft recommendation 6.11.
The NIIC when conducting
a hearing should have the power to compel answers and
the production of documents. Such information
not be admissible in evidence against the person in
criminal or civil proceedings but should be admissible
in disciplinary
proceedings.
Draft recommendation 6.12.
The current provision of
the AAT Act in respect to this matter should apply
to review by the AAT.
Proceedings
normally to be public
6.82 Currently
hearings are to be held in public except in special
circumstances.
The Disciplinary Tribunal may direct that the hearing
be private or restrict the publication or disclosure
of evidence or its
decision or findings if it is desirable
in the public interest or because of the confidential
nature of the evidence or matter.
The Tribunal may
also restrict or prohibit the publication or disclosure
of any matters relating to the hearing including evidence
decisions or findings.
6.83 The AAT Act
has a very similar provision. Hearings before the AAT
are to be in public. However the Tribunal is able to
direct that a hearing or part of a hearing take place
in private where, for example, the evidence is of a
confidential nature.
6.84 The Commission
considers that the AAT provision provides an appropriate
balance between ensuring that the AFP and the public
has information about the working of the complaints
system and protecting the privacy and confidentiality
of parties.
Draft recommendation
Proceedings normally to be public
Draft recommendation 6.13.
Review of disciplinary decisions
by the AAT will be in public unless the AAT determines
otherwise as currently provided for under
the AAT Act
to a decision
6.85 Currently,
there is no automatic right of appearance by complainants
before the Tribunal. The Tribunal may grant leave to
the complainant to appear or be represented if it is
satisfied that there are special circumstances to justify
6.86 The AAT Act
provides that an application may be made by, or on
behalf of, any person or persons (including the Commonwealth
or an authority of the Commonwealth) whose interests
are affected by the decision.
The AAT has defined 'are affected by the decision'
broadly to mean that it is not necessary to show that
it is a pecuniary interest
or even specific legal rights.
In many cases it is conceivable that a complainant
this test. The Commission is concerned that if a significant
number of complainants were to seek review that this
would detract from the main purpose of misconduct proceedings
which is to maintain effective standards of conduct
and employee
suitability in law enforcement agencies.
That should be achieved by the proper conduct of the
matter by the AFP or the NCA and
by their legal representatives.
6.87 To allow complainants
to regularly intervene as parties would also increase
costs and delays in the conduct of these proceedings.
It is also likely to increase the prospect of the proceedings
becoming more adversarial and more technical. If a
complainant
wishes compensation or restitution, the
NIIC may make those recommendations or the complainant
may institute civil actions. Currently
if the Attorney-General
considers that a penalty imposed upon a member by the
Commissioner is inadequate, the Attorney may appeal
the decision to the Tribunal.
6.88 After considering
these circumstances the Commission's view is that it
is necessary to include in the AFP and NCA legislation
a provision to the effect that for the purposes of
the jurisdiction of the AAT 'persons affected by a
decision' is to be limited
to the person who is the
subject of the proceeding or to the Chairperson of
the NIIC. The latter should be allowed to seek review
of a decision, where he or she considers that the AFP
Commissioner or the NCA Chairperson has imposed a manifestly
penalty. This is necessary to ensure that
internal decisions are fair and adequate. It should
be a rare occurrence for the NIIC
to seek review. The
Commission considered whether the power of the NIIC
to report to Parliament about an inadequate penalty
might be sufficient but is of the view that there must
be an express provision for the NIIC to seek review
so that any possible
injustice in the particular case
is reviewed directly and quickly. It would still be
open to the NIIC to report on the penalties
generally or in relation to individual cases.
Draft recommendation
Parties to a decision
Draft recommendation 6.14.
The right to seek review
by the AAT of a disciplinary decision should be expressly
limited to the officer the subject of the
to the Chairperson of the NIIC where he or she is satisfied
that the penalty imposed is manifestly inadequate.
on the availability of AAT review
6.89 The Commission
proposes that there should be a limit on the availability
of review by the AAT. The imposition of minor sanctions
should be the sole province of the AFP or NCA. Those
sanctions are an integral part of management responsibility
and to allow
review reduces the capacity for management
to provide leadership and responsibility for the health
of the organisation. Moreover,
to allow review by the
AAT of minor sanctions will needlessly increase costs
and delays in the process. Reprimands, counselling,
training or retraining and any penalty that can be
reduced to a monetary figure that is below a stipulated
amount of penalty
units should not be reviewable by
the AAT. The Commission considers that currently a
figure of $500 would be appropriate.
Draft recommendation
Limit on the availability of AAT review
Draft recommendation 6.15.
There should be a limit
on the availability of review by the AAT for certain
sanctions. Reprimands, counselling, training or
and any penalty that can be reduced to a monetary figure
that is below a stipulated amount of penalty units
not be reviewable by the AAT. The Commission
considers that currently a figure of $500 would be
appropriate.
6.90 The Tribunal
may order that costs incurred by the member be paid,
in whole or part, by the Commonwealth.
However, the Commissioner cannot obtain a costs order
against a member.
6.91 The AAT has
no power to award costs except where it is specifically
empowered to do so under the relevant primary legislation
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Costs Shifting - Who pays for litigation
the Commission recommended that in proceedings before
the AAT each party should bear his or her own costs
subject to the
the provisions of particular legislation
the AAT's power to impose its own disciplinary and
case management costs orders to enhance compliance
with AAT procedures
an order for costs in favour of a party where the AAT
is satisfied that the order is necessary to permit
the party to present
his or her case properly or to
negotiate a fair settlement taking into account the
resources of the parties and the likely costs
proceedings to each party.
The Commission considers that each of the three above
criteria should apply to the AAT's review of AFP and
NCA disciplinary decisions.
The legislation for the
AFP and the NCA should provide that the AAT may award
costs. It should also provide that as a general
each party should bear their own costs but also specify
the following exceptions where the AAT:
makes a decision more favourable to the applicant then
the AAT should be able to order that all or part of
the costs of the proceedings
should be paid by the
is satisfied that the application for review is wholly
unreasonable or frivolous then it may order that the
applicant pay all
or part of the costs of the proceedings
determines to impose its own disciplinary and case
management costs orders to enhance compliance with
AAT procedures
is satisfied that an order for costs is necessary to
permit the party to present his or her case properly
or to negotiate a fair
settlement taking into account
the resources of the parties and the likely costs of
the proceedings to each party.
6.92 The Commission
believes that this proposal provides an appropriate
balance between the rights and interests of both applicants
and respondents. The Commission has proposed in this
chapter that the AFP and the NCA should have considerable
powers to impose penalties. This means that
there should be a costs sanction available for cases
where the penalty imposed is
excessive. As a general
rule the AAT has no power to award costs because of
the view that such a power may discourage indigent,
vulnerable or inexperienced people from bringing actions.
However, these concerns are unlikely to be generally
relevant for
AFP and NCA officers. Many AFP or NCA
applicants in the conduct of their applications may
well have financial, legal or advocacy
support from
unions or professional associations.
Draft recommendation
Draft recommendation 6.16.
The Commission considers
that the legislation for the AFP and the NCA should
provide that the AAT may award costs. It should
provide that as a general rule each party should bear
their own costs but also specify the following exceptions
makes a decision more favourable to the applicant then
the AAT should be able to order that all or part of
the costs of the proceedings
should be paid by the
is satisfied that the application for review is wholly
unreasonable or frivolous then it may order that the
applicant pay all
or part of the costs of the proceedings
determines to impose its own disciplinary and case
management costs orders to enhance compliance with
AAT procedures
is satisfied that an order for costs is necessary to
permit the party to present his or her case properly
or to negotiate a fair
settlement taking into account
the resources of the parties and the likely costs of
the proceedings to each party.
liability for costs
6.93 Another issue
is the liability of individual AFP appointees to pay
legal costs when their misconduct was directly responsible
for charges against an individual being dismissed or
for a person being wrongly charged in the first place.
Until now the AFP
has met costs awarded against the
informant. Where misconduct is involved it may be more
appropriate for the AFP to require the
responsible
appointee to do so.
Draft recommendation
Individual liability for costs
Draft recommendation 6.17.
There should be a statutory
discretion for the AFP Commissioner or the Chairperson
of the NCA to be able to require an individual
to pay all or part of the agency's legal costs where
the Commissioner or Chairperson is satisfied that the
misconduct was intentional, reckless or negligent,
and led to charges against an individual being dismissed
or for a person being
wrongly charged in the first
place. A decision to exercise this discretion should
be subject to the approval of the NIIC and
any decision
to impose payment should be reviewable by the AAT if
it is above a minimum level of penalty units (equivalent
at the moment to $500).
6.94 One argument
is that the proper determination of complaints is in
the public interest and consequently accused officers
should receive public funding in order to meet the
costs of the Tribunal, particularly where reputation
and career are at stake.
While making no recommendation,
ALRC 9 drew attention to the deficit in provision of
funding by Police Associations. This was
referred to
in recent consultations with the AFPA.
ALRC 9 stated that where the complainant is granted
leave to be represented and costs are borne by the
Commonwealth, then justice
would require that similar
assistance should be made available to the police officer.
6.95 The AAT Act
provides that an applicant or intending applicant may
apply to the Attorney-General for legal or financial
assistance to enable the action to be brought. This
provision does not prevent a person from applying for
Draft recommendation
Legal assistance
Draft recommendation 6.18.
The current AAT provision
of AFP and NCA disciplinary decisions.
from the Tribunal
6.96 Currently
parties who have had matters determined by the Disciplinary
Tribunal may appeal to the Federal Court on any question
of law or on the grounds that a penalty imposed is
unduly severe or inadequate.
A question of law includes whether there was sufficient
evidence to justify a finding of fact. In addition,
the Tribunal may
refer a question of law to the Full
Court of its own motion or on the application of a
6.97 Under the
AAT Act there is a right to appeal to the Federal Court
on a question of law. This would apply to review of
and NCA misconduct decisions.
Draft recommendation
Appeals from the Tribunal
Draft recommendation 6.19.
There would be a right of
appeal on a question of law to the Federal Court.
to disciplinary proceedings
of inappropriate terminology
6.98 The Commission
considers that the terms 'discipline' or 'disciplinary'
should be removed from the legislation and the term
'misconduct' substituted. Discipline has connotations
of the para-military model that should be avoided.
All language that
has usage in criminal matters should
also be avoided such as 'guilt' and 'offences' and
'charges'. As discussed in paragraph
6.35 these proceedings
should not be regarded as quasi-criminal or criminal.
Instead the language of breach of the terms of an
appointment
should be used.
Draft recommendation
Reforms to disciplinary proceedings
Draft recommendation 6.20.
The terms 'discipline' or
'disciplinary' should be removed from the legislation
and the term 'misconduct' substituted. All language
that has usage in criminal matters should also be avoided
in the legislation such as 'guilt' and 'offences' and
for negligence proceeding
6.99 The proceeding
that an appointee was negligent or careless in the
discharge of his or her duties, was removed when s
of the AFP Act was introduced. The rationale for
this removal was that s 26E was to be the procedure
to deal with negligent conduct.
However, the Commission
considers that s 26E cannot be regarded as a complete
substitute for negligence proceedings. Section
provides for retirement. However, there will be cases
of negligence where retirement would be an excessive
outcome. The
Commission is of the view that negligence
proceedings should be available to deter behaviour
that results in significant consequences
such as the
loss of public revenue.
Draft recommendation
Need for negligence proceeding
Draft recommendation 6.21.
A misconduct proceeding
that an appointee was negligent or careless in the
discharge of his or her duties should be included
the AFP misconduct legislation.
6.100 Where it
appears that an AFP appointee may have committed a
disciplinary offence the Commissioner has a discretion
suspend the appointee until the proceedings have
been determined. The person receives his or her salary
during the period of
suspension unless the Commissioner
otherwise directs.
6.101 The Commission
considers that this provision should continue with
the following additional elements to clarify the consequences
of a suspension:
the AFP Commissioner should be able to approve where
appropriate an appointee undertaking paid employment
during the period of
the suspension
immediately upon being suspended, an appointee must
surrender his or her certificate of identity, uniform
and equipment issued
to him or her for the performance
of his or her duties
an appointee who does not surrender the above things
is guilty of an offence and a warrant may be issued
to search for those things
and to seize them
an appointee who has been suspended must comply with
an order to return temporarily to work - a failure
to comply would be an
an appointee who is suspended must not while on suspension,
enter any police premises, other than those areas available
public, unless under a direction to do so -
a penalty would apply to a breach of this requirement
Draft recommendation
Suspension of duty
Draft recommendation 6.22.
The power of suspension
should continue with the following additional elements
the AFP Commissioner should be able to approve where
appropriate an appointee undertaking paid employment
during the period of
the suspension
immediately upon being suspended, an appointee must
surrender his or her certificate of identity, uniform
and equipment issued
to him or her for the performance
of his or her duties
an appointee who does not surrender the above things
is guilty of an offence and a warrant may be issued
to search for those things
and to seize them
an appointee who has been suspended must comply with
an order to return temporarily to work - a failure
to comply would be an
an appointee who is suspended must not while on suspension,
enter any AFP premises, other than those areas available
to the public,
unless under a direction to do so -
a penalty would apply to a breach of this requirement.
Dispute resolution
scope for Alternative Dispute Resolution
6.102 Currently
ADR tends to be used to resolve minor complaints only.
Moreover, it will not always be suggested or tried
all such complaints. The Commission considers that
informal resolution or
mediation. They can be categorised
as minor complaints. The process for those complaints
is discussed in chapter 5. However,
one option is to
use ADR for a much broader range of complaints including
moderate and perhaps in some circumstances even serious
complaints.
6.103 There are
advantages in the use of ADR for a wider range of complaints.
From the perspective of the public interest, ADR
offer the most effective way of actually changing individual
police officers' attitudes and behaviour. It might
to the needs of individual complainants
who, according to survey evidence, often do not want
formal disciplinary action taken
but instead want the
police officer to understand the complainant's feelings
and point of view and to modify his or her own behaviour.
Some complainants, but certainly not all, also want
a face to face meeting with the police officer to discuss
the incident.
Moreover, many complainants see delay
as a major problem and it is the formal investigation
and determination of complaints that
is likely to take
much longer than ADR. Police officers might generally
prefer an ADR approach because there is no intensive
investigation nor risk of a conviction for a disciplinary
6.104 Some disadvantages
may be that police may feel pressured to 'accept' ADR
when they believe they are not guilty of any misconduct.
Complainants may also be pressured by the police to
accept ADR because it will let the individual officer
'off the hook' on
disciplinary charges. The systemic
problems that a complaint may identify may be less
likely to be addressed if ADR is used because
to be a less public process than a formal investigation
and hearing.
6.105 The Commission's
view is that the legislation should not prescribe in
any detail what types of complaints other than those
classified as minor are suitable for ADR. The NIIC
should be able to determine any guidelines for its
use taking into account
for example, the seriousness
of the complaint, the public interest, the wishes of
the complainant, whether the alleged misconduct
deliberate or inadvertent and whether investigation
will be more effective in resolving the complaint.
However, any ADR
undertaken by the AFP or the NCA should
be subject to the approval of the NIIC and monitored
by the NIIC. The NIIC should be
able to develop guidelines
with these agencies about the use of ADR in cases that
are not categorised as minor.
6.106 One particular
form of ADR that the Commission is interested in obtaining
views about in the context of complaints against
AFP and the NCA is the adaptation of conferencing or
re-integrative shaming to complaints. These conferences
used primarily in juvenile justice cases
instead of the traditional court process. It is suggested
that these conferences best
satisfy the victim and
are more likely to prevent further misconduct. There
is a conference with the major players, to allow
the participants the opportunity to explain how the
incident affected them, to get the offender, with the
assistance of
others, to draw up a final plan that
is agreeable to everyone and to monitor the implementation
of the plan.
6.107 The Commission
sought comments on this model in the issues paper but
the only response it has received is from the AFP which
suggests that diversionary conferencing is not appropriate
for matters involving corruption. The Commission does
not know whether
conferencing has been used in relation
to complaints against the police. Some issues that
arise are whether conferencing is appropriate
for complaints,
who would be present at the conference, who would convene
it and whether it would be suitable for all types of
complaints, including internal complaints such as sexual
harassment and corruption. In cases of corruption who
would be the
'victim' or represent the 'victim'?
ADR be compulsory in any case?
6.108 Complainants
should not be required or pressured into agreeing to
any form of ADR. The officer's consent for informal
resolution of minor matters should not be required.
In all other cases the officer's consent for participating
in ADR should
be necessary.
Draft recommendation
Should ADR be compulsory in any case?
Draft recommendation 6.23.
Complainants should not
be required or pressured into agreeing to any form
of ADR. The officer's consent for informal resolution
of minor matters should not be required. In all other
cases the officer's consent for participating in ADR
should be necessary.
Admissibility
of statements
6.109 Currently
evidence of a statement made and answer given by an
AFP appointee in the course of an attempt to resolve
complaint under these conciliation procedures is
not admissible against the appointee in any proceedings
including proceedings
in relation to a breach of discipline.
6.110 The Commission's
view is that this provision should continue as it encourages
officers to use ADR. However, statements made
by officers
should be able to be used for purely employment related
Draft recommendation
Admissibility of statements
Draft recommendation 6.24.
Statements or answers made
by subject officers in the course of ADR should not
be admissible in any proceedings. This rule should
also apply to the complainant. However, statements
made by officers should be able to be used for purely
employment related
and official records
6.111 In Queensland
for both Informal Resolution and mediation there are
no details recorded on the police officer's file. This
is also the case in England. The argument for such
an approach is that it is necessary to encourage police
to participate in
the process and to admit responsibility
where appropriate. One possible problem is that there
may be officers who are subject
to many complaints
resolved informally but there is no disciplinary action
available and there is no recording on their file.
It might be argued that it would be desirable to have
a system of monitoring ADR in relation to individual
officers, not on
their personal files, but for management
purposes. It could be difficult, however, to maintain
this distinction.
6.112 The Commission's
view is that the AFP and the NCA should have a full
profile of their staff in order to assess staff needs
and development and their performance. This must include
details about any ADR process. It may be best to record
ADR on performance review documents rather
than personnel files but there must be a co-ordinated
system that readily provides
a full employment history
and profile.
Draft recommendation
ADR and official records
Draft recommendation 6.25.
The AFP and the NCA should
have a full profile of their staff in order to assess
staff needs and development and their performance.
This must include details about any ADR process. It
may be best to record details of ADR on performance
review documents rather
than personnel files but there
must be a co-ordinated system that readily provides
a full employment history and profile.
6.113 Sanctions
or penalties are imposed in order to protect the public
rather than to punish the wrongdoer and to ensure that
the wrongful action does not recur.
6.114 The sanctions
for a breach of an AFP disciplinary offence are provided
for in the AFP (Discipline) Regulations. Where the
Commissioner determines that an appointee is guilty
of a disciplinary offence the Commissioner may
admonish, caution or reprimand the appointee
impose a fine of a maximum not exceeding the amount
equalling the salary for five days
reduce the salary to a rate that is not lower than
the lowest salary for that rank
reduce the appointee to a lower rank
dismiss the appointee.
with minor misconduct without a misconduct proceeding
6.115 The Commission
considers that in response to minor cases of misconduct
supervisors and managers should be able to take positive,
direct and immediate responses including requiring
attendance at counselling or training programs or issuing
Caution Notices.
These Notices should be able to be
issued on the spot. The Victoria Police has introduced
similar measures. A failure to respond
to these lower
level measures may result in a misconduct proceeding
being commenced.
Draft recommendation
Dealing with minor misconduct without a misconduct
Draft recommendation 6.26.
For minor cases of misconduct,
supervisors and managers should be able to take positive,
direct and immediate responses including
attendance at counselling or training programs or issuing
Caution Notices. These should be able to be issued
spot. A failure to respond to these lower level
measures may result in a misconduct proceeding being
after a misconduct proceeding
6.116 Where the
Commissioner finds a misconduct proceeding proved the
Commission proposes that the following outcomes should
be available:
Counselling, training or retraining
A fine linked to salary seems an inappropriate
measure of penalty given that salaries vary considerably.
For example, two officers
could be liable for the same
misconduct but could receive significantly different
penalties on the basis of their different salaries.
While in some cases this could be appropriate to reflect
their different responsibilities and positions of trust,
cases it may not. The Commission considers
that the most effective means of ensuring that monetary
penalties continue to be consistent
and able to reflect
changes in inflation is for them to be provided for
by penalty units as is now common in legislation dealing
with fines. Without being prescriptive a maximum at
the moment of say $5 000 might be appropriate.
Reduction in rank or seniority.
The AFP has advised
that it has removed its traditional rank structure
and now uses the term 'Federal Agent' for all personnel
working in federal areas. However, the existing ranks
continue to be used in the ACT region, Jervis Bay and
the external territories.
The Commission has included
the sanction to cover the present situation but will
consider its necessity in its final report.
The sanction
may need to be broadened to allow a reduction in a
work classification or position. The Commission considers
if there is a sanction to reduce rank, seniority,
a work classification or position, it should include
a power to reduce that
status for a set period of time
and then allow a return to the previous rank, seniority,
work classification or position. The
AFP should also
be able to suspend these reductions if the officer
complies with specified conditions. A failure to comply
would allow the AFP to enforce the reduction.
Reduction in remuneration.
This sanction should be
available particularly if there is no system of ranks.
Transfer to other duties
superannuation orders be available?
6.117 The part
on s 26E earlier in this chapter dealt with a proposed
change to that section so that for cases of retirement
for serious misconduct a reduction in the employer
contribution to superannuation would be available.
This part of the issues paper deals with withholding
superannuation benefits where there has been an adverse
finding in a disciplinary
proceeding. Under the AFP
Act, persons may be subject to an order against their
superannuation as a penalty if they are found
a corruption offence and sentenced to more than 12
months imprisonment or
a 'relevant disciplinary offence' and dismissed from
the AFP as a result.
6.118 This second
circumstance is unique to the AFP as no other Commonwealth
employee is liable to such a sanction for a disciplinary
matter. Under the AFP Regulations a 'relevant disciplinary
offence' means any improper use by an AFP appointee
of the fact
that he or she is an AFP appointee in the
course of the commission of a particular disciplinary
offence and, in particular, acts
constitute disgraceful or improper conduct either in
an official capacity or otherwise
are prejudicial to the good order and discipline of
are likely to discredit the reputation of the AFP
or which lead to the AFP member being charged before
the court with an offence against the Commonwealth,
State or Territory or
another country where that charge
is proved to the satisfaction of the court whether
or not the court proceeds to conviction,
any act by an AFP member to aid, abet, counsel, procure
or be knowingly concerned in or party to the commission
of any disciplinary
6.119 One argument
for the availability of superannuation orders for disciplinary
matters in the case of the AFP is that AFP personnel
are in a special position of trust and responsibility
and therefore should be open to heavier sanctions than
other public officers
for a gross breach of that trust.
6.120 The alternative
view is that the taking of superannuation should be
regarded as a sanction suitable only in criminal matters
and restricted to serious criminal matters. Disciplinary
proceedings are not intended to be punitive. Their
purpose is to ensure
appropriate standards of behaviour
and employee suitability.
Commission's
6.121 The Commission
supports the availability of deducting the whole or
a portion of the employer's contribution for certain
disciplinary proceedings.
6.122 While the
Commission considers that AFP personnel are in a special
position of trust and responsibility it is difficult
to argue that those responsibilities make them unique
when compared to the whole range of public officers.
However, the Commission
does not consider that it is
necessary to make that argument to support the availability
of reducing superannuation in certain
disciplinary
cases. The Commission is of the view that the availability
of the sanction should be extended to all public sector
personnel. This extends beyond the Commission's current
terms of reference but the principle is clear. It is
possible for an
officer in any public agency to be
in a position of significant trust and responsibility
and to abuse his or her office. Many
staff regularly
deal with members of the public or revenue or public
monies. There is likely to be some scope for corruption
and serious misconduct in every agency. An example
of the inequity under the current situation is where
an AFP officer and
officers from a broad range of other
public agencies are involved in the one wide scale
system of bribery. Each may have acted
in the same
way with the same degree of misconduct. It seems inconsistent
and unfair to have one additional sanction available
in respect of the AFP officer but unavailable in respect
of the rest.
6.123 The Commission
considers that the taking of some amount of the employers'
contribution is not punitive in cases of serious
that involve corruption or a significant abuse of the
person's office. Those who have abused their office
enrichment should not be permitted to gain
the full benefits of superannuation derived from that
office. This is not a punitive
sanction but restorative
6.124 However
the current definition of 'relevant disciplinary offence'
is very broad. One approach would be to provide that
any misconduct proceeding that results in dismissal
is serious enough for a superannuation order to be
available. However, that
would be moving away from
some requirement that the misconduct has an element
of corruption or significant abuse of one's office.
The Commission prefers that the option mirror the provision
relating to the corruption offence. That is, the option
be available for misconduct proceedings
involved an abuse by the person of his or her office
was committed for a purpose that involved corruption
was committed for the purpose of perverting or attempting
to pervert the course of justice.
6.125 As discussed
in relation to s 26E at paragraph 6.14 if superannuation
orders are to be an option then they should be restricted
to the employer's contribution and interest on that
amount. It is this portion that can be clearly identified
as a benefit
that the person has derived from the office
rather than the employee's own contributions. There
should also be a discretion to
deduct a part and not
merely the whole of the employer's contribution and
interest thereon. This would allow the order to be
specifically tailored to the gravity and circumstances
of the particular case.
Draft recommendations
Should superannuation orders be available?
Draft recommendation 6.27.
Deductions from an officer's
superannuation should be available as a sanction for
a misconduct proceeding. The option would only
be available
for misconduct proceedings that
involved an abuse by the person of his or her office
was committed for a purpose that involved corruption
was committed for the purpose of perverting or attempting
to pervert the course of justice.
Draft recommendation 6.28.
Superannuation orders should
be restricted to the employer's contribution and interest
on that amount. There should also be a
discretion to
deduct a part and not merely the whole of the employer's
contribution and interest thereon.
there be a power of expungement?
6.126 There is
an issue as to whether misconduct proceedings should
be expunged from an officer's records and files after
period of time or where the officer has acted
in a way that calls for expungement. Currently there
is no expungement provision.
6.127 The Commission
does not support the introduction of an expungement
provision. Misconduct proceeding are about employee
standards and suitability. They are clearly relevant
to an employment history and profile and should be
recorded for the purpose
of promotion, security clearances
and reappointment.
Draft recommendation
Should there be a power of expungement?
Draft recommendation 6.29.
There should be no statutory
provision for the expungement of misconduct proceedings.
the complainant
6.128 The Commission
considers that regular and informative reporting to
the complainant is a vital part of an effective and
credible complaints system. There are two main areas
to consider - reporting about investigations and reporting
of misconduct proceedings.
requirements in relation to investigations
6.129 A responsive
and comprehensive system for reporting about the progress
and outcomes of investigations of complaints is likely
to increase public confidence in the integrity of the
complaints system. It may also require additional resources
agencies providing the service.
6.130 Complainants
are entitled to routine communication about the status
of their complaint subject to the exceptional demands
of operational security that may be relevant, particularly
in cases alleging corruption.
6.131 The current
reporting requirements under the Complaints Act are
not elaborate. The Ombudsman upon receipt of the investigation
report is to provide a complainant with particulars
of the investigation
and the Ombudsman may at any time also give a complainant
a progress report about the complaint.
6.132 Reports
should contain sufficient information for a complainant
to understand and follow the course of the investigation
and decision-making process. Where a complaint is not
investigated or substantiated the reasons for this
should be provided
to the complainant. That might involve
for example, an explanation of the standard of proof
that applies.
6.133 The Ombudsman's
current practice is to have one officer who takes responsibility
for keeping a complainant advised of developments
the case. The NIIC, the AFP and the NCA should designate
a contact officer for a complainant in respect of each
complaint. That person would be responsible
for periodically reporting to the complainant about
the progress of the investigation,
the reasons for
any significant delay and for answering any direct
inquiries from the complainant. One possibility is
an obligation
of reporting at least monthly. This could
be done where appropriate by telephone.
on misconduct proceedings
6.134 Under the
Commission's draft recommendations it is the AFP or
the NCA that would have the primary role in determining
misconduct actions. As part of that responsibility
they should inform the complainant of the misconduct
process and the outcome.
This should include information
any penalty imposed and the reasons for it.
6.135 The AFP
and the NCA should be required under their legislation
to report to the complainant the outcome of misconduct
actions including the outcome of any review by the
AAT or appeal to the Federal Court. They should also
be required to do so
within a time to be specified
in the regulations or under guidelines. Twenty eight
days from the finding on a misconduct action
a decision by the AAT or the Federal Court might be
an appropriate time frame.
Draft recommendations
Reporting on misconduct proceedings
Draft recommendation 6.30.
Reports should contain sufficient
information for a complainant to understand and follow
the course of the investigation and
decision-making
process. Where a complaint is not investigated or substantiated
the reasons for this should be provided to the
complainant.
That might involve, for example, an explanation of
the standard of proof that applies.
Draft recommendation 6.31.
The NIIC, the AFP and the
NCA should designate a contact officer for a complainant
in respect of each individual complaint. That
would be responsible for periodically reporting to
the complainant about the progress of the investigation,
the reasons
for any significant delay and for answering
any direct inquiries from the complainant. One possibility
is an obligation of reporting
at least monthly. This
could be done where appropriate by telephone.
Information
6.136 The Commission
is of the view that the AFP and the NCA should give
consideration to greater dissemination of information
misconduct throughout their respective organisations,
subject to appropriate
protection of the identity of
complainants. This could be done in gazettes, in-house
information bulletins and notice boards.
6.137 If a proceeding
has been held in camera then dissemination of specific
decisions even in an anonymous format should be avoided
and instead information should be communicated through
guidelines.
However, the Commission considers that as a general
rule, those officers found guilty of significant misconduct
have forfeited
their right to any anonymity. For less
serious cases anonymity and the use of guidelines may
be appropriate.
Draft recommendation
Information about disciplinary results
Draft recommendation 6.32.
The AFP and the NCA should
disseminate widely information about the results of
proceedings throughout their respective organisations
subject to appropriate protection of the identity of
complainants. For example, this could be done by using
gazettes, in-house
information bulletins and notice
Legislative
structure of the disciplinary systems
6.138 The AFP
disciplinary proceedings are provided for by the Australian
Federal Police (Discipline) Regulations made under
the AFP Act. The Commission has considered whether
these regulations should be made pursuant to the NIIC
Act but has reached
the view that because discipline
is not always linked to complaints the discipline regulations
should remain under the AFP Act.
This also acknowledges
the role of discipline as a managerial tool for the
law enforcement agency. For the same reasons the disciplinary
provisions for the NCA should be included under the
Draft recommendations
Legislative structure of the disciplinary systems
Draft recommendation 6.33.
The AFP discipline regulations
should remain under the AFP Act.
Draft recommendation 6.34.
The disciplinary provisions
to be drafted for the NCA should be provided for under
the NCA Act.
use of evidence and information from disciplinary proceedings
6.139 The Issues
Paper sought comment on the derivative use of evidence
and information from disciplinary proceedings. There
is a concern that material and evidence from disciplinary
proceedings is being used by parties in criminal proceedings
proceedings.
This is known as derivative use. One contentious issue
is when a brief of the prosecution or the defence becomes
available to
a party in a different proceeding. It
was thought that this was not a problem in practice
at least in the jurisdiction of complaints
Material could only be obtained by subpoena and that
would be subject to the normal protections of relevance
and privilege.
6.140 The AFP
has submitted that the prohibition against derivative
use under the Complaints Act only operates where an
appointee is a defendant in civil proceedings or
an accused in criminal proceedings.
If an appointee was a witness in criminal or civil
proceedings, information supplied by that person in
the course of an IID investigation
may be admissible.
The AFP has also submitted that IID files have been
subpoenaed for use in criminal proceedings, mainly
question the credibility of AFP appointees. This
has sometimes been used where the wide information
sought had little relevance
to the criminal proceedings.
The AFP has submitted that the legislation should be
amended to afford greater protection to appointees
when they supply information under direction.
6.141 The Attorney-General's
Department has advised that under the
Evidence Act
(Cth) use immunity and derivative use immunity
is given to testimony compelled by a court. The Department
has commented that
it does not appear that under the
Complaints Act such additional immunity is necessary
to encourage co-operation with an investigation.
according to the Department, the inclusion of greater
protection against derivative use might be considered
a more complete reflection of the right
to silence.
6.142 The Commission's
view is that as a matter of principle derivative use
should not be permitted or encouraged. Generally disciplinary
matters should be regarded as limited to the purpose
of imposing proper employment standards. The use of
information derived
from them should not be used for
criminal or civil proceedings. However, there may be
cases where it would be fair or reasonable
some limited use of such information in other proceedings.
The Commission is interested in views on how this principle
of discouraging derivative use should work in practice
and what legislative change, if any, is necessary.
recommendation
Derivative use of evidence and information from disciplinary
proceedings
Draft recommendation 6.35.
As a matter of principle
derivative use should not be permitted or encouraged.
Comment sought on the application of this principle
There may be cases where it would be fair or reasonable
to permit some limited derivative use from disciplinary
proceedings.
The Commission is interested in views
on how this principle of discouraging derivative use
should work in practice and what legislative
if any, is necessary.
Nor merely because a court has convicted the person
of a criminal offence or has found the person guilty
of such an offence without
recording a conviction:
The person would be excluded from Subdivisions B, C,
D and E of Division 3 of Part VIA of the
Relations Act 1998
Senator Kemp
Hansard (Sen)
Second Reading Speech
Federal Police Amendment Bill 1996
Wednesday 29 May
1996, 1318.
'Unjust enrichment' is defined by B Garner's
A Dictionary
of Modern Legal Usage
2nd ed New York Oxford University
Press 1995 to mean a benefit obtained from another,
not intended as a gift and not legally
justifiable,
for which the beneficiary must make restitution or
recompense.
Industrial Relations Court of Australia
Annual Report
id 31. These claims increased at an average rate of
8% per month since the jurisdiction commenced.
Cth Ombudsman
Submission 17.
s 11(5)-(7).
Submission 29
Hardcastle v Commissioner of Police
[1984] FCA 105
(1984) 53 ALR 593
This was referred to in the Commission's consultations
and is also commented on in the NSW Royal Commission
Interim Report para
NSW Royal Commission Interim Report para 3.3.
Complaints AFP Regulations reg 9.
Complaints (AFP) Regulations (Amendment) Statutory
Rules 1993 No 307.
In the State disciplinary tribunals, the standards
are as follows:
balance of probabilities
South Australia
beyond reasonable doubt
balance of probabilities
balance of probabilities
New South Wales
balance of probabilities
balance of probabilities
Northern Territory
balance of probabilities.
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Submission 17
Submission 29
Information provided to the Commission by the AFP.
J Braithwaite 'Good and Bad Police Services and How
to Pick Them' in H Eijkman and P Moir ed
Policing Australia:
Old Issues, New Perspectives
Macmillan Co of Australia
South Melbourne 1992, 13.
See Health Insurance Commission decisions under
Insurance Act 1973
(Cth) eg review of decision of the
Minister after internal review in respect of a qualification
held by a person.
See para 6.89.
of the Public Service Regulations deals with
discipline of officers and sets out the manner of appeal
to the Disciplinary Appeal
Committee (Part X deals
with discipline of unattached officers).
Australian Government
Report of the Public Service
AGPS Canberra December 1994 para 5.14, 6.61.
The Merit Protection Review Agency has recently been
amalgamated with the Public Service Commission to form
the Public Service
and Merit Protection Commission.
Complaints AFP Regulations reg 9.
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
MIEA v Pochi
[1980] FCA 85
(1980) 4 ALD 139
Re Kirby and Collector
(1989) 20 ALD 369.
s 7(5)-(6).
As to the operation of the 'use only' immunity see:
M Findlay 'International Rights and Australian Adaptations:
Recent Developments
in Criminal Investigation' (1995)
[1995] SydLawRw 18
Sydney Law Review
s 7(8), 44.
s 27(5)-(6).
Complaints Act s 83.
AAT Act s 62.
The AAT Act s 60 gives witnesses before the AAT the
same immunities as witnesses before the High Court.
The AAT has also held
that no adverse conclusion should
be drawn by the fact that a person declines to answer
a question on the basis that to do so
may be incriminating:
Dolan v Australian and Overseas Telecommunications
[1993] FCA 202
(1993) 31 ALD 510.
A person who fails to comply with such directions may
be imprisoned for six months.
AAT Act s 35.
AAT Act s 27.
Complaints Regulations reg 7.
ALRC 75 rec 12.
Cth Ombudsman
Submission 17
Consultation Canberra 24 August 1995.
(Discipline) Regulation 20.
Commonwealth Law Enforcement Board
Submission 12
(Discipline) Regulation 22.
AFP (Discipline) Regulations reg 18A and reg 2(2)(c)
Submission 16
Comments made at consultants meeting 7 September 1995.
7. Anti-fraud and anti-corruption plans and measures
Introduction
for planning
developing an anti-corruption plan
current NCA anti-corruption plan
anti-corruption measures
anti-corruption measures
of the NIIC
and education
of conduct and mission statements
Possibilities
of a national or regional anti-corruption strategy
Introduction
7.1 Effective complaints
and disciplinary systems are essential to the accountability
and credibility of the AFP and the NCA.
However, they
do not constitute a complete response to those requirements
of accountability and credibility. They must be complemented
by effective anti-fraud plans and anti-corruption plans
that are properly implemented and monitored. The NSW
ICAC has submitted
that corruption prevention can be
achieved through pro-active work, formulating a strategic
intelligence plan to combat corruption
and targeting
specific areas. Since corruption is frequently a product
of the culture of an organisation, a change in culture
is necessary and can be achieved through education
and training.
7.2 This chapter
examines anti-fraud plans and anti-corruption plans
for the AFP and the NCA and the proposed role of the
in these strategies. The chapter then deals with
specific anti-corruption measures. The chapter concludes
by discussing the possibility
of a national or regional
strategy and approach to fraud and corruption in law
enforcement agencies.
Need for planning
7.3 The Commission
considers that it is essential that the AFP and the
NCA each has its own comprehensive anti-fraud plans
anti-corruption plans and that these plans are
co-ordinated where necessary. The AFP and the NCA as
major law enforcement agencies
should provide leadership
in the Commonwealth in the development and implementation
of these plans. The Commission considers
plans must accurately analyse risk in all aspects of
the respective organisations. They must be comprehensive
their scope. Furthermore, the anti-corruption plans
should provide for a thorough system of integrity testing
for all recruits
and regular integrity testing for
all staff. The view of the Commission is that there
should be testing at least every three
years for all
7.4 The AFP and
NCA are currently in the process of devising new fraud
control plans The Commission expects that the new plans
will contain effective risk assessment of fraud. The
Commission may comment on the new plans if they are
finalised by the time
of the Commission's final report
due on 30 September 1996.
7.5 The federal
Government in 1987 released a report that reviewed
systems for dealing with fraud on the Commonwealth.
report highlighted the need for each Commonwealth
agency to have a plan for fraud control.
What is required is recognition that fraud can and
does occur, and an explicit, systematic approach to
its prevention and detection
appropriate to the requirements
of the agency in question.
7.6 This approach
at a minimum requires
identification of risk areas
analysis of options for reducing the risks
formulating and introducing means of prevention, detection
and deterrence
staff training
exchange of information with other agencies
statistical records sufficient to ensure some measurement
of the effectiveness of action against fraud.
7.7 In December
1994 a revised Commonwealth policy called
Best Practice
Fraud Control
was introduced which set down standards and guidelines
for Commonwealth agencies and made the Commonwealth
Law Enforcement Board
(CLEB) responsible for the co-ordination
of fraud control policy.
7.8 The Commission
has sought advice from the AFP and the NCA about their
anti-fraud plans. It has also contacted CLEB which
advised that both the AFP and the NCA submitted fraud
control plans that complied with the requirements in
place before December
1994. Both agencies, like many
other Commonwealth agencies, are in the process of
revising their risk assessment and fraud control
to meet the additional requirements. The AFP has advised
that it intends that its new fraud control plan will
be submitted
to CLEB in December 1996 or January 1997.
The NCA expects that its updated fraud control plan
will be approved in early July
developing an anti-corruption plan
7.9 The AFP has
advised that it is developing a Security Plan that
is to be a comprehensive anti-corruption plan. Some
elements of that Plan are
a professional reporting policy that will encourage
reporting of unacceptable practices and protect and
mentor whistleblowers
an integrity audit regime that involves all personnel
being required to declare private interests and to
submit to testing for
illicit drugs in the workplace
senior management to provide statements of integrity
current NCA anti-corruption plan
7.10 The NCA has
advised the Commission that it currently has no formalised
anti-corruption plan but it has a number of measures
in place to mitigate against corruption in the NCA.
Those measures are discussed below. The Commission
considers that the NCA
should develop an anti-corruption
plan that includes a risk assessment for corruption
and regular integrity testing of all staff.
anti-corruption measures
7.11 The AFP advises
that it has other extensive anti-corruption measures
in place including the following:
the establishment of the Internal Investigations Division
(IID) and Internal Security and Audit (ISA) with the
latter having a
pro-active focus against corruption
fixed term appointments
a unified workforce and a performance management program
the inclusion of security, ethics, corruption and fraud
awareness in all training programs
ending of appointments under s 26E and proposed amendments
to the section to make it more effective in removing
officers who
have been found to be guilty of serious
loss of superannuation for conviction of corruption
offences and prescribed disciplinary offences
lowering of the burden of proof in disciplinary matters
from beyond reasonable doubt to the balance of probability
a recent restructuring to adopt a multi-skilled team
approach with the intention that the team concept will
act as a self regulator
by the rotation of personnel
between teams and throughout the organisation
establishment of the AFP Security and Audit Committee
in 1990 to reduce the risk of fraud and corruption
by ensuring in-depth
audit scrutiny of programs and
the AFP Protective Security Manual and the AFP Information
Technology Security Policy Statement which establishes
security clearance
a network of Regional Security Officers for each AFP
The AFP is also introducing as part of its accountability
and ethics reforms
a new remuneration scheme to reward those who increase
their capabilities and value to the AFP
greater use of electronic audio and video recording
equipment, particularly for detecting people committing
crimes and for recording
interactions between officers
and the public at police stations and offices.
The AFP is conducting research into the utility of
forensic lie detection (polygraphs) in assessing integrity.
anti-corruption measures
7.12 The NCA has
advised that it has the following anti-corruption measures
the use of small multi-disciplinary teams
rigorous external reporting requirements to the PJC,
the IGC, the Standing Committee on Organised Crime
and Criminal Intelligence
(SCOCCI) and the National
Co-ordination Committee
internal reporting through weekly reports to the General
Manager, Operations and the Authority from all its
secondment of investigators for a limited period, mainly
rotation of staff within regional offices
special care taken by the NCA in its recording and
control of information because of the scrutiny of
the NCA's coercive powers
a strict 'need to know' requirement for information
passing beyond investigation teams
management is closer to investigation teams than in
other law enforcement agencies because of the need
to ensure NCA standards
meet the expectations of the
NCA's partner agencies
a high level of internal control of exhibits and documents
strict supervision and control of assets
auditing of financial procedures and systems
annual audit by the Australian National Audit Office.
7.13 The NCA has
a Security Branch whose main function is to develop,
implement and monitor protective security within the
so as to ensure the integrity of its staff and
assets. It carries out security checks on staff and
potential members of staff.
There is also an internal
auditor who examines whether procedures are being followed.
The NCA has an Audit Committee which meets
year to review internal audit matters.
Role of the NIIC
7.14 The NIIC would
be a key agency in providing external review and assistance
to the AFP and the NCA in relation to anti-corruption
strategies and measures. The Commission proposes that
the NIIC should regularly consult with the AFP and
the NCA about their
anti-fraud plans and anti-corruption
plans. The NIIC would be empowered to conduct random
audits of all aspects of the process
and to make recommendations
annual reports to Parliament information about
AFP and NCA strategies and would report on the results
of its auditing. The AFP and the NCA in developing
and reviewing
these measures and strategies would need
to develop appropriate information links with the NIIC.
Draft recommendations
Need for planning
Draft recommendation 7.1.
The AFP and the NCA should
each develop comprehensive and co-ordinated anti-fraud
plans and anti-corruption plans. These plans
include effective risk assessment. The anti-corruption
plans should include thorough and regular integrity
Role of the NIIC
Draft recommendation 7.2.
The NIIC should regularly
consult with the AFP and the NCA about their anti-fraud
plans and anti-corruption plans. The NIIC would
empowered to conduct random audits of all aspects of
the process and to make recommendations about these
plans. The NIIC
would include in their annual reports
to Parliament information about the AFP and NCA strategies
and would report on the results
of its auditing. The
AFP and the NCA in developing and reviewing these measures
and strategies would need to develop appropriate
information
links with the NIIC.
Comments sought on anti-corruption measures
The Commission welcomes comments on the AFP and NCA
anti-corruption measures (eg relating to effectiveness
and fairness) discussed
above, including comments on
any additional measures.
and education
7.15 The Commission
considers that training and education of AFP and NCA
staff is significant in helping to reduce the causes
of complaints and corruption. Given that the complaints
and disciplinary systems proposed in this paper are
significantly different
to the current situation, AFP
and NCA staff would need to be trained for the operation
of these new systems. Information and
training should
also be included in induction packages and courses.
The NIIC should provide assistance in the training
requirements.
Draft recommendation
Training and education
Draft recommendation 7.3.
The AFP and the NCA in conjunction
with the NIIC should be responsible for providing training
to all AFP members about their
new systems and for
providing training to recruits and refresher training.
conduct and mission statements
7.16 There is a
growing interest in developing ethics and codes of
conduct within organisations including law enforcement
These measures can increase integrity and
accountability. The Canberra Police Association has
submitted that the AFP design and
implement an ethics
course for members and staff members to train them
fully on all issues regarding the complaints process.
7.17 The AFP has
advised that it is developing a Code of Conduct that
will be supplementary to other relevant policies such
as training. The Commission's view is that it would
be desirable for both the AFP and the NCA to have a
document that is accessible
to both their staff and
to the general public that sets out the rights and
obligations of staff and the public in relation to
making and resolving complaints. This could be part
of a broader code of conduct or a mission statement.
The Commission considers
that the document would be
a valuable educative measure for both the agencies
and the community. The Commission would not envisage
that a breach of the code or statement would confer
any legal right. The purpose would be to improve understanding
and awareness
and set out general standards of conduct.
Draft recommendation
Code of conduct and mission statements
Draft recommendation 7.4.
The AFP and the NCA should
have a document that is accessible to both their staff
and to the general public that sets out the
and obligations of staff and the public in relation
to making and resolving complaints. This could be part
of a broader
code of conduct or a mission statement.
A breach of the code or statement would not confer
any legal right.
Possibilities
of a national or regional anti-corruption strategy
7.18 There are
two possibilities to consider. The first is a national
strategy for Australia and the second is a strategy
incorporates not only Australia but also other
countries in the region.
7.19 The Commission
considers that a national strategy to ensure the integrity
and competency of Australian law enforcement officers
has many attractions. It recognises and takes account
of the fact that criminal activity and general law
enforcement issues
cross jurisdictional boundaries.
This is exemplified in the role of the NCA itself where
co-operation and joint operations with
national, State
and Territory law enforcement agencies is a primary
function. It also encourages the adoption of national
and allows greater professional support to
those seeking to apply these standards in any particular
7.20 This national
approach could include standards for recruitment, training,
policy and procedures and data systems. There have
been some developments in these areas.
7.21 The Australasian
Police Ministers Council (now the Ministerial Council
on the Administration of Justice) has endorsed the
development of an Australasian Policing Strategy.
One of the major goals is to enhance professionalism
and accountability including developing a common code
of ethics, a strategy
for police education and training
and developing strategies for dealing with serious
misconduct. One desirable innovation would
be the introduction
of a uniform complaint management data system which
would be very useful in assisting in comparisons of
different approaches to complaints including the resources
involved. The NSW Government has requested the Ministerial
on the Administration of Justice to consider
the introduction of such a system.
7.22 A further
development that suggests that a regional strategy
beyond Australasia is also a possibility is a result
AFP proposal at the Conference of Commissioners
of Police of Australia and the South West Pacific region
in March 1996. The Conference
resolved to
produce a clear, understandable and viable definition
of corruption
support the proposal to define a set of anti-corruption
measures for consideration by all agencies in the region
require the Police Commissioners' Policy Advisory Group
(PCPAG) to advance this proposal out of session and
to report to the next
direct the PCPAG to pay particular attention to the
recommendations of the NSW Royal Commission into the
Police and the Fifth
Australasian Internal Investigations
request the PCPAG to examine and report to the Conference
on the resource and operation efficiency implications
of each of the
measures that it recommends.
The Commission is interested in comment on the feasibility
and content of any national strategy and whether an
Australasian or
extensive regional approach is possible
and desirable.
Submission 23
Commonwealth of Australia
Review of systems for dealing
with fraud on the Commonwealth
AGPS Canberra 1987,
Commonwealth of Australia CLEB
Best Practice For Fraud
Control. Fraud Control Policy of the Commonwealth
Canberra 1994.
Submission 26
to the issues paper.
The Ministerial Council on the Administration of Justice
Directions in Australasian Policing
July 1994-1996,
New South Wales
Legislative Assembly Mr Whelan
Minister for Police, Second Reading Speech
Police Corruption
Commission Bill
24 April 1996, 13.
This information about the Conference was provided
to the Commission by the AFP.
8. Scope of complaints systems
Introduction
of complaint
of the distinction between 'allegations' and 'complaints'
of internal complaints
Unnecessary
distinction
Distinction
between misconduct and employment performance
Interagency
communications
not to investigate
may be subject to a complaint?
'Collective
and scope of complaints legislation
should be able to complain?
'Sufficient
of authority
anonymous complaints be accepted?
of offences to achieve proper scope of complaints system
of the offence
Victimisation
of complainants
substance of a complaint to another AFP member
and secrecy provisions
and encouragement of whistleblowers
Introduction
8.1 This chapter
considers the scope of complaints systems for the AFP
and the NCA.
of complaint
8.2 The Commission
in its issues paper asked whether 'complaint' should
be defined in the Act. Most submissions suggested that
there was no need to define complaint on the basis
that it was better to leave complaint undefined rather
than risk too narrow
a definition.
The AFP has submitted that complaint should be defined.
The AFP wanted the definition to make it clear that
persons who in the
course of their employment with
a government instrumentality communicate information
to the AFP which is capable of being a complaint
the Act are not to be regarded as complainants unless
they specifically request this. The NCA in its submission
advocate a definition of complaint but submitted
that complaints mechanisms should not deal with policy
or resource issues.
8.3 The Commission
has decided that in light of its recommendation to
remove the distinction between complaints and allegations
a new definition of complaint is required. The Commission
proposes the following definition. Complaint should
be defined to
include all situations where a person
expressly or by implication seeks review of, or challenges,
the validity or appropriateness
of the conduct of an
AFP appointee or of the AFP as an organisation. The
proposed definition would remove the distinction between
complaints and allegations and would be sufficiently
broad so as to encourage people to come forward with
their grievances.
The broad definition would ensure
that the NIIC and others do not unnecessarily restrict
the ambit of what can be raised.
of the distinction between 'allegations' and 'complaints'
8.4 Currently there
is a distinction between 'complaints' and 'allegations'.
'Allegations' are determined according to the procedures
set out in AFP General Order 6 and are defined to mean
'a report' made by an AFP member or by the public 'concerning
the behaviour
of an appointee not being a matter to
which the Complaints Act applies'.
Matters to which the Complaints Act apparently does
not apply are:
internal complaints made to an AFP appointee
'off duty' conduct
disputes relating specifically to the employment of
an AFP member.
8.5 'Off duty' conduct
is behaviour that is unconnected to the exercise, or
purported exercise, of police powers or the performance,
or purported performance, of police functions. The
distinction between off duty conduct and conduct where
a member purports
to act as a police officer is often
complex. Some submissions suggested that because police
officers enjoy a privileged position
of trust and exercise
extensive powers as well as having a public duty to
uphold and enforce the law, police must aspire to exemplary
standards in order to maintain community confidence.
Even off duty behaviour can reflect on the police force.
For example,
an officer who constantly gets drunk
while off duty in hotels, might be seen as bringing
discredit on the reputation of the AFP.
Off duty conduct
may indicate a potential for corruption. For example,
a police officer who uses drugs recreationally may
supplied by criminals raising the possibility of
blackmail and the request for favours in response to
police protection of illegal
activities.
8.6 The Australian
Federal Police Amendment Bill 1996 which deals with
the power of Commissioner to terminate appointments
the basis of serious misconduct adopts the following
definition of 'serious misconduct' that appears to
cover off duty conduct:
corruption, a serious abuse of power or a serious dereliction
any other seriously reprehensible act or behaviour
by a person whether acting, or purporting to act, in
the course of his or her
duties as a member or staff
. [italics added].
The Commission is of the view that off duty conduct
should remain predominantly a matter for the AFP to
deal with internally if
it raises issues about a member's
suitability for the profession of policing. The Commission
recognises, however, that there
may be some situations
where the NIIC should investigate off duty conduct,
particularly where there is a suggestion of serious
misconduct. The Commission proposes that off duty conduct
should be able to come within the definition of a complaint.
the NIIC would have a discretion to send matters
involving off duty conduct to the AFP. The NIIC would
be able to require a report
with a particular matter involving off duty conduct.
of internal complaints
8.7 A number of
submissions including those from the AFP and the Attorney-General's
Department made the point that there was merit
oversight of internal complaints by an external body
and suggested that the determination of all allegations
AFP should be regularly audited and reported
on by the external agency. The Commission supports
Unnecessary
distinction
8.8 The Commission
is of the view that the current distinction between
complaints under the Complaints Act and allegations
General Order 6 is both confusing and unnecessary.
The introduction of one system of complaints that
covers the current category
of allegations would allow
the NIIC to have a complete picture of the types of
complaints that are being made about the AFP and
assist in providing an overview of the AFP's performance.
Distinction
between misconduct and employment performance
8.9 It is the Commission's
view that a relevant distinction is between complaints
that relate to misconduct and complaints that
merely to employment performance and suitability. The
Commission is therefore of the view that all matters
which would
previously have been regarded as falling
under General Order 6 would now fall within the broader
definition of a complaint and
would fall within the
review of the NIIC. However, the Commission proposes
that the NIIC would have a discretion and a system
of guidelines to refer matters back to the AFP and
the NCA that relate solely to internal management.
As stated earlier the
Commission envisages that these
guidelines would deal with matters such as off duty
Interagency
communications
8.10 In the issues
paper the question of interagency communications was
raised with the example given of a communication between
the DPP and the AFP about an AFP member's failure to
appear at a court hearing. Because it is a statement
of an AFP officer it would be regarded
as falling within the current definition of complaint
despite the unsuitability of dealing
with the matter
in this way. The NIIC should therefore have a power
under the guidelines it develops to deem that interagency
communications are not complaints unless the agency
requests the communication to be dealt with in that
Draft recommendations
Removal of the distinction between 'allegations' and
'complaints'
Draft recommendation 8.1.
The distinction between allegations
and complaints should be abolished with matters currently
defined as allegations under General
Order 6 to be
regarded as complaints.
Draft recommendation 8.2.
The NIIC should have a discretion
to refer matters that relate solely to internal management
and resolution.
Draft recommendation 8.3.
In conjunction with the AFP
and NCA the NIIC would draft a set of guidelines which
deal with the matters that will be referred
the AFP and NCA.
Draft recommendation 8.4.
Complaint should be defined
to include all situations where a person expressly
or by implication seeks review of, or challenges,
validity or appropriateness of the conduct of an AFP
appointee or of the AFP as an organisation. 'Conduct'
should be defined
to include any action or inaction
(or alleged action or inaction):
whether or not it also involves non-AFP participants
whether or not it occurred while the AFP appointee
was officially on duty.
Draft recommendation 8.5.
A similar definition of complaint
should be adopted for the purposes of the NCA.
Draft recommendation 8.6.
The NIIC should have a power
to deem that interagency communications are not complaints
unless the agency requests the communication
dealt with under the Act.
not to investigate
8.11 Section 24
of the Complaints Act provides the Commonwealth Ombudsman
with a number of discretions to determine that a complaint
should not be investigated or should not be investigated
further. The Ombudsman can exercise the discretion
not to investigate
she is satisfied that the complainant became aware
of the action complained of more than 12 months before
the complaint was made
if in her opinion:
(i) the complaint is frivolous or vexatious or was
not made in good faith; or
(ii) the complainant does not have a sufficient interest
in the subject matter of the complaint
if a person has been charged with an offence or breach
of discipline or offered a caution or admonition for
a breach of discipline
in relation to the action complained
if in her opinion, the investigation or further investigation
of that action is not warranted having regard to all
the circumstances.
8.12 The Ombudsman
also has power to determine that a complaint shall
not be investigated where a complainant has sought
by a court or tribunal or has a right to have
the action complained of reviewed by a court or tribunal.
8.13 The Commission
is of the view that each of these discretions should
be available to the NIIC. The Ombudsman's submission
suggested that these discretions are broad enough.
In relation to the 12 month limitation the Department
of Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs has suggested that
the limitation period should be increased so that people
from non-English speaking backgrounds
who have cause
to complain have a sufficient opportunity to become
familiar with the complaints processes of the AFP before
the time period elapses. The Department in its submission
gives the example of refugees from a country where
the police are
part of a repressive regime. These refugees
distrust the police and the independence of any complaints
mechanism. A twelve month
limitation period therefore
would not provide an adequate opportunity for a refugee
to gain trust in the Australian complaints
and lodge a complaint. The Commission supports the
extension of the time limit to a period of two years.
It recognises
that the NIIC would still have the more
general discretions which it can apply if investigation
in all the circumstances is thought
not to be warranted.
Draft recommendation
Discretion not to investigate
Draft recommendation 8.7.
Each of the discretions contained
in s 24 of the Complaints Act should be available to
the NIIC although the time limit in s
24(1)(a) should
be extended to two years.
be subject to a complaint?
8.14 Complaints
may be made about 'action taken by an AFP appointee',
whether or not the AFP appointee is identified.
'AFP appointee' is defined as:
(a) a member of the Australian Federal Police; or
(b) a staff member of the Australian Federal Police;
(c) a special member of the Australian Federal Police.
The Commission considers that all AFP employees and
staff should come within the complaints system including
AFP temporary employees,
secondees and consultants
engaged by the AFP. Having all categories of staff
covered by the legislation reflects the reality
any staff member can be the subject of a complaint.
For example, complaints could cover unauthorised access
to information.
By ensuring that all staff are covered
by the complaints system the AFP will be encouraged
to take a wider view of the complaints
system than
merely regulating police powers.
For the purposes of the complaints legislation the
definition of an AFP appointee should be amended to
clearly cover consultants
and secondees.
'Collective
8.15 The current
approach focuses on individual police employees. Although
the Ombudsman can investigate a complaint which is
in substance 'about the practices and procedures of
the Australian Federal Police'
a complaint must still arise from the actions of an
individual AFP appointee. The Commission proposes that
the Act should clearly
indicate that collective action
by the AFP can also give rise to a complaint within
the Act. This would allow a greater focus
on organisational
deficiencies identified in complaints.
and scope of complaints legislation
8.16 The range
of NCA employees covered by the proposed NIIC Act is
dealt with in chapter 4.
Draft recommendations
Who may be subject to a complaint?
Draft recommendation 8.8.
All employees, temporary
employees, secondees and consultants of the AFP should
be covered by the complaints legislation.
Draft recommendation 8.9.
The Act should provide that
a complaint can be about the AFP as an organisation
or about the collective action of the AFP.
be able to complain?
8.17 The Complaints
Act does not clearly define who can make a complaint.
The Act provides that the Ombudsman may determine that
a complaint should not be investigated if the 'complainant
does not have a sufficient interest in the subject
matter of the
complaint'.
The practice of the Ombudsman is to accept complaints
made by individuals or organisations on behalf of the
person who is directly
affected by, or a witness to,
the conduct that gives rise to the complaint provided
there is some indication that the individual
has authorised the agent to make the complaint.
'Sufficient
8.18 The Act does
not define 'sufficient interest'. The term could be
applied broadly to include a member of the public with
personal knowledge of, or a special interest in, the
circumstances giving rise to a complaint, or narrowly
so as to be limited
to those directly affected by the
events giving rise to the complaint.
8.19 A broad test
of standing has the potential to increase the number
of complaints and it may increase access by Aborigines
and Torres Strait Islanders, youth and persons from
a non-English speaking background to the complaints
system if they can
complain through bodies such as
community legal centres. To ensure broad access to
the complaints system the legislation should
allow for complaints by agents and different bodies
on behalf of complainants.
There is no need, however, to define who these organisations
or individuals could be as to do so would curtail the
complainant to ask any person or organisation
to make the complaint on his or her behalf. The legislation
should provide that
groups or corporations may lodge
complaints as entities.
of authority
8.20 The Commission
is of the view that there is no need to specify that
an agent must have evidence of authority to act as
an agent. At present there is no requirement for proof
of authority and the Ombudsman is able to deal with
the matter in a common
sense way. If there is uncertainty
as to whether the complainant has authorised the person
or organisation lodging the complaint
to do so the
Ombudsman contacts the individual, or asks the person
lodging the complaint to provide written authorisation
requests the complainant to contact the Ombudsman.
Formalising the system of authorisation is likely to
lead to a more rigid
and complex system which may deter
complainants with low literacy skills and result in
less access to the system.
Draft recommendations
Who should be able to complain?
Draft recommendation 8.10.
The requirement of standing
should be open to any person or body with sufficient
interest. There is no need to define 'sufficient
more specifically. The legislation should specify that
organisations or corporate bodies may lodge a complaint
the same way as an individual.
Draft recommendation 8.11.
The legislation should expressly
allow complaints by organisations on behalf of individuals
but there is no need to specify the
organisations.
Draft recommendation 8.12.
The legislation should not
specify a requirement of proof for an agent to lodge
and proceed with a complaint.
anonymous complaints be accepted?
8.21 A complaint
to an AFP appointee can be made whether or not the
identity of the complainant is known to the member
who receives
the complaint.
The Act is silent concerning anonymous complaints
to the Ombudsman, but it appears they are accepted
subject to the Ombudsman's
discretion to determine
that a complaint should not be investigated if 'the
investigation, or further investigation, of that
is not warranted having regard to all the circumstances'.
There are no express provisions concerning anonymous
'allegations'. The Ombudsman's records show that the
following numbers of
anonymous complaints have been
In 1993/94, 7 anonymous complaints were received of
which 4 were investigated
In 1994/95, 8 anonymous complaints were received of
which 1 was investigated
From June 1995 to February 1996, 11 anonymous complaints
were received of which three have, or are in the process,
of being investigated.
The proportion of anonymous complaints for the years
1993/94 and 1994/95 is therefore less than 1.3% with
a much smaller proportion
of those anonymous complaints
being investigated.
8.22 Many complainants,
especially police officers, fear victimisation when
they make a complaint.
The opportunity to make anonymous complaints encourages
complaints to be made because complainants need not
fear retribution.
This promotes the legislative aim of ensuring the
disclosure of instances of police deviance, particularly
internal complaints
which are most likely to reveal
serious police misconduct.
The Ombudsman has stated that several serious complaints
have been lodged anonymously by AFP appointees which
upon investigation
have been found to have had substance.
8.23 During the
Commission's consultations some members of the AFP
objected to the fact that complaints could be made
anonymously.
They argued that this gave people the
opportunity to make malicious or false complaints without
fear of punishment. The Ombudsman's
Office has said
that in the case of anonymous complaints the Office
will often carry out some preliminary inquiries to
whether there is any likely substance in the complaint
and whether there is sufficient information to enable
the complaint to
be investigated. A full investigation
is usually only conducted when the answer to both of
these questions is in the affirmative.
The Ombudsman
has a discretion to decide that a complaint which lacks
proper substance ought not be investigated and the
supplied by the Ombudsman suggest this discretion
8.24 The Commission
considers that the very small number of anonymous complaints
which are actually investigated by the Ombudsman
year suggests that anonymous complaints are not being
used widely to victimise police. The Commission is
of the view that
anonymous complaints should continue
to be able to be accepted given that they have in the
past revealed serious misconduct and
that they provide
an avenue for complaint for police officers in particular
who may fear victimisation.
8.25 The NSW Police
Legislation Amendment Bill 1996 provides that the Ombudsman
should not investigate an anonymous complaint
of the opinion:
that the complaint appears to contain sufficient information
to enable an investigation to be carried out and
that the conduct which is the subject of the complaint
- if the conduct had occurred, provide reasonable grounds
to believe that a criminal offence had been committed
by a police officer,
- if a departmental charge were proved against a police
officer in relation to the conduct, warrant the imposition
of a substantial
punishment on the police officer.
The Commission considers that a similar provision should
be included in the AFP and NCA complaints legislation.
8.26 No particular
problems with anonymous complaints in relation to the
NCA have been brought to the Commission's attention.
The Commission's tentative view is that the same approach
should be adopted for the NCA as proposed for the AFP.
Draft recommendations
Should anonymous complaints be accepted?
Draft recommendation 8.13.
Anonymous complaints should
continue to be accepted. However, an anonymous complaint
should only be investigated where:
the complaint appears to contain sufficient information
to enable an investigation to be carried out and
the conduct which is the subject of the complaint if
it had occurred would constitute a criminal offence
or a disciplinary offence.
There is no need to specify that anonymous complaints
must be made to the NIIC.
Draft recommendation 8.14.
The NIIC does not require
a specific discretion not to investigate anonymous
complaints as the discretion to determine that investigation
is not warranted in all the circumstances is sufficient.
offences to achieve proper scope of complaints system
8.27 There are
a number of offences that can be used to help achieve
an appropriate balance between encouraging legitimate
but deterring or punishing false ones.
8.28 It is an offence
to make a false complaint under the Complaints Act.
However, proceedings for the offence cannot be brought
without the consent in writing of the Ombudsman or,
if the Ombudsman refuses
to consent, the Attorney-General.
The offence was introduced following a recommendation
of a Working Party consisting of the
AFP, the Commonwealth
Ombudsman and the federal Attorney-General's Department.
The Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional
Affairs also agreed with the introduction of the offence.
of the offence
8.29 There are
different views about the necessary width of the section
and the appropriate penalty. For example, the Northern
Territory Act
provides for an extremely broad offence of intentionally
creating a 'false impression' which would lead to the
investigation
of a complaint. However, the consent
of the Northern Territory DPP is required before the
charge may be laid. In Queensland,
it is also an offence
to make a frivolous or vexatious complaint to the Criminal
Justice Commission,
and if the offence is proven the offender may be ordered
to pay the costs of any investigation which is instituted.
In South Australia the false complaint offence includes
an offence of preventing a person from making a complaint.
Any prosecution is subject to the consent of the Police
Complaints Authority.
8.30 One view is
that the process for dealing with false or vexatious
complaints is necessary to ensure that the complaints
mechanism retains internal credibility.
The Ombudsman's view is that on balance there is probably
a place for such an offence but only with at least
the existing safeguards
in place. The Ombudsman still
has some concerns about the offence and whether it
acts as a deterrent.
8.31 The Commission
considers that the offence of a false complaint should
be retained in order to ensure a proper balance in
the system. The Commission proposes that the offence
should be amended to ensure that a court or tribunal
can award the costs
of any investigation into the false
complaint against any person found guilty of the offence.
The NIIC should monitor the way
in which complainants
and potential complainants are informed of the existence
of the offence by police so as to ensure that
of the offence is not used as a way of improperly
deterring people from making complaints.
8.32 The Commission
has received no specific submissions on the application
of this offence to the NCA. It is of the view however
that the offence should apply to false complaints concerning
Draft recommendation
False complaints
Draft recommendation 8.15.
The false complaints offence
should be retained but should be amended to allow a
court on conviction of a person to award the
of any investigation into the false complaint against
that person.
Victimisation
of complainants
8.33 The AFP Complaints
Working Party
recommended that there be an offence of victimisation.
The Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional
Affairs also
recommended that an offence of victimisation
be created to balance the proposed offence of false
In 1994 an offence of victimisation was inserted in
the Complaints Act as follows
s 88A. A person must not cause, or threaten to cause,
detriment to another person (the victim) on the ground
that the victim,
or any other person:
(a) has made or might make a complaint under this Act;
(b) has made or might give a document or other information
to a person under this Act.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 6 months.
8.34 The rationale
for the offence is clear. Complainants need to be encouraged
to come forward with grievances and to be made
that they are protected from possible victimisation
including threats of prosecution for making a false
complaint or
from civil action by a member against
whom the complaint is made.
The Commission is of the view that the offence of
victimisation should be retained. No submissions have
been received in relation
to the NCA and the availability
of this offence. The Commission considers that this
offence should also apply to matters arising
in relation
to the NCA.
Draft recommendation
Victimisation of complainants
Draft recommendation 8.16.
The offence of victimisation
should be retained under the NIIC Act and should apply
to complaints concerning the NCA.
substance of a complaint to another AFP member
8.35 It is an offence
for an AFP officer, staff member or person investigating
a complaint to divulge information supplied to
or acquired
by the AFP during the investigation of a complaint
except in the performance of his or her duties or with
the consent
in writing of the appropriate person. The
section does not prevent a person from disclosing information
in a production of a
report made under the Act or in
evidence before a court or disciplinary tribunal.
It is also an offence for the Ombudsman or her staff
to divulge or communicate information obtained in the
course of investigation
of a complaint.
8.36 These offences
are intended to protect the confidentiality of information
relating to complaints and their investigation.
there is an exception that allows the Commissioner
a discretion to disclose information to any person
or to the public
if in the opinion of the Commissioner
it is in the interests of the AFP or the public.
The AFP uses this discretion to disclose information
to supervisors and managers when patterns of complaints
appointees are detected by IID. This
information is now also taken into account when considering
dismissal or reappointment of
appointees.
8.37 The Ombudsman
has said that difficulties remain over how much information
should be disclosed for such purposes.
The Ombudsman is concerned that protection of the
complainant's right to complain may be curtailed if
complainants believe that
their personal details and
complaints could become widely known within the AFP.
There have also been cases where information
was disclosed
to operational areas of the AFP in order to investigate
the individual complainant. The Ombudsman argues that
this should only occur where there is overwhelming
public interest in that investigation as balanced against
the public interest
in protecting the integrity of
the complaints system.
8.38 According
to the Ombudsman the information required by the AFP
to supervise and manage appointees does not need to
information identifying the complainant. The
Ombudsman suggests that the secrecy provisions should
be redrafted to provide that
information relating to
appointees, including complaint investigation details,
should be available for prescribed purposes within
the AFP, but that personal information identifying
the complainant should not be disclosed without the
consent of the Ombudsman.
To protect the internal confidentiality
of the complaints process, secrecy provisions need
also apply to information obtained
by AFP appointees
as a result of a complaint investigation. This will
ensure that the integrity of the complaints system
protected and appointees are accountable.
and secrecy provisions
8.39 The Commission
is of the view that similar provisions should apply
to the NCA. The current secrecy provisions applying
to the NCA are discussed in chapter 4.
Draft recommendation
AFP and NCA secrecy provisions
Draft recommendation 8.17.
The secrecy provisions in
s 87 should be redrafted to ensure that information
relating to appointees does not need to include
information
identifying the complainant. The legislation should
provide that information relating to appointees, including
complaint investigation details, should be available
for defined purposes within the AFP as discussed above,
but that personal
information identifying the complainant
should not be disclosed without the consent of the
and encouragement of whistleblowers
8.40 Whistleblowers
are people in organisations who report corrupt, illegal,
fraudulent or harmful activity by the organisation
or members of it.
8.41 The first
whistleblowers legislation was passed in Queensland
in the form of
Whistleblowers (Interim Protection)
and Miscellaneous Amendments Act 1990
(Qld). This legislation
was primarily aimed at providing interim protection
for whistleblowers until fully fledged legislation
was passed. The next State to introduce whistleblower
legislation was South Australia with the passage of
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1993
(SA). Other
legislation passed includes the
Whistleblowers Protection
Protected Disclosures Act 1994
(NSW) and the
Public Interest Disclosure Act 1994
Western Australia has made some amendments to the
Corruption Commission Act 1988
(WA) and has thus provided
a degree of protection to whistleblowers in that State.
8.42 A Senate Select
Committee on Public Interest Whistleblowing issued
a report in August 1994 and recommended that Commonwealth
legislation should be passed establishing an independent
agency to be known as the Public Interest Disclosures
Agency (the
Agency). The role of the Agency would be
to receive public interest disclosures and arrange
for an appropriate authority to investigate
them. Other
functions would be to ensure the protection of people
making such disclosures, to provide a national education
program and to develop and oversee recommendations
relating to the Agency's role.
8.43 The Committee
recommended that the AFP be covered by the whistleblower
protection legislation. It also commented that there
appeared to be a lack of successful police force reform
to date and that additional education initiatives and
strategies should
be directed at whistleblower protection
in State and federal police services. Other recommendations
were directed at changing
community attitudes towards
whistleblowers and informing the public of the public
benefits flowing from whistleblowing.
8.44 On 1 December
1994 a further Senate Select Committee was established
to inquire into unresolved whistleblower cases. The
report of this Committee was tabled in October 1995.
A response by the previous government to the earlier
report was tabled
in Parliament on 26 October 1995.
The Government stated that it would introduce whistleblowing
legislation as part of its response
to the Gibbs committee's
recommendations
and as part of its response to the recommendations
of the Samuels' Commission of Inquiry into ASIS.
However, no further action was taken on introducing
whistleblowers legislation before the recent change
of government.
8.45 The NSW Royal
Commission into Police has highlighted the ethical
dilemmas and fears that many would-be whistleblowers
Whistleblowers must be encouraged and protected
and this is especially so in relation to organisations
like the AFP and the NCA
where there may be cultures
that victimise or intimidate whistleblowers.
Draft recommendation
Protection and encouragement of whistleblowers
Draft recommendation 8.18.
Legislation to protect and
encourage whistleblowers is necessary. Although legislation
covering all Commonwealth agencies would
be desirable
there is a pressing need for legislation that covers
the AFP and the NCA.
Parliamentary Commissioner for Administrative Investigations
Submission 4
; The Law Society of Western Australia
Submission 23
; Commonwealth Ombudsman
Submission 47
Commonwealth Attorney-General's Department
General Order 6, s 1.
Internal complaints (ie complaints made to an AFP appointee
by another AFP appointee) are excluded by s 6(4).
s 5(3). In s 3(3) action 'in relation to employment'
is defined to include action 'with respect to the promotion,
termination
of appointment or discipline of, or the
payment of remuneration to, AFP appointees'.
eg s 5, 22.
s 3(1). See: s 6(2) AFP Act: 'The
of the Australian
Federal Police are: (a) the Commissioner of Police;
and (b) a Deputy Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioners
of Police; and (c) senior executive commissioned police
officers; and (d) other commissioned police officers;
and (e) non-commissioned
police officers.'; s 6(3)
AFP Act: 'The
staff members
of the Australian Federal
Police are senior executive officers, and other officers
who are not police officers.'; s 27 AFP Act
special members
may be appointed by the Commissioner
of the AFP with such powers and duties as are specified
in the instrument of appointment.
[Italics supplied]
Commonwealth Ombudsman
Submission 47
s 23(1)(a).
T O'Gorman has suggested that public interest groups
should have standing to make a complaint: consultants'
meeting 7 September
1995. See also ALRC DP 61
sue? A review of the law of standing
s 88 (UK) which expressly allows for
complaints to be received and sent to the Police Complaints
Authority by various bodies.
Commonwealth Ombudsman
Submission 47
s 24(1)(d).
Commonwealth Ombudsman
Submission 47
This perception casts doubt on the effectiveness of
the victimisation offence in Complaints Act s 88A.
See generally A Goldsmith 'External Review and Self-Regulation:
Police Accountability and the Dialectic of Complaints
Procedures'
in A Goldsmith ed
Complaints Against the
Police. The Trend to External Review
Clarendon Press
Oxford 1991 20.
It should be noted that the incidence of anonymous
complaints does not appear to be high. For example,
research into complaints
against police in New South
Wales showed that less than 3% of complaints in 1990
and 1991 were anonymous: J Stubbs
Complaints Against
Police In New South Wales
New South Wales Bureau of
Crime Statistics and Research Attorney- General's Department
Sydney 1992 8-9.
Section 24(1)(d) allows the Ombudsman to determine
that a complaint not be investigated if in his/her
opinion the investigation
of the action is not warranted
having regard to all the circumstances.
s 19. The penalty is 20 penalty units. It is also an
offence to make a false statement to the Ombudsman:
Ombudsman Act
s 44 (20 penalty units).
Review of the Office of the Commonwealth Ombudsman
AGPS Canberra December 1991 .
Police Administration Act 1978 (NT)
Criminal Justice Act 1989
(Qld) s 136.
Criminal Justice Act 1989
(Qld) s 137.
Police (Complaints and Disciplinary Proceedings) Act
DP Smeaton, Executive Member, Commonwealth Law Enforcement
Submission 12
The Working Party consisted of the AFP, the Commonwealth
Ombudsman and the federal Attorney-General's Department.
The Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia. Report
by the Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional
Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Amendment
Senate Printing Unit Parliament House 1994
Canberra 7-13.
Parliamentary Commissioner for Administrative Investigations
Submission 18
Ombudsman Act
Submission 17
The Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law (the Gibbs
Committee) was set up in 1987 and released its final
report in December 1991.
In the course of its review
the Committee examined proposed reforms to the official
secrecy laws and examined whistleblowing
in this context.
See the Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law
December 1991 Parliamentary Paper No 371 of
See report of the Commission of Inquiry into the Australian
Secret Intelligence Service (Samuels' Commission) 1995.
9. Processing complaints
Introduction
Information
and advertising
Advertising
duty on the AFP to provide information
importance of recording complaints
should complaints be recorded?
to record a complaint
Introduction
9.1 This chapter
examines receiving and recording complaints and providing
information about the complaints systems.
9.2 The Complaints
Act does not specifically prescribe who may receive
a complaint. It is only when a complaint is lodged
the Ombudsman or an AFP appointee that the complaints
procedure under the Act is invoked.
9.3 The Commission's
view is that although complainants should be able to
ask any individual or group to lodge a complaint on
their behalf, it is not desirable to widen significantly
the range of places at which complaints can be lodged
formally. The
Commission proposes that complaints will
be regarded as formally lodged when they are lodged
with an AFP appointee, an NCA staff
member, the Commonwealth
Ombudsman or with the NIIC. The Ombudsman should be
retained as a lodgement point because of the fact
she has offices in all States and Territories apart
from Tasmania and because she has already built up
a public profile
in the community in relation to police
complaints. On receiving complaints the Ombudsman would
be obliged to forward them directly
to the NIIC. The
Commission also believes that the State and Territory
anti-discrimination bodies, ICAC, the CJC and the NSW
PIC as well other State and Territory external agencies
for handling police complaints might be possible reception
complaints against the AFP and the NCA.
The Commission invites comments on this suggestion.
Draft recommendations
Receiving complaints
Draft recommendation 9.1.
The legislation should specify
that complaints can be lodged with the NIIC, the Commonwealth
Ombudsman, the AFP, the NCA and
the NIIC. The complainant
would be able to nominate an agent to act on his or
her behalf.
Draft recommendation 9.2.
The legislation should specify
that complaints lodged with a Commonwealth Ombudsman's
office should be forwarded to the NIIC
within 48 hours
of receipt. Confidentiality obligations should also
Information
and advertising
Advertising
9.4 There is a need
for greater public accessibility to the AFP and NCA
complaints systems. Advertising and information strategies
should target those most likely to be unaware of the
system or who lack the confidence to use it. Campaigns
should be directed
towards youth, ethnic groups, women,
gays and lesbians, Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders
and the socially disadvantaged.
These campaigns should
be conducted in innovative and accessible ways. For
example, in targeting youth, the NIIC might consider
making itself available for interviews or providing
information that could be played on television or radio
programs that have
a large youth audience. Advertising
and information could be directed towards youth magazines
and newspapers as well as schools,
drop in centres,
sporting organisations, welfare organisations and other
venues that cater for a youth audience. The NIIC should
consult with youth workers and others working in the
field to ensure that its advertising campaigns are
run in ways that are
accessible to, and effective for,
targeted groups such as youth.
9.5 Information
for groups from non-English speaking backgrounds should
be directed towards the ethnic press and radio and
services which are used by ethnic groups. Information
for indigenous Australians could be disseminated through
ATSIC, the Aboriginal
Legal Service and through media
programs and information outlets delivering services
to indigenous Australians.
9.6 Information
could also be disseminated in appropriate places including
police stations, community legal centres and migrant
centres. There could be a complaints against police
'hotline' under the supervision of the Commissioner
for Complaints. The
Commissioner for Complaints should
employ an Aboriginal and Torres Straits Islander liaison
officer and should put in place outreach
programs to
with special needs. Each of these measures would involve
some additional resources but it should be recognised
that simply translating information into different
languages or providing
pamphlets will not ensure broad
access to the complaints system. Innovative campaigns
should also be conducted to target other
specific groups
such as women and the gay and lesbian community. Both
mainstream and alternative avenues should be explored
and the focus should be on both written and oral presentations
to ensure that those with literacy problems are not
from the information campaign.
Draft recommendations
Information and advertising
Draft recommendation 9.3.
The NIIC in consultation
with the Commonwealth Ombudsman should conduct advertising
and information campaigns in innovative and
ways targeting youth, women, gays and lesbians, Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islanders, people from non-English
speaking backgrounds and the socially disadvantaged.
The NIIC should ensure that its campaigns are conducted
both in written
and oral forms so that those with literacy
problems are not excluded.
Draft recommendation 9.4.
The Commissioner for Complaints
operate a hotline for complaints against the AFP and
have an Aboriginal and Torres Straits Islander liaison
officer and
should conduct outreach programs directed at specific
ethnic groups and other groups with special needs.
duty on the AFP to provide information
9.7 The Commission
asked in the issues paper whether there should be a
duty on police to inform a person about the complaints
system after any significant interaction with the police
or whether there should be a legislative requirement
that those interrogated
in police custody be advised
that they have a right to make a complaint.
9.8 The majority
of submissions which addressed these issues contended
that there should be not be a legislative requirement
on the police. Some submissions indicated that this
would be tantamount to inviting complaints while others
suggested that imposing
this requirement on police
would lead to a situation where police would provide
the information in such a way as to actively
potential complainants from taking up their complaints.
The Ombudsman, on the other hand, thought that there
some merit in this proposal.
9.9 The Commission
considers that it is not practical to place a duty
on police to inform a person about the complaints system
after any significant interaction with the police.
This would be lead to complex debate about what constituted
a significant
interaction. However, the Commission
does support an obligation on police to inform a person
under arrest of the existence of
the complaints process.
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) which deals with
the obligations of police when investigating a Commonwealth
crime should be amended to provide this duty.
The Commission
is of the view that it is essential for people to know
as crucial as other rights during the investigative
process. There is a significant problem with people
being unaware of their
right to complain or being directly
or indirectly intimidated or deterred from making a
legitimate complaint. This proposal of
a legislative
duty would ensure that people under arrest would be
properly informed of their rights. It would be a positive
reinforcement of the independence and effectiveness
of the complaints system. Taping or video-recording
of interviews would
allow the method and manner of
the provision of the information by the police to be
monitored so as to avoid intimidation of
complainants.
importance of recording complaints
9.10 There is considerable
evidence that police may under-record complaints.
This is often due to an antagonistic or defensive
attitude towards the complaints system. Under-recording
of complaints may be
reduced by changing the police's
perception and culture.
should complaints be recorded?
9.11 Currently
the Act requires various particulars of complaints
which are referred to the IID to be recorded.
The particulars that must be recorded are set out
in the Complaints Regulations and include:
the names of the complainant, the AFP appointee who
is the subject of the complaint, the AFP appointee
to whom the complaint was
made (if applicable) and
the investigator
the dates of the making of the complaint or the referral
from (or to) the Ombudsman (as applicable) and of any
referral from the
Disciplinary Tribunal to the Commissioner
for further investigation
a description of the substance of the complaint
the details and outcome of any charge.
9.12 More limited
recording requirements are imposed on the Ombudsman.
There are also annual reporting requirements placed
and the Ombudsman
concerning police complaints. The specific requirements
for annual statistics include details of the total
number and different
of complaints which were substantiated, unable to be
substantiated, not substantiated or withdrawn,
number of complaints in which the complainant and AFP
appointee were reconciled and the number that were
determined should
not be investigated.
Other useful information could be obtained for assessing
the operations of the complaints system or of the police.
9.13 The issues
paper asked whether there should be a requirement to
record more comprehensive details about the complainant
the complainant's sex
whether the complainant is a juvenile
the language spoken at home
the ethnicity of a complainant
whether the complainant is Aboriginal
whether the complainant is disabled.
9.14 A number of
submissions and those who were consulted suggested
that such information if it is to be accurate must
be collected
from the complainant. Requests for this
information might cause complainants to feel discriminated
against or threatened. The
Ombudsman submitted that
her office was currently exploring how to obtain useful
data about ethnicity and other demographic data
discouraging complainants by asking intrusive questions.
The Ombudsman believed that other methods such as surveys
were preferable ways of obtaining this information.
The Commission considers that at the very least the
collection of such information
should be voluntary
and this should be explained to the complainant along
with an explanation of the reason why the information
is collected and any persons or agencies to whom the
information might be disclosed.
9.15 The Commission
also suggested in the issues paper that it might be
useful to record more comprehensive details about the
AFP appointee who is the subject of the complaint.
At present, only the name, rank and number of the member
must be recorded.
The Ombudsman has questioned whether it is useful
to prescribe legislatively any further details than
those above as she believes
the categories under which
it is important to record details will change over
time. The Federal Privacy Commissioner has submitted
that deriving further details about AFP appointees
from existing personnel records would be likely to
fall under Information
so long as the use of such information was confined
to internal management purposes within the agency concerned.
However, as
the use of the information for this purpose
would not have been envisaged at the time when the
information was collected the
Commissioner thought
it would be wise to consult with staff first as not
to do so could discourage staff from providing such
data in future. At the same time any use of such data
would need to be carefully monitored to ensure that
officers or staff
could not be identified despite not
being named.
9.16 The Commission
proposes that no further details for complainants,
appointees or the complaint itself should be specified
in the legislation as it would be making the process
too rigid when what is necessary is targeted research.
A legislative requirement
of more detailed information
in every case would create delays and additional costs
and would also run the risk of intimidating
complainants.
If the NIIC as part of its research function wanted
further information about complainants and AFP or NCA
it should conduct such research on a voluntary
basis and by other means such as surveys.
to record a complaint
9.17 The issues
paper asked whether there should be a specific criminal
or disciplinary offence of failing to record a complaint.
Failure to record a complaint can already constitute
a disciplinary offence under the broad provisions of
AFP General Order
5. The Commission considers that
specific offences are desirable. The recording of complaints
constitutes a fundamental part
of an effective and
fair complaints system. A failure to record obstructs
the whole process. It may frustrate potential complainants,
allow police who have misconducted themselves to escape
detection and appropriate sanction and it may contribute
to a misleading
picture of the performance of the law
enforcement agency. Under-recording of complaints is
a significant problem that must be
addressed. The Commission
proposes that a deliberate failure to record a complaint
should be a criminal offence while a negligent
or careless
failure to record a complaint should be a specific
disciplinary offence.
Draft recommendations
Recording complaints
Draft recommendation 9.5.
There should be a legislative
duty on police to inform persons under arrest of the
existence of the complaints process. Part
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) should be amended to include
Draft recommendation 9.6.
The recording of complaints
by the appropriate officer should be a legislative
requirement. A deliberate failure to record a
should be a criminal offence, while a negligent or
careless failure to record a complaint should be a
specific disciplinary
A Goldsmith ' External Review and Self-Regulation:
Police Accountability and the Dialectic of Police Complaints
Procedures' in
A Goldsmith ed
Complaints Against the
Police. The Trend to External Review
Clarendon Press
Oxford 1991 22
Complaints Regulations reg 4(1).
s 43, Complaints Regulations reg 6.
See Complaints Regulations reg 4(2), 5.
This observation was made in respect of the NSW complaints
system, J Stubbs consultants' meeting 7 September 1995
and see J Stubbs
Complaints against the Police in New
South Wales
NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research
Sydney 1992 5-6.
Complaints Regulations reg 4(1)(b), 6(a)(ii) .
Information Privacy Principle 10 deals with limits
on the use of personal information and provides that
a record keeper who has
records containing personal
information obtained for a particular purpose shall
not use the information obtained for other purposes
unless the individuals involved have consented, it
is authorised by law or it is necessary for enforcement
of a criminal law
or other law. Other situations where
the information could be used are where the record
keeper believes on reasonable grounds
that the information
is necessary to prevent or lessen a serious or imminent
threat to the life or health of an individual or
purpose for which the information is used is directly
related to the purpose for which the information was
10. The territories
Introduction
external territories
Accessibility
for AFP personnel
Translating
and interpreting services
Introduction
10.1 This chapter
discusses special issues that arise in relation to
complaints systems for the ACT, Jervis Bay and the
territories. The AFP has a community policing
role in each of these territories.
10.2 Under the
Administrative Arrangements Order the federal Attorney-General
has responsibility for the AFP Act and the Complaints
and the Minister for Justice has portfolio responsibility
for the AFP. The ACT Attorney-General has pointed out
that despite
these arrangements the ACT community views
the ACT Attorney-General as the responsible minister
in regard to community policing
and the complaints
process. The ACT Attorney-General would like to see
the AFP complaints legislation amended so that complaints
that raise issues about policy and practices are notified
to him so that those broader issues can be dealt with
as separate
matters. The ACT Standing Committee on
Legal Affairs has recommended that legislation or procedures
be developed to allow the
ACT Attorney-General to have
an appropriate level of input into the handling of
complaints against police and that the legislation
be amended to enable, where appropriate, the Commonwealth
Ombudsman to make recommendations to the ACT Police
Commissioner
and the Chief Minister of the ACT.
10.3 The Ombudsman
in her submission recognised the need for information
to be provided to the ACT Government but argued that
the provision of information should not disclose personal
details of the complainant. The Ombudsman also considered
that rather
than providing the ACT Government with
information on all complaints that relate to ACT policing
it would be more useful to provide
information about
complaints trends and special briefings on particular
matters of significant concern to the ACT Attorney-General
or the ACT public. The AFP agreed that the Complaints
Act should be amended to allow for information concerning
relevant complaints
to be passed to the ACT Attorney-General.
10.4 The Commission
considers that it is important for the ACT Government
to have clear and timely access to information about
policing matters and complaints that arise in the ACT
or that affect the ACT. This is appropriate because
the ACT provides
funding for the service and because
the ACT community looks to the ACT government to take
responsibility for policing issues.
Any information
provided should be subject to privacy considerations
particularly in relation to complainants and operational
Draft recommendations
Draft recommendation 10.1.
The NIIC Act should allow
the AFP or the NIIC to make recommendations or to report
to the ACT Chief Minister and the Legislative
where the complaint or matter relates to ACT policing
(subject to privacy considerations).
Draft recommendation 10.2.
A protocol should be established
for allowing the ACT Chief Minister or ACT Attorney-General
to be advised as soon as practicable
by the AFP or
the NIIC of any complaint about ACT policing that raises
significant public interest for the ACT ( subject to
Draft recommendation 10.3.
Information and analysis
provided annually by the AFP and the NIIC to the
Chief Minister, ACT Attorney-General and the Legislative
10.5 The main issues
in relation to Jervis Bay are lack of community awareness
alternative to lodging complaints with the AFP. Both
the AFP and the Jervis Bay Administration have already
to increase public awareness of the complaints
system by use of pamphlets. The AFP also intends to
give occasional presentations
on the complaints system
to community meetings. The Commission's consultations
in Jervis Bay and the submission from the Department
of the Environment, Sport and Territories (DEST) suggest
that there may be some people who would be reluctant
to lodge a complaint
with the local AFP given the closeness
of the small community. The Commission was told that
people were likely to take the view
that because the
complaint would be investigated by other AFP police
it was not worthwhile jeopardising personal and sometimes
professional relationships by making a complaint. The
physical isolation of the territory from Canberra also
makes it difficult
to lodge a complaint with the Ombudsman
or AFP officers other than those in Jervis Bay.
10.6 The Commission
considers that the NIIC should arrange with DEST for
the Jervis Bay Territory Administration to be a receiving
point for complaints about the AFP. It should be able
to provide information to complainants about the complaints
process and
how to contact the NIIC. It should have
available information leaflets about the complaints
10.7 DEST pointed
out that unlike the AFP arrangements with the external
territories there is no formal agreement or memorandum
of understanding with the AFP in relation to Jervis
Bay. The Commission considers that a formal agreement
would be useful.
10.8 The relationship
between the AFP and the local Aboriginal community
is discussed in chapter 11.
Draft recommendations
Draft recommendation 10.4.
The NIIC should arrange
with the Department of the Environment, Sport and Territories
for the Jervis Bay Territory administration
to receive complaints on its behalf about the AFP.
It should be able to provide information to complainants
the complaints process and how to contact the
NIIC. It should have available information leaflets
Draft recommendation 10.5.
The AFP should enter into
a memorandum of understanding with the Department of
the Environment, Sport and Territories in relation
to the policing of Jervis Bay.
external territories
10.9 Submissions
and consultations have identified the following as
major issues to examine in respect of the complaints
on Norfolk Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands and
Christmas Island:
accessibility
training for AFP personnel
translating and interpreting services
Accessibility
10.10 The Commission's
consultations on Norfolk Island indicate that there
is very little understanding of the existing complaints
system and the role that the Ombudsman plays in the
10.11 Lack of
accessibility is also likely to a significant problem
on the Cocos (Keeling) Islands and Christmas Island.
fact it may be a greater problem on those islands
because of their diverse cultural backgrounds. The
population of Christmas
Island is drawn from Singapore,
Malaysia and the Cocos (Keeling) Islands. There are
three main languages spoken, English, Malay
and Chinese,
with a number of different dialects.
Two of the main islands of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands
are inhabited; West by about 200 Commonwealth and private
sector employees
and their families and Home by about
400 members of the Cocos Malay community.
10.12 Each of
the three external territories is geographically isolated.
None has any direct link with the Commonwealth Ombudsman's
offices. People on these islands may be reluctant to
make a complaint directly to the local AFP because
of the smallness of
the community and the few AFP appointees
on the islands.
They could be concerned that their complaints would
not be fairly dealt with or kept confidential.
10.13 The AFP
has advised that its members in the external territories
have now been requested to initiate education programs
to bring the complaints process to the attention of
Draft recommendations
The external territories
Draft recommendation 10.6.
The NIIC should arrange
with the Department of the Environment, Sport and Territories
for the respective administrations of Christmas,
(Keeling) and Norfolk Islands to be able to receive
complaints about the AFP. Each should be able to provide
information
to complainants about the complaints process
and how to contact the NIIC. Each should have available
information leaflets about
the complaints system.
Draft recommendation 10.7.
The AFP in conjunction with
the NIIC should develop a policy for increasing awareness
of the complaints systems in the external
territories.
for AFP personnel
10.14 The AFP
advised that there is no specific cultural awareness
training for AFP members employed on the external territories
although cultural awareness and understanding of multi-cultural
issues, particularly for Christmas Island and Cocos
Islands, are included in selection criteria
for deployment. The AFP believes that it should do
more to prepare staff for working
in the external territories
and it is investigating the cultural awareness and
language training that the Department of Foreign
and Trade (DFAT) provides for its staff prior to overseas
deployment, with a view to supplementing its own training.
Draft recommendation
Training for AFP personnel
Draft recommendation 10.8.
The AFP should develop specific
training programs and induction packages for officers
who are to work on the external territories.
In developing
these measures it should consider consulting with the
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and the Department
of Environment, Sport and Territories.
Translating
and interpreting services
10.15 Cocos (Keeling)
and Christmas Islands have significant numbers of their
populations who are from non-English speaking backgrounds.
Translating and interpreting services are therefore
very important. One concern discussed in the issues
paper was the limited
use of the Translating and Interpreting
Service (TIS) on Christmas Island.
The AFP has submitted that because of legislative
requirements for the recording of interviews it had
not been equipped to use
TIS in the Christmas Island
police station for a period of time. Interviews where
TIS assistance was required were carried out
Administration's office to use its conference telephone
system. Suitable facilities have now been installed
in the police
10.16 The AFP
has advised that where it needs to interview a suspect
or victim and an interpreter is likely to be required
appear in court, the practice on Christmas Island
has been to enlist the services of local certified
interpreters if the interviewee
consents to this procedure.
Local certified interpreters are also engaged by the
Administration and the Shire Council.
10.17 The AFP
has indicated that there are a number of issues that
can arise in relation to translating and interpreting.
example is a situation where the services of a TIS
interpreter speaking a particular Chinese dialect and
the services of a Legal
Aid solicitor could not be
simultaneously obtained. Ultimately a local certified
interpreter was used but approximately eight
had elapsed from the time of the arrest until when
charges were laid.
10.18 The value
of TIS is limited in circumstances where a warrant
is to be executed and an interpreter is required to
the warrant to the person on whose premises
it is to be executed given the detail and complexity
of information contained in
considers that the preferable option is that interpreting
issues arising from search and seizure warrants
addressed by using local certified interpreters to
explain the nature and contents of the warrants and
the procedures involved.
10.19 The AFP
has stated that on Cocos (Keeling) Islands there are
a number of certified interpreters whose services are
by the police in addition to using TIS.
10.20 The Commission
has considered the issue of the use of interpreters
and translators more generally in chapter 11. It proposes
that the AFP and the NCA should try to ensure that
independent and appropriately trained and qualified
interpreters and translators
are used wherever there
is an issue of proper comprehension because of linguistic
reasons. This should especially be the case
interviews and statements.
Draft recommendation
Translating and interpreting services
Draft recommendation 10.9.
The AFP should develop a
policy in relation to the external territories for
the availability and use of independent and qualified
interpreters and translators. This policy should be
particularly focussed on Christmas Island and the Cocos
(Keeling) Islands.
However Part III of the Complaints Act which deals
with the responsibilities of the Ombudsman is the portfolio
responsibility
of the Department of Prime Minister
and Cabinet.
Australian Capital Territory. Standing Committee on
Legal Affairs
Future of Policing in the ACT No 1
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal
and Constitutional Affairs.
Islands in the Sun. The
Legal Regime of Australia's External Territories and
the Jervis Bay Territory AGPS
Canberra 1991.
The Cocos (Keeling) Islands have only one AFP appointee.
Issues paper para 11.17-20.
11. Groups who may have special needs
Introduction
EEO policy and grievance systems
EEO policies and grievance procedures
and Torres Strait Islanders
representation
legal issues facilitators
from non-English speaking backgrounds
prejudiced behaviour
and lesbians
of the system
from non-English speaking backgrounds
with disabilities
Introduction
11.1 This chapter
discusses groups in the community who may have special
needs in relation to complaints against the NCA and
the AFP. This includes Aborigines and Torres Strait
Islanders, women, youth, gays and lesbians, people
from non-English speaking
backgrounds and people with
disabilities.
11.2 The first
part of this chapter deals with AFP and NCA personnel
who are from these groups. The second part is concerned
with possible difficulties for members of these groups
external to these organisations.
Part 1 - Internal complaints
EEO policy and grievance systems
11.3 The Office
of the Status of Women (OSW) has submitted that the
Niland report
indicates that there is a degree of hostility within
the AFP towards the AFP's EEO program. The Office suggested
that this hostility
may arise from a misunderstanding
of the differences between EEO, the operation of the
merit system and affirmative action and
also reflect
some conservative aspects of police culture.
11.4 The OSW suggested
that the AFP's response to the Niland report was superficial
in relation to the EEO program and would not
necessarily
result in long term attitudinal change. OSW considers
that education of officers on the productivity and
benefits of an EEO program was essential to effect
these long term changes. The Commission agrees with
11.5 The AFP is
developing a new EEO program for the 1995-1998 period
in conjunction with the consultancy firm Carmel Niland
and Associates. The AFP has appointed a Workforce Equity
and Diversity Specialist who would be responsible for
implementing effective equity and diversity strategies
within the broader AFP organisational framework, including
through the
AFP recruitment strategy
developing and managing implementation processes and
procedures including awareness training programs
monitoring and evaluating outcomes to ensure that best
practice outcomes are achieved and maintained.
11.6 The AFP has
submitted that it is developing new 'best practice'
conflict resolution guidelines to maximise managerial
to handling complaints of harassment and
discrimination.
11.7 The Commission
notes that the AFP is making a concerted effort to
improve its internal culture and to promote an effective
EEO program in response to the Niland report. The Commission
believes that the AFP as it continues to develop its
program should
further consult with bodies with expertise
and experience such as the Office of the Status of
Women, ATSIC, the Department of
Immigration and Ethnic
Affairs and others concerned with equal opportunity
employment.
Draft recommendation
AFP's EEO policy and grievance systems
Draft recommendation 11.1.
Education of officers on
the benefits of an EEO program is essential to effect
the desired long term changes in AFP culture and
promote EEO. The AFP should consider consulting with
bodies with relevant expertise and experience such
as the Office of
the Status of Women as it continues
to develop its EEO program and grievance procedures.
EEO policies and grievance procedures
11.8 The NCA's
EEO policy and program are discussed in its most recent
Annual Report.
The Commission has received no information on the
NCA's EEO or access and equity strategies in response
to the questions asked
in the issues paper. The Commission
again invites comments on the effectiveness of the
current policies and any suggested changes.
The Commission invites comments on the effectiveness
of the NCA's current EEO program and its access and
strategy policies and
any suggested changes.
Part 2 - External complaints
and Torres Strait Islanders
11.9 The Ombudsman
submitted that in the past Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander communities have had little trust in the AFP
complaints system but recently there has been some
increase in complaints being lodged by members of indigenous
communities.
The Ombudsman thought it essential that
her office play a much greater role in supervising
or directly investigating complaints
as members of
indigenous communities were more likely to have faith
in the system if they were confident that their complaint
would be independently supervised or independently
investigated.
11.10 In the AFP
's view the relationship between the Aboriginal community
in the ACT and the AFP is good with AFP management
regularly liaising with Aboriginal leaders. AFP police
members are undergoing a second round of cultural awareness
Aboriginal cross-cultural awareness training
is provided by consultants
who aim to explore cultural awareness and encourage
non-racist attitudes. Members discuss information about
Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander culture and are
asked to explore attitudes and behaviours towards those
cultures and to reflect on their own
attitudes and
the formation of those attitudes.
11.11 The AFP
advised that the Wreck Bay Aboriginal Community in
Jervis Bay and those AFP members stationed at Jervis
a good working relationship. Meetings of
the officer in charge and the Wreck Bay Aboriginal
Community Council (WBACC) take place
on an informal
basis. The WBACC has indicated that it does not wish
for a more formal liaison committee at this stage.
11.12 The Commission
held meetings in Jervis Bay and invited comments from
members of the community. The consultations indicate
that there are no special difficulties in the relationship
between the AFP and the Aboriginal community. The Commission
understands
that the AFP is considering appointing
an Aboriginal liaison officer for the area. This would
be a useful measure. The Wreck
Bay community should
be consulted about the position and the necessary background
and skills of the person. The AFP should continue
ensure that any AFP officer who is to work in Jervis
Bay has undergone the cross cultural awareness training
and can demonstrate
an understanding of its principles
and a capacity to act accordingly. The AFP should also
consider the appointment of Aboriginal
officers in
the area given the significant Aboriginal population.
That decision would also need to take into account
suitability
and operational requirements.
representation
11.13 The Royal
Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody recommended
that in the adjudication of complaints made by or on
behalf of Aboriginal persons one member of the review
or adjudication panel should be an Aboriginal person
nominated by an
appropriate Aboriginal organisation(s)
in the State or Territory in which the complaint arose.
It also suggested that the panel
should also contain
a person nominated by the Police Union or similar body.
11.14 The Ombudsman
has suggested that this recommendation would create
a number of significant difficulties. There may be
considerable
problems in finding an Aboriginal person
acceptable to a wide cross section of the indigenous
communities. There would also be
a likelihood of polarisation
between the Aboriginal representative and the AFP Union
representative leading to the body being
unproductive.
Such an approach might also alienate other members
of the community who might question why one group apparently
receives special treatment.
11.15 The Commission
considers that it is preferable to develop a clearly
independent complaints body and to ensure that decision
makers on that body have effective cross cultural awareness
training. The NIIC as the proposed primary investigatory
body should
develop its own awareness programs and
strategies particularly for those who deal with complaints.
The NIIC should also employ
an Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander liaison and support officer to assist,
where appropriate, Aboriginal or Torres Strait
complainants. The officer should help to publicise
the complaints system amongst Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander
communities. In chapter 6 the Commission
proposed that the AAT should review disciplinary decisions
made by the AFP and the NCA.
The AAT has developed
cross-cultural awareness training and access and equity
strategies.
legal issues facilitators
11.16 There is
a community legal issues facilitator project running
in Nova Scotia, Canada which provides a service of
resources and support to the local Aboriginal
community and the criminal justice agencies in Nova
Scotia. The facilitators work
in conjunction with Aboriginal
clients and criminal justice agencies to create a good
working relationship and mutual understanding.
case of a complaint against the police a facilitator
usually makes contact with the Aboriginal client and
filing a complaint with the Complaints Division
of the Police. The facilitator may also accompany the
client to file the complaint
and be present when interviewing
occurs. The final police investigative report is usually
given to the facilitator to explain
to the complainant
the outcome and if necessary give advice and assistance
in relation to the appeal process. The Commission
comment on whether a similar scheme should be trialled
in Australia.
Draft recommendations
Complaints by Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders
Draft recommendation 11.2.
Decision-makers in the AFP
and NCA complaints and disciplinary systems should
have effective cross-cultural awareness training.
NIIC as the proposed primary external agency should
also develop its own cross-cultural programs and strategies,
particularly
for those who deal with complaints.
Draft recommendation 11.3.
The NIIC should have an
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander liaison and support
officer in relation to assisting, where appropriate,
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander complainants.
The officer should also assist in helping to publicise
the programs amongst
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
communities.
Draft recommendation 11.4.
The NIIC should establish
links with relevant bodies concerned with Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander interests.
from non-English speaking backgrounds
11.17 The National
Police Ethnic Advisory Bureau submitted that the existing
legislative provisions in relation to interpreters
are flawed in that they place an onus on investigating
officials to determine whether a person can communicate
fluently in
English. The Bureau argues that the issue
should not be whether the person is fluent in English
but should be the right of all
people to be understood
and to understand the nature of any interaction with
police. The Bureau believes that this can be achieved
if the AFP and the NCA strive to ensure that an independent,
professionally trained and if possible accredited interpreter/translator
will be engaged in circumstances involving police interaction
with people from ethnic communities requiring interpreting/translating
assistance.
11.18 The Bureau's
view is that the AFP and NCA should engage on site
interpreters or interpreters by means of the telephone
using the Translating and Interpreting Service (TIS)
in the following circumstances:
if the client makes a request for an interpreter/translator
if a police member deems it necessary to engage the
services of an interpreter/translator.
11.19 The Bureau
stated that while it supported the use of in-house
linguistic skills in general interaction with people
non-English speaking backgrounds it was inappropriate
and undesirable to use in-house linguistic skills in
criminal investigations
or other matters likely to
result in court proceedings. The Department of Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs also submitted that
friends or relatives
or witnesses to an incident should not be used as interpreters
for any official interview or provision of
statements.
11.20 The Bureau
also argued that it was vital to ensure that people
who came to Australia understood the role and services
of police in Australia. By decreasing their fear of
police, they would be more likely to participate in
police/community oriented
programs and to make complaints
delivery strategies should include ethnic
electronic media and talks at ethnic community venues
including Migrant Resource Centres and Adult Migrant
Centres. The Bureau also suggested that complainants
should regularly be kept informed of the progress of
investigations either
in writing or orally and that
preferably this should be done in the complainant's
Draft recommendations
People from non-English speaking backgrounds
Draft recommendation 11.5.
The AFP and the NCA should
try to ensure that independent and appropriately trained
and qualified interpreters and translators
wherever there is an issue of proper comprehension
because of linguistic reasons. This should be especially
for formal interviews and statements.
Draft recommendation 11.6.
Information delivery strategies
should include ethnic print and electronic media and
talks at ethnic community venues. Complainants
regularly be informed of the progress of investigations
and outcomes either in writing or orally. Preferably
this should
be done in the complainant's language.
prejudiced behaviour
11.21 Some submissions
addressed the question raised in the issues paper of
whether there should be a disciplinary offence of
prejudiced behaviour. The Attorney-General's Department
suggested that racially prejudiced behaviour was already
by regulation 18 of the existing discipline
regulations, but that the inclusion of such a specific
offence might have merit in
that it would have educative
value. Others who thought the offence might have educative
value were the Ombudsman, the Department
of Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs and the National Police Ethnic Advisory
11.22 The Commission
does not support the introduction of a specific new
proceeding against racially prejudiced behaviour. While
such a proceeding might have some educative value,
the key task is to improve internal culture and attitudes
so that improper
behaviour does not occur in the first
place. There is already a widely held view that the
disciplinary system is overly regulated
and complex
and that new proceedings will only add to that concern.
For those cases where disciplinary action is appropriate
then there is scope under the current proceedings to
take action.
Draft recommendation
Racially prejudiced behaviour
Draft recommendation 11.7.
There should be no specific
proceeding against racially prejudiced behaviour.
Gays and lesbians
11.23 The ACT
Gay & Lesbian Anti-Violence Project (the Project)
and the AFP are currently working together to reduce
amongst the community in accessing police services.
There are two gay and lesbian liaison officers and
community workshops have
been conducted by the AFP
addressing such issues as reporting processes, client
rights and delivery of service complaints about
AFP. There is also a public relations media campaign
and regular liaison with leaders in the gay and lesbian
11.24 The Project
believes that the introduction of the gay and lesbian
liaison officers will encourage lesbians and gays to
utilise police services including the complaints system.
11.25 The Ombudsman
has submitted that there have been several complaints
over the past few years which indicated antipathy towards
gays by AFP officers and at least one substantiated
case of abuse of a gay person by an AFP officer. The
Ombudsman argued that
greater supervision and independent
investigation in serious cases and a change in the
attitude of AFP appointees when dealing
with gays and
lesbians would encourage greater use of the system.
Training and other measures directed towards promoting
of others should be instituted within the
11.26 The Beat
Outreach Project Co-ordinator of the ACT Aids Action
Council (the Council) submitted that while the AFP
public duty to act on complaints concerning 'beats',
anecdotal reports had indicated that in the course
of these duties officers had sometimes used extreme
methods of investigation
such as spotlighting of individuals
in the vicinity of beats. The Council advised that
in September 1995 the NSW Police Commissioner
a circular to all officers in regard to policing beats,
stipulating police protocol and conduct in matters
covert operations, entrapment and patrol commanders'
responsibilities. The Council suggested that a formal
police policy regarding
the policing of beats in the
ACT could lead to an improvement for beat users in
their relations with police and a more co-operative
atmosphere for outreach activities. It suggested that
a beat policy should ensure that the first priority
of beat policing
should be preventing violence and
that plain-clothed police should only be deployed at
beats as a last resort.
Draft recommendations
Gays and lesbians
Draft recommendation 11.8.
The AFP should develop a
formal policy for the policing of beats and should
consider the policy developed by the NSW Police Service.
Draft recommendation 11.9.
The AFP should provide training
to all members and staff members to encourage attitudes
of acceptance of gays and lesbians within
the workplace.
Draft recommendation 11.10.
The AFP's policies and
performance on these issues should be monitored and
examined in consultation with relevant interest groups.
11.27 A major
issue for women in relation to complaints against the
police arises in relation to domestic violence cases.
AFP submitted that in the ACT region, police respond
to incidents of domestic violence as a matter of priority
as these disturbances
are considered to be potentially
life threatening situations. The primary role of police
upon attendance is to prevent violence
and to defuse
hostility. The AFP regularly liaise with the ACT Domestic
Violence Crisis Centre and is developing an AFP strategy
on domestic violence in the ACT. The Police Regional
Instructions in relation to handling domestic violence
cases are also
under review.
11.28 The Office
of the Status of Women has submitted that police need
to be clear about their law enforcement role and not
to confuse this with a conciliator role which might
minimise the seriousness of the violence and may jeopardise
the safety of
the victim. The Office believes that
training should be given to all new recruits and refresher
training to all officers at appropriate
The content of that training should be consistent with
the guidelines of the National Committee on Violence
Women and the National Strategy on Violence
Against Women. The Office also submitted that a specialist
domestic violence unit
is a way of ensuring a consistent
approach through policy and training and monitoring
police practice. Police should have clear
on charging and on their powers of arrest where a criminal
offence has occurred.
11.29 Similar
recommendations have been made in the ACT Community
Law Reform Committee's recent report into domestic
The Committee stated that many submissions
to it criticised police for failing to charge in domestic
violence cases where the
police had reasonable grounds
to believe that a criminal offence had occurred. In
response to these submissions the Committee
number of recommendations including
police regional instructions should direct police to
charge where police have reasonable grounds to believe
that a criminal offence
has occurred in the context
of domestic violence
the regional instructions should specify that the practice
of referring the victim to a service to obtain a domestic
protection order or a restraining order as
a substitute for charging is unsatisfactory and unprofessional.
The Committee also recommended that the decision about
whether to charge should be made by the police and
not by the victim. Both
victim and offender should
be told that the police will decide whether to charge.
11.30 The Committee
agreed with the AFP that it would be impractical to
create a domestic violence unit to deal with all domestic
violence cases because domestic violence constitutes
such a large proportion of police work in the ACT.
However, the Committee
recommended that there should
be a specialist domestic violence unit to:
drive and monitor the implementation by police of the
ACT Domestic Violence Strategy
provide support and advice to other police on domestic
violence matters
monitor the quality of domestic violence response by
liaise with external agencies and victims
undertake police domestic violence training
undertake law reform activity
co-ordinate police community education initiatives.
Other recommendations made by the Committee included
the need for a Domestic Violence Liaison Officer within
the Unit, the need
for new instructions on exercising
the power to arrest and to grant bail, and on the timing
and content of training for police
on domestic violence.
of the system
11.31 Another
issue is the level of knowledge of women about the
complaints system. The Ombudsman submitted that although
survey material was not specifically directed towards
the AFP complaints system it would suggest that generally
women from disadvantaged
groups or from non-English
speaking backgrounds are least likely to be aware of
the right to complain. The Ombudsman indicated
in 1994-95 the number of complaints made against the
AFP by women was 189 (29%) compared to 371 (57%) by
men. Ninety two
(14%) were not identified.
11.32 The Ombudsman
submitted that the need to ensure that interpreters
are used when required is particularly important to
women of non-English speaking backgrounds who may have
had fewer opportunities to develop English language
skills than men in
their communities. According to
the Ombudsman there is also a need to ensure that female
investigators are available where complaints
allegations of domestic violence, sexual slurs, harassment
or sexual assault. This was essential in the first
11.33 Complaints
arising from alleged sexual assault is another issue
to consider. The AFP submitted that the ACT Region
Assault Unit is staffed by highly trained personnel
with specialist skills and knowledge. This Unit has
made the welfare of sexual
assault victims a matter
of paramount importance and its staff regularly liaise
with agencies such as the Rape Crisis Centre.
is isolated from the rest of the police environment
so that sexual assault victims are given greater privacy
and anonymity.
11.34 The Coalition
Against Police Violence has submitted that unwarranted
strip searches conducted by the police, constitute
sexual assaults and that it is important for police
complaints systems to treat the use of unwarranted
strip searches as a
serious matter. The Third National
Conference on Women's Health held in Canberra and the
Taking Legal Action Against Sexual Assault
held in Melbourne
have endorsed the view that strip searches are a sexual
assault. Currently the legislation covering searches
at the federal level
is found in the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) as amended by the
Crimes (Search Warrants and
Powers of Arrest ) Amendment Act 1994
(Cth). The legislation
defines the conditions under which strip searches may
be conducted and the Commission seeks comment on
failure by police to abide by these conditions.
The Commission seeks comments on the AFP response in
relation to complaints arising from domestic violence
and sexual assault.
It also seeks comments on compliance
with the conditions for strip searches conducted by
the AFP under the
Crimes Act 1914
11.35 The issues
paper asked questions about the relationship between
the AFP and youth. Very few submissions addressed these
matters. The Children's Interests Bureau (SA) submitted
that children affected by disputed orders of the Family
Court deserved
special attention and sensitivity in
the way that volatile situations are managed. The Bureau
stated that it was aware that young
people were reluctant
to register complaints and were generally unaware of
appeal mechanisms.
11.36 The Commission
in conjunction with the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission is currently conducting an inquiry
children and the legal process. As part of this inquiry
the Commissions have held consultations in Canberra
and conducted
youth focus groups. Comments made in
the ACT focus groups support the suggestion in the
issues paper that there are problems
in the relationship
between youth and the AFP in the ACT. Examples of the
complaints made at the focus groups were that:
Children, particularly teenagers, are regularly hassled
by the police. Police are often very aggressive towards
them and abuse
their power. Young people are stereotyped
by the police as trouble makers.
The appearance of youth is very important in young
people's interaction with the AFP - for example, skateboard
riders and those
who wear distinctive clothes such
as baseball caps turned backwards are common targets
of intimidation because of their appearance.
The attitude of young people is also important - for
example, they will get into more trouble if they are
seen as rude by the
police. There is the occasional
Police don't give kids a fair go in interviews. Kids
allege they have been bashed while in custody but cops
always stick together
so there is no point in complaining
Police don't caution young people enough.
The Commission considers that these comments and, in
particular, the frequency with which they are expressed,
are a matter for
concern. The Commission intends to
give further consideration to these issues in the context
of its inquiry into children and
the legal process.
However, for the purposes of this inquiry, areas of
concern are the perceptions of AFP officers about youth
and the distrust that youth have in the police and
the complaints system. The existence of these perceptions
means that the
NIIC should be particularly sensitive
to the requirements of youth in a complaints system.
The Commission seeks further comments
on AFP and youth
from non-English speaking backgrounds
11.37 On 7-9 July
1995 the first national summit on police and ethnic
youth relations was held. The summit was an initiative
of the National Police Ethnic Advisory Bureau and a
range of departments and community groups working with
youth. Recommendations
arising from the summit were
the Bureau establish a Working Party of representatives
of young people and peak youth advocates to monitor
the implementation
of the Summit recommendations
the Bureau recommend to the Conference of Commissioners
of Police the development and implementation of a national,
strategy on police and ethnic youth relations
the Bureau seek funding from suitable sources such
as the Office of Multicultural Affairs, the Australian
Multicultural Foundation,
the Department of Employment
Education and Training and the Department of Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs to conduct a national
audit of best
practice strategies on police and ethnic youth relations
the Bureau seek endorsement from police commissioners
and take up with State and Territory police services
the development of
an anti-racism policy, more effective
methods of data collection on ethnic youth demographics
and a re-examination of training
and recruitment
State and Territory police services, particularly ethnic
affairs units, expand joint police-community initiatives
such as youth
and community consultations, school programs
and other outreach activities
the Bureau, State and Territory ethnic affairs units,
youth advocates and young people themselves consider
the development of
a joint project with the media industry
and unions which helps to foster more positive images
of police and youth and their relations
police, local government, housing, community services,
the community sector and other relevant agencies establish
inter-departmental
committees at the State and Territory
level on police and ethnic youth relations
State and Territory justice departments provide on-going
funding for legal services for young people, in particular,
ethnic young
people, to provide effective information
and advice on legal rights
the Bureau recommend to police commissioners and each
State and Territory police service that they establish
an independent complaints
mechanism for handling complaints
from young people
youth delegates attending the First National Summit
on Police and Ethnic Youth Relations form a Youth Network
to support and resource
their work at the local level
and in particular to share information and ideas.
11.38 The Commission
generally endorses these recommendations as a worthwhile
step in establishing a national strategy and suggests
that the AFP should consider these initiatives and
participate as appropriate.
Draft recommendations
Draft recommendation 11.11.
The Commission endorses
the recommendations of the first national summit on
police and ethnic youth relations and suggests that
the AFP should consider these initiatives and participate
as appropriate.
The AFP and NIIC should also consult with peak youth
organisations on appropriate methods of providing information
and education
with disabilities
Discrimination Act 1992
(Cth) (DDA) makes it unlawful
to discriminate against people on the basis of disability
in a broad range of activities, particularly
areas of employment, access to goods, services and
facilities, access to premises used by the public and
the administration
of Commonwealth laws and programs.
The phrase 'people with intellectual and physical disabilities'
does not cover the full range
of disabilities covered
by the DDA. The definition of 'disability' under the
Act is very broad and includes physical, sensory,
intellectual,
learning and psychiatric disabilities as well as physical
disfigurement. Any policy on the response to people
with a disability should use the definition of disability
provided for under the Act.
11.40 The Disability
Commissioner has submitted that the DDA exemption for
disability discrimination when it is the result of
direct compliance with a prescribed law such as statutory
medical requirements ended on 1 March 1996 thus requiring
to consider the full range of employment issues
including recruitment. The AFP must ensure that people
with disabilities have
equal access to the AFP's services
and to the laws and programs administered by the AFP.
11.41 The Disability
Commissioner also submitted that any recruiting strategy
or testing of staff, for example, psychological
should comply with the provisions of the DDA.
11.42 According
to the Disability Commissioner any information strategy
must overcome barriers which are common to people with
disabilities. Examples of measures which can be used
providing information in Braille, audiotape or computer
disk formats
advertising through newsletters produced by disability
providing Teletypewriter (TTY) numbers for any hotline
and advertising on
Radio for the Print Handicapped
Draft recommendations
People with disabilities
Draft recommendation 11.12.
The AFP and NCA should
seek advice from peak disability organisations in developing
a comprehensive policy to meet their obligations
the Discrimination Disability Act (DDA), particularly
in relation to recruitment, conditions of employment
and provision
of services.
Draft recommendation 11.13.
Any AFP or NCA policies
dealing with the provision of services to people with
a disability should be based on the definition
of disability
provided for under the DDA.
Draft recommendation 11.14.
The AFP, NCA and NIIC should
consult with peak disability organisations and the
Disability Discrimination Act Legal Advocacy
on appropriate methods of providing information and
education about the complaints procedures to people
with a disability.
The Niland Report is a confidential report by Carmel
Niland and Associates which reported on an assessment
of the culture of
the AFP, an audit of the 1992-1995
EEO program, an effective training program for members
and staff members, the appropriate
budget and staffing
requirements for EEO and effective target strategies
for different levels of the AFP.
Annual Report 1994-95
Dalton Morgan & Associates.
National Police Ethnic Advisory Bureau
Submission 3
'Beat' is used here to mean a location where men meet
for sex or for organising sex. See M Swivel 'Public
Convenience, Public
Nuisance: Criminological Perspectives
on The Beat' 1991 (3)
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
This would avoid the possibility of entrapment.
The Community Law Reform Committee of the Australian
Capital Territory
Domestic Violence ACT Community Law
Reform Committee
, Canberra 1995 82.
The small percentage of complaints by women may reflect
a lack of knowledge of the system or it may merely
reflect the fact that
a greater percentage of men come
into contact with and are arrested by the AFP. Without
further information it is difficult to
draw conclusions
from these statistics.
Held in 1996.
12. Other police powers and responsibilities
Introduction
disciplinary action
on ground of invalidity
Resignation
of an AFP member's name and address upon request
of medical examinations for complainants
Introduction
12.1 This chapter
deals with the possibility of AFP appointees avoiding
disciplinary action through retirement on the ground
of invalidity or resignation, the obligation of AFP
appointees to provide identifying details and the extent
of the Commonwealth's
liability for the actions of
AFP appointees.
disciplinary action
on ground of invalidity
12.2 Officers who
are likely to face disciplinary action may try to avoid
it by resigning or taking retirement on the grounds
of invalidity. The AFP submitted that retirement on
the ground of invalidity has not been used to avoid
disciplinary proceedings.
Under the provisions of the
AFP Act and the Commonwealth superannuation legislation,
the retirement of AFP appointees on invalidity
cannot be legally effected without the issue of an
appropriate certificate by the Commonwealth Superannuation
of Trustees.
Resignation
12.3 Under the
AFP Act the resignation provisions differ according
to whether the appointee is a member or a staff member.
staff member may resign at any time by giving written
notice to the Commissioner with the resignation taking
effect from the
date specified in the notice. For a
member's resignation to be effective it must be offered
three months after (or within such
shorter period as
the Commissioner allows) a notice was given to the
Commissioner indicating the member's intention to resign.
12.4 The AFP advised
that there have been some occasions where members or
staff members who have been the subject of disciplinary
proceedings have resigned. Generally these resignations
have been accepted with the result that the disciplinary
action lapses.
The AFP submitted, however, that each
case is considered in the context of the surrounding
circumstances and there may be occasions
when accepting
the resignation is in the best interests of the AFP.
An example would be where the person's behaviour or
raises serious doubt as to his or her continued
employment suitability but s 26E or non renewal of
appointment is not available
and there is no guarantee
that a disciplinary hearing will result in a finding
of dismissal. The Commissioner's power not to
a resignation is limited by s 52 of the AFP Act.
12.5 Section 52
provides that where proceedings are started in respect
of a breach of a relevant disciplinary offence and
person, either before or after those proceedings
are commenced, gives notice of intention to resign
or resigns or is retired
to take effect on or after
the commencement of proceedings, the resignation or
retirement will not have any effect. In this situation
the person will be regarded as being suspended without
pay. The AFP has stated that it has received legal
advice that proceedings
under s 52 are limited to Federal
Police Disciplinary Tribunal proceedings which is a
further restriction on the situations where
the Commissioner
could refuse to accept a resignation.
12.6 The NSW Police
Corruption Commission Bill 1996 provides that conduct
may be dealt with, or continue to be dealt with, under
that Bill even though any police officer involved has
ceased to be a police officer and that references in
the Bill to a police
officer should be read where appropriate
as including a former police officer. In the Commission's
view a similar provision which
would allow the NIIC
to investigate conduct of a former officer should be
provided in the proposed NIIC legislation.
12.7 The Commission
considers that in the interests of public confidence
in the system the s 52 power to defer resignation and
suspend an officer without pay should be extended.
It should be extended to those situations where the
Commissioner has initiated
an action for misconduct
by providing the appointee with notice in writing of
the initiation of that action or where a formal
investigation
into the appointee's conduct has been commenced by
the NIIC or at its direction.
Draft recommendations
Avoiding disciplinary action
Draft recommendations 12.1.
The NIIC Act should include
an amended equivalent to s 52 of the
Complaints (Australian
Federal Police) Act.
The provision should ensure that
the Commissioner's power to defer a resignation is
available where the Commissioner has initiated
for misconduct by serving the appointee with notice
in writing of the initiation of that action or where
investigation into the appointee's conduct
has been commenced by the NIIC or at its direction.
Draft recommendations 12.2.
The NIIC should have power
to investigate or deal with conduct even though an
AFP appointee or NCA staff member has ceased to
an AFP appointee or a NCA staff member.
of an AFP member's name and address upon request
12.8 When a person
requests the name and address of place of duty of an
AFP appointee for the purpose of making a complaint,
the Complaints Act provides that it is an offence to
refuse or to give false details.
The obligation only exists where the individual requests
such information for the purpose of making a complaint.
12.9 The AFP has
submitted that this requirement for members to furnish
their names and addresses should be dispensed with
cases where the member is wearing a visible official
AFP identification number. Members should also have
a discretion not to
disclose their names where there
is a justification for not doing so, for example, where
the member fears harassment.
12.10 Members
of the rank of constable and sergeant are required
to wear identification numbers attached to the front
uniforms at all times. However, numbers may
be removed or exchanged and the obligation only applies
to members at these ranks
at the time they are in uniform.
This means that the obligation is in fact only applicable
to the AFP within the ACT as almost
all members of
the AFP within the national region operate in civilian
clothes. The obligation does not apply when members
off duty but are purporting to act as police officers
(for example, an officer who attempts to break up a
brawl at a local football
game in his or her capacity
as a police officer as opposed to that of a concerned
12.11 The Commission
is of the view that the requirement should apply even
where the officer is wearing an identification number.
However, AFP officers should have a discretion not
to provide their names or addresses where they believe
on reasonable grounds
that to do so would jeopardise
their safety or the safety of others or jeopardise
operational security. The requirement for officers
to wear their identification numbers when they are
in uniform should be amended to apply to all officers
and the numbers should
be permanently affixed to uniforms.
Draft recommendations
Provision of AFP members' name and address upon request
Draft recommendations 12.3.
Officers should be under
a duty to provide their names and work addresses on
request where the person requesting the information
indicates that he or she wishes to make a complaint.
However, AFP officers should have a discretion not
to provide their names
or addresses where they believe
on reasonable grounds that to do so would jeopardise
their safety or the safety of others or
operational security. The requirement for officers
to wear numbers when they are in uniform should be
extended to
apply to all officers and the numbers should
be permanently affixed.
of medical examinations for complainants
12.12 In the issues
paper the Commission asked about medical treatment
or medical services for detainees and others. The Ombudsman
responded that although in the past she has had some
concerns about AFP care for detainees she believes
that the AFP has improved
its procedures for ensuring
detainees receive adequate medical treatment and that
she is not aware of any current concerns.
12.13 According
to the AFP submission, where a person complains of
being assaulted by an AFP officer and there are reasons
believe that a medical examination of that person
will produce relevant evidence, the normal procedure
is to request the person
to submit to a medical examination
by a AFP medical officer or, in cases outside the ACT,
a Commonwealth Medical Officer or private
medical practitioner.
AFP medical officers conducting examinations in such
circumstances submit reports and these reports are,
where appropriate, forwarded to the Ombudsman.
12.14 The Ombudsman
has commented that private medical practitioners are
often not experienced in providing a report for such
purposes and may provide insufficient detail. She has
stated that there would be some benefits in an arrangement
whereby complainants
are seen by a medical practitioner
experienced in forensic medicine if the complainant
agrees. The Ombudsman has suggested that
where services
such as the Victorian Office of Forensic Medicine are
available, it would be useful to have arrangements
place to allow access. Where arrangements are not
available, or where complainants prefer their own medical
practitioners, an
alternative may be to develop a reporting
form for complainants to give to the medical practitioner
to assist in providing adequate
information about the
examination.
12.15 The Ombudsman
has also suggested that assessment of medical evidence
may well require specific expertise in forensic medicine
and that it would be preferable for the external agency
overseeing the AFP complaints process and the AFP to
have access to
independent expertise in considering
medical evidence. The Ombudsman has suggested exploring
the provision of advice by an existing
State or Territory
body with sufficient independence. The Commission seeks
further comment on this suggestion.
Draft recommendations
Provision of medical examinations for complainants
Draft recommendations 12.4.
Where specialist services
such as the Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine
exist, the AFP should investigate the possibility
arrangements which would allow complainants access
to these services.
Draft recommendations 12.5.
The AFP and the NIIC should
develop a reporting form for medical practitioners
asked to examine a person who has complained about
assault or other mistreatment by the police or other
law enforcement officer.
12.16 Under the
Complaints Act s 64B, the Commonwealth is liable in
respect of torts and acts or omissions of AFP members
the performance or purported performance of their
duties. It is likely that the corrupt activities of
a member would not fall
within the definition of the
performance or purported performance of duties so the
Commonwealth would not be liable for these
activities.
In any case, the Commonwealth's liability does not
extend to any punitive damages that may be awarded.
borne by the member involved.
The Commission considers that it is desirable to amend
s 64B to make it clear that corrupt conduct does not
fall within the definition
of performance or purported
performance of duties. In recognition of the fact that
it is not only members who may incur liability,
should be extended to include staff members as well.
Draft recommendation
Vicarious liability
Draft recommendations 12.6.
The operation of s 64B
should be extended to cover staff members as well as
members. The section should be amended to make it
that the corrupt activities of a member do not fall
within the definition of the performance or purported
performance
AFP Act s 37.
Submission 29
AFP Act s 64B.
Appendix A: Terms of references
Federal Police
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Law Reform Commission Act 1973
I, MICHAEL LAVARCH, Attorney-General of Australia,
HAVING REGARD TO:
(a) the importance of the Australian Federal Police
(AFP) in Australia's law enforcement efforts;
(b) Australia's obligations under international law,
including under -
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
Against Women
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination
the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
the Convention on the Rights of the Child;
(c) the responsibility of the Commonwealth to protect
human rights and civil liberties and the need to maintain
a proper balance
between that protection on the one
hand and protection of the community by practical and
effective law enforcement on the other;
(d) Australian Law Reform Commission Reports No. 1
Complaints against Police
1975 and No. 9
against Police Supplementary Report
(e) the passage of time since the enactment of the
Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981
and any changes in public attitudes towards the accountability
of police in that time;
(f) the attainment of self-government by the Australian
Capital Territory; and
(g) the report of the Senate Standing Committee on
Legal and Constitutional Affairs on the Complaints
(Australian Federal Police)
Amendment Bill 1994;
in pursuance of section 6 of the
Law Reform Commission
(the Act), at the request of the Minister
for Justice and the AFP, HEREBY REFER to the Law Reform
Commission for inquiry and
Complaints (Australian
Federal Police) Act 1981
(Cth) (the Act).
In particular the Commission is to inquire into and
(a) the complaints and disciplinary system applying
to police and staff members of the AFP in its entirety,
including all related
laws and subordinate instructions;
(b) whether the Act and associated legislation meets
the expectations of the public in terms of police accountability,
effectiveness
and efficiency;
(c) the laws, practices and procedures for handling
complaints against police in the Australian States
and Territories and in
comparable overseas jurisdictions;
(d) appropriate standards for handling complaints
against police;
(e) appropriate ways to handle complaints against
police, including through use of mediation and conciliation
in cases involving
minor complaints;
(f) the appropriateness of sanctions provided for
in the Act and associated legislation, including the
forfeiture of superannuation
(g) means by which the Government of the Australian
Capital Territory can be more involved in cases where
complaints or allegations
are directed against police
and staff members of the AFP under the command of the
Chief Police Officer for the Australian Capital
or against the practices and procedures applicable
to that command;
(h) any related matters of particular relevance to
Australia's external territories; and
(i) what amendments, if any, should be made to the
Act and other legislation applying to police and staff
members of the AFP.
IN PERFORMING its functions in relation to the reference,
the Commission is to consult widely among the Australian
particularly in the Australian Capital Territory
and Norfolk Island, with the AFP and other relevant
federal, State and Territory
authorities and with relevant
non-government organisations.
THE COMMISSION IS REQUIRED to report not later than
30 June 1996.
DATED 29 March 1995
Michael Lavarch
Crime Authority
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Law Reform Commission Act 1973
I, MICHAEL LAVARCH, Attorney-General of Australia,
HAVING REGARD TO:
(a) the importance of the National Crime Authority
(NCA) in Australia's law enforcement efforts;
(b) Australia's obligations under international law;
(c) the responsibility of the Commonwealth to protect
human rights and civil liberties and the need to maintain
a proper balance
between that protection on the one
hand and protection of the community by practical and
effective law enforcement on the other;
(d) Australian Law Reform Commission Reports No. 1
Complaints against Police 1975
against Police Supplementary Report 1978
(e) the reports of the Parliamentary Joint Committee
on the National Crime Authority
Who is to Guard the
Guards?: An Evaluation of the National Crime Authority
Investigating Complaints Made against the
National Crime Authority 1994
(f) terms of reference given to the Commission on
29 March 1995 to inquire into and report on the
(Australian Federal Police) Act 1981
in pursuance of section 6 of the
Law Reform Commission
(the Act), at the request of the Minister
for Justice and the NCA and with the agreement of the
Inter-Governmental Committee
on the NCA, HEREBY REFER
to the Law Reform Commission for inquiry and report
procedures for the investigation and resolution
complaints against the NCA and staff members of the
NCA or police officers seconded to the NCA.
In particular the Commission is to inquire into and
(a) the complaints and disciplinary system applying
to police and staff members of the NCA in its entirety,
including all related
laws and subordinate instructions;
(b) whether the complaints and disciplinary system
meets the expectations of the public in terms of accountability,
effectiveness
and efficiency;
(c) appropriate standards for handling these complaints;
(d) appropriate ways to handle these complaints, including
the use of mediation and conciliation in cases involving
minor complaints;
(e) appropriate sanctions to be applied if a complaint
is established;
(f) what laws, if any, should be enacted to give effect
to the Commission's recommendations.
The Commission is to consider the particular situation
of police officers seconded to the NCA and the appropriateness
or otherwise
of their being subject to any complaints
system established for the NCA rather than to complaints
systems for the police services
from which they were
The Commission should undertake this inquiry in conjunction
with its inquiry under the terms of reference dated
29 March 1995
referred to above.
IN PERFORMING its functions in relation to the reference,
the Commission is to:
(a) have regard to the laws, practices and procedures
for handling complaints against police in the Australian
Federal Police
(AFP) and in Australian States and Territories
and in comparable overseas jurisdictions;
(b) consult widely among the Australian community,
with the NCA, the AFP and State and Territory police
services, with other
relevant federal, State and Territory
authorities and with relevant non-government organisations.
THE COMMISSION IS REQUIRED to report not later than
30 June 1996.
DATED 26/7/95
Michael Lavarch
Appendix B: Participants
The Commission
The Division of the Commission constituted under the
Law Reform Commission Act 1973
for the purposes of
these references comprises the following:
Alan Rose AO
Deputy President
Sue Tongue (to October 1995)
David Edwards PSM (from 13 December 1995)
Chris Sidoti (to August 1995)
Michael Ryland
Kathryn Cronin (from 1 February 1996)
Team Leader
Michael Barnett
Legal Specialist
David Kinley
Law Reform Officers
Lucinda Jones (to September 1995)
Annemaree McDonough (from September 1995)
Research Assistants
Annemaree McDonough (to September 1995)
Stephen Bird (to December 1995)
Legal Intern
Hanne Stig Andersen (to March 1996)
Project Assistant
Maureen Carter (to December 1995)
Anna Hayduk
Joanna Longley
Emma Joneshart
Library Officer
(from April 1995)
Consultants
Mr David Allen, Justice Division, Human Rights &
Equal Opportunity Commission
Mr Bill Antill, Assistant Commissioner, Australian
Federal Police (Qld) (to November 1995)
Professor John Braithwaite, Division of Philosophy
and Law, Australian National University
Mr Brian Dargan, Director, Law Reform, National Crime
Authority (from February 1996)
Dr Sandra Egger, Associate Professor, Faculty of Law,
The University of New South Wales
The Hon Justice Michael Foster, President, Federal
Police Disciplinary Tribunal
Mr Ian Freckleton, Barrister
Mr Garry Fulton, National Treasurer, Australian Federal
Police Association (from June 1996)
Dr Adam Graycar, Director, Australian Institute of
Criminology
Mr Tom Howe, Deputy Director, Australian Government
Solicitor (ACT)
Mr Crispin Hull, Deputy Editor, Canberra Times
Mr Mark Ierace, Barrister, Office of the Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions
Mr John Ireland, Director, Executive Office, Australian
Federal Police (from November 1996)
Ms Jeannine Jacobson, Director, Policy, National Crime
Authority (to February 1996)
Mr Ron McLeod, Inspector-General of Intelligence &
Ms Vasiliki Nihas, Consultant, Access and Equity and
Social Justice
Mr Terry O'Gorman, Vice President, Queensland Council
for Civil Liberties
Ms Sue Pidgeon, Senior Assistant Ombudsman, Commonwealth
& Defence Force Ombudsman
Mr Daryl Smeaton, Executive Member, Commonwealth Law
Enforcement Board
Ms Julie Stubbs, Senior Lecturer in Criminology, University
Mr Sid Tilmouth QC, Chairman, Criminal Law Section,
Law Council of South Australia
Mr Garry Wills, Federal Agent, Australian Federal Police
AFP liaison and policy contact
Mr Patrick Leonard, Federal Agent, Legislation Review,
Australian Federal Police
Appendix C: Abbreviations
Administrative Appeals Tribunal
Australian Capital Territory
Alternative Dispute Resolution
Australian Federal Police
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
Australian Federal Police Association
Australian Federal Police Regulations
Australian Government Solicitor
Australian International Defence Exhibition
Complaints Against Police
Complaints Against Police (Supplementary Report)
Aboriginal Legal Service
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation
Australian Secret Intelligence Service
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission
Criminal Investigation Division
Criminal Justice Commission (Qld)
Community Legal Centres
Complaints Act
Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981
Canberra Police Association
Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau (Singapore)
Crown Prosecution Service (England)
Disability Discrimination Act
Director of Public Prosecutions
Equal Employment Opportunity
Internal Audit Branch (ISA)
Independent Commission Against Corruption (NSW)
Independent Commission Against Corruption (Hong Kong)
Inter-Governmental Committee on the NCA
Internal Investigation Branch (SA)
Internal Investigation Division of the AFP
Internal Investigation Unit (Tas)
Informal Resolution
Internal Security and Audit (AFP)
Memorandum of Understanding
National Crime Authority
National Crime Authority Act 1984
New South Wales
Northern Territory
New Zealand
Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984
Police Complaints Authority, England
Police Complaints Authority, South Australia
Police Complaints Authority, Victoria
Parliamentary Commissioner for Administrative Investigations
Police Complaints Board, Republic of Ireland
Police Integrity Commission
Parliamentary Joint Committee
Police Review Board, Cleveland, Ohio
Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody
Royal Canadian Mounted Police
South Australia
Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Public Administration
United States
Very Important Persons
Western Australia
Select bibliography
ACCESS TO JUSTICE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
- Access to justice - an action plan Commonwealth
of Australia 1994
Administrative review council
- Access to Administrative Review by Members of Australia's
Ethnic Communities Report No 34 Australian Government
Printing Service
Perceptions of the Treatment of Juveniles in the
Legal System
National Youth Affairs Research Scheme
National Clearing House for Youth Studies Hobart 1992.
AUSTRALIA. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES STANDING COMMITTEE
ON LEGAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS
- Islands in the Sun. The Legal Regime of Australia's
External Territories and the Jervis Bay Territory Australian
Printing Service Canberra 1991
ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDER AFFAIRS
- Justice under Scrutiny - Report of the Inquiry into
the Implementation by Governments of the Royal Commission
into Aboriginal
Deaths in Custody Australian Government
Printing Service Canberra 1994
AUSTRALIA. DEPARTMENT OF PRIME MINISTER AND CABINET
OFFICE OF MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS
Access and Equity Plan 1991-94
Australian Federal
Police Portfolio Australian Government Printing Service
Canberra 1991
AUSTRALIAN FEDERAL POLICE
Annual Report 1990-91
Canberra 1991
Annual Report 1992-93
Canberra 1992
Annual Report 1993-94
Canberra 1994
Annual Report 1994-95
Canberra 1995
Journal of the AFP September 1995 No 48
No 6 June 9 1994
ACT Regional Instruction 22/93. Mental Health Patients
and Forensic patients
AUSTRALIA. FEDERAL RACE DISCRIMINATION COMMISSIONER
State of the Nation - A Report on people of non-English
speaking background
Australian Government Printing
Service Sydney 1993
AUSTRALIA. COMMONWEALTH POLICE FORCE
Annual Report of the Commissioner of Police for
year ended 30 June 1977
Canberra Australian Government
Publishing Service 1977
AUSTRALIA. INDEPENDENT COMMISSION AGAINST CORRUPTION
Annual report 1991/1992
Sydney The Commission 1992
Annual report 1992/93
Sydney The Commission 1993
AUSTRALIA. LAW REFORM COMMISSION
Complaints against police
Canberra Australian Government
Publishing Service 1975
Complaints against police: supplementary report
Canberra Australian Government Publishing Service 1978
Multiculturalism and the law
Commonwealth of Australia
Sydney 1992
Equality before the law: justice for women
Commonwealth
of Australia Sydney 1994
AUSTRALIA. PARLIAMENT.
A Report of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on
the National Crime Authority
. Canberra 1994
AUSTRALIA. PARLIAMENT. SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
INTEREST WHISTLEBLOWING
In the Public Interest
Canberra 1994
AUSTRALIA. PARLIAMENT. SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON UNRESOLVED
WHISTLEBLOWER CASES
The Public Interest Revisited
Canberra 1995
AUSTRALIA. PARLIAMENT. SENATE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
LEGAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS
Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Amendment
Canberra The Committee 1994
AUSTRALIA. PRIVACY COMMISSIONER
Advice and report to Ministers: disclosure of arrest
details of AIDEX demonstrators
Australian Federal Police
and Department of Social Security Canberra Human Rights
Australia 1992
AUSTRALIA. PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION
Report of the Public Service Act Review Group.
Summary of Recommendations and Government Decisions
Canberra August 1995
AUSTRALIA. ROYAL COMMISSION INTO ABORIGINAL DEATHS
Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody
Interim Report
Australian Government Publishing Service
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY. COMMUNITY LAW REFORM
Domestic Violence
Canberra 1995
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY. GAY AND LESBIAN POLICE
LIAISON NETWORK
Harassment and Violence Survey
Canberra 1994
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY. LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY.
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL POLICY
Standing Committee on Social Policy Public Behaviour
Inquiry Report
February 1990 Canberra Legislative Assembly
of the Australian Capital Territory 1990
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY. STANDING COMMITTEE ON
LEGAL AFFAIRS
Future of Policing in the ACT No 1
Canberra 1995
AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATION INCORPORATED
- Papers presented at the ninth annual AIJA conference
18-19 August 1990, Melbourne
Cost of justice; alternative
dispute resolution; electronic recording of police
interviews with crime suspects
Carlton South The Institute
BALDWIN R & KINSEY R
Police Powers and Politics
Melbourne Quartet Books
BARKER T & CARTER DL (ED)
Police Deviance
Cincinnati Ohio Pilgrimage 1986
Police for the Future
Oxford University Press New
- 'Accountability and Control of Police' in T Bennet
The Future of Policing
no 15 Cropwood Conference
Series Institute of Criminology University of Cambridge
Cambridge 1983
BENNETT T (ED)
The future of policing
papers presented to 15th
Cropwood Round-Table Conference December 1982 Cambridge
University of Cambridge Institute of Criminology
A tale of failure: race and policing
Policy papers
in ethnic relations No 3 Coventry University of Warwick
- 'ICAC a critique' (1989) 1(1)
Criminology Australia
- 'The New Zealand system for dealing with complaints
against the police: a comparative evaluation' (1981)
Auckland University Law Review
- 'Policing Multicultural Australia' in P Moir and
P Eijkman ed
Policing Australia: Old Issues, New Perspectives
Macmillan Co of Australia South Melbourne 1992
The functions of the police in modern society: a
review of background factors, current practices and
possible role models
Rockville Maryland National Institute
of Mental Health 1970
Beyond the limits of the law
Pelican Books 1973
BRAITHWAITE J
- 'Good and Bad Police services and How to Pick Them'
in H Eijkman and P Moir ed
Policing Australia: Old
Issues, New Perspectives
Macmillan Co of Australia
South Melbourne 1992
Resolving Crime in the Community: Restorative Justice
Reforms in New Zealand and Australia
paper presented
at the Conference Resolving Crime in the Community:
Mediation in Criminal Justice Institute for the Study
Treatment of Delinquency and the London Victim-Offender
Mediation Network 23 September 1994
Crime, Shame and Reintegration
Cambridge University
Press Cambridge 1989
Civilian review of complaints against the police:
a survey of the United States
literature Paper No 19
London Home Office 1983
The police complaints procedure: a survey of complainants
London HMSO 1987
BUCHANAN GW
- 'Managing police use of force' (1993) vol 60(8)
Police Chief
- 'Interviewing the Mentally Handicapped' (1993) 9
BUTTERWORTHS AUSTRALIA
Federal Criminal Law
- 'Connolly may reform laws to curb street offences'
Canberra Times
16 January 1993
- 'Failings in the complaints system cause concern'
Canberra Times
29 September 1993, 11
- 'Police action dangerous, inexcusable'
28 September 1993
- 'Police not the villains: MLA'
Canberra Times
September 1993, 18
- _ 'Indigenous employment strategy launched'
Australian Federal Police Journal September 1995 No
- 'Law enforcement policy and strategy in the Republic
of the Philippines' (1991) V 14(2)
Police Studies
CANADA. COMMISSION IN INQUIRY CONCERNING CERTAIN ACTIVITIES
OF THE ROYAL CANADIAN MOUNTED POLICE
Security and information
Quebec, Minister of Supply
and Services 1980
- 'Policing Youth in "Ethnic" Communities: Is Community
Policing the Answer?' in R White and C Adler ed
Police and Young people in Australia
Cambridge University
Press Melbourne 1994
- 'Police Accountability in a Multicultural Society'
Criminology Australia
CHAPPELL D & WILSON PR
The Police and the Public in Australia and New Zealand
St Lucia University of Queensland Press 1969
Australian policing: contemporary issues
Butterworths 1989
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Implementation of Commonwealth Responses to the
Recommendations of the Royal Commission into Aboriginal
Deaths in Custody First
Annual Report 1992-93
and 2 Royal Commission Government Response Monitoring
Unit Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission
Aboriginal Deaths in Custody
Overview of the Response
by Governments to the Royal Commission Australian Government
Printer Canberra 1992
Review of Systems For Dealing With Fraud On The
Commonwealth
AGPS Canberra 1987
COMMONWEALTH OMBUDSMAN
Annual report 1994/95
Canberra AGPS 1994
- Report of the Commonwealth Ombudsman
Investigation into the Improper Accessing of Information
by Members of the Australian Federal Police
20 September 1995
- 'Improving the capability to monitor police field
behaviour' (1992) 26 1
The Journal of California Law
Enforcement
- 'Complaints against the police: the new procedure
of informal resolution' (1991) vol 21
August Policing
and Society
Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated
Ship Painters and Dockers Union
Final Report Canberra
CRIMINAL JUSTICE COMMISSION
Ethical Conduct and Discipline in the Queensland
Police Service: The Views of Recruits, First Year Constables
and Experienced
Brisbane 1995
Whistleblowers-Concerned Citizens or Disloyal Mates?
Brisbane 1994
Informal Complaint Resolution in the Queensland
Police Service: An Evaluation
Brisbane 1994
External Oversight of Complaints Against Police
in Australia: A Cross Jurisdictional Comparison
- 'Enforcing Genocide? Aboriginal Young People and
the Police' in C Alder and R White ed
The Police and
Young People in Australia
Cambridge University Press
Melbourne 1994
- 'Aboriginal Young People and Police Violence' (1991)
Aboriginal Law Bulletin
CUNNINGHAM AR
Police Complaints Authority: collected papers
The Authority 1988
- 'Whistleblowing' (1995) 20
Alternative Law Journal
- 'Intellectual Disability' (1994) 19
Alternative
Law Journal
Betaenkning om behandlingen af klager over politipersonalet
afgivet af et af Justitsministeriet nedsat udvalg (A
report reviewing the Danish police complaints system
given by an ad hoc
expert committee appointed by the
Minister of Justice) Copenhagen 1994
Reform by Legal Regulation: International Experience
in Criminal Investigation
Paper presented at the Institute
of Criminology Seminar Police Reform Options for Change
Parliament House Sydney 20 September
- 'Police and ethnic youth discuss concerns at summit'
AFP Journal
September 1995 No 48, 13
DUGAN JR & BREDA DR
- 'Complaints about police officers: a comparison
among types and agencies' (1991) 19:2
Journal of Criminal
- 'Language and the law: white Australia v Nancy'
Language and Culture in Aboriginal Australia
Aboriginal Studies Press Canberra 1993 181
FEDERAL RACE DISCRIMINATION COMMISSION
State of the Nation - A Report on people of non-English
speaking backgrounds
Australian Government Printing
Service Sydney 1993
- 'Corruption control and monstering: government agendas,
community expectations and the ICAC solution' (1991)
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
- 'Police authority, respect and shaming' (1993) 51
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
- 'The Ambiguity of Accountability: Deaths in Custody
and the Regulation of Police Power' {1994}
Issues in Criminal Justice
- 'Implementing Corruption Prevention Strategies Through
Codes of Conduct' (1991) 3
Current Issues in Criminal
- 'International Rights and Australian Adaptations:
Recent Developments in Criminal Investigation' (1995)
[1995] SydLawRw 18
Sydney Law Review
FINDLAY M & ODGERS S & YEO S
Australian Criminal Justice
Oxford University Press
Melbourne 1994
Police and government: histories of policing in
Melbourne Oxford University Press 1994
FITZGERALD REPORT
Queensland. Criminal Justice
FRECKELTON I (ED) & SELBY H (ED)
Police in our society
Sydney Butterworths 1988
- 'Piercing the Blue Veil: An Assessment of External
Review of Police' in D Chappell and P Wilson ed
Policing Contemporary Issues
Butterworths North Ryde
A Dictionary of Modern Legal Usage 2nd Ed
Oxford University Press 1995
GAY AND LESBIANS RIGHTS LOBBY INCORPORATED
Streetwatch report: a study into violence against
lesbians and gay men
Darlinghurst Gay and Lesbian Rights
Incorporated 1990
GAY MEN AND LESBIANS AGAINST DISCRIMINATION (GLAD)
- Interim Report
Survey into Discrimination and Violence
Against Lesbians and Gay Men in Victoria
GLAD Melbourne
- 'People with intellectual disabilities and the criminal
justice system'
Law Institute Journal
GOLDSMITH AJ (ED)
- 'New directions in police complaints procedures:
some conceptual and comparative departures' (1988)
Police Studies
Complaints Against The Police. The Trend to External
Oxford Clarendon Press 1991
GOLDSTEIN JI
- 'New teeth for the public's watchdog: the expanded
role of the independent accountant in detecting, preventing
and reporting
financial fraud' (1989) 44(2)
- 'Complaints Against Police in Australia: Where we
are Now, and What we Might Learn about the Process
of Law Reform, with Some
Comments about the Process
of Legal Change' in A Goldsmith ed
Complaints Against
the Police. The Trend Towards External Review
Press Oxford 1991 115-52
GREAT BRITAIN
Police Complaints Board Triennial Review Report
London, HMSO; 1983
GREAT BRITAIN. COMMISSIONER OF POLICE OF THE METROPOLIS
Report of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis
for the year 1979
London Her Majesty's Stationery Office
GREAT BRITAIN. HOME AFFAIRS
The Annual Report of the Police Complaints Authority
London HMSO 1988
GREAT BRITAIN. HOME OFFICE
London HMSO 1984
Evidence to the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure
Memo I-III & VIII
Keeping in touch: police-victim communication in
London HMSO 1990
The handling of complaints against the police
of the working group for England and Wales London Her
Majestys Stationery Office 1974
The Police and Public in England and Wales
crime survey report London HMSO 1990
GREAT BRITAIN. HOME SECRETARY
Review of the Public Order Act 1936 and Related
Legislation
London HMSO 1980
GREAT BRITAIN. PARLIAMENT. HOUSE OF COMMONS. HOME AFFAIRS
Deaths in Custody: Third Report from the Home Affairs
Committee Session 1979-80
London HMSO 1980
1988 Annual Report of the Police Complaints Authority:
Minutes of Evidence
session 1988/89, 3 vol 1989
GREAT BRITAIN. POLICE COMPLAINTS BOARD
Report of the Police Complaints Board
Report of the Police Complaints Board 1983
Triennial Review Report 1980
Her Majestys Stationery
Office 1980
GREAT BRITAIN. ROYAL COMMISSION ON THE POLICE 1962
Final Report
London Her Majesty's Stationery Office
GREAT BRITAIN. SCOTTISH OFFICE
The Handling of Complaints Against the Police: Report
of the Working Group for Scotland
London Her Majesty's
Stationery Office 1974
GRISWOLD DB
- 'Complaints against the police: predicting dispositions'
(1994) 22(3)
Journal of Criminal Justice
Police Command: Decisions and Discretions
MacMillan 1975
HAIN P (ED)
Policing The Police
- volume 2 London: John Caldor,1980
Police Misconduct: Legal Remedies
1987 2nd ed Legal
Action Group London 1991
- 'Police Corruption: Tradition and Evolution' in
K Byett and C Lewis eds
Un-peeling Tradition: Contemporary
Centre for Australian Public Sector Management
Brisbane 1994
A Fair Cop: Reforming the Police Complaints Procedure
London National Council for Civil Liberties 1982
HONG KONG. INDEPENDENT COMMISSION AGAINST CORRUPTION
Annual report 1991
Annual report 1992
Annual report 1993
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES STANDING COMMITTEE ON ABORIGINAL
AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDER AFFAIRS
Justice Under Scrutiny Report of the Inquiry into
the Implementation by Governments of the Recommendations
of the Royal Commission
into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody
Government Printer Canberra 1994
HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
Racist Violence Report of the National Inquiry into
Racist Violence in Australia
Australian Government
Printer Canberra 1991
Juvenile Justice and Young People of Non-English
Speaking Background
Australian Government Printing
Service Canberra 1994
ICAC (HONG KONG)
An Introduction to the Independent Commission Against
Corruption Hong Kong
The Commission 1989
ICAC Operations Department Review 1993-94 Hong Kong
The Commission 1994
Intellectual Disability. A Manual for Criminal Lawyers
Intellectual Disability Rights Centre Sydney 1989
JUSTICE (SOCIETY)
Observations on the Triennial Review Report of the
Police Complaints Board
London Justice 1980
Pre-trial Criminal Procedure; Police Powers and
the Prosecution Process
London Justice 1979
KIRBY JUSTICE MD
Complaints Against Police: How Should They Be Handled:
Paper given to the Australian Institute of Criminology
United Nations Conference 'Human rights in the administration
of justice' Sydney 1976
Police Powers and Accountability
London Croom Helm
LAMBERTON H
- 'On-the-spot fines proposed to counter street violence'
Canberra Times
8 January 1993
LAW REFORM COMMISSION OF CANADA
Legal Status of the Police
Ottawa The Commission
The Police: A Policy Paper
Ottawa The Commission
LAW REFORM COMMISSION OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Report on Police Act Offences
Perth The Commission
Corruption and Its Control in Hong Kong
University Press Hong Kong 1981
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF QUEENSLAND. THE PARLIAMENTARY
CRIMINAL JUSTICE COMMITTEE
A report of a review of the Criminal Justice Commission
pursuant to s 118(1)(f) of the Criminal Justice Act
Report No 26 6 February 1995
LEWIS CE & LINDEN SB & KEENE J
- 'Police complaints against police in metropolitan
toronto - the history and operation of the office of
the Public Complaints
Commissioner' (1986) 29:1
Criminal Law Quarterly
- 'Police Complaints in Metropolitan Toronto: Perspectives
of the Public Complaints Commissioner' in Goldsmith
Complaints Against the Police. The Trend to External
Clarendon Press Oxford 1991
- 'The police as client' (1988) vol 11(1)
Spring Police
Report of the Commission to Inquire into New South
Wales Police Administration
New South Wales Parliament
LUSTGARTEN L
The Governance of Police
London Sweet & Maxwell
- 'Complaints against the Police: The British Experience'
in Goldsmith A ed
Complaints Against the Police. The
Trend to External Review
Clarendon Press Oxford 1991
MAGUIRE M & CORBETT C
A Study of the Police Complaints System
London HMSO
- The Anti-Corruption Agency
Function and Organisation
Kuala Lumpur 27 December 1993
- 'When the guards guard themselves: undercover tactics
turned inward' (1992) 2(3)
Policing & Society
Violence against lesbians and gay men
Canberra Australian
Institute of Criminology 1993
MASTERMAN GG
Report on the first three years of operation of
the new police complaints system in New South Wales:
report to the Honourable
BJ Unsworth
Sydney Government
Printer 1987
- 'External Review: The New South Wales Experience'
in I Freckleton and H Selby ed
Police in Our Society
Butterworths North Ryde 1988
MCCABE S & SUTCLIFF F
Defining crime: a study of police decisions
Basil Blackwell 1978
MCCULLOCH J
- 'All's Fair in Love and War: Policing Women' in
McKullops & Easteal PW ed
Women and the Law
Proceedings
of a Conference held 24-26 September 1991 Canberra
Australian Institute of Criminology 1993
MCDONALD EM
Up before the judge; perspectives of juvenile defendants
in the Children's Court system
(2 vol) Canberra Report
to Criminology Research Council 1981
MCKILLOP S (ED) & VERNON J (ED)
The Police and the Community in the 1990s
Proceedings
of a conference held 23-25 October 1990 Canberra Australian
Institute of Criminology 1991
- 'ICAC: a barrister's perspective' (1991) 2(3)
Issues in Criminal Justice
- 'Police accountability: the situation of complaints
in Toronto' (1988) 12
Contemporary Crises
Complaints against police officers in the Commonwealth
of Australia
Winston Churchill Memorial Trust Hampshire
(England) Hampshire Constabulary (1988)
- 'Complaints in Australia' (1990) 6(3)
Police in Australia
Sydney Butterworths 1977
MINISTERIAL COUNCIL ON THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE
Directions in Australasian
Policing July 1994-1996
- 'Report a waste of time: AFP defends handling of
AIDEX demonstrations'
Canberra Times
29 September 1993,
Commission to investigate allegations of police
corruption and the anti-corruption procedures of the
police department New York
The Commission 1994
MORGAN D & STEPHENSON G (ED)
Suspicion & silence
London Blackstone Press
MORIARTY CCH & WILLIAMS WJ (ED)
Police law: an arrangement of law and regulations
for use of police officers
London Butterworths 1974
MUGFORD J & EASTEAN P & EDWARD A
ACT Domestic Violence Research Report to the ACT
Community Law Reform Committee
Australian Institute
of Criminology Canberra 1993
NATIONAL POLICE ETHNIC ADVISORY BUREAU
The First National Summit on Police and Ethnic Youth
Relations 7-9 July 1995
Melbourne 1996
NEW SOUTH WALES. INDEPENDENT COMMISSION AGAINST CORRUPTION
Interim report on investigation into alleged police
protection of paedophiles
Redfern The Commission 1994
NEW SOUTH WALES LAW REFORM COMMISSION
Scrutiny of the Legal Profession: Complaints Against
Sydney 1992
NEW SOUTH WALES OMBUDSMAN
Annual Report 1993-94
Sydney 1994
NEW SOUTH WALES. PARLIAMENT. REPORT OF THE JOINT COMMITTEE
ON THE OFFICE OF THE OMBUDSMAN
Inquiry upon the role of the Office of the Ombudsman
in investigating complaints against police
Sydney Government
Printers 1992
NEW SOUTH WALES TASK FORCE ON PREVENTION OF DEATHS
IN POLICE CUSTODY
Prevention of deaths in police custody: task force
Sydney New South Wales 1988
- 'Self-scrutiny gives rise to a new culture'
Australian Federal Police Journal September 1995 No
NEW ZEALAND. LAW COMMISSION
Criminal evidence: police questioning: a discussion
Wellington The Commission 1992
Police questioning
Wellington The Commission 1994
- 'Young People and Their Rights' in R White and C
The Police and Young People in Australia
University press Melbourne 1994 76-101
O'CONNOR KP
Federal Police records
Sydney Law Reform Commission
Police, Government and Accountability
Press Basingbroke 1987
- 'Independent element - yes or no' (1982) vol 55(3)
Police Journal
ONTARIO OMBUDSMAN
Public Opinion Survey: Winter 1991
Ontario 1991
- 'The Likely Environment in the year 2000 and Beyond'
in B Etter & M Palmer eds
Police Leadership in
Australasia
The Federation Press Sydney 1995
PARLIAMENTARY JOINT COMMITTEE (PJC)
Who is to guard the guards? An Evaluation of the
National Crime Authority
Commonwealth Government Printer
Canberra 1991
PETTERSON WE
- 'Police Accountability and Civilian Oversight of
Policing: An American Perspective' in Goldsmith A ed
Complaints Against the Police. The Trend to External
Clarendon Press Oxford 1991
- 'Community police liaison committee' (1985) vol
Legal Services Bulletin
Complaints against Police: Legislation and Issues
in Australia
Thesis for Masters of Public Law Australian
National University September 1986
POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY (GREAT BRITAIN)
Annual Report 1993
London HMSO March 1994
QUEENSLAND. CRIMINAL JUSTICE COMMISSION
Implementation of reform within the Queensland Police
Service: the response of the Queensland Police Service
to the Fitzgerald
Inquiry recommendations
The Commission 1994
- 'Report on a review of police powers in Queensland'
Electronic surveillance and other investigative
Toowong The Commission 1994
- 'Report on a review of police powers in Queensland'
Arrest without warrant, demand name and
address and move on powers
Toowong The Commission 1993
Report on an inquiry into allegations of police
misconduct at Inala in November 1990
Toowong The Commission
Informal Complaint Resolution in the Queensland
Police Service: An Evaluation
Brisbane November 1994
External Oversight of Complaints: A Cross-Jurisdictional
Brisbane July 1995
Police Powers in Queensland
The Criminal Justice Commission 1991
- 'Complaints and efficiency - the modern police force'
(1994) 18(1)
Criminologist
The Politics of the Police
Wheatsheaf Books Brighton
- 'Multiple Realities, Divided Worlds: Chief Constables'
Perspectives on the Police Complaints System' in A
Goldsmith ed
Complaints Against the Police. The Trend
to External Review
Clarendon Press Oxford 1991
RICHARDSON N
- 'Bad news cop' (1993) 9 November
The Bulletin
- 'The practice of principle' (1993) 30 November,
The Bulletin
ROYAL CANADIAN MOUNTED POLICE PUBLIC COMPLAINTS COMMISSION
Annual Report 1994-95
Minister of Supply and Services
ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE NEW SOUTH WALES POLICE SERVICE
Interim Report
Sydney 1996
- 'Towards the Notion of Policing 'By Consent' and
its Implications for Police Accountability' in D Chappell
& P Wilson ed
Australian Policing Contemporary
Butterworths North Ryde 1989
The Brixton Disorders
Cmnd 8247 HMSO London 1981
Dealing with Young Offenders
Law Book Company North
SENATE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION
Review of the Office of the Ombudsman
Government Printing Service Canberra 1991
Organizational police deviance: its structure and
Toronto Butterworths 1981
SINGAPORE CORRUPT PRACTICES INVESTIGATION BUREAU
The Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau. An Introduction
Singapore October 1990
SIXTH CONFERENCE INTERNATIONAL ANTI-CORRUPTION - YOUNG
Open paper: preventing corruption in Korea; a comparative
perspective among Korea, Singapore and Hong Kong
SXITH CONFERENCE INTERNATIONAL ANTI-CORRUPTION - DR
JON ST QUAH
Workshop paper: combating corruption Singapore style
Mexico 1993
SOUTH AUSTRALIA. COMPLAINTS AGAINST POLICE COMMITTEE
Report of the committee on complaints against the
police (Grieve report)
Adelaide Chief Secretary's Office
SOUTH AUSTRALIA. POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY
Annual Reports 7th, 8th and 9th
- 'Complaints against police and Departmental Management:
making the connection' (1992) 59:8
The Police Chief
STEVENS P & WILLIS C
Ethnic minorities and complaints against the police
London Home Office 1981
STEWART JUSTICE
Report of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drug
Trafficking
Australian Government Printing Service
Canberra 1983
- 'ICAC under the microscope - paper 2' (1992) 2(2)
Australian Corporate Lawyer
Complaints against police in New South Wales
Crime Bureau of Crime Statistics Research Sydney 1992
SUNAHARA DF
- 'Public inquiries into policing' (1992) 162
Police College Journal
SWANTON B & VAGG J
Resolution of complaints made against police persons:
Canberra Australian Institute of Criminology
SWANTON B & HANNIGAN G & PSAILA T
Police source book 2
Canberra Australian Institute
of Criminology 1985
- 'Public Convenience, Public Nuisance: Criminological
Perspectives on the Beat' 1991 3(3)
Current Issues
in Criminal Justice
SYDNEY MORNING HERALD
- 20 September 1995, 1, 4.
- 'A return to ethics' (1994) 65(1) i 54
- 'ICAC: working in the public interest' (1991) 2(3)
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
- 'Disability, Child Abuse and Criminal Justice' (1994)
Modern Law Review
TEMPLETON H
- 'The abuse of authority' (1992) 8(2)
- 'Civilian Oversight of the Police, Complaints Process
in the United States: Concerns, Developments, and more
Concerns' in Goldsmith
Complaints Against the
Police. The Trend to External Review
Oxford Clarandon
THE CORRUPT PRACTICES INVESTIGATION BUREAU
The Corrupt Practices Bureau
Singapore The Bureau
- 'ICAC: living in an imperfect world' (1991) 2(3)
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
- 'The Police Complaints System in Northern Ireland'
in Goldsmith A ed
Complaints Against the Police. The
Trend to External Review
Clarendon Press Oxford 1991
TWENTY-FIRST OFFICERS' COURSE
Effects of law reform - look into the future
Australian Police College 1980
UILDRIKS NA
Policing police violence
Deventer The Netherlands
Kluwer Law and Taxation Publishers 1991
UNITED STATES COMMISSION ON CIVIL RIGHTS
Who is guarding the guardians: a report on police
Washington DC The Commission 1981
UNITED STATES. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE. NATIONAL INSTITUTE
OF LAW ENFORCEMENT AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE; EDGAR I, JAMES
M; MARCUS, MARVIC;
WHEATON, ROBERT J & HICOX RC
Team policing
National Criminal Justice Reference
Service 1976
UNITED STATES. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE; WILSON, JQ &
The effect of the police on crime
United States
Department of Justice Law Enforcement Assistance Administration
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY. INSTITUTE OF CRIMINOLOGY
Complaints against police
Seminar proceedings of
the Institute of Criminology Sydney Institute of Criminology
Police discretion in the criminal process
University of Sydney Faculty of Law 1980
Policing public order
Sydney Government Printer
VERNON J (ED) & BRACEY D (ED)
Police resources and effectiveness
Proceedings of
a seminar held 31 May-2 June 1988 Canberra Australian
Institute of Criminology 1989
VERNON J & BERWICK D (EDS)
Police Technology: Asia Pacific Police Technology
Proceedings of a conference held 12-14 November
1991 Canberra Australian Institute of Criminology 1993
VICTORIA. BOARD OF INQUIRY INTO ALLEGATIONS AGAINST
MEMBERS OF THE VICTORIA POLICE FORCE
Report of the Board of Inquiry into Allegations
against Member of the Victoria Police Force
vol 1 Melbourne
Government Printer 1978
VICTORIA. CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE ON POLICE POWERS OF
INVESTIGATION
Custody and investigation: report on section 460
Crimes Act 1958
Melbourne Government Printer
Identification tests and procedures - fingerprinting:
interim report
Melbourne Government Printer 1987
VICTORIA. DEPUTY OMBUDSMAN (POLICE COMPLAINTS)
The alleged suppression of police investigations,
police intelligence and related matters
Melbourne Government
Printer 1993
- 'The Law's Construction of (Homo) Sexuality' (1995)
Law in Context
- 'Answers to 10 Key questions about civilian review'
(1992) 18:355
Law Enforcement News
- 'The effectiveness of civilian review: observations
on recent trends and new issues regarding the civilian
review of the police'
American Journal of
WARD RH & MCCORMACK R
Managing police corruption: international perspectives
Chicago Office of International Criminal Justice 1987
Protecting the police: a fresh look at police accountability,
complaints procedures and the impact of ethnic minorities
London Conservative Political Centre
- 'Oversight in policing' (1991) 33:3-4
Canadian Journal
of Criminology
- 'Investigation of complaints against the police:
summary report of a national survey' (1988) 7:2
Journal of Police
WHITE R & ALDER C
The police and young people in Australia
Cambridge University Press 1994
- 'Street life: Police Practices and Youth Behaviour
in R White and C Adler ed
The Police and Young People
in Australia
Cambridge University Press Melbourne 1994
Preventing Corruption in Korea: A Comparative Perspective
among Korea, Singapore and Hong Kong
Opening Paper
at the Sixth International Anti-Corruption Conference
Cancun Mexico November 1993
YOUTH JUSTICE COALITION OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Nobody Listens: The Experience of Contact Between
Young People and Police
Youths Justice Coalition of
NSW Western Sydney Juvenile Justice Interest Group
and the Youth Action Policy Association Sydney
The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984
Sweet & Maxwell
1991 Rev 2nd
Table of cases
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Dolan v Australian and Overseas Telecommunications
[1993] FCA 202
(1993) 31 ALD 510
Hardcastle v Commissioner of Police
[1984] FCA 105
(1984) 53 ALR 593
MIEA v Pochi
[1980] FCA 85
(1980) 4 ALD 139
Re Kirby and Collector of Customs
(1989) 20 ALD 369
Table of legislation
Commonwealth
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
Australian Federal Police Amendment Bill 1996
Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981
Crimes (Search Warrants and Powers of Arrest) Amendment
Crimes Act 1914
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
Evidence Act 1995
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Health Insurance Act 1973
Industrial Relations Act 1988
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act
Migration Act 1958
National Crime Authority Act 1984
Ombudsman Act 1976
Public Service Act 1922
Capital Territory
Public Interest Disclosure Act 1994
NSW Police Legislation Amendment Bill 1996
Police Corruption Commission Bill 1996
Protected Disclosures Act 1994
Police Administration Act 1978
Criminal Justice Act 1989
Police Service Administration Act 1990
Whistleblowers (Interim Protection) and Miscellaneous
Amendments Act 1990
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1994
South Australia
Police (Complaints and Disciplinary Proceedings) Act
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1993
Official Corruption Commission Act 1988
United Kingdom
Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984
Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders
Administrative review
Alternative dispute resolution
Allegations
Anonymous complaints
Anti-corruption
Australian Capital Territory
Burden of proof
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Codes of conduct
Conciliation
Criminal Justice Commission (Qld)
Definition of complaint
Disciplinary Tribunal
Disciplinary offences
Domestic violence
False complaints
Gays and Lesbians
Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC)
Information about Disciplinary Results
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
Internal Investigation Division (IID)
Internal Security and Audit (ISA)
NSW Royal Commission into the Police Interim Report
Niland report
Norfolk Island
Off duty conduct
People with a disability
People from non-English speaking backgrounds
Receiving complaints
Recording complaints
Resignation
Right to silence
Roles of the AFP and NCA
Vicarious liability
Whistleblowers
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter