URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/lawreform/NSWLRCIP/1996/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:37:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Uniform Succession Laws: The Law of Wills - Issues Paper [1996] NSWLRCIP 10
Issues Paper 10 (1996) - Uniform Succession Laws: The Law of Wills
Table of Contents
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 AUSTRALIAN WILLS LEGISLATION
1.2 ISSUES OF WILLS LAW IN MOST URGENT NEED OF UNIFORMITY
1.3 ABBREVIATIONS
2. EXTENT OF WILL - CAPACITY AND FORMALITIES
2.1 WHAT PROPERTY MAY BE DISPOSED OF BY WILL?
2.2 LEGAL CAPACITY TO MAKE A WILL
2.3 EXECUTION REQUIREMENTS
2.4 THE POSITION OF THE TESTATOR'S SIGNATURE
2.5 THE EXECUTION OF POWERS OF APPOINTMENT BY WILL
2.6 THE EXECUTION OF ALTERATIONS
2.7 PUBLICATION OF WILL UNNECESSARY
2.8 COMPETENCE OF WITNESSES
2.9 GIFTS TO ATTESTING WITNESSES TO BE VOID
2.10 WILLS OF MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES
3. FORMALITIES - A DISPENSING POWER
3.1 SHOULD THE COURT BE EMPOWERED TO DISPENSE WITH THE FORMAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE EXECUTION, ALTERATION AND REVOCATION OF WILLS?
3.2 CASE HISTORY
3.3 THE EXISTING LEGISLATION IN AUSTRALIA
3.4 AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
3.5 NEW SOUTH WALES
3.6 NORTHERN TERRITORY
3.7 QUEENSLAND
3.8 SOUTH AUSTRALIA
3.9 TASMANIA
3.10 VICTORIA
3.11 WESTERN AUSTRALIA
3.12 AMERICAN UNIFORM PROBATE CODE
4. REVOCATION BY ACT OF TESTATOR - EFFECT OF MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE ON WILL
4.1 NO WILL TO BE REVOKED BY PRESUMPTION
4.2 MANNER OF REVOCATION
4.3 REVIVAL OF REVOKED WILLS
4.4 EFFECT OF MARRIAGE ON WILL
4.5 EFFECT OF DIVORCE ON WILL
5. FORMAL VALIDITY OF WILLS
6. GENERAL RULES FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF WILLS
6.1 WHEN A DEVISE IS NOT TO BE RENDERED INOPERATIVE - EFFECT OF SUBSEQUENT CONVEYANCE ON WILL
6.2 WILL TO SPEAK FROM DEATH OF TESTATOR
6.3 WHAT A RESIDUARY DEVISE SHALL INCLUDE
6.4 DEVISE OF LAND INCLUDES LEASEHOLD LAND
6.5 GENERAL DEVISE OR BEQUEST CAN EXECUTE A GENERAL POWER OF APPOINTMENTS
6.6 THE EFFECT OF A DEVISE WITHOUT WORDS OF LIMITATION
6.7 HOW THE WORDS "DIE WITHOUT ISSUE", OR "DIE WITHOUT LEAVING ISSUE" OR "HAVE NO ISSUE" SHALL BE CONSTRUED
6.8 NO DEVISE TO TRUSTEES ETC TO PASS A CHATTEL INTEREST
6.9 TRUSTEES UNDER AN UNLIMITED DEVISE TO TAKE THE FEE
6.10 DEVISES OF ESTATES TAIL SHALL NOT LAPSE
6.11 GIFTS TO CHILDREN OR OTHER ISSUE OF THE TESTATOR WHO LEAVE ISSUE LIVING AT THE TESTATOR'S DEATH SHALL NOT LAPSE - STATUTORY
SUBSTITUTIONAL PROVISION
7. RECENT REFORMS
7.1 BENEFICIARIES MUST SURVIVE TESTATOR BY THIRTY DAYS
7.2 IS THIRTY DAYS AN APPROPRIATE PERIOD FOR A GENERAL ANTI-LAPSE RULE?
7.3 POWER OF COURT TO RECTIFY WILLS
7.4 CONSTRUCTION OF RESIDUARY DISPOSITIONS
7.5 INCOME ON CONTINGENT AND FUTURE DISPOSITIONS
7.6 DELEGATION OF WILL MAKING POWER
8. MISCELLANEOUS ISSUES
8.1 DISPOSITION TO UNINCORPORATED ASSOCIATIONS OF PERSONS
8.2 THE ADMISSION OF EXTRINSIC EVIDENCE IN THE CONSTRUCTION OF WILLS
8.3 REFERENCE IN A WILL TO A VALUATION
8.4 WHO MAY SEE A WILL?
8.5 DEPOSIT OF WILL IN REGISTRY BY TESTATOR DURING LIFETIME
9. CONCLUSION
Issues Paper 10 (1996) - Uniform Succession Laws: The Law of Wills
History of this Reference (Digest)
The Standing Committee of Attorneys-General of Australia decided in 1991 that steps should be taken towards rendering uniform the
succession laws of the Australian States and Territories. The Attorney-General for Queensland remitted a reference to the Queensland
Law Reform Commission to co-ordinate the project in January 1992.
This paper was first published by the Queensland Law Reform Commission (QLRC) in July 1994 and reprinted in June 1995. In May 1995
the New South Wales Law Reform Commission was given a reference to participate in a joint project with other States and Territories
to develop uniform succession laws. The project is being coordinated by the QLRC.
Following the agreement of other States and Territories to participate in the project it was agreed that each agency involved in the
project would republish or recirculate the QLRC Issues Paper on the Law of Wills (WP46) and Family Provision (WP 47) for the purposes
of consultation in each State and Territory.
The New South Wales Law Reform Commission is therefore republishing the two papers as part of its own Issues Paper series. The text
of the Papers has not been changed other than to take account of any developments since the first date of publication. There is some
variation to the format, the paragraph numbers are the same in the QLRC and NSWLRC publications, but the page numbers vary.
The need for uniformity
English succession law and jurisdiction were imported into Australia upon the colonisation of the States and existing English succession
legislation was duly copied into the State statute books. The succession laws were therefore uniform during the nineteenth century.
During the twentieth century the succession laws diverged when States began to enact their own legislation. Those divergences have
become more marked as States have embarked on more purposive law reform, in some cases as the result of recommendations of law reform
Differences between the States
The consequence of these divergent activities is that there are no two States or Territories in Australia where the succession laws
are the same. In many respects the divergences are matters of detail; but often enough they are of great significance.
For example, a will made by a testator may be recognised for admission to probate in some States but not others. The main reason for
this is that some States are more exacting than others with respect to compliance with formalities of execution.
The intestacy rules, that is the rules that govern the distribution of a deceased estate to the extent that a will fails to, differ
substantially between the States.
Where neither the will makes nor the intestacy rules make adequate provision for the proper maintenance and support of members of
the deceased’s family, all States and Territories confer a power upon the Court to make provision for them. But the laws differ
markedly as to who may apply for such provision.
Less significant differences between the succession laws of the States and Territories are numerous, particularly in those relatively
neglected areas of law reform such as probate and administration. If one extends the scope of the inquiry to the Rules of Court,
the conclusion is justified that to practise successfully in succession law requires State by State expertise. Since most succession
practice is or should be concerned with minimising the costs of administering deceased estates, the majority of which are of no great
financial value, it is ordinary people who suffer most from the inevitable increase in costs which must occur if a deceased estate
has connection with more than one jurisdiction.
Implications of differing legislation
To offer a general example, if a person dies domiciled in one State or Territory but leaves land in another State or Territory, two
(or more) systems of succession law will apply - the law of the place in which the land is situate (the
), as far as that land is concerned, and the law of the place of the deceased’s domicile (the
lex domicilii
), as far as property other than that land is concerned. Thus, a person might die domiciled in South Australia but leaving land in
Victoria and Queensland. A will of the deceased’s might be admissible to probate in South Australia but not in Victoria or
Queensland because of a deficiency in execution, tolerated in South Australia but not in Victoria or Queensland. The deceased would
therefore die intestate so far as the land in Victoria and Queensland are concerned, but testate in South Australia.
Again, if the parents of the deceased person wished to make a family provision application with respect to the estate, they would
not be able to do so with respect to the land situate in Victoria, because parents may not apply for family provision in that State;
but they would be able to do so in Queensland, where parents may apply; and although the Queensland Court would not be able to make
an order affecting the land in Victoria, it would be able to take its value into account in considering whether and what order it
should make affecting any land in Queensland.
Recent legislative and law reform activity in Australia
There has been considerable activity, both by legislatures and by law reform agencies in most Australian States within the last decade
Australian Capital Territory
Amendments to the
made in 1991.
New South Wales
Amendments to the
Probate and Administration Act 1898
made in 1989.
Succession Act 1981
has brought all the succession law together into one enactment of a mere 72 sections, incorporating some reforms of a ground breaking
nature. In July 1993 the Queensland Law Reform Commission issued its Report No 42 entitled
Intestacy Rules
South Australia
The Wills (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act 1994.
Wills Act 1992
embodies some of the reforms recommended by Report No 35 of the Law Reform Commission of Tasmania entitled
Report on Reform in the Law of Wills
(1983). But the 1992 Act goes further in including some additional provisions.
Administration and Probate (Amendment) Act 1994
has introduced changes to the intestacy rules, and makes provision with respect to the effect of divorce on wills. In addition the
Victorian Law Reform Committee has published its comprehensive Report
Reforming the Law of Wills
(1994), with a proposed
Wills Act 1994
. References in this Paper to the Victorian Law Reform Committee’s recommendations are references to that Report. This proposed
Act is of considerable significance for law reform and uniformity initiatives.
The Victorian Report was published when this Issues Paper was in its final stages of preparation. There are close similarities between
the Report and the Issues Paper including identity of language in some places. This is not because the Issues Paper has drawn on
the Report, but because a member of the Queensland Law Reform Commission assisted the Victorian Law Reform Committee as a consultant
in its work in preparing the Report.
Western Australia
Wills Amendment Act 1987
introduced provisions for the admission to probate of wills informally executed, following the Law Reform Commission of Western Australia’s
Report on Wills: Substantial Compliance
(Project No 76 Part I, November 1985). Other Reports of that Commission, including the
Report on Recognition of Interstate and Foreign Grants of Probate and Administration
(Project No 34 Part IV, November 1984), the
Report on the Effect of Marriage or Divorce on Wills
(Project No 76 Part II, December 1991) and the
Report on the
Administration Act 1903
(Project No 88, August 1990), have been published but have not resulted in enacted legislation.
This list of activity is not exhaustive.
To date, in Australia, State succession laws have been reformed in a piecemeal manner. There has never been an attempt to reconsider
all the succession laws in their entirety in any State or Territory. Piecemeal reforms have tended to be concentrated on relatively
urgent or popular issues. The most neglected part of succession law is the part that relates to procedure.
Law reform and the concept of uniformity
To a certain extent law reform and the search for uniformity of laws amongst the States and Territories of Australia do not go hand
in hand. A law reform agency may find it difficult to recommend, in the interests of uniformity, provisions existing in other States
with which it cannot agree; and a State which has recently enacted legislation, which it believes represents the best in up-to-date
law, cannot be expected very soon afterwards to introduce further amendments merely in the interests of uniformity. It may be asked,
therefore, what the objects of initiatives to render Australia’s succession laws uniform really are.
Word for word uniformity
Ideally, uniform laws should be identical, word for word, in every State and Territory. Where the subject matter of the legislation
is of vital commercial significance, word for word uniformity becomes a matter of political priority and can be accomplished, as
in the uniform corporations legislation. In the relatively less urgent context of the law relating to private family wealth, however,
political commitment sufficient to overcome relatively minor differences in the wording of legislation may be difficult to secure.
It is therefore fair to ask whether “uniformity” can be achieved with something less than complete verbal identity of
all State and Territory statutes.
Consistency
If word for word uniformity cannot be realised, it may nevertheless be possible to achieve
consistency
of the succession laws in major respects. If the substance of the legislation, section by section, is the same, then a great deal
will have been achieved. For instance, if it were made quite clear in all the legislation that a will admissible to probate in any
Australian jurisdiction is admissible in all jurisdictions, anxiety would be alleviated in those cases, which can exist under the
present law where a will is admissible to probate in some jurisdictions but not others.
If rules about the effect of marriage and divorce on a will are consistent as far as policy is concerned, that is, the rule is the
same and any standard of proof (for example, respecting contrary intention) is the same, the fact that there may be differences of
drafting of the various provisions will not matter. The point is that it may be particularly difficult, in a search for word for
word uniformity, to secure agreement by parliamentary counsel in State or Territory A to accept that the drafting habits of parliamentary
counsel in State or Territory B are either preferable or acceptable, practices of counsel being varied and guarded with some pride
of expertise. It may be preferable to aim for consistency of policy.
What are the goals of the project?
Whether uniform or consistent, all the succession laws must be up-to-date. The law of wills, intestacy, family provision, administration
and probate, and administration of assets must be brought together in one piece of legislation and must share, as far as possible,
a common underlying principle. Unnecessary provisions and old language must be recognised and removed. Such a project inevitably
entails law reform.
Nevertheless, it may be said that the statutes which have been examined, between them, probably achieve all that could be desired
to ensure that proper provision can be guaranteed for persons having legitimate claims on the estates of deceased persons. If the
best bits are taken from all the statutes, with some reconsideration of the presentation and drafting of the material, it is predictable
that a statute could be produced, without the travail of major reconsideration of issues of principle or of substantive reform, which
could arguably, as far as it goes, be the best in the world.
Identifying issues
In an attempt to identify matters which could be the subject of a common approach to succession law throughout Australia a series
of papers discussing relevant issues will be published. To a paper on
Family Provision
(QLRC WP47, June
1995; NSWLRC IP11
, February 1996) and this paper on
The Law of Wills
(QLRC WP46; NSWLRC IP10, February 1996).
The Issues Papers have as their object initiating action towards rendering uniform the relevant legislation of the Australian States
and Territories. It is not their object to analyse the differences which exist with a view to coming to a decision as to whether
a given provision in one State or Territory is preferable to a similar provision elsewhere; or to analyse the way in which the provisions
work, their success from the point of view of practitioners, the incidence of applications actually made, or the case-law record.
Those tasks lie ahead.
Future work
All Australian jurisdictions are co-participants in the project. In September 1995 a meeting was held in Brisbane of representatives
from all jurisdictions to discuss the scope of the project and its future direction.
Other topics which may need to be dealt with as part of the project include:
(a) intestacy;
(b) administration of estates including:
(i) abolition of distinction between probate and administration;
(ii) abolition of the administrator’s bond;
(iii) vesting of deceased estates;
(iv) chain of executors;
(v) entitlement to letters of administration;
(vi) order of payment of debts;
(vii) common forms of application for grants;
(viii) interstate recognition of grants without resealing;
(ix) statutory wills for people lacking testamentary capacity.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
. In Re Butchart (Deceased)
[1932] NZLR 125.
Issues Paper 10 (1996) - Uniform Succession Laws:
The Law of Wills
Terms of Reference, Participants and Submissions
of this Reference (Digest)
Terms of Reference
New South Wales Law Reform Commission (May 1995)
To inquire into and report on
the existing law and procedure relating to succession and to recommend
and draft a model State and Territories
law on succession.
In undertaking this inquiry the Commission is to
consult with the Queensland Law Reform Commission which has accepted
responsibility
for the co-ordination of a uniform succession laws
Queensland Law Reform Commission (January 1992)
To review the existing law and
procedure relating to succession and to recommend and draft a model
State and Territory law on succession;
To co-ordinate the conduct of the reference with
other States' and Territories' law reform agencies and other relevant
Participants
New South Wales Law Reform Commission
Pursuant to
Commission Act 1967
the Chairman of the Commission
constituted a Division for the purpose of conducting the reference. The
members of the Division are:
The Hon G J Samuels AC QC (Chairman)
The Hon Justice David Hodgson (Commissioner-in-charge)
Mr Craig Kelly
Professor Michael Tilbury
Officers of the Commission
Executive Director
Mr Peter Hennessy
Legal Research
Ms Leonie Armstrong
Ms Fiona Manning
Ms Beverley Caska
Desktop Publishing
Ms Julie Freeman
Administrative assistance
Ms Zoya Howes
Queensland Law Reform Commission
Commissioners:
Chairperson
The Hon Justice G N Williams
Deputy Chairperson
Ms R G Atkinson
Mr W G Briscoe
Ms P A Cooper
Dr J A Devereux
Mr P D McMurdo QC
Secretariat:
Ms S P Fleming
Ms C E Riethmuller
Legal Officer
Ms L K Flynn
Administrative Officer
Ms M L Basile
Ms A C Thompson
Submissions
The Commission invites submissions on the issues relevant to
this review, including but not limited to the issues raised in this
All submissions and inquiries should be directed to:
Mr Peter Hennessy
Executive Director
NSW Law Reform Commission
GPO Box 5199
SYDNEY NSW 2001
[DX 1227 SYDNEY]
Phone: (02) 252 3855
Fax: (02) 247 1054
There is no special form required for submissions. If it is
inconvenient or impractical to make a written submission you may
the Commission and either direct your comments to a Legal
Officer over the telephone, or else arrange to make your submission in
Closing dates for submissions
The closing dates for submissions is
. No final decisions will be made by the
Commission until after the deadline for submissions has passed.
of submissions and confidentiality
If you would like your submission to be treated as
confidential, please indicate this in your submission. Submissions made
Commission may be used in two ways:
Since the Commission's
process of law reform is essentially public, copies of submissions made
to the Commission will normally be
made available on request to any
person or organisation. However, if you would like all, or part of your
submission to be treated
as confidential, please indicate this in your
submission. Any request for a copy of a submission marked
"confidential" will be determined
in accordance with the
of Information Act
In preparing the final Report, the Commission may
also find it useful to refer to and make mention of comments submitted
in response
Issues Paper
. However, if a
request for confidentiality is made, it will be respected by the
Commission in relation to the publication of such
submissions in a
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
NSWLRC Home
Table of Contents
Issues Paper 10 (1996) - Uniform Succession Laws: The Law of Wills
1. Introduction
History of this Reference (Digest)
1.1 AUSTRALIAN WILLS LEGISLATION
Wills legislation in all Australian States and Territories has the English
Wills Act 1837
as its origin. That Act sought amongst other things to resolve
difficulties of earlier law. Its language therefore looks back to
eighteenth century as much as forward to the nineteenth. So far as the
law of devises was concerned the
Wills Act 1837
necessarily reflects old system conveyancing, 1837 style. A major
general objective of any re-writing of the statutory law of
therefore ensure that all references to the pre-1837 law, whether
expressed or implied, and all language redolent of old
conveyancing, must be eliminated.
1.2 ISSUES OF WILLS LAW IN MOST URGENT NEED OF UNIFORMITY
Issues in most urgent need of uniformity are:
formalities required for the execution of wills
a power enabling the Court to dispense with compliance with those formalities
a clear explanation of what property can pass by operation of will
assimilating, consistently with their function, the law of powers of appointment exercised by will with the law of wills
the effect of marriage and divorce on wills
extent of proof of contrary intention negativing a statutory provision
conflict of laws issues
statutory rules for the construction of wills, with particular attention to getting rid of old language
statutory anti-lapse (substitutional) provisions
Court’s power to rectify wills
Court’s power to make wills for minors
Court’s power to make wills for persons with intellectual disabilities.
These issues are expressed in general terms and are not intended to be exhaustive.
There follows a section by section precis of most sections to be
found in the wills legislation of the Australian States and
Territories.
The order which has been followed reflects most of the
time the New South Wales
Probate and Administration Act 1898
1.3 ABBREVIATIONS
In the following chapters the State legislation is referred to as follows:
Wills Act 1968
Probate and Administration Act
Wills Act 1990
Succession Act 1981
Wills Act 1936
Wills Act 1992
Wills Act 1958
Wills Act 1994
(Vic) as proposed by the Final Report of the Victorian Law Reform Committee, May 1994.
Wills Act 1970
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
Issues Paper 10 (1996) - Uniform Succession Laws: The Law of Wills
2. Extent of Will - Capacity and Formalities
History of this Reference (Digest)
2.1 WHAT PROPERTY MAY BE DISPOSED OF BY WILL?
The object of this provision, which appears at the beginning of all wills’ legislation, is to explain what property may be disposed
of by will. The wording found in existing legislation derives from the
Wills Act 1837
(UK) and its language is in all cases archaic.
It is arguable that the provision on its face does not go far enough. It should be made clear that a will may dispose of property
to which the testator was not entitled either at the time of the making of the will or at the date of death. There may, for instance,
be litigation pending at the time of the testator’s death which is not resolved for a considerable time after the death but
which results in the payment of a sum of money, or the transfer of property, to the testator’s personal representatives; or
there may be a possible claim upon which the testator has not embarked but upon which the personal representatives do embark, which
results in the payment of money or the transfer of property to the representatives; or money may become payable or property transferable
to the personal representatives as a result of a gift or will of another person which in the terms of the gift or will is payable
to the representatives. All late accruals of money or property to the estate are subject to the terms of any will of the testator.
The will differs from any gift inter vivos because it can include property which did not belong to the testator when the will was
made, or even at the time of the death.
A uniform provision should reject the arcane language of the
(UK) and clearly bring out these principles.
2.2 LEGAL CAPACITY TO MAKE A WILL
A person under the age of eighteen cannot make a will unless he or she is married. The statutes differ as to the capacity to make
a will of a person who has been married but is no longer married. Some provisions allow a person under the age of 18 who has been
married to make a will (for example, ACT and in SA by section 5 inserted by the
Wills (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act
(SA)); Queensland allows a person who has been married to revoke a will, but not to make a new will. A uniform policy must be achieved.
Issues for consideration
(1) Should the age of capacity be reduced to 16?
(2) Should the Court be given power to allow a minor to make a will?
The latter is permitted in New South Wales (section 6A) and in South Australia (section 6 inserted by the
Wills (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act 1994
(SA)) and has been recommended by the Victorian Law Reform Committee in its Report on
Reforming the Law of Wills
(1994). In Tasmania, the Public Trustee may approve of a minor making a will, subject to certain conditions (section 7) and the Supreme
Court may subject to very similar conditions (section 8). See also Victoria (1994), section 6, a lengthy provision, concerned with
adults as well as minors.
One circumstance in which a minor might wish to seek the approval of the Court to make a will is if one or both of the minor’s
parents has abandoned the minor; and the minor wishes to make a will in favour of the parent, or some other person, who has cared
gratuitously or beyond the call of duty for the minor.
Issue for consideration
Should the Court be given power to make a will for an adult who lacks testamentary capacity?
This question raises wide issues. It presupposes that neither the existing will, if any, nor the relevant intestacy rules, nor the
relevant family provision legislation, can do justice in certain circumstances. Once again an example may be where the person who
lacks testamentary capacity has been abandoned by his or her family and it is right that a will should be made in favour of a person
who has no rights upon intestacy or under family provision legislation, most probably a person who has cared gratuitously or beyond
the call of duty for the incapacitated person, whether a member of the family or not.
To allow Courts to make a will for a person who lacks testamentary capacity may be seen as inconsistent with the policy underlying
family provision legislation, which is concerned not with the will which a competent testator might make, but with making adequate
provision for the proper maintenance and support of the persons entitled to make application under the legislation. In Victoria,
for instance, the parents of a deceased person are not permitted to apply for family provision. In that State to allow a parent of
an incapacitated person to apply to the Court to have a will made in his or her favour might be seen as compromising the policy of
family provision legislation. It may be justifiable to do this in the case where the person concerned cannot make a will at all because
of incapacity. Nevertheless this question does abut upon the possibility of reconsidering the underlying policy of family provision
legislation.
The proposed Victorian provision (Vic (1994), section 6) provides a generalised precedent.
2.3 EXECUTION REQUIREMENTS
Although there is some divergence between States and Territories concerning execution requirements, all States still require the testator
to sign, or acknowledge a previously made signature, in the presence of at least two witnesses, and require the witnesses to sign,
as an act of attestation of their having seen the signing or acknowledgment, in the presence of the testator. This basic requirement
has survived since the
Wills Act 1837
(UK). The advantages of a standardised rule for the execution of wills are obvious from the point of view of probate administration,
as well as in relation to the protection which the testator is afforded.
One possible modification of the two witness rule might be to allow a testator to sign in the presence of one witness and later to
sign again or acknowledge in the presence of another. This would solve the problem that can arise where only one witness at a time
seems to be available.
Issue for consideration
Should a testator be permitted to sign or acknowledge the signature in the presence of two witnesses serially rather than concurrently?
2.4 THE POSITION OF THE TESTATOR’S SIGNATURE
One perennial difficulty of the rules for the execution of wills has been the requirement of the
Wills Act 1837
(UK) that the testator’s signature be made “at the foot or end” of the will. This requirement necessitated the
inclusion of an additional provision attempting to explain the requirement. Nevertheless, the requirement has generated a volume
of litigation out of proportion to its importance. Recent reforms to wills legislation have addressed this question and as a result
the requirement has been omitted from the legislation in New South Wales, Western Australia, South Australia and the Australian Capital
Territory, and the Victorian Law Reform Committee has recommended that it be omitted (see Vic (1994), section 6(1)). Tasmania and
Queensland have retained the requirement. This does not affect the principle that the signature of the testator must be made with
the intention of executing the will (see Vic (1994), section 6(2)).
Issue for consideration
Should the requirement that a testator sign “at the foot or end” of the will be dropped?
2.5 THE EXECUTION OF POWERS OF APPOINTMENT BY WILL
A power of appointment is a power given to a person, called a donee of a power, enabling that person to decide who is to take certain
property described in the power. For instance, a testator may leave property to a spouse or child for life and allow the spouse or
child to decide who should take the property upon his or her death. Often such a power is exercisable by the will of the donee of
the power of appointment. Usually the donor of the power does not include any requirement, in the instrument creating the power,
concerning the way in which the donee of the power should exercise it; but the donor can insist that the power should be exercised
with formalities differing from and perhaps exceeding those required for the execution of a will. A result of that could be that
a power of appointment exercised in a properly executed will could be ineffective.
To ensure that the exercise of a power is not invalidated by such a formal requirement, since at least 1837 a provision has been included
in wills legislation to the effect that where a testator exercises a power of appointment by will, the power must be exercised in
accordance with the requirements for the execution of wills; and that if any additional requirement as to form is prescribed by the
instrument creating the power, the person exercising the power need not comply with it.
The drafting of this provision differs to a certain extent between States and Territories but the principle has never been questioned.
Nevertheless, other issues concerning the exercise by will of a power of appointment may exist. For instance, if a power of appointment
happened to allow the donee to appoint amongst the “issue” of a particular person and the testator exercised the power
in favour of “the issue of” that person, there are statutory rules for the construction of wills which determine who
such issue are and in what proportions they should take (see paragraph 6.11 below). It is not necessarily the case that the law of
construction of powers of appointment would give the same result.
Issue for consideration
It is arguable that the law relating to powers of appointment exercisable by will should be the same as the law relating to legacies
contained in wills, except to the extent that the instrument creating the power of appointment otherwise provides. This is an area
which may require some research.
2.6 THE EXECUTION OF ALTERATIONS
All States’ and Territories’ legislation make provision with respect to the execution of alterations to wills. The provisions
derive from the
(UK). In some States there has been a very slight relaxation in the requirement respecting the position of the signature or initials
of the testator and the witnesses relating to an alteration. Perhaps more surprising is the fact that the provision is found close
to the section regarding execution of wills in some legislation, but many sections away from it in others. There is no reason why
a common draft of this provision should not be achievable as the policy of the provisions is the same. Even if exact identity of
wording cannot be achieved in the short term it should be possible to achieve uniformity in the positioning of this section. In this
paper it is placed in the earlier position.
Issue for consideration
The position in the legislation of provisions relating to the execution of alterations to wills. Redrafting.
2.7 PUBLICATION OF WILL UNNECESSARY
no provision
no provision
There was a pre-1837 rule that in some cases a testator should “publish” his or her will by declaring to the witnesses
to the execution that the document was a will. That is no longer required and this section says so in some States (for example, New
South Wales) in the original language of the
Wills Act 1837
(UK) and in others (for example, Queensland) more directly. A form of words recommended by the Victorian Law Reform Committee’s
Wills Bill 1994
, section 8, is in the following terms:
Draft 8 Must witnesses know the contents of what they are signing?
A will which is executed in accordance with this Act is validly executed even if a witness to the will did not know that it was a
In South Australia and Western Australia the provision has simply been omitted from the legislation, to make way for new material.
A likely objective of the process of rendering this provision uniform will therefore be to remove it or to clarify it perhaps in
the manner of the Victorian recommended draft.
Issue for consideration
Removal or clarification of provisions relating to publishing wills.
2.8 COMPETENCE OF WITNESSES
ss16,17(2), 18,19
Before 1837 certain categories of persons were considered to be incompetent to act as witnesses in civil proceedings, in particular
persons whose testimony might be self serving. The difficulty about this, in probate proceedings, was that if such witnesses had
witnessed the execution of a will the will could not be proved. Piecemeal changes in the law of wills, some of which are described
in the next paragraph (Gifts to attesting witnesses to be void), became redundant as a result of changes to the law of evidence in
England made in the mid nineteenth century. Nevertheless in some States (for example, South Australia, Tasmania) antiquated provisions
remain; but in others (for example, Queensland) there is a more recent provision.
There is one particular respect in which a person cannot act as witness to a will and that is where the witness cannot see the signature
of the testator because the witness is blind. Hence the provision in the Queensland
Succession Act 1981
(section 14)
that any person competent to be a witness in civil proceedings in Court, other than a blind person, may act as a witness to a will.
It is possible that none of these provisions is really necessary in succession legislation and that who may be a witness, in probate
proceedings, should be left entirely to the law of evidence.
Issue for consideration
Whether it is necessary to have provisions relating to the competence of witnesses in succession legislation.
2.9 GIFTS TO ATTESTING WITNESSES TO BE VOID
no provision
no provision
The rule that neither a witness to a will nor the spouse of a witness to a will can take any benefit under it has been increasingly
questioned in recent times. The rule has been abolished by the
American Uniform Probate Code
, section 2-505, in South Australia in 1972 and in the Australian Capital Territory in 1991. The Victorian Law Reform Committee’s
Wills Bill 1994
, section 11, abolishes the rule in direct language.
The original rule of evidence law was that a person, and that person’s spouse, were disqualified from giving evidence in a cause
in which either of them was interested. A consequence of this was that if a beneficiary, or the spouse of a beneficiary, witnessed
a will that witness could not testify as to the execution of the will in probate proceedings. A result of that was that sometimes
a will could not be admitted to probate at all and the testator’s obvious intention was thwarted. By the
Wills Act 1750
(UK) the rule was changed, enabling the witness to give evidence in probate proceedings but disqualifying the witness and the witness’s
spouse from taking a benefit under the will. The former rules of evidence were reformed in the nineteenth century in particular by
Evidence Act 1851
(UK) and the
Evidence Amendment Act 1853
(UK); but the disqualification of beneficiary-witnesses remained embedded in the
Wills Act 1837
(UK) and a revised justification for it was posited namely that if a witness or a witness’s spouse were allowed to take a benefit
under a will an opportunity for undue influence would arise.
The difficulty with the rule is that it does not distinguish between the innocent and the guilty witness. The editors of the
American Uniform Probate Code
, commenting on abolishing the rule disqualifying witnesses from taking a benefit observe (section 2-505):
Of course the purpose of this change is not to foster the use of interested witnesses, and attorneys will continue to use disinterested
witnesses. But the rare and innocent use of a member of the testator’s family in a home-drawn will is not penalised.
This approach does not increase appreciably the opportunity for fraud or undue influence. A substantial devise by will to a person
who is one of the witnesses to the execution of the will is itself a suspicious circumstance, and the devise might be challenged
on the grounds of undue influence. The requirement of disinterested witnesses has not succeeded in preventing fraud and undue influence;
and in most cases of undue influence, the influencer is careful not to sign as witness, but to procure disinterested witnesses.
It is understood that in the twenty years since the rule was abolished in South Australia there have been no problems.
Misgivings about the harshness of the rule have resulted in various attempts, on the part of legislatures and the judiciary, to soften
its impact. Thus in some States the rule does not apply if there is a sufficiency of disinterested witnesses. In Victoria there is
a provision which allows an interested witness to take an intestacy share or the benefit left by the will, whichever is the less
(section 13(3)(c)); and a provision that a witness can approach the Court for relief (Part V of the
Wills Act 1958
(Vic)). In some States solicitors who have witnessed the execution of a will have been relieved of the disqualification in respect
of a provision in the will allowing them their reasonable costs for acting in the administration of the deceased estate.
In Tasmania there is a provision in sections 45 and 46 which allows a disqualified person to apply to the Court for an order that
that person be entitled under the will. There are requirements as to time limits and notice. The Court must be satisfied of the propriety
of the person’s conduct.
The accretion of exceptions to the disqualification rule has made the provision prolix, even counterproductive. Thus the Victorian
exception allowing the witness to take an intestacy benefit can have the effect of giving that benefit without any possibility of
questioning the propriety of the witness’s conduct. The Courts have tended to creativity in diminishing the force of the rule
by the doctrine of dependent relative revocation;
and have been easily satisfied, where they are permitted to consider it, of the propriety of the witness’s conduct.
The abolition of the disqualification will not prevent the Court from requiring a witness-beneficiary to answer an allegation that
there is a suspicious circumstance concerning the execution of the will;
or that there has been undue influence.
It is unlikely that, in the absence of adverse experience of the effect of the abolition of the rule, States which have abolished
it could be persuaded to re-instate it; and consequently the probable direction of a search for uniformity would be to abolish the
rule throughout Australia. The divergence of the present law, however, requires that comparisons be made and that, if it is desired
to retain the rule, some inexpensive procedure should be allowed to ensure that the innocent witness is not disqualified.
Issues for consideration
(1) Should the rule that neither a witness to a will nor his or her spouse can take any benefit under the will be abolished?
(2) If not, what procedure should be available to ensure that an innocent witness is not disqualified?
2.10 WILLS OF MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES
no provision
no provision
Historically the law has exempted from both the requirements of form and the disqualification of minority “any soldier being
in actual military service or any mariner or sailor being at sea”. The legislatures of the Australian States have tended to
enlarge the classes of persons given this “privilege”.
The value of this privilege has been greatly doubted. Thus Jeremy Bentham is quoted as follows:
As if it were a favour done to a man to enable an imposter to dispose of his property in his name! - as if the exception could be
beneficial, unless the rule were mischievous.
The “privilege” enabling soldiers and sailors to make wills without any formality and at any age may have been justifiable
in the eighteenth century when such persons had no recourse to legal advice. But it is arguable that, in the light of the policy
of the Commonwealth Department of Defence to encourage all members of the armed forces to make wills, and to provide free legal advice
to enable them to do so, it is no longer appropriate. To continue the “privilege” would be to allow the persons to whom
it is granted to revoke without formality wills made with the assistance of proper legal advice. It would be to undermine the policy
and practice of the Defence Department.
The privilege has been abolished in New South Wales and its abolition has been recommended by the Victorian Law Reform Committee.
In any case, to render the privilege uniform might in itself give rise to difficulties because a comparison of the legislation granting
the privilege reveals wide differences of approach. To reconcile them all would almost certainly entail broadening this doubtful
privilege. It is therefore arguable that the best form of uniformity would be to abolish it altogether.
Issue for consideration
Should the “privilege” relating to members of the armed forces be abolished?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
Estate of Brian
[1974] 2 NSWLR 231
Re Finnemore
[1991] 1 WLR 793.
[1981] VicRp 12
[1981] VR 113.
Wintle v Nye
[1959] 1 WLR 284.
. By Hardingham, Neave & Ford in
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand
(Law Book Co 2nd ed 1991) at para 401.
Issues Paper 10 (1996) - Uniform Succession Laws: The Law of Wills
3. Formalities - A Dispensing Power
History of this Reference (Digest)
SHOULD THE COURT BE EMPOWERED TO DISPENSE WITH THE FORMAL REQUIREMENTS
FOR THE EXECUTION, ALTERATION AND REVOCATION OF WILLS?
s9(a) & (b)
no provision
For some time there has been opinion that there should be some
mechanism to enable the Court to admit to probate a will which has
been executed in compliance with the requirements as to form of the
Wills legislation.
In the context of a drive towards uniform or consistent
succession laws for Australia the Australian case history and
precedents must
be scrutinised and evaluated and any experience gained
from them carefully considered.
3.2 CASE HISTORY
There has been a recent, authoritative survey of the cases in
which the dispensing power has been exercised, in South Australia, the
South Wales, the jurisdiction with the shortest experience
The article setting out the survey results lists, in an Appendix, 41
South Australian and New South Wales cases in which the dispensing
power has been invoked. The article and the Appendix of cases give a
clear picture of the sorts of cases in which the dispensing
be expected to be exercised in favour of probate and those in which the
power is unlikely to be exercised. Of 43 cases
(namely 41 included in
the Appendix and two other cases,
Re Kolodnicky
21 were admitted to probate under the jurisdiction. These include those
numbered 1, 4, 9, 12, 16, 18, 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, 30,
31, 32, 33,
36, 38 and 39 in the Appendix,
Twelve cases were refused admission to probate, all of which were
concerned with draft wills, notes and instructions for wills,
engrossed but not executed and lists of legacies or amendments. They
are numbered 1, 5, 6, 15, 19, 20, 22, 26, 34, 37, 40 and
Appendix. “Mirror” wills have been admitted (numbers 3 and
11). Unsigned wills are not usually admitted but
can be if the failure
to sign is accidental, that is, the intention is present (numbers 36,
38 and 39).
Many of the refusals mentioned in Justice Powell’s article
occurred in the early stages of the exercise of the jurisdiction,
the boundaries of the jurisdiction were being tested. They indicate a
policy which distinguishes between instruments which the
intends to be a will and drafts, letters of instruction, even
engrossments of wills which were not intended to be the will
time they were under consideration by the testator. The advantage for
any jurisdiction which adopts wording similar to that
found in South
Australia and New South Wales is that it will have a substantial body
of persuasive precedent to enable the Courts
to establish the
likely outcomes in individual fact situations.
Further literature on the subject has been generated in the
United States partly as a result of the South Australian initiative. In
particular, there is Professor Langbein’s article “Excusing
Harmless Errors in the Execution of Wills: a Report on
Australia’s
Tranquil Revolution in Probate Law”.
3.3 THE EXISTING LEGISLATION IN AUSTRALIA
In 1972 South Australia legislated to give the Court a
dispensing power, allowing it to admit to probate a will not duly
The legislation has been amended by the
Wills (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act 1994
In 1975 the distinguished American Professor John Langbein
argued that if there was substantial compliance with the requirements
for execution of wills the Court should be able to admit the
to probate.
In 1981 the
Succession Act
Professor Langbein’s “substantial compliance”
doctrine. A description of that legislation follows.
In 1983 the Tasmanian Law Reform Commission recommended
the adoption of the Queensland “substantial compliance” approach but Tasmania’s
Wills Act 1992
has followed the “dispensing power” model.
In 1987 Western Australia legislated, inserting “Part X - Informal Wills” into its
Wills Act 1970
(WA). This legislation adopts the South Australian, “dispensing
power” approach rather than the Queensland “substantial
compliance” approach.
In 1989 New South Wales legislated, inserting section 18A into its
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) also adopting the South Australian “dispensing power”
approach in preference to the Queensland “substantial
compliance” approach.
In 1990 the American
Uniform Probate Code
took the matter further with a comprehensive provision, described in paragraph 16 below.
3.4 AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Section 11A
Wills Act 1968
(ACT), inserted in
1991, is in terms not dissimilar to that of the New South Wales
provision (see paragraph 3.5 below). It sets the
civil standard of
proof, namely that the Court must be satisfied of the testator’s
3.5 NEW SOUTH WALES
Section 18A of the
Probate and Administration Act 1898
(NSW) reads as follows:
18A(1) A document purporting to embody the testamentary intentions
of a deceased person, even though it has not been executed in
with the formal requirements of this Act, constitutes a will
of the deceased person, an amendment of such a will or the revocation
of such a will if the Court is satisfied that the deceased person
intended the document to constitute his or her will, an amendment
his or her will or the revocation of his or her will.
(2) In forming its view, the Court may have regard (in addition
to the document) to any other evidence relating to the manner of
or testamentary intentions of the deceased person, including
evidence (whether admissible before the commencement of this section
otherwise) of statements made by the deceased person.
The jurisdiction in New South Wales is in its early days. Its
effectiveness has been indicated by the article of Justice Powell
in paragraph 3.2 above.
3.6 NORTHERN TERRITORY
Section 12(2) of the
Wills Act 1990
(NT) is in the same
terms as the former South Australian legislation. It requires proof
that there can be “no reasonable doubt”
(see paragraph 3.12
3.7 QUEENSLAND
Section 9(a)
and (b) of the
Succession Act 1981
(Qld) reads as follows:
(a) the Court may admit to probate a testamentary instrument
executed in substantial compliance with the formalities prescribed by
this section if the Court is satisfied that the instrument expresses
the testamentary intention of the testator; and
(b) the Court may admit extrinsic evidence including evidence of
statements made at any time by the testator as to the manner of
of a testamentary instrument.
Although the standard of proof required is that the Court be
satisfied of the testator’s intention, the requirement that there
be “substantial compliance” has proved so great a stumbling
block that the jurisdiction has had poor success, and cases
which would
almost certainly have been found to come within the dispensing power in
South Australia or New South Wales have failed
in Queensland. In the
following cases substantial compliance was
[1985] 1 Qd R 513
were signatures of two witnesses on the will, but one self-interested
witness swore that only she had been present when the
will was executed
and the other witness could not be traced.
Re Johnston
[1985] 1 Qd R 516
witness subscribed a folded document, the testator’s signature
not being visible. A second witness attested at a different
testator’s signature then being visible.
Re Henderson
QSC, Case No 231, 1985
Only one witness attested, a Justice of the Peace, who informed the testator that his attestation would suffice.
Will of Eagles
A codicil was
witnessed by two witnesses, but there was evidence that they were not
present at the same time and there was no evidence
as to who attested
first or of the interval between the first and second attestations.
On the other hand substantial compliance has been found on a few occasions.
(Unrep) QSC Case No E375, 1984
witness testified that the other witness was not present when the will
was executed. The other witness testified that both witnesses
Re Matthews
[1989] 1 Qd R 300
first witness attested and signed in the presence of the testator;
then, at the testator’s request, took the will to another
to witness, which was done in the absence of the testator.
(Unrep) QSC,
Case No 1653, 1987
The will was executed but not at the foot or end.
[1992] 2 Qd R 63
The will was executed in the presence of one witness; the next day the second witness signed in the presence of the testator.
The difficulty with
is that they both could have been decided in favour of probate under
existing law, without the need to plead the “substantial
compliance” doctrine. In
the judge could have
found for the will by believing the witness who maintained that both
witnesses were present at the same time.
precedents which show that the Courts can admit to probate wills which
have been signed by the testator in an unconventional
probably indicates the limited use to which the provision can be put.
The profession in Queensland has found the jurisdiction
difficult to predict and it is rarely used. As the cases above
indicate, far
more is required than is required either in New South
Wales or South Australia. In a search for uniformity it would be
to persuade any State or Territory to replace existing
legislation, which appears to be working as intended, with the
precedent, or the similar provision recommended by the Law
Reform Commission of Tasmania, which is not working well.
3.8 SOUTH AUSTRALIA
When first introduced in 1972 section 12(2) of the South Australian
Wills Act 1936
A document purporting to embody the testamentary intentions of a
deceased person will, notwithstanding that it has not been executed
with the formalities required by this Act, be taken to be a will of the
deceased person if the Supreme Court, upon application for
admission of
the document to probate as the last will of the deceased, is satisfied
that there can be no reasonable doubt that the
deceased intended the
document to constitute his or her will.
This provision has been amended by the
Wills (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act 1994
(SA) to read as follows:
(2) Subject to this Act, if the Court is satisfied that a document
that has not been executed with the formalities required by this
expresses testamentary intentions of a deceased person, the document
will be admitted to probate as a will of the deceased person.
(3) If the Court is satisfied that a document that has not been
executed with the formalities required by this Act expresses an
by a deceased person to revoke a document that might
otherwise have been admitted to probate as a will of the deceased
person, that
document is not to be admitted to probate as a will of the
deceased person.
(4) This section applies to a document whether it came into existence within or outside the State.
(5) Rules of Court may authorise the Registrar to exercise the powers of the Court under this section.
What is significant about the amended law is that it lowers the
standard of proof required in cases of this kind. Under the original
legislation the Court had to be satisfied that there could be “no
reasonable doubt” as to the intention of the testator.
Court has only to be “satisfied” of the testator’s
intention. It is apprehended that this means that the
more flexible
test of satisfaction clarified by the High Court in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
is applicable. The express reference to the power to authorise the
Registrar to exercise the powers of the Court is of significance.
understood that because of the former proof requirement it was felt
that the jurisdiction should be exercised only by the judiciary;
the Registrar was not permitted to exercise the jurisdiction even in
uncontested cases.
3.9 TASMANIA
Section 26 of the
Wills Act 1992
(Tas) is as follows:
26(1) A document purporting to embody the testamentary intentions
of a deceased person is taken, notwithstanding that it has not been
executed in accordance with Division 3, to be a will of the deceased
person, an amendment of such a will or the revocation of such
the Court, on application for a grant of probate of the last will of
the deceased person, is satisfied that there can be
no reasonable doubt
that that person intended the document to constitute the will of that
person, an amendment of such a will or
the revocation of such a will.
(2) In considering a document for the purposes of subsection
(1), the Court may have regard, in addition to the document, to any
evidence relating to the manner of execution or the testamentary
intentions of the deceased person, including evidence, whether
before the commencement of this Act or otherwise, of
statements made by the deceased person.
This provision departs from the recommendation of the Law Reform Commission of Tasmania’s
Report on the Law of Wills
in that it has not adopted the Queensland “substantial
compliance” model, but the South Australian “dispensing
power” model. Nevertheless it does require a high standard of
proof by the inclusion of the words “that there can be
reasonable doubt”.
3.10 VICTORIA
A proposed section 9 for the
Wills Act 1994
(Vic), recommended by the Victorian Law Reform Committee reads as follows:
Draft 9 When may the Court dispense with requirements for execution of wills?
(1) A document purporting to embody the testamentary intentions
of a deceased person, even though it has not been executed in
with the formal requirements of this Act, constitutes a will
of the deceased person, the exercise of a power of appointment, an
of such a will or the revocation of such a will if the Court
is satisfied that the deceased person intended the document to
his or her will, the exercise of a power of appointment, an
amendment to his or her will or the revocation of his or her will.
(2) In forming its view, the Court may have regard (in addition
to the document) to any evidence relating to the manner of execution
testamentary intentions of the deceased person, including evidence
(whether admissible before the commencement of this section
otherwise) of statements made by the deceased person.
(3) This section applies to a document whether it came into existence within or outside the State.
(4) Rules of Court may authorise the Registrar to exercise the powers of the Court -
(a) without limit as to the value of the interests affected, in all cases in which those affected consent; and
(b) even if there is no consent, in all cases in which the value
of the interests affected does not exceed a sum specified in the
3.11 WESTERN AUSTRALIA
In 1987 the following provisions were introduced into the
Wills Act 1990
Informal wills
34. A document purporting to embody the testamentary intentions
of a deceased person is a will of that person, notwithstanding that
has not been executed in accordance with section 8, if the Supreme
Court in a probate action is satisfied that there can be no
doubt that the deceased intended the document to constitute his will.
Informal alteration of will
35. Any alteration made to a will of a deceased person after the
will was executed or made has effect, notwithstanding that the
has not been made in accordance with section 10, if the
Supreme Court in a probate action is satisfied that there can be no
doubt that the deceased intended the will as so altered to
constitute his will.
Informal revocation of will
36. A writing declaring an intention of a deceased person to
revoke a will or part of a will has effect, notwithstanding that it has
not been executed in accordance with section 15(1)(c), if the Supreme
Court in a probate action is satisfied that there can be no
doubt that the deceased intended by the writing to revoke the will or
part of the will, as the case may be.
Informal revival of will
37. A writing declaring an intention of a deceased person to
revive a will or part of a will that has been revoked has effect,
notwithstanding
that it has not been revived in accordance with section
16(1), if the Supreme Court in a probate action is satisfied that there
be no reasonable doubt that the deceased intended by the writing to
revive the will or part of the will.
The advantage of this form of dispensing legislation is that it
makes separate provision for the making of a will, and the alteration,
revocation and revival of a will. It may be considered to be a plain
English draft.
3.12 AMERICAN UNIFORM PROBATE CODE
Section 2-503 of the
American Uniform Probate Code
reads as follows:
Writings intended as wills, etc
Although a document or writing added upon a document was not
executed in compliance with Section 2-502, the document or writing is
treated as if it had been executed in compliance with that section if
the proponent of the document or writing establishes by clear
convincing evidence that the decedent intended the document or writing
to constitute (i) the decedent’s will, (ii) partial
or complete
revocation of the will, (iii) an addition or alteration of the will, or
(iv) a partial or complete revival of his [or
her] formerly revoked
portion of the will.
The commentary to this provision refers to the existence of similar
legislation in Manitoba and Israel. The Uniform Laws Conference
Canada approved a comparable measure for the Canadian
Uniform Wills Act
in 1987. The Commentary also pays considerable attention to the South
Australian legislation and the experience derived under it.
It will be vital for any uniform succession law to ensure that
the Court’s power to admit to probate defectively executed wills,
alterations and revocations is, at least as far as policy is concerned,
the same in all States. The standard of proof should be the
would be contrary to uniformity if a defectively executed will could be
admitted to probate under a dispensing power in
some States but not in
Issues for consideration
(1) Should the Court be able to admit to probate a will which
has not been executed in compliance with legislative requirements as
(2) If yes to (1) what policy considerations should be included in the Court’s power?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
. The Hon Mr Justice
Powell Recent Developments in New South Wales in the Law Relating to Wills
(1993) 67 ALJ 25.
(1981) 27 SASR 374.
(1986) 40 SASR 305.
(1987) 87 Colum LR 87.
Substantial Compliance with the Willis Act (1975
88 Harvard Law Review 489.
. Report 35
Reform of the Law of Wills
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
. Report No 35 1983.
Issues Paper 10 (1996) - Uniform Succession Laws: The Law of Wills
4. Revocation by Act of Testator - Effect of Marriage and Divorce on Will
History of this Reference (Digest)
4.1 NO WILL TO BE REVOKED BY PRESUMPTION
no provision
no provision
no provision
This provision is that no will shall be revoked by any presumption of an intention on the ground of an alteration of circumstances.
Issue for consideration
Should this provision be omitted and included in a general provision about when a will is revoked, such as the provision which follows
(paragraph 4.2 below).
4.2 MANNER OF REVOCATION
This section is concerned with the manner in which a will is revoked, viz. by the testator by a later will, by a revoking instrument,
and by destruction of the will with the intention of revoking it, and by operation of law, viz. by marriage and divorce, or order
of the Court under a dispensing or other power. It begins with words like “A will or part of a will is revoked only by...”
and is therefore intended to be comprehensive as to revocation.
It is arguable that perhaps there should be separate provisions dealing with revocation by act of the testator, revocation by marriage,
revocation by divorce and revocation by Court order. It is likely that this provision was originally intended to refer only to revocation
by act of the testator and that the added references to sections providing for revocation by other means are drafting short cuts.
The Tasmanian provision fails to include a cross reference to the Court’s dispensing power (section 26).
Issue for consideration
Should there be separate provisions dealing with revocation by act of the testator, revocation by marriage, revocation by divorce
and revocation by court order?
4.3 REVIVAL OF REVOKED WILLS
These provisions are concerned with the revival of a will that has been revoked. They are affected by provisions in some States that
allow the Court to dispense with requirements for the execution of wills, including revivals. The provisions tend to be in the language
Wills Act 1837
(UK) so some reconsideration of the drafting would be appropriate.
Issue for consideration
Should these provisions be re-drafted?
4.4 EFFECT OF MARRIAGE ON WILL
Wills Act 1837
(UK) provided that a will is revoked by the marriage of the testator, except to the extent that it exercised a power of appointment
irrelevant to the married status of the testator. Subsequent legislation allowed the will to remain on foot, despite the marriage,
if the testator indicated an intention contrary to the rule. The wording commonly adopted was that the will should be “expressed
to be made in contemplation of marriage”. This wording placed a high degree of proof upon the issue of intention and generated
litigation.
Later revisions to the legislation have concentrated on the question of the testator’s contrary intention and the degree of
proof required. Thus in the Report of the Law Reform Commission of Western Australia entitled
Effect of Marriage or Divorce on Wills
the recommendations of the Commission respecting the effect of marriage on a will are principally concerned with the proof of the
testator’s contrary intention.
The Victorian legislation is similarly preoccupied with issues of proof of contrary intention; but it has made a considerable contribution
to the solution of the problem by a provision that marriage does not revoke the will to the extent that it makes provision for the
person to whom the testator is married at the time of death. So far as the cases brought to Court were an attempt by a spouse to
take a benefit left by a will made before marriage, this provision has the effect of short circuiting the problem of proof of contrary
The more general issue raised is that of the extent to which testators should be allowed to indicate an intention contrary to a statutory
rule. It is arguable that marriage is so important a step that a person getting married should be encouraged to make a new will after
the event, rather than to try to make a will before the event attempting to take into account the consequences of a particular marriage
or of marriage generally. On the other hand it is arguable that the testator’s intention, as is his or her presumed intention,
should be an underlying concern of all wills legislation. A major factor to be considered is the costs factor of showing a contrary
intention which is not expressed in the clearest terms.
There is a more general observation which places these issues in context. The average age of marriage in Australia is in the early
to mid twenties. The average age of death for men is in the early seventies and for women in the later seventies. A will made before
marriage is therefore unlikely to be relevant to a testator dying some fifty years later. That is to say, legislation about the effect
of a contrary intention on the rule that marriage revokes the will is based on a statistically negligible assumption of early death.
A statutory provision which allows an intention over fifty years old to be litigated is unrealistic. It is arguable that it would
be better to lay down an absolute rule, viz that marriage revokes a will. This argument can be reinforced by the observation that
a surviving spouse today fares far better, under intestacy rules, than he or she did in 1837; and that family provision laws also
ensure that adequate provision is made for the proper maintenance and support of the surviving spouse. An absolute rule would be
far easier as a basis for legal advice respecting the making of a will by persons intending to marry.
However, the Victorian solution which saves a will to the extent that it confers a benefit on a person to whom the testator is married
at the time of death seems to be a useful compromise, although it requires consideration both as to principle and drafting.
These issues and the divergences of approach between the various statutes on this matter require consideration.
Issues for consideration
(1) To what extent should a testator be allowed to indicate an intention contrary to a statutory rule that the will is revoked by
the marriage of the testator?
(2) Would it be preferable to have an absolute rule that marriage revokes a will?
(3) Should a will be saved to the extent that it confers a benefit on a person to whom the testator is married at the time of death?
4.5 EFFECT OF DIVORCE ON WILL
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
Divorce, like marriage, has a considerable impact on the economic situation of both parties. One object of a divorce is to terminate
every aspect of the relationship which existed between the parties and to ensure that they are afterwards, so far as possible, economically
independent of each other. If either party to a marriage has made a will benefiting the other it is likely that that party would
wish to make substantial changes to that will in the event of divorce. So far as the will makes provision for the spouse it is likely
that in the event of divorce the testator would wish that part of the will to be revoked. But so far as the will makes provision
for others for whom the testator has decided, for whatever reason, to make provision it is probable that the testator would wish
those provisions to continue.
Some States have already legislated. In the Australian Capital Territory, New South Wales and Queensland there is a provision the
general tenor of which is that divorce revokes the will to the extent that it provides benefits for the spouse, or appoints the spouse
to be executor, trustee, advisory trustee or sometimes guardian. In Tasmania the effect of divorce is that it revokes the wills of
the spouses altogether, thus obliging them to make new wills.
The Law Reform Commission of Western Australia in a Report on the
Effect of Marriage or Divorce on Wills
recommended that divorce have the effect of partially revoking any wills of the spouses. The South Australian Law Reform Committee
issued a Report entitled
The Effect of Divorce upon Wills
in 1977 also recommending that divorce have the effect of partially revoking any wills of the spouses. A provision was included in
Wills (Miscellaneous) Amendment Bill
(SA) in 1993 but did not find its way into ensuing legislation (
Wills (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act 1994
(SA)). The Victorian Law Reform Committee has recommended that divorce have the effect of partially revoking any wills of the spouses
- see proposed
Wills Act 1994
(Vic), section 14.
As in the case of the effect of marriage on wills, all these provisions attempt to define the extent to which a testator may displace
the statutory provision by an expression of contrary intention. It is worth considering whether this statutory rule should be capable
of being displaced by a contrary intention contained in the will. After all, the divorced parties may live for many years after the
divorce and the intention of a will made before the divorce may seem to be irrelevant to a situation if death occurs many years later.
It is arguable that the costs of showing such a contrary intention might often be too high a price to pay for this liberty and that
a more absolute rule preventing a testator from indicating a contrary intention is justified. A clear rule would enable legal advisers
to give divorced persons simple and correct advice and bring them to a clear realisation of the need to make new wills after divorce.
These issues, the absence of legislation in some States and the Northern Territory, and differences between States that do have legislation,
await examination.
Issues for consideration
(1) Should divorce only partially revoke the will; such as to the extent that it provides benefits for the spouse, or appoints the
spouse to be executor, trustee, advisory trustee and guardian?
(2) Should divorce revoke the wills of the spouses altogether?
(3) Should the statutory will be capable of being displaced by a contrary intention contained in the will?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
[1949] VicLawRp 36
[1949] VLR 201
[1951] VicLawRp 67
[1951] VLR 477.
. Project No 76, Part 11, 1991
. Project No 76, Part 11, 1991
Issues Paper 10 (1996) - Uniform Succession Laws: The Law of Wills
5. Formal Validity of Wills
History of this Reference (Digest)
5.1 RECOGNITION OF WILLS MADE IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS
Part 11A, ss15A-15H
Part 1A, ss32A-32F
ss13,15,15C
Part 1A, ss20A-20D
Part VII, ss20-23
These provisions are about the recognition of wills made in other jurisdictions. They are concerned with the requirements for execution
of such wills, establishing what system of law applies to such wills, and the construction of the law applying to these wills. They
are intended to conform with the
Hague Convention
of 1960 on the conflict of laws relating to the form of testamentary disposition. The. problem is that in adopting the Convention
drafters have improved upon the original draft which appeared in the
Wills Act 1963
(UK). Queensland adopted the English precedent almost verbatim; but other jurisdictions have used their own drafting styles. The
rules may come to be of greater significance within Australia if Australian succession laws diverge substantially as a result of
law reform. One main objective of having uniform succession laws is to prevent conflicts problems arising within Australia.
Nevertheless, these sections do date back to the Convention of 1960 and there does not appear to have been any substantial reconsideration
of their substance in the mean time. There may therefore be some case for their reconsideration; but there is no reason why they
should not be rendered uniform, the present differences between them being largely matters of drafting preference.
Reconsideration of this part of succession law requires a conflicts of laws approach as well as an Australian constitutional law approach.
Issue for consideration
Should the effect of these provisions relating to the recognition of wills made in other jurisdictions be the same?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
Issues Paper 10 (1996) - Uniform Succession Laws: The Law of Wills
6. General Rules for the Construction of Wills
History of this Reference (Digest)
6.1 WHEN A DEVISE IS NOT TO BE RENDERED INOPERATIVE - EFFECT OF SUBSEQUENT CONVEYANCE ON WILL
The gist of this provision is that a devise of land is not adeemed, that is revoked, altogether by a conveyance made subsequent to
the will by which some part or interest in the land devised is conveyed away from the testator. Before 1837 any change in the testator’s
interest in relation to realty could cause the revocation of any devise of that land contained in the testator’s will. The
drafting of the provision raises the issue of the extent to which the drafting of a modern law of wills should be constrained by
pre-1837 law.
It is likely that this provision can be repealed altogether if a comprehensive draft can be achieved concerning what property may
be disposed of by will (see paragraph 2.1 above).
Issue for consideration
Is it appropriate to revoke provisions relating to the effect of a subsequent conveyance of land on a will?
6.2 WILL TO SPEAK FROM DEATH OF TESTATOR
This provision is the first of four or five sections appertaining to the construction of wills. In Queensland and Western Australia
these sections have been conflated into one, abridged and put into relatively up-to-date language. This provision establishes the
rule that a will is to be construed, with reference to the property comprised in it, to speak and take effect as if it had been executed
immediately before the death of the testator. One of its objects is to ensure that property acquired by a person after he or she
has made a will can be included in provisions of an existing will. It therefore abuts upon the question of what property may be disposed
of by will - see paragraphs 6.1 and 2.1 above. To this extent the provision requires careful consideration.
Issues for consideration
This provision to be re-considered in light of the resolution of other issues identified above.
6.3 WHAT A RESIDUARY DEVISE SHALL INCLUDE
This is the second of four sections, conflated into one in Queensland and Western Australia, about the construction of wills. The
gist of this provision is that property the subject of a disposition in a will that fails to take effect is to be included in any
residuary disposition contained in the will.
It is an important rule which requires up-to-date drafting.
Issue for consideration
This provision needs to be re-drafted in modern terms.
6.4 DEVISE OF LAND INCLUDES LEASEHOLD LAND
It seems that before 1837 a general disposition of
by will might include only freehold land; and that if the testator owned leasehold land it would not pass under the general devise.
A likely reason for this was that in a general devise the testator would use the correct words of limitation for the conveyance of
the freehold so inferentially excluding any leasehold. The
Wills Act 1837
(UK) abolished the requirement that the correct words of limitation be used in the devise of land, (see paragraph 6.6 below) and
this provision, viz. that a general disposition of land or of land in a particular area includes leasehold land whether or not the
testator owns freehold land, is consequential.
This relict of pre-1837 law has left at least one unsolved problem. Suppose a testator’s will provides: “I devise all
my realty in Queensland to X”. Would this provision include leaseholds in Queensland? Since the language of the will is traditionally
associated with realty - both by the use of the word “devise” and of the word “realty”, it is arguable that
leaseholds could not pass. This section does not solve this problem. For a possible approach to the solution of the problem consideration
section 29(a)
Succession Act
(Qld) may assist (see paragraph 7.4 below).
Issue for consideration
How best to include leaseholds in the type of property that can be devised?
6.5 GENERAL DEVISE OR BEQUEST CAN EXECUTE A GENERALPOWER OF APPOINTMENT
This provision or provisions is to the effect that a general devise of land and a general bequest of personalty can operate as the
execution of a power of appointment.
The object is to ensure that the will deals comprehensively with the testator’s property including property over which he or
she had a power of appointment.
By the will of X a power to appoint in relation to Bectare is given to Y, to be exercised in favour of such of X’s children
as Y shall appoint and in default of appointment to X’s children in equal shares. Y has died leaving a will which includes
the provision “I devise all my realty to X2”. X2 is one of X’s children. The statutory provision ensures that the
general devise contained in Y’s will exercises the power conferred on Y by X’s will in favour of X2. Otherwise the gift
over in default of appointment would have applied and Bectare would have been divided amongst all the surviving children of X. X2
will also take any realty belonging to Y.
6.6 THE EFFECT OF A DEVISE WITHOUT WORDS OF LIMITATION
At common law a devise of realty was considered to be a conveyance and the fee simple could pass only if the required words of limitation
- that is, “to A and his heirs” or “to A and the heirs of his body” - were used. If these words were not
used the devise could not pass the fee simple. This provision abolishes that rule. Since words of limitation are no longer required
to pass the fee simple it should be considered whether this provision needs to be retained. It is about pre-1837 law and old system
conveyancing.
Issue for consideration
Whether there is any reason for retaining these provisions?
6.7 HOW THE WORDS "DIE WITHOUT ISSUE", OR "DIE WITHOUT LEAVING ISSUE" OR "HAVE NO ISSUE" SHALL BE CONSTRUED
no provision
There must have been pre-1837 cases in which a disposition of property in the event of a designated person dying without issue, or
without leaving issue, or having no issue, had been construed as referring to failure of issue at any time in the future, and not
failure during the life of the person designated. Such a disposition might then have been in danger of being held to be void for
breach of the rule against perpetuities. The possibility of this construction being arrived at has been negatived by this provision.
It is perhaps not without significance that the rule has been omitted from the Western Australian legislation. It will be worth reconsidering
this provision and examining its history, since it may be justifiable to omit it as one of those provisions which hark back to before
Issue for consideration
Whether there is any reason for retaining this provision?
6.8 NO DEVISE TO TRUSTEES ETC TO PASS A CHATTEL INTEREST
no provision
no provision
no provision
This is a provision intended to ensure that devises to trustees or executors carry the entire fee simple if the testator has the fee
simple. It has the appearance of a remnant from the days when words of limitation were required in devises even to trustees. That
is, it is about old system conveyancing. It has already been covered by the general provision that the entire interest of the testator
in property whether realty or personalty passes under the will - see paragraph 2.1 above. Its omission from the Western Australian
and Queensland legislation, and the Victorian proposed
Wills Act 1994
is clearly correct.
Issue for consideration
Whether there is any reason for retaining this provision?
6.9 TRUSTEES UNDER AN UNLIMITED DEVISE TO TAKE THE FEE
no provision
no provision
no provision
This again is a provision dating from the time when a devise to trustees might be found not to have transferred the fee simple to
them. That is it is a provision about old system conveyancing. It was intended to ensure that the fee simple was vested in the trustees.
The same comments apply as in the case of the last paragraph. In the Tasmanian
Wills Act 1992
this provision and the last have been conflated into one section.
Issue for consideration
Whether there is any reason for retaining this provision?
6.10 DEVISES OF ESTATES TAIL SHALL NOT LAPSE
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
This is an anti-lapse provision designed to ensure that if a person to whom an estate tail was devised died in the lifetime of the
testator the devise would not fail but would pass to those who would have taken had the person died immediately after the testator.
Estates tail are now so anomalous as to cast doubt upon the utility of this provision. It has been justifiably omitted from the legislation
in the Australian Capital Territory, Queensland and Western Australia and proposed legislation in Victoria.
A general anti-lapse provision (see paragraph 6.11 below) will take care of this kind of case where the issue is issue of the testator.
Where a life interest and remainder is given, the intention of the testator will prevail and the death before the testator of a person
intended to be a life tenant will not affect the rights of the remainderman who survives the testator. It is doubtful whether any
attention has been paid to this provision for some time, so perhaps some consideration of it in general terms may be desirable; although
it is probable that it should just be omitted from future legislation.
Issue for consideration
Whether there is any reason for retaining this provision?
6.11 GIFTS TO CHILDREN OR OTHER ISSUE OF THE TESTATOR WHO LEAVE ISSUE LIVING AT THE TESTATOR’S DEATH SHALL NOT LAPSE - STATUTORY
SUBSITUTIONAL PROVISION
Conveyancing Act 1919
The ordinary law of wills is that if a beneficiary dies before the testator the benefit left does not take effect. It is said to lapse.
The reason for this is that it is conceived that the benefit is intended to be personal to the beneficiary and is not intended to
go to a deceased beneficiary’s estate. The rule is old and is never questioned.
A testator who contemplates the possibility of a beneficiary predeceasing the testator may include a substitutional provision in the
will naming another beneficiary to take in the event of the death before the testator of the original beneficiary. In the case of
gifts to issue of a testator wills legislation furnishes a ready made substitutional provision, with the object of favouring issue
of predeceased issue.
The history of the statutory substitutional (or anti-lapse) provision has not been without difficulties. In the
Wills Act 1837
(UK) the rule was framed to provide that the issue was deemed to have survived the testator. The effect of that was that the property
left to the issue would pass to the estate of that issue and then under the will, if any, of that issue. The difficulty of this was
that the will might leave the property elsewhere, for instance to the spouse, to the exclusion of that person’s (and the testator’s)
Another difficulty was that the rule at one time was held not to apply in the case of a gift to a class - for example “to such
of my children as survive me”. If one child died before the testator a statutory substitutional provision could not be applied
for the benefit of that child’s issue because the child was considered not to be within the description of the “surviving”
Revisions of the anti-lapse rule have attempted to address these questions; but these attempts have the appearance of being piecemeal.
What a statutory anti-lapse provision should ensure is that issue of predeceasing issue should take the property left as if the pre-deceasing
issue had died intestate without leaving a spouse, that is,
per stirpes
. An anti-lapse provision should apply expressly to class gifts to issue; and although the rule should be subject to a contrary intention,
a contrary intention should require stronger language than a mere reference to issue as having predeceased the testator. A draft
provision recommended by the Victorian Law Reform Committee’s Report on
Reforming the Law of Wills
1994 reads as follows:
Draft s32 - Dispositions not to fail because issue have died before the testator
(1) If a person makes a disposition to any of his or her issue, where the disposition is not a disposition to which section 30 applies,
and where the interest in the property disposed is not determinable at or before the death of the issue, and the issue does not survive
the testator for thirty days, the issue of that issue who survive the testator for thirty days take that disposition in the shares
they would have taken of the residuary estate of the testator if the testator had died intestate leaving only issue surviving.
(2) Sub-section (1) applies so that issue who attain the age of 18 years or who marry take in the shares they would have taken if
issue who neither attain the age of 18 years nor marry under that age had predeceased the testator.
(3) Sub-section (1) applies to dispositions to issue either as individuals or as members of a class.
(4) This section is subject to any contrary intention appearing in the will; but a general requirement or condition that issue survive
the testator or attain a specified age is not a contrary intention for the purpose of this section.
This provision addresses the difficulties which have been encountered as a result of the drafting of earlier provisions.
Of the provision in subsection (2) the Victorian Report says:
It has been argued that consistency with the Committee’s views on s.30 requires the condition in s.32(2) of the 1991 Draft Wills
Bill as to attaining the age of 18 years or marrying to be omitted because they have no place in Victoria’s law of intestate
succession. However the point of s.30 is to identify persons included in the description of issue, whereas s.32 attempts to give
effect to the presumed or most likely intention or preference of testators who have indicated the importance of survivorship. The
Wills Working Party recommended the inclusion of the condition, and gave as a reason that it would prevent property of one side of
the family going to the other side of the family on the intestacy of a minor. The Committee accepts that a testator would ordinarily
prefer his or her property not to be distributed on the early death of an intestate minor who had never controlled it.
This is not found in other legislation, but the reason given for its inclusion warrants consideration for adoption.
The provision in subsection (4) is new for Victoria; but was included in the Queensland
Succession Act 1981
section 33(2).
Under the existing Victorian law, if a testator leaves property to, for example, “such of my children as survive me and attain
the age of 18”, and the testator is survived by one child and three grandchildren the children of a deceased child, the property
will be taken only by the surviving child and the grandchildren will take nothing.
Under the Queensland provision the grandchildren will take the property their parent would have taken had he or she survived the testator.
Issues for consideration
(1) Should statutory anti-lapse provisions ensure that issue of predeceasing issue take the property left as if the predeceasing issue
had died intestate without leaving a spouse, that is per stirpes?
(2) Should anti-lapse provisions apply expressly to class gifts to issue?
(3) For any contrary intention to affect such a provision, should that intention be expressed in stronger language than a mere reference
to issue having predeceased the testator?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
. Parliament of Victoria Law Reform Committee
Reforming the Law of Wills
May 1994 at 147.
Bassett v Hall
[1994] 1 VR 432.
[1993] 2 Qd R 269.
Issues Paper 10 (1996) - Uniform Succession Laws: The Law of Wills
7. Recent Reforms
History of this Reference (Digest)
This Chapter is concerned with certain reforms which have appeared in Australian wills legislation in the last decade or so. The provisions
all address substantial issues of wills law reform mostly not found in other jurisdictions; but some are inspired by recent law reform
7.1 BENEFICIARIES MUST SURVIVE TESTATOR BY THIRTY DAYS
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
s26 and proposed s99A of
Administration and Probate Act 1958
no provision
As has already been mentioned in paragraph 6.11 above if a beneficiary dies before a testator the benefit left does not take effect.
It is said to lapse.
In Queensland
Succession Act 1981
(1) Unless a contrary intention appears by the will, where any beneficial disposition of property is made to a person who does not
survive the testator for a period of 30 days the disposition shall be treated as if that person had died before the testator and,
subject to this Act, shall lapse.
The Queensland intestacy rules contain a similar provision (
Succession Act 1981
section 35(2)).
The Australian Capital Territory is the only other Australian jurisdiction which has followed this precedent, which originated in
section 2-702 of the American
Uniform Probate Code
as well as a not uncommon practice of including a similar provision in well drawn wills.
The same provision appears in the traditional anti-lapse rule with respect to surviving issue of the deceased (Qld section 33, ACT
section 31).
There are several arguments in favour of the provision. Its theoretical justification is the same as the justification for the lapse
rule, that is, that testamentary benefits are intended to be personal to the beneficiary and are not intended to accrue to the estate
of a beneficiary who dies before the testator. The statutory provision only extends that rule by a period of thirty days. The more
practical context is that of multiple deaths of members of a family in a war time catastrophe or road or other accident.
John and Mary are married. Mary is John’s second wife. They are killed in a car accident, Mary surviving John by a few hours.
Each had made a will leaving everything to the other. Probate of John’s will must be obtained, under which Mary’s estate
would take everything. Probate of Mary’s will would then be obtained but her estate would be distributed to her issue or other
blood relatives upon intestacy. John’s family would get nothing. Under the Queensland provision John’s estate would pass
as upon his intestacy; and Mary’s as upon hers.
A father and child die in one accident, the father having left part of his estate to the child, and the child having survived the
father by a few hours. The part of the father’s estate left to the child would pass to the child’s estate and thence,
if the child had not made a will, to the child’s intestacy beneficiaries. Under the Queensland provision the child’s
share would pass under the residuary provision of the father’s will.
There are several advantages to the provision.
In each of the above examples a costly double administration is avoided by a thirty days’ rule.
One reason why lawyers used to include a thirty days’ survivorship provision in wills was the English context of high death
or estate duties. Two lots of duties would be imposed if there were two deaths in quick succession. A thirty day rule can ensure
that death duties legislation will not impact too heavily on a family. Although there are not death duties in Australia at the present
time there may be tax implications to a double succession which would be avoided by a thirty days’ rule.
If there are doubts as to whether one survived the other for a matter of seconds or minutes in the event of a fatal accident, a thirty
days’ rule resolves any difficulties of proof.
The Victorian Law Reform Committee has recommended a similar provision.
Issue for consideration
Should there be a provision that, unless a contrary intention appears in the will, where any beneficial disposition of properties
is made to a person who does not survive the testator for a particular period the disposition shall be treated as if that person
had died before the testator and shall lapse.
7.2 IS THIRTY DAYS AN APPROPRIATE PERIOD FOR A GENERAL ANTI-LAPSE RULE?
There is some opinion that thirty days is “too long” to wait to find out whether a beneficiary under a will or intestacy
will or will not be entitled to a benefit. If a testator leaves all of his or her estate to a spouse or child and there is no reason
to believe that the spouse or child will fail to survive for thirty days, the rule means that no part of the estate can be distributed
to the spouse during a period of time, immediately after the death, when he or she may be in special need of financial resources,
for instance to pay for a funeral and perhaps unexpected debts, or to obtain access to the deceased’s bank account.
Queensland has to a certain extent met this criticism of a thirty days’ rule by a provision in
section 49(3)
Succession Act 1981
(Qld) which is as follows:
The personal representatives may, during and after the period of 30 days after the death of a deceased person, make reasonable provision
out of the estate for the maintenance (including hospital and medical expenses) of any spouse or issue of the deceased who would,
if the person survived the deceased for a period of 30 days, be entitled to a share in the estate, and any sum so expended shall
be deducted from that share; but if any spouse or issue of the deceased for whom any provision has been so made does not survive
the deceased for a period of 30 days any sum expended in making such provision shall be treated as an administration expense.
This provision meets the difficulty at a practical level but not at a theoretical level and the Victorian Law Reform Committee in
its 1994 Report on
Reforming the Law of Wills
has recommended the inclusion of a similar provision as section 99B of the Victorian
Administration and Probate Act 1958
The provision may have broader interest as a possible mechanism for dealing more generally with the financial difficulties which can
arise upon the death of a person. For instance, it might be worth considering whether to provide a statutory authority to banks to
pay for the funeral of a deceased person out of the deceased person’s bank account, without having to await probate of a will
or letters of administration, or other means, to obtain access to the account.
Perhaps of some interest in this context is information furnished to the Queensland Law Reform Commission by the Queensland Police
Service of the length of time those involved in fatal road accidents survive the accident. Of 390 deaths resulting from motor vehicle
accidents in Queensland between 1 September 1992 and 31 August 1993, 377 victims died instantly or within seven days. The remaining
13 victims all died within nineteen days after the accident. No victims died more than nineteen and less than thirty days after the
accident. Persons who died more than thirty days after the accident are considered not to have died as a result of the accident and
so are not included in the gathering of statistics.
On this information, a period of twenty-one days could perhaps justifiably be substituted for thirty days. The period of thirty days
derives from wills precedents directed to the same issues. However, any reduction of the period should not be regarded as a reason
for not considering the more practical question of access to assets of the deceased for immediate and important needs of the deceased’s
family in the days and weeks immediately following a death. This is, however, not so much an issue of the law of wills but of the
administration of estates.
A careful comparison of the differing laws in Australia is needed and a clear policy for reform and uniformity reached.
Issue for consideration
What is an appropriate period for a survivorship provision?
7.3 POWER OF COURT TO RECTIFY WILLS
no provision
no provision
no provision
In 1981 Queensland introduced a modest power of rectification in its
Succession Act 1981
section 31(1)
of which reads as follows:
Power of Court to rectify wills
(1) As from the commencement of this Act the Court shall have the same jurisdiction to insert in the probate copy of a will material
which was accidentally or inadvertently omitted from the will when it was made as it has hitherto exercised to omit from the probate
copy of a will material which was accidentally or inadvertently inserted in the will when it was made.
Subsection (2) requires the matter to be brought to Court within six months of the death of the testator.
At common law, the probate Court was bound to omit from probate material accidentally or inadvertently inserted in a will.
In 1989 New South Wales inserted into the
Wills, Probate and Administration Act 1988
(NSW) section 29A which provides, by subsection (1), that:
If the Court is satisfied that a will is so expressed that it fails to carry out the testator’s intentions, it may order that
the will be rectified so as to carry out the testator’s intention.
In 1991 the Australian Capital Territory inserted a very wide and lengthy provision in section 12A of its
Wills Act 1968
Rectification
12A(1) If the court is satisfied that the probate copy of the will of a testator is so expressed that it fails to carry out his or
her intentions, it may order that the will be rectified so as to carry out the testator’s intentions.
(2) If the court is satisfied that circumstances or events existed or occurred before, at or after the execution by a testator of
his or her last will, being circumstances or events -
(a) that were not known to, or anticipated by, the testator;
(b) the effects of which were not fully appreciated by the testator; or
(c) that occurred at or after the death of the testator;
in consequence of which the provisions of the will applied according to their tenor would fail to accord with the probable intention
of the testator had he or she known of, anticipated or fully appreciated the effects of those circumstances or events, the Court
may, if it is satisfied that it is desirable in all the circumstances to do so, order that the probate copy of the will be rectified
so as to give effect to that probable intention.
There are further detailed provisions respecting the time within which an application must be made, notification and procedure.
A power of rectification, particularly one as broad as that of the Australian Capital Territory, raises a number of matters for consideration.
To what extent should a power to rectify a will be modelled on a power to rectify a contract? In the case of contracts the parties
are usually available to give evidence to the Court. In the case of a will the testator cannot.
Another major issue of the existence of a broad power to rectify a will is its consequence on the accepted rules for the construction
of wills. The rules for the construction of wills represent the accumulated experience of the Courts regarding what testators usually
mean when they use certain forms of words. A general power of rectification could have the effect of destabilising the rules of construction,
leaving executors and their legal advisers with no guidance concerning the meaning of a will.
The large power conferred on the Court in the Australian Capital Territory may be considered to go beyond the concept of rectification.
It is difficult to see as rectification a power to take into account matters or events taking place at or after the death of the
The Australian Capital Territory’s provision seeks to enable justice to be done in the light of circumstances prevailing at
or after the death of a testator. It can be a means of circumventing (a) inadequacies in the law of wills, (b) inadequacies in the
intestacy rules and (c) inadequacies in family provision law. It is arguable, however, that to attempt to meet such inadequacies
by a very enlarged power to rectify is merely to provide a short cut. What is needed, particularly in the context of a drive towards
uniformity, is a more detailed investigation of the reasons why succession laws, as a whole, still fail to correct occasional patent
injustices.
In 1994 South Australia inserted section 25AA into its
Wills Act 1936
(SA) which reads as follows:
Power of rectification
(1) If the Court is satisfied that a will does not accurately reflect the testamentary intentions of a deceased person, the Court
may order that the will be rectified so as to give proper expression to those intentions.
(2) An application for an order under this section must not, except with the consent of the Court, be made more than six months after
the grant of probate or letters of administration.
(3) Nothing in this section affects the operation of section 29 of the
Trustee Act 1936
This power is almost as radical as the Australian Capital Territory power.
The Tasmanian
Wills Act 1992
contains the following provision:
Rectification of wills
47(1) Where on an application made for a grant of probate of the last will of a deceased person or on an application made within 3
months after a grant of probate of a will, the Court is satisfied that there can be no reasonable doubt -
(a) that the deceased person made an error in expressing testamentary intentions in the will; and
(b) as to the nature and effect of the error -
the Court may -
(c) grant probate of the will of the deceased person subject to such directions as appear to the Court to be necessary in order to
give effect to the testamentary intentions of the deceased person; or
(d) if probate of the will has been granted, revoke the grant and substitute a fresh grant of probate subject to any such directions.
(2) Notice of an application under subsection (1) is to be served on the personal representative of the deceased person within such
time as is prescribed by the rules.
In 1994 the Victorian Law Reform Committee recommended the adoption of a rectification provision the substantive provision of which
is as follows:
Draft 37 - Can a will be rectified?
(1) The Court may make an order to rectify a will to carry out the intentions of the testator if the Court is satisfied that the will
does not carry out the testator’s intentions because -
(a) a clerical error was made; or
(b) the will does not give effect to the testator’s instructions.
(2) A person who wishes to claim the benefit of sub-section (1) must apply to the Court within six months from the date of the grant
of probate.
(3) The Court may extend the period of time for making the application if the Court thinks this is necessary, even if the original
period of time has expired, but not if the final distribution of the estate has been made.
(4) If a personal representative makes a distribution to a beneficiary, the personal representative is not liable if -
(a) the distribution has been made under section 99B of the
Administration and Probate Act 1958
(b) the distribution has been made -
(i) at a time when the personal representative has not been aware of any application for rectification or any application under
Administration and Probate Act 1958
having been made; and
(ii) at least six months after the grant of probate.
Application must be made to the Court within six months from the date of the grant of probate to invoke this jurisdiction. There are
further provisions concerning notice and procedure.
Clearly with these diverse precedents respecting the rectification of wills substantial reconsideration of the entire question is
Issues for consideration
(1) To what extent should a power to rectify a will be modelled on a power to rectify a contract?
(2) What consequences should a broad power to rectify a will have on the accepted rules for the construction of wills?
(3) Should a power of rectification take into account matters and events taking place at or after the death of the testator?
7.4 CONSTRUCTION OF RESIDUARY DISPOSITIONS
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
There are several provisions in the Queensland
Succession Act 1981
which are not found in other legislation the object of which is to reduce the incidence of partial intestacies of residue.
is one of them. It reads as follows:
Construction of residuary dispositions
Unless a contrary intention appears by the will -
(a) a residuary disposition referring only to the real estate of the testator or only to the personal estate of the testator shall
be construed to include all the estate of the testator both real and personal; and
(b) subject to this Act, where a residuary disposition in fractional parts fails as to any of such parts for any reason that part
shall pass to that part of the residuary disposition which does not fail and if there is more than 1 part which does not fail to
all those parts proportionately.
Paragraph (a) attempts to deal with the case where a testator mistakenly uses the word “personalty” or “realty”
in a residuary gift in a will, without realising the legal meaning of these technical words, intending to leave all the estate. Thus
if a testator leaves in a residuary provision “all my realty to X”, then X cannot take any personalty, and unless the
personalty has been expressly given elsewhere the testator will die intestate as to residuary personalty. Likewise if a testator
leaves in a residuary provision “all my personalty to X” then X cannot take any of the testator’s realty and the
testator will die intestate as to residuary realty. The reason for this is that the testator, in using technical legal words, is
considered to have intended the consequences.
The Queensland legislation is based on the view that testators should not be held to the technical meanings of words which they use
inadvertently, in the belief, perhaps, that they sound legal, where the consequence is that the testator dies partially intestate.
It is observed that the Law Reform Commission of Western Australia has considered adopting the Queensland provision in its Report
Administration of Assets of Solvent Estates of Deceased Persons in the Payment of Debts and Legacies
However it appears to have misunderstood the object of the Queensland provision - see paragraph 5.18 above. This is not a vital provision,
as it is only very occasionally that a testator can be expected to use technical terms inadvertently with such undesirable consequences;
but it does clear up a problem and is justifiable to consider it for inclusion in uniform legislation.
Paragraph (b) of section 29 of the Queensland legislation is in relation to residuary estates which are left in fractional shares
amongst persons. The provision is that if a fractional share fails it passes to the others to whom fractional shares were given.
It too is concerned with preventing a probably unintended partial intestacy of residue. In
it was held that a gift of all the estate was not a gift of residue and that the provision could not apply to it. That has been seen
by the Victorian Law Reform Committee as placing an undue restriction on the efficacy of the provision and in the Victorian Law Reform
Committees’s draft
Wills Act 1994
there is the following provision:
Draft 33 - Construction of residuary dispositions
(1) A disposition of the whole or of the residue of the estate of a testator which refers only to the real estate of the testator
or only to the personal estate of the testator is to be construed to include both the real and personal estate of the testator.
(2) If any part of a disposition in fractional parts of the whole or of the residue of the estate of a testator fails, the part that
fails passes to the part which does not fail, and, if there is more than one part which does not fail, to all those parts proportionately.
(3) This section does not apply if a contrary intention appears in the will.
Issue for consideration
Should wills legislation aim to reduce the incidence of partial intestacies of residue, by for example, applying certain constructions
to words used by the testator?
7.5 INCOME ON CONTINGENT AND FUTURE DISPOSITIONS
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
Under case law the beneficiary of a
residuary gift did not take the income arising before the gift vested.
The income would pass to those entitled upon intestacy. In the case of a specific bequest, too, there was a rule that the beneficiary
was not entitled to income accruing to the bequest until the bequest vested,
unless a fund was set aside for the purpose of answering the bequest.
Difficulties in knowing whether a legacy or devise would carry intermediate income from the date of the death or from a later date
led the Queensland Law Reform Commission to recommend
that there be a general rule giving intermediate income to the beneficiary of the capital in all cases unless the income were given
elsewhere. Section 62 of the
Succession Act 1981
(Qld) gave effect to this recommendation. It clears up a difficult part of the law and avoids the occasional partial intestacy of
income. It has been accepted in the Australian Capital Territory and in the Victorian proposed
Wills Act 1994
Issue for consideration
Should such a provision be included in all wills legislation?
7.6 DELEGATION OF WILL MAKING POWER
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
There is extensive literature concerning the rule that a testator cannot delegate the power to make a will. Difficulty is caused by
reason of the fact that the ability to include in wills powers of appointment that are standard in settlements made
inter vivos
is subject to considerable doubt. The doubt was fuelled, in Australia, by remarks of Fullagar J in
Tatham v Huxtable
the decision in
Horan v James
where it was held that a testator could not create a hybrid power by will, and
where a power given to trustees of a will to “make such further payments” to the widow of the testator “either
in the form of payments to her or payments for her benefit as they may consider reasonable after the balancing the interests of all
parties” was held to be invalid as a delegation of the testator’s will making power. An entire Chapter in Hardingham,
Neave & Ford’s
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand
is devoted to the subject. It is probable that much of the difficulty of the subject was generated by an arguably misconceived article
by D.M.Gordon.
The heresy has been rejected in England and Canada.
It is anomalous that there should be one law for trusts created
inter vivos
but a different, far more restrictive law for trusts created by will. Furthermore it has the effect that developments in precedents
inter vivos
trusts cannot be relied on when drafting wills. Since developments in drafting trusts
inter vivos
are frequently driven by tax planning considerations, the supposed non delegation rule has the effect of placing testators in an
historical strait jacket.
The Victorian Law Reform Committee has recommended the following provision in section 35 of its proposed
Wills Act 1994
Draft 35 - Can a person, by will, delegate the power to dispose of property?
A power or a trust to dispose of property, created by will, is not void on the ground that it is a delegation of the testator’s
power to make a will, if the same power or trust would be valid if made by the testator, by instrument during his or her lifetime.
Issue for consideration
Should there be provision for delegation of will making power?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
Harter v Harter
(1873) LR 3 P&D 11 and
[1948] Ch 212.
. Project No 34 - Part VII, 1988.
. [1990] 2 Qd R 508.
Re Gillett’s Will Trusts
[1950] Ch 102
[1964] Ch 136.
Guthrie v Walrond
(1883) 22 Ch D 573.
[1895] 2 Ch 309.
. Queensland Law Reform Commission Report 22
On the Law relating to Succession
. (1950) 81 CLR 638.
[1982] 2 NSWLR 376.
. (Unrep.) Vic. Sup. Ct. 1963 Case No 63/4731.
. Law Book Co. 2nd ed 1989, ch 5.
. Delegation of Will Making Power”
[1990] 1 WLR 1503,
Re Nicholls
(1987) 34 DLR (4th) 321.
Issues Paper 10 (1996) - Uniform Succession Laws: The Law of Wills
8. Miscellaneous Issues
History of this Reference (Digest)
8.1 DISPOSITION TO UNINCORPORATED ASSOCIATIONS OF PERSONS
If the aims, objects or purposes of an unincorporated association of persons are not charitable in law (for example, of a social or
sports club), a legacy or devise on trust for those aims or purposes would fail for want of charity. This question is dealt with
in detail in Ford & Lee
Principles of the Law of Trusts
and was considered by the Queensland Law Reform Commission in its
Report on the Law relating to Succession
The following comment was made in that Report:
A lay testator, minded to include in his will a legacy or devise for an unincorporated association of persons, has a phenomenal series
of legal obstacles to overcome. If he leaves the benefit to the members of the association for the time being the legacy will take
effect. But, if he leaves it to the present and future members of the association, it will fail. If he leaves it to augment the general
funds of the association the legacy will take effect; but, if he leaves it for the purposes of the association, then, unless the
purposes are charitable, it will fail. None of the problems arise if the association of persons happens to be incorporated. Perhaps,
even less explicable, in layman’s terms, is the fact that one may easily make a gift in one’s lifetime to an unincorporated
association of persons, but, if one attempts the same thing by one’s will inordinate technicalities block the way. Further,
how is anyone to understand why it is that a legacy to “the Communist Party of Australia ... for its sole use and benefit”
should fail,
... the same fate would, of course, await the same legacy to any [unincorporated] political party ... whereas a legacy “for
the general purposes of the Loyal Orange Institution of Victoria”,
or a Masonic Lodge,
or the Old Bradfordians Club,
should succeed?
In Queensland section 63 of the
Succession Act 1981
(Qld) was inserted to relieve testators, who clearly wish to provide a benefit for a lawful, non charitable unincorporated association
of persons, from these often fatal technicalities.
Subsection (1) provides that a disposition to:
(a) an unincorporated association of persons, which is not a charity; or
(b) to or upon trust for the aims, objects or purposes of an unincorporated association of persons, which is not a charity; or
(c) to or upon trust for the present and future members of an unincorporated association of persons, which is not a charity,
has effect “as a legacy or devise in augmentation of the general funds of the association”.
Legacies or devises coming under (b) and (c) would almost certainly fail without the gloss of this provision. A legacy coming under
(a) may be effective, if it can be interpreted as a legacy or devise in augmentation of the general funds of the association, that
is, not upon trust for the aims or purposes of the association, or on trust for present and future beneficiaries. As the Privy Council
Leahy v A-G (NSW)
In law a gift to such a society simpliciter (ie, where, to use the words of Lord Parker in
Bowman v. Secular Society Ltd.
neither the circumstances of the gift nor the directions given nor the objects expressed impose on the donee the character of a trustee)
is nothing else than a gift to its members at the date of the gift as joint tenants or tenants in common. It is for this reason that
the prudent conveyancer provides that a receipt by the treasurer or other proper officer of the recipient society for a legacy to
the society shall be a sufficient discharge to executors.
The provision is intended to marshall these principles so as to ensure the validity of gifts intended for unincorporated associations
of persons.
Subsection (3) takes care of the problem where a testator fails to include, in a will, provisions respecting the giving of a receipt
by a Treasurer or other officer.
The benefits of the provision are very clear and the Victorian Law Reform Committee’s proposed
Wills Act 1994
contains a similar provision, but makes it clear, unlike the Queensland precedent, that the provision only applies to unincorporated
associations which are “not a charity”. The Queensland provision should have contained such a provision. If an unincorporated
association has aims, objects or purposes which are exclusively charitable, or which can be considered to be exclusively for charitable
then the law relating to charities should govern not only the validity but also the administration of that gift.
Subsection (4) of the Queensland provision reads:
It shall not be an objection to the validity of a legacy or devise to an unincorporated association of persons that a list of persons
who were members of the association at the death of the testator cannot be compiled.
The provision is worthy of comment. It might be argued that if a complete list of all the members of an unincorporated association
of persons could not be compiled at the date of death of the testator a disposition to them could not take effect because it could
not be divided amongst them in equal shares. That is, the assumption is that the gift must be divisible amongst the members before
it can be valid. This assumption stems from a principle, as formerly understood, of the law of trusts that to be valid all the beneficiaries
of a trust must be listable, or, in the case of a gift to a class, that each member of the class must be identifiable. Although that
principle is no longer insisted upon in the law of trusts, since
McPhail v Doulton
this provision is intended to stave off arguments based on the former understanding of that principle.
The proposed Victorian
Wills Act 1994
has a provision, section 34, based on the Queensland provision but which goes further by providing in subsection (5) as follows:
It is not an objection to the validity of a disposition to an unincorporated association of persons that a list of persons who were
members of the association at the time the testator died cannot be compiled,
or that the members of the association have no power to divide assets of the association beneficially amongst themselves
[emphasis added]
The reason for the addition of the underlined words is that there are, and have in the past been, many unincorporated associations
of persons the members of which cannot terminate the association and divide the assets amongst themselves. Today these are associations
which enjoy taxation benefits. In the case of such associations there is usually a requirement of the Commissioner of Taxation that
in the case of termination of the association any assets must be distributed to a similar, tax exempt association and not divided
amongst the members of the terminating association. Not all such associations are necessarily charitable, although the Courts use
concepts from charity law to ensure the validity of such gifts over (see, for example,
The Darwin Cyclone Tracy Relief Trust Fund
The Victorian Law Reform Committee proposal is intended to cover this point.
Issue for consideration
Should provision be made to protect dispositions to non-charitable unincorporated associations from failure due to technicalities?
8.2 THE ADMISSION OF EXTRINSIC EVIDENCE IN THE CONSTRUCTION OF WILLS
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
Apart from statute the law of wills allows the admission of extrinsic evidence in the construction of wills in three cases.
First it recognises the “armchair” rule. The armchair rule allows to be admitted evidence of the circumstances in which
a testator made a will, including the testator’s habits of language to assist in the construction of a will. The principle
is examined in detail in
Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand
by Hardingham, Neave and Ford.
Secondly, evidence of the testator’s actual intention, whilst not ordinarily admissible to assist in the construction of a will,
is admissible where there is what is described as “equivocation” in the will, that is, where a description, usually of
a person, is equally capable of referring to more than one person. Extrinsic evidence of the testator’s actual intention is
then admissible which may show that yet another person was intended by the testator.
Thirdly, where equity raises a presumption of intention, for instance, where equity raises a presumption that a legacy is in satisfaction
of a prior debt, or that a legacy is adeemed by a later portions payment, extrinsic evidence of the testator’s actual intention
is admissible to fortify or rebut the presumption.
The potentially restrictive nature of the concept of equivocation in the second principle, and the arcane nature of the third, has
understandably led law reformers and legislatures to propose statutory rules respecting the admissibility of extrinsic evidence.
In 1981 Victoria inserted section 22A into its
Wills Act 1958
(Vic). The section reads:
Provisions as to the construction of wills
22A. (1) In the construction of a will acts, facts and circumstances touching intention of the testator shall be considered and evidence
of such acts, facts and circumstances shall be admitted accordingly but evidence of a statement by the testator declaring the intention
to be effected or which had been effected by the will or any part thereof shall not be received in proof of the intention declared
unless the statement would apart from this section be received in proof of the intention declared.
(2) Where in any matter relating to the construction of the will any evidence adduced by a party is admissible by reason of and by
reason only of the provisions of subsection (1), the party or parties by which that evidence is adduced or relied upon shall bear
such part of the costs of the proceedings as is attributable to the introduction of that evidence unless the Court or judge otherwise
determines.
The 1994 Report on
Reforming the Law of Wills
of the Victorian Law Reform Committee recommended the retention of this provision which had been recommended by a
Report on the Construction of Wills
(1980) by the Victorian Chief Justice’s Law Reform Committee.
In 1982 the
Wills Act 1837
(UK) was amended by making provision for the admission of extrinsic evidence in the construction of wills. It allows extrinsic evidence,
including evidence of the testator’s intention, to be admitted only:
(a) in so far as any part [of the will] is meaningless;
(b) in so far as the language used in any part [of the will] is ambiguous on the face of it;
(c) in so far as evidence, other than evidence of the testator’s intention, shows that the language used [in the will] is ambiguous
in the light of surrounding circumstances.
The provision represents a compromise between conservative and progressive voices to be found in a Report of the English Law Reform
Committee on the
Construction of Wills
In 1986 the New South Wales Law Reform Commission recommended the English model in its
Report on Wills - Execution and Revocation
but the recommendation has not been acted upon.
In 1991 the Australian Capital Territory inserted section 12B in its
Wills Act 1968
as follows:
Extrinsic evidence
12B. In proceedings to construe a will, evidence, including evidence of the testator’s dispositive intention, is admissible
to the extent that the language used in the will renders the will, or any part of the will -
(a) meaningless;
(b) ambiguous or uncertain on the face of the will; or
(c) ambiguous or uncertain in the light of the surrounding circumstances;
but evidence of a testator’s dispositive intention is not admissible to establish any of the circumstances referred to in paragraph
This provision, in identical terms, is found in the Tasmanian
Wills Act 1992
It is clear from the above that this is a matter which requires careful consideration. What is at stake is the fundamental principle
that a will must be in writing; and the extent to which it is appropriate to compromise that principle where there is extrinsic evidence
that the writing does not embody the testator’s intention.
Issue for consideration
Should wills legislation extend the admissibility of extrinsic evidence in the construction of wills?
8.3 REFERENCE IN A WILL TO A VALUATION
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
There are provisions in Queensland, South Australian and Victorian wills legislation, which are intended to clarify the law in relation
to a reference in a will to the taking of a valuation. The issue needs to be considered since it is arguable that in Queensland the
provision was linked to estate duty considerations, but in Victoria it is a more general enabling provision.
Issue for consideration
A clarification of the law in relation to a reference in a will to the taking of a valuation.
8.4 WHO MAY SEE A WILL?
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
There is a novel provision in the Victorian proposed
Wills Act 1994
which reads as follows:
Draft 39 - Consequential and further amendments to the
Administration and Probate Act 1958
66A - Who may see a will?
Any person having the possession or control of a will (including a purported will) of a deceased person must -
(a) produce it in Court if required to do so;
(b) allow the following persons to inspect and, at their own expense, take copies of it, namely -
(i) any person named or referred to in it, whether as beneficiary or not;
(ii) the surviving spouse, any parent or guardian and any issue of the testator;
(iii) any person who would be entitled to a share of the estate of the testator if the testator had died intestate; and
(iv) any creditor or other person having any claim at law or in equity against the estate of the deceased.
A major reason for the proposed insertion of this provision is that sometimes a person having control of a will is reluctant to show
it to anyone. The reluctance may be caused by a misconceived view that a will is a private document. Since not all wills are brought
to Court for probate, particularly where the estate is small and not worth the expense of taking to Court, possible beneficiaries
and other claimants can be placed in an invidious position because they may not know anything. A person with a claim under family
provision legislation may not be able to discover whether the testator has made provision for him or her by will and so will not
be able to begin to consider whether to make a claim. An intestacy beneficiary may need to know whether the will lacks a valid residuary
provision; and a creditor may need to know whether the testator had assets, information which may be discoverable to a certain extent
from a will.
The provision does not allow persons not interested to see the will, for instance the press, or creditors of small sums which can
be paid quickly by the representative. In any case persons entitled to share in the estate should be able to see the contents of
a will. This information is always available once the will has been admitted to probate. This provision is intended to ensure the
same thing before the will is admitted to probate.
Issue for consideration
Should wills legislation include a provision entitling certain people to see the contents of the will?
8.5 DEPOSIT OF WILL IN REGISTRY BY TESTATOR DURING LIFETIME
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
no provision
There is a provision in the New South Wales
Probate and Administration Act 1898
, section 32, and in the Australian Capital Territory
Wills Act 1968
, which permits a testator to deposit a will in the Registry. There is no such provision in the wills legislation of other States;
but there may be in administration legislation.
The New South Wales provision raises not only the general issue of whether it is desirable to deposit wills in the Probate Registry
before the death of the testator but also the question of whether there should be insistence that all wills, after death, should
be brought into Court, whether intended to be admitted to probate or not. That leads to the question of whether there should be a
national register of wills of deceased persons. This is a large issue which belongs not to the law of wills as such but to the more
general issue of the administration of deceased estates.
Issue for consideration
Should there be a national register of wills of deceased persons?
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
. See Lee, W A “Trusts and Trust-like Obligations with Respect to Unincorporated Associations” Ch 10 of
Essays in Equity
(Ed P D Finn Law Book Co 1985) at 179.
. 2nd ed Law Book Co 1990 at 527-531.
. Report 22 1978.
. Id at 46.
Bacon v Pianta
[1966] HCA 44
(1966) 114 CLR 634.
[1971] VicRp 98
[1971] VR 801.
Re Turkington
[1937] 4 All ER 501.
Re Drummond
[1914] 2 Ch 90.
[1959] UKPC 1
[1959] AC 457
[1917] AC 406
. For instance, by statute, eg
Conveyancing Act
(NSW) s37D;
Trustee Act
Property Law Act
(Vic) s131;
Trustees Act
[1970] UKHL 1
[1971] AC 424.
(1979) 39 FLR 260.
. Law Book Co 2nd ed 1989 at para 1103.
[1963] VicRp 3
[1963] VR 17
is a remarkable illustration of this rule.
Re Tussaud’s Estate
(1878) 9 Ch D 363
at 373-375.
Administration of Justice Act 1982
Issues Paper 10 (1996) - Uniform Succession Laws: The Law of Wills
9. Conclusion
History of this Reference (Digest)
The law of wills still contains, even in its most recent forms, some dead wood; and some major policy decisions remain to be made
before progress can be made. This first Issues Paper does not necessarily cover every issue to be considered and debated. The views
of the judiciary, Registrars of probate, the legal profession, trustee companies, Public Trust Offices, and law reform agencies,
as well as those of ordinary members of the public who have to deal with the practical problems of administering very small deceased
estates as well as very large estates, must be canvassed to ensure that the widest reconsideration of the law of wills ever undertaken
in Australia can lead to an effective, viable and efficient law for the twenty-first century.
Terms of reference
Participants
Submissions
Table of contents
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter